Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038 
ASHFIELD DISTRICT COUNCIL 
Draft Local Plan  
2020 -2038  
October  2021  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038 
Contents  
Chapter  Page  
Foreword - Planning together for all our futures.  1 
How to comment on the Draft Local Plan  2 
1 Where are we now?  
• Plan Purpose and Background.  
• How have we arrived at the Draft Local Plan?  
• Structure of this document.  
• Evidence Base and Duty to Cooperate.  
• Other Supporting Documents.  
• Ashfield District.  
• Delivering Sustainable Development.  
• National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) and Planning Practice 
Guidance (PPG).  
• Regional Plans / Strategies.  
• Local Context / Strategies.  
• Key Issues.  3 
2 Shaping the future of Ashfield, what we want to achieve. (Vision 
and objectives).  
• A Vision for Ashfield.  
• Strategic Objectives.  26 
3 Sustainable development in Ashfield - Spatial strategy and 
strategic policies . 
• Ashfield Local Plan Strategy.  
• Key Diagram.  
• Strategic Policy S1: Achieving Sustainable Development.  
• Strategic Policy S2: Meeting the Challenge of Climate Change.  
• Strategic Policy S3: Location of Development.  
• Strategic Policy S4: Green Belt.  
• Strategic Policy S5: High Quality Buildings and Places thro ugh 
Place Making and Design.  
• Strategic Policy S6: Meeting Future Needs New Settlement: Land 
at Whyburn Farm, Hucknall.  32 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  
 
  
• Strategic Policy S7: Meeting Future Needs New Settlement: Land 
at Cauldwell Road, Sutton in Ashfield.  
• Strategic Policy S8: Meeting Future Needs Strategic Employment 
Allocation Junction 27, M1 Motorway, Annesley.  
• Strategic Policy S9: Meeting Future Housing Provision.  
• Strategic Policy S10: Delivering Economic Opportunities . 
• Strategic Policy S11: Aligning Gro wth and Infrastructure . 
• Strategic Policy S12: Improving Transport Infrastructure . 
• Strategic Policy S13 Vibrant Town Centres.  
• Strategic Policy S14 Tackling Health Inequalities and Facilitating 
Healthier Lifestyles . 
• Strategic Policy S15 Protecting and Enhanc ing Our Green 
Infrastructure and the Natural Environment.  
• Strategic Policy S16 Conserving and Enhancing Our Historic 
Environment.  
• Strategic Policy S17 Safeguarding Mineral resources . 
4  
Meeting the challenge of climate change and adapt to its effects.  
 
• Policy CC1:  Zero and Low Carbon Developments and 
Decentralised, Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation.  
• Policy CC2: Water Resource Management.  
• Policy CC3: Flood Risk and Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDs).  100 
5 Protecting and enhancing Ashfield’s  character through its natural 
environment and heritage.  
• Policy EV1: Green Belt.  
• Policy EV2: Countryside.  
• Policy EV3: Re -use of Buildings in the Green Belt and Countryside.  
• Policy EV4: Green Infrastructure, Biodiversity and Geodiversi ty. 
• Policy EV5: Protection of Green Spaces and Recreation Facilities.  
• Policy EV6: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows.  
• Policy EV7: Provision and Protection of Allotments.  
• Policy EV8: Agricultural Land Quality.  
• Policy EV9: The Historic Environment.  
• Policy EV10: Protection and Enhancement of Landscape 
Character.  113 
6 Meeting local housing needs and aspirations.  
• Policy H1: Housing Allocations.  
• Policy H2: Provision for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople.  
• Policy H2a: Travelling Showpeople Site Allocations  
• Policy H3: Affordable Housing.  156 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  
 
  
• Policy H4: Rural Exceptions Sites.  
• Policy H5: Public Open Space in New Residential Developments.  
• Polic y H6: Housing Mix.  
• Policy H7 Housing Density.  
• Policy H8: Houses in Multiple Occupation, Flats and Bedsits.  
7 Building a strong economy which provides opportunities for local 
people.   
• Policy EM1: Business and Economic Development.  
• Policy EM2: Employment Land Allocations.  
• Policy EM3: Retention of Employment Sites and Allocations.  
• Policy EM4: Rural Development.  
• Policy EM5: Education, Skills and Training .  185 
8 Placing vibrant town and local centres at the heart of the 
community.  
• Policy SH1: Retail, Leisure, Commercial and Town Centre Uses.  
• Policy SH2: Local Shopping Centres, Shopping Parades and Single 
Shops.  
• Policy SH3: Shopfronts.  200 
9 Achieving successful development through well designed places.  
• Policy SD1: Social Value.  
• Policy SD2: Good Design Considerations for Development.  
• Policy SD3: Amenity.  
• Policy SD4: Recycling and Refuse Provision in New Development.  
• Policy SD5: Developer Contributions.  
• Policy SD6: Assessing Development Viability and Development 
Demand.  
• Policy SD7: Communications Infrastructure.  
• Policy SD8: Contaminated Land and Unstable Land.  
• Policy SD9: Environmental Pro tection.  
• Policy SD10: Transport Infrastructure.  
• Policy SD11: Parking.  
• Policy SD12: Advertisements.  
• Policy SD13: Provision and Protection of Health and Community 
Facilities.  212 
Appendix 1 - Glossary  254 
Appendix 2 - Five Year Land Supply and Housing Trajectory  266 
Appendix 3 - Development Briefs For Large Housing Sites  278 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038 
Appendix 4 - Wind Energy Opportunities Within Ashfield  279 
Appendix 5 - Agricultural, Forestry and Other Occupational Dwellings  280 
Appendix 6  - Policy EV4: Green Infrastructure, Biodiversity and Geological 
Conservation Sites  285 
Appendix 7 - Policy EV5: Protection of Green Spaces and Recreational Facilities 
Sites  297 
Appendix 8 - Policy EV6: Trees, Woodlands and Hedgerows  303 
Appendix 9 - Policy EV7: Provision and Protection of Allotments  304 
Appendix 10 - Policy EV 9 – The Historic Environment  305 
Appendix 11 - Environmental Protection – Matters For Consideration In Taking 
Decisions On Planning Applications  306 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038      Foreword  
 
  
P a g e  1Foreword - Planning together for all our futures.  
Please find set out the Council’s proposed strategic approach to guide development in the 
District of Ashfield.  This document, the Draft Ashfield Local Plan, together with other 
supporting materials, explains the Council’s approach to delivering sustainable development 
in the District for the period 2020 – 2038.  
It is a national requirement that local authorities have a  sound Local Plan, not only to ensure 
that vital new homes and jobs are provided but also because in the absence of an up -to-
date Local Plan, the Council cannot effectively control where development takes place, the 
quality of that development and the comm unity benefit arising from new development.  
Following previous attempts of the Council to replace the current adopted (Ashfield Local 
Plan Review, 2002) it is becoming even more imperative that a new land use plan is 
prepared and adopted on time to provi de certainty about how we want the District to prosper 
in the future.  
We are required by the government to bring forward a Local Plan that delivers housing 
targets set by the government. While none of us wish to see fields being built over it is 
inescapa ble that there are insufficient brownfield site s available to achieve these targets and 
so use of greenfield sites is unavoidable. We have adopted a spatial strategy that attempts 
to minimise the negative impacts of development, but it is inevitable that t here will be strong 
feelings about the development brought by the government targets.  
I am committed to ensuring that this document is prepared in an open and transparent 
manner and that the views of the public and stakeholders are listened to and taken i nto 
account. We need to know what you think about the policies and proposals contained in the 
Draft Local Plan before it is submitted to the Secretary of State and the Planning 
Inspectorate for Examination in Public.  I would very much welcome your views. Please 
remember to submit these by 5pm on the 1 6th November 2021.  
Councillor Matthew Relf, Por tfolio Holder for Place, Planning and Regeneration,  
Ashfield District Council  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038 How to Comment
P a g e  2How to comment on the Draft Local Plan  
The Draft Local Plan consultation represents an opportunity for everyone in Ashfield and 
beyond to think about how the places people live, work, learn and visit should develop 
over the period to 2038. We would like to know whether you agree with the land use 
policies and proposals for accommodating new development in the Ashfield District 
Council area.  
The easiest and most efficient way to view the Draf t Local Plan and submit any comments 
you have on the policies and proposals is via the interactive form  which can be found on 
the Councils website here:  
https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/local -plan/  
Paper copies of the consultation documents are available to be viewed at all local libraries 
and at the Plann ing Office at Urban Road?  
There will also be an opportunity to view documents and speak to planning officers, details 
of which can be found on the Council ’s website.  
If possible, please respond on -line using the interactive response form.  Alternatively, 
please send your completed consultation response to:  
Localplan@ashfield.gov.uk ; or to:  
Local Plans,  
Place and Communities,  
Ashfield District Council,  
Urban Road,  
Kirkby -in- Ashfield,  
NG17 8DA  
The consultation is open for 6 no of weeks from 4th October to 16th November 2021.   
All comments must be received by 5.00pm on 16th November.  Those received after the 
deadline will not be considered.  
If you need any further information please co ntact the Local Plans Team at 
localplan@ashfield.gov.uk   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038 Chapter 1 - Where are we now?
P a g e  3Chapter 1  
Where are we now?
Plan Purpose and Background
1.1 The development plan for Ashfield consists of:
• Once adopted, the Local Plan as set out in this document;  
• The Jacksdale, Underwood Selston Tomorrow ( JUS-t) and Teversal, Stanton 
Hill and Skegby Neighbourhood Plans (further information is conta ined in 
paragraph 1.36 below);  
• Nottinghamshire and Nottingham Replacement Waste Local Plan, Part 1 Waste 
Core Strategy 20131;  
• Nottinghamshire and Nottingham Waste Local Plan 2002 Saved Policies2; and  
• The Nottinghamshire Mineral Development Plan 20 213. 
Issues related to waste or minerals are not included in the draft Ashfield Local Plan. 
Any development proposals related to waste or minerals will be assessed by the 
County Council as the Waste and Minerals Authority.  
1.2 This draft local plan (2020 – 2038) provides the basis for delivering sustainable 
development within the district of Ashfield4. It sets out a vision for the future, a 
framework for meeting identified needs and priorities, and a way in which 
communities can get involved in shaping the future of the area.  The plan considers 
land use needs for specific types of development and identifies sites and areas of 
protection. It also provides the basis upon which planning applications will be 
determined, outlining the main criteria that the Coun cil will employ in assessing 
planning proposals within the District.  
1.3 All future development in Ashfield will be guided by the policies included in this draft 
Ashfield Local Plan which has been prepared according to the requirements of 
planning legislation5 and an extensive process of evidence gathering and 
 
1 https://www.nottinghamshire.gov.uk/planning -and-environment/waste -development -plan/waste -core-
strategy  
2 https://www.nottinghamshire .gov.uk/planning -and-environment/waste -development -plan/adopted -waste -
local-plan 
3 https://www.nottinghamshire.gov.uk/planning -and-environment/minerals -local-plan/adopted -minerals -local-
plan 
4 In accordance with section 39 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase A ct (2004).  
5 The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 and the Town and Country Planning (Local 
Plan)(England) Regulations 2012, as amended.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  4 
   consultation.   The draft Local Plan has been informed by a number of supporting 
evidence and background studies including:  
• The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)6 and Planning Practice 
Guidance7; 
• A robust, objective and up -to-date Evidence Base8;  
• Regional and local plans and strategies including strategic Council priorities;  
• Engagement with specific consultation bodies, organisations, our community 
and neighbour ing Authorities 9, and  
• Previous consultation on the Local Plan withdrawn in September 2018.  
1.4 When the Local Plan is adopted the saved policies10 from the Ashfield Local Plan 
Review (2002) will be superseded and will no longer form part of the development 
plan.   
How have we arrived at the Draft Local Plan?  
1.5 The Council has submitted two previous Local Plans for examination.  The Local 
Plan Public ation 2013 was withdrawn from examination in July 2014 following an 
Exploratory Meeting with the Planning Inspector, who raised concerns over specific 
aspects of the Plan.  A subsequent Local Plan was submitted for examination on 
the 24th February 2017.  A fter the examination hearing sessions and further work, 
particularly on the education infrastructure aspects with the County Council as the 
Education Authority, the Inspector considered that some main modifications to the 
Plan were required to make it soun d.  A main modifications consultation was 
undertaken from 22nd June 2018 to 10th August 2018 with all representations 
being forwarded to the Inspector for consideration.  However, following a change in 
the political administration of the Council, a resolut ion11 was passed at the full 
Council meeting of 6th September 2018 to withdraw the Local Plan from 
examination and commence development of a new Local Plan immediately.  
1.6 Under these circumstances, part of the evidence base for the withdrawn Local Plan 
is still relevant and has informed the draft Local Plan.  A new Statement of 
Community Involvement12 (SCI) and Local Development Scheme13 (LDS) has also 
been produced as a result of commencing work on a new plan.  
1.7 The Council’s SCI sets out how members of the publi c can become involved in plan 
making and planning decisions.  It is important that neighbourhoods and 
 
6https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/810197/N
PPF_Feb_2019_revised.pdf   
7 https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/planning -practice -guidance   
8 The Local Plan Evidence Base is available on the Council’s website.  
9 The Statement of Common Grounds is available on the Council’s website.  
10 The Town and Country Planning (Local Plannin g) (England) Regulations 2012, as amended Regulation 
8(5). 
11 https://democracy.ashfield -dc.gov.uk/ieListDocuments.aspx?CId=132&MId=3675&Ver =4 
12 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/local -plan/statement -of-community -involvement/  
13 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -contr ol/local -plan/emerging -local-plan/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  5 
   communities have a voice in planning for their area at both a strategic and planning 
application level.   
1.8 The LDS sets out the timetable for Local Pla n preparation and adoption.  It provides 
a starting point for people to see at what stage they can become involved in drafting 
the local plan along with key stages of its preparation such as Examination in Public 
and adoption.  
Structure of this document  
1.9 This Draft Local Plan is a comprehensive document setting out a statement of policy 
to inform the public of the approach the Council will follow as the local planning 
authority in decision-making, unless there is good reason to depart from it. It 
provides a means of guiding development and the policies are designed to secure 
consistency and direction in the exercise of planning powers, while allowing a 
measure of flexibility to be retained. 
 
1.10 The Local Plan should be read as a whole, rather than as a series of individual 
policies, in order to understand all the policies and guidance which will apply to any 
proposal.  Applications for planning permission will be considered against all 
relevant policies in the adopted Local Plan, neighbourhood plans and against other 
material considerations, including the NPPF.  
 
1.11 In reading the Local Plan the starting point is the wording of the policy assisted with 
the words of the supporting text which are relevant to the interpretation of the policy. 
 
1.12 Published with the Draft Local Plan are the separate Policies Maps. The Maps set 
out the areas in the District to which specific policies in the Draft Local Plan apply.   
 
1.13 As the Council’s key planning docume nt, the Local Plan performs the following 
functions: 
• sets out the key issues that the plan is seeking to address, a spatial vision for 
Ashfield to 2038 and a number of strategic objectives (chapter 2);  
• sets out a growth and spatial strategy and strategic p olicies including the location 
and amount of new development to take place over the plan period alongside 
policies which seek to protect the environment (chapter 3);  
• provides policies which will guide the determination of planning applications 
(chapter 3 a nd 4); and  
• identifies targets and indicators to monitor the implementation and effectiveness 
of the Plan (chapter 5)  
 
1.14 Monitoring the implementation of the Local Plan requires working and co-operation 
with a range of organisations, including developers, businesses, residents, 
community and amenity groups, transport and service providers, and neighbouring 
councils. An important mechanism for implementing the Local Plan is the 
consideration of planning applications through the development management 
process.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
 
1.15 The Council will monitor the Local Plan through the production of an Authority 
Monitoring Report (AMR) which will examine where there are changing trends or 
uncertainties to determine whether any changes to the Plans policies are required.  
Details of the indicators and mechanism used to monitor the Local Plan is outlined 
within the Monitoring Framework in chapter 5.  Each Local Plan policy also contains 
the indicator and target (taken from the Monitoring Framework) that will be used to 
monitor the effectiveness of that particular policy.   There is a statutory requirement 
to undertake Plan review every 5 years14, the AMR will assist in future plan review. 
P a g e  6 
   Evidence Base and Duty to Cooperate  
1.16 This provides relevant detail and information on a range of issues to help support 
the creation of a sustainable, ‘sound’ local plan for the District.  
1.17 The evidence base broadly falls under two categories. The first category focusses 
on understanding the objectively assessed needs of the District.  This relates to 
housing, gypsy and travellers, employment, retail, leisure and open space 
requirements. The second category has helped the Council to understand how and 
where this need could be best met and any subsequent issues and considerations 
relating to meeting those needs. This second category includes studies such as the 
Landscape Character Assessment, Green Belt Review, Transport Study, Flood Risk 
Assessment, and Infrastructure Delivery Plan. These studi es, along with the 
Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment (SHELAA) have 
enabled the Council to understand the potential suitability of a site for development 
and any mitigation needed as a result of development. Equally, these studie s also 
informed where future development may not be acceptable. Some of the evidence 
base will be updated as the Plan moves forward and the most up to date evidence 
base studies can be found on the Councils website15 
1.18 Councils and various other bodies are under a Duty to cooperate under section 33A 
of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.  The Act places a legal duty to 
engage constructively, actively and on an ongoing basis to maximise the 
effectiveness of a local plan.  Ashfield District Council and its neighbouring 
authorities have long, well established working relationships that have led to 
effective collaborative working that has benefited all our communities.   The Local 
Plan has been brought forward in a context of collaborate working with ne ighbouring 
councils and infrastructure providers, as evidenced by ‘Statements of Common 
Ground’ with these various parties.  The Plan reflects engagement with local 
communities and relevant bodies including Local Enterprise Partnership, Local 
Nature Partne rship and Nottinghamshire County Council.  
1.19 From a strategic perspective, Ashfield District Council forms part of a wider Housing 
and Functional Economic Market Area.  The location of Hucknall and its close 
proximity to Nottingham City has also led to a  close working relationship with other 
 
14 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2017/1244/regulation/4/made   
15 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/development -management -documents/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  7 
   local authorities forming part of the Greater Nottingham Joint Planning Partnership.  
Further information on the duty to co - operate and the Housing and Functional 
Economic Market areas can be found in the Spatial Strateg y background paper16.  
Other Supporting Documents  
1.20 In addition to its evidence base, the final Local Plan to be submitted to the Secretary 
of State will require a number of other supporting technical documents as follows:  
• Sustainability Appraisal.  
• Habitat Regulations Assessment.  
• Health Impact Assessment . 
• Equalities Impact Assessment , and  
• Data Protection Impact Assessment  
Sustainability Appraisal  
1.21 A Sustainability Appraisal (SA) is an integral part of the plan making process and 
the Council has undertaken an SA for the Local Plan, including an assessment of a 
number of alternative options. The SA is framed around 17 criteria covering the 
different e lements of sustainability (economic, social and environmental). It is 
utilised to guide the Plan and ensure it successfully balances the economic, social 
and environmental considerations of its chosen growth and spatial strategy, content 
and policy directi on.  
Habitat Regulations Assessment  
1.22 A Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA) has been carried out as part of the Local 
Plan process to provide an assessment of the potential effects of the plan on 
European Union designated sites and identify whether proposals in the Local Plan 
have a negative impact on the integrity of any existing or potential sites (Special 
Protection Areas and Special Areas of Conservation). There are two EU designated 
sites within 15 kilometres of the District boundary:  
• The Birkl ands and Bilhaugh Special Area of Conservation located within 
Sherwood Forest, as part of Newark and Sherwood District Council’s 
administrative boundary, and   
• The South Pennine Moors Special Area of Conservation and Special Protection 
Area located in the counties of Cheshire, Derbyshire, Lancashire, Staffordshire 
and Yorkshire.  
1.23 In addition to the two designated sites, there is an additional site within the 
Sherwood Forest Area, important for breeding woodlarks and nightjar, which is not 
currently designated as a protected site, but which has the potential for future 
classificatio n. Consequently, the authority has decided to take a risk -based 
 
16 For FEMA see Background Paper No 3: Economy & Employment Land 2021.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  8 
   approach as advocated by Natural England and undertaken a robust assessment of 
all sites in order to future proof the Plan.  
Health Impact Assessment  
1.24 A Health Impact Assessment of the Local P lan will be undertaken to help ensure the 
Plan acknowledges the potential health impacts resulting from its implementation.  It 
will also identify any mitigation which may be required to reduce the impact of the 
Plan on health and wellbeing.  In seeking to  realise the Local Plan’s Vision, the 
Council has ensured Health is successfully imbedded in the Plan. The assessment 
will also highlight how different environments can affect people’s health and mental 
wellbeing directly or indirectly; and will set out ho w any negative health impacts of 
the Local Plan could be mitigated, for example, improved access to open spaces 
and green infrastructure links will encourage people to use the outdoor areas close 
to their home and work.  
1.25 Local Plan policies also include a  number of measures that will benefit health and 
wellbeing such as improved access to community amenities, heritage  and cultural 
facilities. New facilities  will seek to remove health inequalities within the District, by 
allowing all members of the communit y to access health services more easily.  
Equalities Impact Assessment  
1.26 An Equalities Impact Assessment of the Local Plan will be undertaken to ensure 
that it meets the needs of all members of the community. Undertaking Equality 
Impact Assessments allows  the Council to identify any potential adverse impacts on 
people with protected characteristics caused by its policies, or the way in which it 
works, and take steps to make sure that measures can be put in place to mitigate 
the impact. Equality Impact Asse ssments also allow for the identification of 
opportunities to promote equality.  
Data Protection Impact Assessment  
1.27 A Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) has been undertaken to help identify 
and minimise any data protection risks in relation to the Local Plan.  
Ashfield District 
1.28 Ashfield District covers an area of 10,956 hectares and has a population of 
127,91817.  The district is located on the western side of Nottinghamshire in the East 
Midlands Region and adjoins seven others as shown in Figure  1 below, including 
the City of Nottingham to the South, Mansfield to the east and Bolsover in 
Derbyshire to the west.  
 
17ONS data, mid 2019 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/dataset
s/populationes timatesforukenglandandwalesscotlandandnorthernireland   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
     Figure 1: The district of Ashfield and surrounding area  
     Source: Ashfield District Council  
1.29 The District benefits from a number of high-quality transport links (Figure 1), with 
the M1 dissecting the District, providing communities and businesses with access to 
the motorway network via Junctions 27 and 28 (adjacent to the District).   The A38 
provides a major east- west route across the District and the A611 links the District 
to the City of Nottingham.  For cycling, the National Cycle Route runs through the 
District.  In addition, there are also heavy and light rail connections that link Ashfield 
with the wider area.  The Robin Hood Line runs through the District from Worksop to 
Nottingham with stations at Hucknall, Kirkby- in-Ashfield and Sutton Parkway.  The 
P a g e  9 
   
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
Nottingham Express Transit (NET) runs from Hucknall into Nottingham and other 
parts of Greater Nottingham including Clifton and Beeston.  Within Ashfield, the 
proposed HS2 route is subject to safeguarding directions  to the east of the M1.  
P a g e  10 
   1.30 The Rural-Urban Classification of Local Authority18 sets out Ashfield as “Urban with 
City and Town”.  This identifies that the majority of the resident population in the 
District live in the urban settlements.  
1.31 There are three main urban areas in the District whe re housing, jobs and services 
are largely concentrated ( Figure 1). Hucknall lies immediately north of Nottingham 
in the south of the District, whilst Kirkby -in-Ashfield and Sutton -in-Ashfield are to the 
north and include the adjoining settlements of Kirkby Woodhouse, Annesley 
Woodhouse, Nuncargate, Huthwaite, Stanton Hil l and Skegby.    The three town 
centres have an important economic and social role.   An analysis of the town 
centres is set out in the Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study, 2016.  
1.32 The villages of Jacksdale, Selston  and Underwood are more rural in nature and 
whilst they also contain significant residential areas, they lack the concentration of 
employment opportunities and services found in the three towns. The remainder of 
the District is primarily countryside but co ntains a number of smaller settlements 
including Bagthorpe, Teversal, Fackley and New Annesley together with smaller 
hamlets.  
1.33 Across Ashfield lie a number of important historic and environmental assets which 
play an important role in characterising the ru ral and urban environments. These 
include a number of listed and locally listed buildings, scheduled monuments, 
conservation areas, registered and local historic parks and gardens.  Both Hardwick 
Hall and the Old Hall are Grade I listed, which is the highe st designation.  Both are 
located just outside the District boundary but any development in th e northern part 
of the District will impact on the setting of these exceptional historic assets.  
Hardwick Hall’s Park and Gardens extend into Ashfield and are a Grade 1 
Registered Park  and Garden.  Annesley Hall, near Junction 27 of the M1, is a 
Grade II listed building.  Its associated Park and Gardens are also listed under the 
Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England (Grade II*).   
Felley Priory, an adjoining garden wall and a complex of stables/other buildings are 
Grade II listed.  
1.34 In terms of ecology there are a significant number of nationally important 
designations including ancient woodlands, and S ites of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI ).   Parts of Sherwood Forest have been identified as being a potential Special 
Protection Area (SPA) for its breeding bird (nightjar and woodlark) interest19.  A 
large  number of sites have also been identified as Local Wildlife Sit es.  
 
18 2011 Rural -Urban Classification of Local Authority Districts and Similar Geographic Units in England:  
DEFRA & ONS.  
19 https://www.mansfield.gov.uk/downloads/file/482/natural -england -s-advice -notes -on-the-sherwood -ppspa -
2014  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  11 
   1.35 A substantial part of the District is also designated as part of the Nottingham and 
Derby Green Belt ( Figure 2)  and equates to approximately 41% of Ashfield.  This 
includes land around Hucknall, land to the south and east of Kirkby -in-Ashfield and 
land surrounding the rural villages of Selston, Jacksdale, Underwood and part of 
Brinsley.  The village of Bagthorpe is ‘wash ed over’ by the Green Belt.   
                      Figure 2: Green Belt Ashfield & surrounding districts  
Source:  Ashfield DC  
1.36 There  are two parish councils located within the District - Annesley and Felley 
Parish Council and Selston Parish Council. There are two Neighbourhood Plans 
which form part of the development plan for the District:  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  12 
   • Jacksdale, Underwood Selston Tomorrow (JU S-t) Neighbourhood Plans20 
brought forward by Selston Parish Council and covering a substantial part of 
the Parish of Selston.  
• Teversal, Stanton Hill and Skegby Neighbourhood Plan21 brought forward by 
the Neighbourhood Forum.  The Plan covers Stanton Hill, Skegby and  the 
rural area to the north of Sutton in Ashfield (including Teversal, Fackley and 
Stanley).  
1.37 The Localism Act of 2011 introduced a new right for communities to shape th eir 
local areas. Neighbourhood Plans provide an opportunity for local people to help 
actively and positively  to make their local area a great place to live and work22. The 
Council will support parish councils and community groups who form 
neighbourhood forums to prepare a neighbourhood plan/order provided that it is 
undertake in accordance with the regulations and strategic requirements set out in 
the Local Plan.  
Delivering Sustainable Development 
1.38 International and national bodies have se t out broad principles of sustainable 
development. Resolution 42/187 of the United Nations (UN) General Assembly 
defined sustainable development as meeting the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own ne eds.  
1.39 The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals ( Figure 3)  define the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development, signed by all 193 member states of the 
United Nations.  
1.40 The key pillars underpinning the goals are reflected in the approach to the Planni ng 
system with the NPPF emphasising that the role of the planning system is to 
contribute to the achievement of sustainable development.  The planning system 
has three overarching objectives ; economic, social and environmental, which are 
interdependent an d need to be pursued in mutually supportive ways (so that 
opportunities can be taken to secure net gains across each of the different 
objectives).  
 
20 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/neighbourhood -plans/jacksdale -underwood -selston -
neighbourhood -plan/  
21 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/neighbourhood -plans/teversal -stanton -hill-skegby -
neighbourhood -plan/  
22 1. Impacts of Neighbourhood Planning in England, Final Report to the Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and Local Government, May 2020.  University of Reading.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  13 
   
           Figure 3:  The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals23 
1.41 The key pillars underpinning the goals are reflected in the approach to the Planning 
system with the NPPF emphasising that the role of the planning system is to 
contribute to the achievement of sustainab le development.  The planning system 
has three overarching objectives24; economic, social and environmental, which are 
interdependent and need to be pursued in mutually supportive ways (so that 
opportunities can be taken to secure net gains across each of the different 
objectives).  
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) and Planning Practice Guidance 
(PPG) 
1.42 The development plan is at the heart of the planning system with a requirement set 
in law that planning decisions must be taken in line with the development plan 
unless material considerations indicate otherwise25 
1.43 The NPPF and supporting Planning Practice Guidance stresses the importance of 
having a planning system that is genuinely plan -led.  They identify that succinct and 
up-to-date plans shoul d provide a positive vision for the future of each area26 and a 
framework for addressing housing needs and other economic, social and 
environmental priorities.  This includes needs and opportunities in relation to 
housing, the economy, community facilities  and infrastructure – as well as a basis 
 
23 https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable -development -goals/  
24 National Planning Policy Framework 2021, Part  2. Achieving sustainable development . 
25 Town and Country Planning and Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.  
Section 70(2) of the  
26 National Planning Policy Framework 2021, Paragraph 15 . Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  14 
   for conserving and enhancing the natural and historic environment, mitigating and 
adapting to climate change, and achieving well designed places.  
1.44 In accordance with the NPPF, the Local Plan for Ashfield comprises a  combination 
of strategic policies (which address the priorities for the area27) and non -strategic 
policies (which deal with more detailed matters28).  Strategic policies are required to 
look ahead over a minimum 15 year period from adoption , subject to where there is 
proposed to be larger scale development such as new settlements the policies are 
set within the context of a vision that looks further ahead.  (At least 30 years)29.    
The policies within the Plan are underpinned by up -to-date ev idence and have been 
informed by the sustainability appraisal, which demonstrate how the Plan has 
addressed relevant economic, social and environmental objectives.  
Regional Plans / Strategies  
1.45 This section sets out the regional plans and strategies that h ave helped to shape 
the local plan.  
Transport Plans  
1.46 The Local Plan has taken into account the provisions of the Local Transport Plan 
(LTP), which sets out Nottinghamshire's transport strategy.  The strategy covers all 
types of transport including public transport, walking, cycling, cars and freight.  
1.47 The current Local Transport Plan30 (known as the third Local Transport Plan) runs 
from 1 April 2011 to 31 March 2026.    It is made up of two documents:  
• the Local Transport Plan strategy which details  the County Council's vision and 
the strategy, and  
• the Implementation Plan 2018/19 -2020/21 which details the transport 
improvements that will help deliver the strategy.  
1.48 Nottinghamshire County Council is currently drafting a Bus Service Improvement 
Plan (BSIP) for Nottinghamshire and Nottingham, in collaboration with the local bus 
operators. This will inform the development of the Enhanced Partnership (EP) Plan 
and Scheme. Transport connectivity to existing train stations within Ashfield and to 
neighbouring districts is required along with enabling access to employment. 
Ashfield is not solely a feeder for employment opportunities in neighbouring cities 
but has employment opportunities within the district.  
 
27 This is a legal requirement under Section 19(1B -1E) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.   
28 These can include allocating sites, the provision of infrastructure an d community facilities at a local level, 
establishing design principles, conserving and enhancing the natural and historic environment and setting 
out other development management policies.  
29 Except in relation to town centre development, NPPF 2021, Part 7 . 
30 https://www.nottinghamshire.gov.uk/transport/public -transport/plans -strategies -policies/local -transport -
plan#implementation  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  15 
   1.49 The County Council have undertake n a number of studies to identify potential 
options for improvements to local roads in Ashfield which are anticipated to 
influence future Implementation Plans.  
D2N2 Local Economic Partnership  
1.50 Local Economic Partnerships (LEPs) are non -statutory partnershi ps between local 
authorities and businesses, which promote economic growth in their local area.  
D2N2 is the LEP that covers Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire.  
1.51 D2N2 has published an updated Strategic Economic Plan as the first stage of its 
Local Industrial Strategy (LIS) and a draft Local Industrial Strategy. This has been 
summarised by the Local Economic Partnership Network31 as follows:  
‘The D2N2 LEP’s Local Industrial Strategy deliver a roadmap towards achieving the 
vision that  ‘by 2030, D2N2  will have a transformed high -value economy, 
prosperous, healthy and inclusive, and one of the most productive in Europe. The 
spark in the UK’s growth engine.’  It will tackle the cross -sector productivity gap 
alongside capitalising on its key innovation an d business assets.  The D2N2 LIS 
prioritises those policies and interventions that will have the greatest impact in 
driving productivity and promoting prosperity in all their communities. ’       
1.52 The NPPF32 specifically identifies that planning policies should have regard to Local 
Industrial Strategies and other local policies for economic development and 
regeneration.   While the LIS  does not make an explicit connection to local plans, 
local plans have an i mportant role in achieving its vision and there are specific 
priority actions in the draft LIS that are facilitated through a local plan such as:  
• ‘Develop ing planning policy for new housing developments which surpass 
national standards33 .’   
• ‘Support ing the growth of our cities, towns and economic corridors to improve 
quality of place and economic prosperity in the wider region.  
• Ensur ing that housing and empl oyment development opportunities are unlocked, 
and the visitor economy bolstered, to enable wider place -making and 
productivity objectives34.’ 
1.53 The role of the local plan is to identify the physical infrastructure requirements to 
deliver the priorities set  out in the local industrial strategies.  Councils need to 
ensure that the right kind of employment space, employment land and housing is 
available to enable that growth and facilitate increase d productivity.   High quality 
housing, vibrant town centres, leisure and recreation facilities and good 
infrastructure are important aspect s to retaining and attracting graduates and skilled 
people.  The culture, leisure, and town centre offers are signifi cant factors in 
business decision -making about where to locate, and key to supporting start -ups.  
 
31 https://www.lepnetwork.net/lep -activities/local -industrial -strategies/  
32 NPPF 2021, paragraph 82.  
33 D2N2 Draft Local Industrial Strategy Proposition # 2  page 14  
34 D2N2 Draft Local Industrial Strategy Proposition # 3  page 1 7 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  16 
   From Ashfield ’s perspective, place making is regarded as having a key role within 
the plan and it is important to improve productivity, to upskill local peopl e and our 
connectiv ity.  
Maid Marian Line  
1.54 The Council with its partners has developed a business case for the reopening of 
the freight -only line between the Robin Hood Line in Nottinghamshire and the 
Erewash Valley Line in Derbyshire (between Kirkby Lane End and Ironville 
Junctions) and convert it to carry passenger train . 
1.55 The business case is supported by Ashfield and Mansfield Station Masterplans 
which identify development and place making improvement opportunities arising 
from locations near Kirkby -in-Ashfield and Sutton Parkway Stations.  
1.56 Additional work is being undertaken to investigate the economic, social, and 
environmental benefits of providing additional station platforms at both Kingsmill 
and Selston (Jubilee), building on recent Maid Marian L ine studies by AECOM and 
Systra on behalf of Nottinghamshire Councils. An Ashfield Economic Recovery Plan 
has been commissioned by the Council to inform how town centres and 
employment are supported post pandemic. This will support the business case that 
is to be developed for the station platforms.  
1.57 While recognising the wider opportunities associated with HS2, the Maid Marian 
Line is being developed as stand -alone scheme which will provide greater local 
connectivity with cross county connections, improvin g access to employment, 
education, and healthcare for both Ashfield residents and those of neighbouring 
districts.  
1.58 For Ashfield a key aspect is the connections to the East Midlands Station.  The 
Maid Marian Line reflects the opportunity for the existing freight -only line between 
the Robin Hood Line at Kirkby -in-Ashfield and the Erewash Valley Line to be 
reopened to pas senger trains. This would connect the four existing stations in 
Ashfield and Mansfield potentially directly to the proposed HS2 East Midlands 
Station at Toton with an approximate journey time of 40 minutes.  It also offers 
wider connectivity to Derby/ Leic ester and beyond.  
1.59 While recognising the wider opportunities associated with HS2, the Maid Marian 
Line is being developed as stand -alone scheme which will provide greater local 
connectivity with cross county connections, an alternative route into Nottingha m and 
to Derby and beyond. This will support Ashfield’s ambition to be a destination for 
employment, education, and tourism.  
High Speed 2 Phase 2b (HS2)  
1.60 HS2 Phase 2b is the proposed high -speed railway from Birmingham to Leeds.  As 
part of the proposals, there will be an E ast Midlands hub at Toton.  The Station will 
connect to major cities and destinations in the UK, allowing travel to our region 
from:  Chesterfield in 11 minutes - Birmingham in 19 minutes - Leeds in 29 minutes - Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  17 
   York in 36 minut es - London in 51 minutes & Newcastle in 106 minutes.  The Toton 
station will link up to local train, tram and bus services.  
1.61 HS2 Phase 2b has been identified as forming a key part of plans for regional growth 
in Nottinghamshire and the East Midlands, with  the proposed station at Toton, and 
two development sites planned at Ratcliffe on Soar Power Station, and East 
Midlands Airport  (part of the E ast  Midlands Freeport proposal 35). 
1.62 For Ashfield a key aspect is the connections to the East Midlands Station.  The 
Maid Mari an Line would connect the four existing stations in Ashfield and Mansfield 
directly to the proposed HS2 East Midlands Station at Toton with an approximate 
journey time of 40 minutes.   
1.63 The route of HS2 Phase 2b will be considered by Parliament under a hybrid bill.  
However, the Secretary of State for Transport has issued safeguarding directions36 
to protect the anticipated route  which are shown on the Policy Map accompanying 
the draft Plan. 
1.64 It is clear in the safeguarding direction t hat ‘the Directions are made by the 
Secretary of State for Transport. They are not proposals of the L ocal Planning 
Authority  and the HS2 Phase 2b route in question will not be determined through 
the development plan process. The HS2 Phase 2b route is consi dered in Parliament 
under the hybrid Bill procedures, which provide appropriate opportunities for 
petitions to be made to Parliament by those directly affected by the scheme’37. 
Joint Health & Wellbeing Strategy 2018 -2022, Nottinghamshire Health & Wellbeing 
Board  
1.65 The aim of the Health and Wellbeing Strategy is to improve the health and wellbeing 
of the local community and reduce inequalities for all ages through ensuring 
commissioned services reflect need.    This includes making sure that health an d 
wellbeing fairness according to need will be at the centre of all public policy making 
by influencing other agendas such as housing, the economy, education, the 
environment, planning and transport.  
Lowland Derbyshire & Nottinghamshire Local Nature Partnership – A Prospectus for 
Lowland Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire  
The Prospectus makes the case for strategic investment in Green Infrastructure as 
a way to maintain and extend the high quality natural environment. It emphasis that 
it also wants to ens ure its value to the economy is recognised, including its full 
economic potential. The LNP recommends that local strategic partners collaborate 
 
35 https://d2n2lep.org/east -midlands -freeport -bid/  
36 Safeguarding directions aim to ensure that land which has been earmarked for major infrastructure 
projects is protected from conflicting developments before construction starts.  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/hs2 -safeguarding -for-developers -and-local-authorities  
37 Paragraph 24, High Speed Two Phase 2b Crewe to  Manchester West Midlands to Leeds Safeguarding 
Direction, January 2021 
https://assets.publishing.service. gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/952453/Ja
nuary_2021_SG_Directions.pdf   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  18 
   and adopt a three step action plan, outlined below, to develop and enhance green 
infrastructure to meet future e conomic growth and to mitigate environmental risk 
from climate change:  
• Step 1 – Undertake a Green Infrastructure Audit  
• Step 2 – Establish a regional Strategic Green Infrastructure Network and GI 
Targets  
• Step 3 – Developing the Green Infrastructure Action Plan and Delivery  
1.66 For Ashfield, the proposed Sub -Regional Green Infrastructure Corridors include:  
• B - Trent Strategic River Corridor (including River Leen, Grantham Canal, Trent 
& Mersey Canal, Beeston Canal and Chesterfield Canal)  
• F - Erewash Strategic River Corridor and Erewash Canal  
The Prospectus also places an emphasis on Urban Fringe GI Enhancement Zones.  
         Figure 4:   Strategic Green Infrastructure Network Concept  
           Source: Lowland Derbyshire & Nottinghamshire Local Nature Partnership – A Prospectus for Lowland     
           Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  19 
   
            Figure 5 :  Strategic Green Infrastructure Network Concepts for Urban Areas  
              Source: Lowland Derbyshire & Nottinghamshire Local Nature Partnership – A Prospectus for    
              Lowland Derbyshire and Nottinghamshir e. 
Local Context / Strategies  
1.67 The following plans and polices are of local relevance and have been used to shape 
the draft local plan.  
Ashfield District Council Corporate Plan (2019 – 2023)38 
1.68 Six priorities are set out in the Ashfield District Council Corporate Plan (2019 – 
2023)39 as follows:  
• Health and Happiness,  
• Homes and Housing,  
 
38 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/media/8d84458 b550cb95/corporate -plan-2019 -2023 -final-to-publish.pdf  
39 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/your -council/strategies -plans -policies/   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  20 
   • Economic Growth and Pl ace, 
• Cleaner and Greener,  
• Safer and Stronger, and  
• Innovate and Improve  
1.69 Planning, and the development plan in particular has a cross cutting role to play in 
helping to meet and deliver these priorities for the People of Ashfield. In particular, 
the local plan has a key responsibility in delivering the outcomes around the supply 
of appropriate and affordable homes, improving our town centres, facilitating 
economic growth especially around transport hubs, improving parks and open 
space and increasing tree co verage.  
Ashfield Social Value Policy  
1.70 The Council’s Social Value Policy40 sets out the Council’s commitment to social 
value and the added benefits that can be gained from projects and public 
procurement, specifically for the social, economic and environmental benefit of local 
people living in the local area.  
1.71 The Policy identifies that it is important for Ashfield District Council to know and 
understand what is being delivered so that we can understand where we need to 
concentrate improvement on.  Examples of delivering social value in the Policy 
includes ‘Building Social Value into planning services’.   This has been reflected with 
the inclusion of a social value policy in the draft Plan and the Council have been 
involved with the Social Value Task  Force in the development of the policy 
approach.  
Ashfield and Mansfield A Plan for Growth 2017. Ashfield DC & Mansfield DC41 
1.72 This reflects the commitment by both councils, to produce a combined economic 
strategy. This reflects the fact that the two distr icts together are effectively an 
integrated economic community, with many people living in one district and working 
in the other. This is also supported by Centre for Cities, who have recognised 
Mansfield principle urban area (including the Ashfield area) as one of the 64 UK 
“cities”.  
1.73 It updates the 2011 Joint Economy Masterplan setting out a vision ‘to maximise the 
opportunities for people and businesses to grow and prosper in Ashfield & 
Mansfield.’  Its sets out a SWOT analysis and set out three themes a nd associated 
priority actions:  
• Developing the workforce to support business growth.  
• Encouraging enterprise and business growth.  
• Improving infrastructure and stimulating investment . 
 
40 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/media/8d88f9438231a5e/social -value -policy.pdf  
41 https://www.ashfie ld.gov.uk/media/8d850ae2a324a84/ashfield -and-mansfield -a-plan-for-growth -2017.pdf  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  21 
   Affordable Housing Delivery Strategy 2019 – 2021. Ashfield District Council42 
1.74 The strategy focuses on the actions that can be taken by the Council to increase the 
supply of affordable homes for rent or for sale in Ashfield district, developed either 
by the Council, housing association or by a private developer.  Together with the 
Local Plan, this strategy will help to deliver affordable homes in the District.  
Ashfield Playing Pitch Strategy 2017 -2020  
1.75 The Playing Pitch Strategy will provide a focus for three key areas : 
• Sustainable long term management of outdoor sports facilities,  
• Evidence of need and priorities to support funding bids for continued 
improvement of facilities,  
• Provision of new facilities through the development process where a need has 
been identified.  
Ashfield Public Open Space Strategy 2 016-2026  
1.76 The Public Open Space Strategy provides a vision for Ashfield’s public open spaces 
and emphasises three key areas:  
• Sustainable long term management of public open space;  
• Continued improvement of public spaces;  
• Provision of new public open space and associated facilities through the 
development process.  
1.77 The strategy focuses on publicly accessible open spaces, including parks and green 
spaces, town centre spaces such as squares and plazas, allotments, cemeteries 
and green links.  
The Ashfiel d Community Partnership Strategic Plan 2019 - 202243 
1.78 Ashfield Community Partnership (ACP) is a multi -agency body responsible for 
tackling and addressing crime and disorder in Ashfield.  The Strategic Plan 2019 - 
2022 is a 3 -year rolling document, which iden tifies how the partnership plans to 
tackle local community safety issues that matter to the local community.  
Lifestyle Strategy Active Ashfield 2017 – 2021  
1.79 The Strategy looks to improve health and wellbeing and the quality of life for 
residents by increasing participation in healthy lifestyles .  
Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership Strategy Be Healthy, Be Happy, 2021 – 
2025 Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership.  
1.80 The Ashfield Health and Wellbeing partnership is a local partnership which aim s to 
encourage and provide opportunities for residents within the Ashfield area to lead a 
healthy, active lifestyle.   The Strategy identifies a mission ‘To work collaboratively to 
 
42 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/media/8d85a72e4fe7225 /affordable -housing -delivery -strategy -2019 -2021 -
final.pdf  
43 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/community -leisure/anti -social -behaviour -community -safety/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  22 
   help people improve their health and wellbeing, develop pride and aspiration  in our 
communities and promote Ashfield in a positive manner.’  
Ashfield District Council Towns Fund  
1.81 Kirkby -in-Ashfield and Sutton in Ashfield were chosen by the government in Autumn 
2019, as two of the towns in the UK to receive the governments Towns Fund.  The 
Government set out the three areas of regeneration the Towns Fund will focus on:  
• urban regeneration, planning and land use,  
• skills and enterprise infrastructure, and  
• digital and transport connectivity.  
1.82 Since then, the Counci l, together with the Discover Ashfield Board have been 
working closely with stakeholders including business, education, health, transport, 
and local elected Members to develop the Kirkby and Sutton Town Investment 
Plan44. 
1.83 On 8 June 2021 the government ann ounced that it was awarding the Kirkby and 
Sutton Town Deal £62.6 million. Together with funding secured from the Towns 
Fund Accelerator Fund (£1.5m) and the Future High Streets Fund, over £70 million 
has now been secured for Ashfield. Together with co -funding this will bring well over 
£100 million of investment into the District over the next five years.  
 
1.84 The investment will deliver jobs and further education opportunities, long -term 
economic and productivity growth, new homes, improved transport infrastru cture, 
reduced carbon and new cultural and visitor facilities.   The investment plan focuses 
on four areas:  
• Business & Education  
• Health & Wellbeing  
• Visitor Economy  
• Greener Ashfield  
 
1.85 Several projects are currently underway using the £1.5m from the Accelerated 
Towns Fund funding, including:  
 
• New Kirkby indoor market – due to open in late July  
• Off-road cycle path improvements between Sherwood Business Park and Kirkby  
• New play area at Hornbeam Park, Kirkby  
• Purchase of vacant properties on Low Street, Sutton  
• Creation of a Centre of Excellence for disabled people in Sport and Theatre, at 
Portland College  
 
 
 
 
 
44 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/business -licensing/support -into-work/towns -fund/   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  23 
   Key Issues  
1.86 Set out below is a s ummary of the key issues facing the District as has been 
identified by the extensive evidence base45 in support of the Plan, the Annual 
Monitoring Report (AMR)46 and the Sustainability Appraisal (SA) scoping report47.  
The key issues identified are not ranked in any particular order of importance or 
priority.  
 
Transport  
• Ashfield is well located with rega rd to national, regional and local transport links 
and is close to major centres of population including Nottingham City, Mansfield, 
Chesterfield and Sheffield.  
• Traffic congestion is an issue at specific locations in the District but it is unlikely 
that there will be significant public funding available for new roads.  
• To work with partners to provide an integrated and efficient transport system 
including public transport, community transport, taxis, walking and cycling 
network in Ashfield.  
 
Settlements  
• Ashfield has a network of urban areas with their own ‘sense of place’ providing 
accessible local services and facilities, attractive rural settings and generally 
high quality environments.  
• There is a need to improve the quality and range of ser vices available within 
communities.  
 
Town Centres  
• All the District’s town centres need continued support and investment to help 
sustain them into the future.    
 
Housing  
• There is a need for more housing across the District, including affordable, 
specialist  housing and housing for travelling show people and gypsies and 
travellers.  
• Given that substantial parts of the District are in Green Belt, there are issues in 
balancing the housing needs of specific areas against the impact on the Green 
Belt and the coun tryside.  
• Past development of previously developed land means that currently there are 
limited stocks of vacant previously developed land. By implication, this means 
that there will be a loss of green field sites and agricultural land.  
 
Economy  
• The District offers relatively affordable housing and supply of employment sites 
to meet the District’s job forecasts.  
 
45 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/development -management -documents/   
46 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control /local -plan/monitoring/  
47 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/local -plan/sustainability -appraisal/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  24 
   • The District has traditionally relied on the manufacturing and construction 
sectors and there needs to be a more diverse local economy moving  towards 
‘high value -added’ services and manufacturing.  
 
Employment  
• New employment will require higher level skills, so that businesses and the 
District can compete in both national and international markets. The past 
industrial history also results in neg ative perceptions of the District.  
• Ashfield has lower than average education attainment levels in schools.  
• There is a h igh percentage of residents with no qualifications and those working 
in unskilled occupations in comparison to other areas.  
 
Ageing Popul ation  
• The older population (65+) continues to increase across the District. The Rurals 
has a particularly large percentage of older people, exceeding that of the 
younger generation (up 15).  
 
Deprivation  
• The Index of Multiple Deprivation identifies that Ash field is within the top 25% of 
most deprived districts in the country.  
 
Health  
• The health of people in Ashfield is generally worse than the England average, 
with higher mortality rates, high numbers of smokers and high levels of obesity.   
 
Infrastructure  
• Areas of the District suffer from limited infrastructure capacity and solutions  are 
needed, in consultation with infrastructure providers to enable future 
development needs to be accommodated.  
 
Flooding and Water  
• While the risk of flooding from watercourses is relatively low there is a risk from 
flooding is specific area, in particul ar, Hucknall and Jacksdale.  Further, 
additional water into the River Leen raises significant flood issues in Nottingham.  
• Ensuring that development contributes towards reducing flooding risk through 
improvements to the drainage infrastructure and the use o f sustainable urban 
drainage systems.  
• Reducing the level of water use given the constrained water supply for Greater 
Nottingham and Ashfield.  
 
Green Infrastructure  
• The District holds sites of significant environment value , as well as open space 
and facilit ies, including the Green Belt. Appropriate protection, access and 
linkages between these assets may need to be improved to aid the network of 
green spaces.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038     Chapter 1 - Where are we now?  
 
  
P a g e  25 
   • Ensuring that there are no adverse effect upon the South Pennines Special Area 
of Conservation (SAC ), the Birklands & Bilhaugh SPC and the Sherwood Forest 
potential Special Protection Area.  
 
Historic Environment  
• There is a significant history in Ashfield which should be positively utilised and 
enhanced. These assets play an important role in providing o ur places with their 
distinct identity and character, which should be used in a positive way to 
regenerate the District’s town centres and communities.   
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 2 – Shaping the Future  
 
  
P a g e  26 
   Chapter 2  
Shaping the future of Ashfield, what we want to achieve. 
(Vision and objectives).  
 
2.1 This chapter sets out a vision for Ashfield to 2038 and a number of strategic 
objectives to help deliver the identified vision.  
 
A Vision for Ashfield 
 
2.2 The Vision and set of accompanying strategic objectives will guide future 
development across the District, benefiting existing and new communities.  The 
policies and proposals identified in the Plan flow from the vision and the strategic 
objectives. 
 
 
   
Vision: ‘Ashfield, a place to be proud of’’  
 
Ashfield is a District where people of all ages are proud to live, study, 
work, visit and aspire to stay.  
 
High quality design and place making will shape the delivery of new 
development, responding to the infrastructure requirements of new and 
existing local communities and rising to the challenge of climate 
change.  
 
New housing is responsive to local needs, enhancing the built 
environment and reflecting the distinctive charac teristics of Ashfield’s 
towns and villages.   The lifestyle of the community will be enhanced by 
accessible health, leisure, and education opportunities.  
 
Building on our transport links, a more diverse and thriving economy 
will encourage higher educationa l attainment, business enterprise, 
quality jobs and provide opportunities for a skilled workforce.  
 
Sutton in Ashfield, Hucknall and Kirkby -in-Ashfield will have thriving, 
vibrant town centres, providing a mix of retail, cultural, employment and 
local ser vices, places where people want to visit and live.  
 
The District’s rich heritage, scenic countryside and biodiversity are 
valued resources for local residents to discover, providing opportunities 
for tourism and recreation.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 2 – Shaping the Future  
 
  
P a g e  27 
   Strategic Objectives  
 
2.3 The following strategic objectives have been identified as central to achieving the 
delivery of the vision for Ashfield .  
 The Community  SO1  Facilitate Place Making  
 
Ensure that place making is at the heart of the delivery of high quality well 
designed neighbourhoods and developments by:  
a) Creating, safe, welcoming and adaptable places that enhance local 
character and support communities.  
b) Providing attractive and accessible green spaces to encourage 
healthy lifestyles.  
c) Identifying strategic gaps between settlements to prevent 
coalescence.  
d) Creating sustainable places that contribute to people’s health and 
wellbeing and function well for the purpose they were designed.  
e) Reducing energy needs by adopting sustainable energy measures.  
f) Promoting greater community pride and ownership in an area.  
 The Community  SO2 Promote socially cohesive, healthy and active communities  
 
Promote social inclusion, healthier life styles and improve the health and 
wellbeing of the population by:  
a) Working with healthcare partners to deliver improved and, where 
required, new health and social care facilities.  
b) Facilitating involvement for all in the social and economic life of the 
community through the location and design of development and 
supporting  infrastructure.  
c) Improving community safety, reduce crime and the fear of crime 
through the development of good quality well planned environments.  
d) Improving access to the countryside, recreational, leisure and cultural 
facilities.  
e) Addresses issues of air quality.  
f) Facilitating walking and cycling to work, to services and for leisure.  
 The Community  SO3 Meeting Local Housing Needs and Aspirations  
 
To meet local housing needs and aspirations by:  
a) Supporting the delivery of well -designed good quality, new homes at 
densities, which respect local character.  
b) Ensuring that development delivers a range of housing types and 
tenures to meet the needs of Ashfield’s existing and future 
households.  
c) Enabling people to live independently longer including p rovision of 
adaptable, accessible and specialist homes.  
d) Increasing the supply of quality affordable homes to provide inclusive 
and mixed communities.  
e) Meeting the accommodation needs of Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople in appropriate locations.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 2 – Shaping the Future  
 
  
P a g e  28 
   The Community  SO4 Timely and Viable Infrastructure  
 
Ensure necessary infrastructure is provided on a timely basis as part of 
new development for the benefit of new and existing residents. This 
includes:  
a) Working with partners to secure education, training, community and 
health facilities in appropriate locations.  
b) The provision of green and blue infrastructure.  
c) Supporting the provision of an accessible, energy efficient and 
integrated transport network inc luding links to regional and national 
destinations.  
d) Enhancing the digital infrastructure of broadband and mobile networks 
to ensure that benefits to economic growth and social wellbeing for 
Ashfield are fully realised in the future.  
 The Community  SO5 Strong and Vibrant Rural Communities  
 
Protecting the character of rural settlements and ensuring that 
development respects the size of villages, whilst sustaining local services, 
supporting diversification of rural businesses and making provi sion for 
affordable housing.  
 
Supporting enhancing and improving the sustainability, vibrancy and 
vitality of the larger villages of Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood by 
providing:  
a) Access to a range of quality housing providing for the needs of all 
sectors of the communities, while ensuring that any development 
relates positively in form and function of the village.  
b) Development, which sustain and where appropriate, enhances local 
facilities including retail capacity and community facilities such as 
health and education.  
c) An environment that is attractive to small businesses and home 
working.  
d) For the extension and enhancement of public space and recreational 
facilities.  
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 2 – Shaping the Future  
 
  
P a g e  29 
   The Economy  SO6  Economic Opportunity for All  
To be ambitious for economic growth and productivity in Ashfield while 
recognising the requirements of environmental capacity and amenity by:  
a) Creating a climate for business and enterprise growth with an emphasis on 
making investment happen.  
b) To encourage economic development and regeneration of the District and 
diversification of the local economy by ensuring the provision of a range and 
choice of employment sites in terms of size, quality and location  
c) Promoting a higher wage and higher skilled economy.  
d) Supporting the growth of a diverse range of economic sectors, p romoting 
development to parts of the district where it is needed to build and strengthen  
vibrant and cohesive communities. Facilitating access to a skilled and 
educated labour force.  
e) Facilitatin g the wider transport network and local rail links to integrate with key 
transport hubs  
f) Expanding the leisure, tourism and visitor offer to inspire and encourage the 
exploration of Ashfield.  
 
 The Economy  SO7 Sutton -in-Ashfield Town Centre  
 
Refocus Sutton as an attractive and vibrant Town Centre by:  
a) Encouraging a high quality mix of retail, health, culture, housing, employment 
and leisure that will enhance the opportunity for people to live, work and visit 
the town centre;  
b) Creating a town cen tre environment which residents are proud of;   
c) Strengthening connections across the town centre through linking key 
destinations and promoting activity;  
d) Enhancing the townscape character by ensuring that new development 
respects the town’s heritage particularly around Brook Street, Market Square 
(Cons ervation Area), Portland Square and Fox Street, and provides high 
quality design.  
 
 The Economy  SO8 Hucknall Town Centre  
 
Promote Hucknall as a lively and prosperous Town Centre that is proud of its past 
by: 
a) Protecting and making the most of the town centre’s rich heritage and strong 
links to Lord Byron as part of the District’s visitor economy;  
b) Enhancing the townscape character and historic environment through 
ensuring that new development respects the town’s Conservation Area and 
provides high qualit y design;  
c) Encouraging a high quality mix of retail, tourism, health, culture, leisure, 
housing and  employment that will enhance the opportunity for people to live, 
work and visit the town centre;  
d) Strengthening connections between the NET Station and the town centre;  
e) Creating a town centre environment, which is the focus for the life of the 
community.  
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 2 – Shaping the Future  
 
  
P a g e  30 
   The Economy  SO9 Kirkby -in-Ashfield Town Centre  
 
Continue Kirkby’s regeneration as a vibrant and successful District Centre by:  
a) Reinvigorating the town centre leisure offer and health provision through the 
provision of a state -of-the-art flagship leisure centre and swimming pool;  
b) Encouraging a high quality mix of retail, culture, health, housing and 
employment that will enhance the opportunity for people to live, work and visit 
the town centre;  
c) Enhancing the townscape character by ensuring that new development offers 
high quality design;  
d) Creating a town centre environment which is the focus for the life of the 
community;   
e) Strengthening connections across the town centre through linking key 
destinations and promoting activity.  
 The Economy  SO10  Local Shopping Areas  
 
Ensure local shopping areas provide appropriate services to satisfy local 
consumer needs by:  
a) Protecting and promoting a diverse mix of uses, which cater for the day -to-
day needs of the community.   
b) Supporting sensitive redevelopments and new developments where they 
contribute to the vitality and viability of the area and enhance the retail, 
servic e and leisure offer;  
c) Enhancing the environment to make local shopping areas attractive place to 
visit at any time of the day.  
 
 
 
The Environment  SO11  To meet the global challenge of climate change  
 
To rise to the global challenge of climate change, which at a local level 
presents risks to people, property, infrastructure and natural resources by:  
 
a) Supporting the delivery of low carbon renewable energy and local energy 
networks;  
b) Shaping places to help secure cuts in greenhouse gas emissions with 
location for new developments that allows for efficient use of resources;  
c) Facilitating the integration of sustainable building design principles in new 
development, improve the resilience of buildings and places to cope with a 
changing climate, ensuring fl ood risk is managed and potential problems of 
extreme weather are minimised;  
d) Reducing the amount of waste that ends up in landfill, particularly 
biodegradable waste, and increase self -sufficiency;  
e) Supporting the infrastructure to provide for zero emissio n vehicles;  
f) Ensuring that there are opportunities to take positive action on climate 
change by encouraging community -led initiatives such as the promotion of 
decentralised renewable energy use;  
g) Moving away from the extraction of fossil fuels, the burning o f which is 
carbon intensive.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 2 – Shaping the Future  
 
  
P a g e  31 
   The Environment  SO12  Transport and Accessibility  
 
Improving movement and accessibility through:  
a) Make efficient use of the existing transport infrastructure,  
b) Reduce the need to travel by car and improves accessibility.  
c) Working with others to promote quality public transport.  
d) Encouraging cycling and walking opportunities.  
e) Improve access to jobs, homes and services.  
 The Environment  SO13  Minimising our Impact on the Environment  
  
Promote the efficient use of resources by embracing sustainable patterns of 
development including:  
a) Maximising the use of previously developed land unless it conflicts with 
other strategic objectives and policies.  
b) Ensuring development proposals fully consider the coal mining legacy 
issues to ensure the stability of the land  and to o ptimise the potential for 
the u se of mine water heating . 
c) Minimising the impact of new development on natural resources.  
d) Improving water quality, ensuring that development safeguards the wate r 
supply in the principal limestone and sandstone aquifers.  
e) Minimising pollution including air, noise, water, soil and light pollution.  
 The Environment  SO14  Protecting and Enhancing the Quality of the Local Environment  
 
Enrich the quality of the natural, historic, geological and built environment 
enhancing the District’s distinctiveness and sense of place by:  
a) Protecting and enhancing geological sites, natural habitats, ecological 
networks and the biodiversity they support.  
b) Safeguarding Ashfield’s scenic and distinct countryside, heritage and 
valued landscapes.  
c) The provision of connected quality green and blue spaces that are 
multifunctional, accessible to all, supporting wildlife and human health.  
d) Conserving, and enhancing the District’s distinct historic environment and 
cultural heritage including locally valued non -designated heritage assets.  
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  32 
   Chapter 3  
 
Sustainable development in Ashfield -Spatial strategy and 
strategic policies  
 
Ashfield Local Plan Strategy 
  
3.1 The spatial strategy sets out how the Council will seek to deliver the Local Plan’s 
Vision by guiding the distribution of development  across the District over the Plan 
period, 2020 – 2038.  
 
3.2 In order to arrive at the preferred spatial strategy, the Council formulated a number 
of alternative spatial options (outlined within the Sustainability Appraisal) which 
took into consideration the evidence base including the Strategic Housing and 
Employment  Availability Assessment  (SHELAA), the local plan history in Ashfield 
Distric t Council, the key issues that the plan is seeking to address along with the 
plan vision.  Guided by the outcomes of these assessment s the Council believes 
that the spatial strategy proposed is the most sustainable approach for achieving 
the Vision.  
 
3.3 Furth er information in relation to the Spatial Strategy and Location of development 
can be found in Background Paper No 1  (September 2021 ).  Briefly, the spatial 
strategy seeks to:  
 
• Take advantage of the district’s proximity to Nottingham City,  
• Capitalise on the accessibility of the M1 transport corridor,  
• Locate growth in sustainable and accessible locations,  
• Ensure a strong regeneration focus on Kirkby in Ashfield and Sutton in 
Ashfield,  
• Allow proportionate and sustainable growth in the villages , 
• Facilitate the delivery of new infrastructure, and  
• Deliver high quality design and placemaking  
 
3.4 The strategy meets the housing requirements set out in the standard  housing need  
methodology48, 457 dwellings per annum (dpm ) and provides for the evidenced 
employment land requirement as set out in the Employment Land Needs Study49 
and the Employment Background Paper50.  The SHELAA identifies that there are 
insufficient brownfield sites within the existing main urban areas and  built-up areas 
that are deliverable (as defined by national planning policy) to accommodate the 
required levels of growth over the plan period.  As such, it has been necessary to 
seek to direct new development to greenfield land outside of the existing 
settlements to deliver the required development over the plan period. Some of this 
new development requires the release of land from the Green Belt.  This includ es 
 
48 Background Paper No 2: Housing  2021  
49 The Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment Land Needs Study, Litchfield, 2021.   
50 Background Paper No3: Economy and Employment Land July 2021.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  33 
   a new mixed -use settlement identified at Whyburn  Farm, Hucknall , further 
strategic employment land allocated at junction 27 of the M1  and other smaller 
housing allocations .  Another new settlement is also proposed at Cauldwell Road, 
Sutton in Ashfield but it is not anticipated to come forward until the end of the Plan 
period.  T his land is not in t he greenbelt.  
 
3.5 Previous attempts to replace the Local Plan in the District have also sought to 
direct development outside of but adjacent to the main urban areas  of Sutton in 
Ashfield and Kirkby -in- Ashfield .  However, this approach did not meet the 
aspira tions of the Council which resulted in the withdrawal of the previous plan51.  
The strategy , as now proposed , seeks to address those concerns and deliver a 
sustainable solution to accommodate new growth in the District over the Plan 
period.  
 
3.6 The main proposals of the Local Plan are illustrated  on the Key Diagram below,  
 
 
51 Report and Minutes for the withdrawn plan in 2018 https://democracy.ashfield -
dc.gov.uk/ieListDocuments.aspx?CId=132&MId=3675&Ver=4   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  34 
    
  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  35 
   Strategic Policy S1: Achieving Sustainable Development  
 
 
Strategic Policy S1:  Achieving Sustainable Development  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO6, SO11, SO12, SO13.  
 
1. The Council will work with applicants and other stakeholders to seek solutions, 
which mean that proposals can be approved wherever possible and will 
secure improvements to the economic, social and environmental conditions in 
the area.  
 
2. Development will be permitted without delay where:  
 
a) It will not conflict with other policies in this Local Plan or policies in a 
neighbourhood plan, unless material considerations indicate otherwise;  
 
b) It will not adversely affect, and should enhance, the c haracter, quality, 
amenity and safety of the environment ; 
 
c) It will not adversely affect highway safety or the capacity of the transport 
system;  
 
d) It will not materially conflict with adjoining or nearby land uses;  
 
e) It will not prejudice the comprehensive development of an area ; 
 
f) It protects the environment and quality of life by:  
• managing and reducing the risk of pollution in relation to the quality of 
land, air, light and water and  
• ensuring the site is suitable for its proposed use taking account of 
ground conditions, including land instability and contamination.  
 
g) It does not form part of a larger site where there would be a requirement for 
infrastructure provision if developed as a whole;  
 
h) It would not result in piecemeal, unsatisfactory forms of development, and 
 
i) proposals should be of high-quality  design and construction, which 
enhance local character and distinctiveness.  
 
3. Where there are no policies relevant to the application or the policies which 
are most important for determining the application are out of date at the time 
of making the decisio n, the Council will grant permission unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise, taking into account whether:  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  36 
    a) Application of policies within the National Planning Policy Framework 
that protect areas or assets of particular importance provide a clear 
reason for refusing the development proposed, or  
   
b) Any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and 
demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in 
the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) taken as a whole.  
 
4. All development should be located, designed, constructed and operated so as 
to maximise and deliver social value.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal , August 2021  Wood Group UK Ltd .  
• Social Value Portal , August 2021.  
• Ashfield Social Value Policy, 2020.  Ashfield District Council  
• Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership Strategy Be Healthy, Be 
Happy, 2021 – 2025 Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership.  
• Ashfield Community Partnership Strategic Plan 2019 -2022  
• Ashfield Community Partnership Strategic Assessment 2019 -2022  
• Annual Monitoring Report , Annually – Ashfield District Council . 
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021. 
3.4 The Council is committed to promoting sustainable development, which is set out 
in the NPPF , and which is replicated below:  
 
3.5 Policy S1 sets out the Councils approach to sustainable development, including 
social value.  It represents the general policy against which all development 
proposals will be assessed irrespective of land use.  It enshrines the presumption 
in favour of sustainable development and outlines the basic criteria which all 
develo pment proposals must satisfy, it also applies to all the land use -based 
policies in the Plan.  
 
3.6 The Council has adopted a positive approach in seeking to meet the objectively 
assessed development needs of the District. The policies in the Local Plan provide 
a clear framework to guide development that creates positive, sustainable growth, 
enabling proposals that accord with the Plan objectives to be approved without 
delay.  Development is required to make effective use of land while safeguarding 
and im proving the environment and ensuring the health/ wellbeing of the 
community.  
 
3.7 A development must not adversely affect the character, quality, amenity or safety 
of the built or natural environment, wherever it occurs. This will include the need to 
protect o pen spaces and playing fields in urban areas and elsewhere. The 
appearance of a proposed development and its relationship with its surroundings 
are a key factor and the Council will require good quality design solutions which 
respect and enhance the local character of an area.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  37 
   NPPF Paragraph 8  
 
Achieving sustainable development means that the planning system has three  
overarching objectives, which are interdependent and need to be pursued in  
mutually supportive ways (so that opportunities can be taken to secure net gains  
across each of the different objectives):  
 
a) an economic objective – to help build a strong, responsive and competitive economy, 
by ensuring that sufficient land of the right types is available in the right places and at 
the right t ime to support growth, innovation and improved productivity; and by 
identifying and coordinating the provision of infrastructure;  
 
b) a social objective – to support strong, vibrant and healthy communities, by ensuring 
that a sufficient number and range of homes can be provided to meet the needs of 
present and future generations; and by fostering well -designed, beautiful and safe 
places, with accessible services and open spaces that reflect current and future needs 
and support communities’ health, social and  cultural well -being; and  
 
c) an environmental objective – to protect and enhance our natural, built and historic 
environment; including making effective use of land, improving biodiversity, using 
natural resources prudently, minimising waste and pollution, a nd mitigating and 
adapting to climate change, including moving to a low carbon economy.  
  
 
3.8 All developments must have a safe means of access which is adequate to serve 
the proposal and does not adversely affect pedestrian, cyclist or vehicular safety. 
The capacity of the transport system to take new development will also be an 
important aspect and transport impact assessments will be required for major 
proposals.  
 
3.9 National planning policy requires that policies and decisions should promote an 
effective use of land in meeting the needs for homes and other uses.  Some 
developments, due to the rela tionship between the site and adjacent land, may 
prove to be unacceptable as their implementation in isolation could adversely 
affect the more comprehensive development of the area of land at a later date or 
negate the development contributing towards affo rdable housing and 
infrastructure.  In such circumstances, the Council will expect that developer will 
work with adjacent landowners to derive a comprehensive solution.   
 
3.10 Developments which are acceptable in one location may be unacceptable in 
another due  to possible conflicts with adjacent or nearby land uses. This may 
include such issues as diverse as a new lighting scheme which may result in glare 
or light spillage beyond the site, for example the floodlighting of a sports facility 
adjacent to residenti al properties. New industrial uses may also be unacceptable 
close to residential areas or existing uses may generate noise, smells, vibrations 
etc. which render nearby sites unsuitable for other uses.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  38 
   3.11 The minimisation of pollution, ground instability and contamination are important 
priorities.   The Council will consider the possible polluting effects of a 
development proposal on aspects such as amenity and surrounding land -uses, 
and will take account of the agent of change principle52 
 
3.12 It is important to make efficient use of land. Development proposals should not 
sterilise a larger site, for example by impeding access, or bringing forward a 
number of small developments on a clearly larger site which could limit the 
potential for a holistic approach to be taken to design.    Development proposals 
will be required to provide or contribute towards infrastructure needs arising from 
the development. Where requirements are based on development thresholds, a 
number of smaller development proposals will not be permitted if by doing so, the 
full requirements of a site would not be met.  
 
3.13 The concept of social value relates to the delivery of positive social, economic and 
environmental impacts, arising from the actions and operations of various 
organisations.  It c an be defined as : 
 
“ the wider social contribution that a development creates for society 
through how it is constructed and managed including the economic return to 
the local economy, the wellbeing of individuals and communities as well as 
the benefits to help regenerate the environment.”   (Social Value Portal, 
August 2021) .  
 
3.14 This means that as well as taking into account the direct effects of interventions, 
the wider effects on other areas must also be considered, particularly the effects 
on the local economy and the health and wellbeing of local residents.   It is 
important to ensure that potential benefits – including small -scale benefits which 
together can have major cumulative benefits – are maximised from all possible 
sources.  The way places are planned, maintained, built and operated can 
positively impact a number of factors including:  
 
• Jobs and economic growth  
• Health, wellbeing and the environment;  
• Community cohesiveness.  
 
3.15 For Ashfield, to achieve the maximum benefits of a social value approach, the 
Council will take social value into consideration for decisions on planning and 
development with the aim of integrating sustainable economic, social and 
environment al objectives through social value. Further detail on how this will be 
applied to individual development proposals is set out in Policy SD1.   
 
 
 
52 Under the agent of change principle, if new development or uses are to be introduced near a pre -existing 
busin ess, such as a live music venue, it is the responsibility of the developer to ensure solutions to address 
and mitigate noise are put forward as part of proposals.  (NPPF  2021,  paragraph 18 7) Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  39 
   
 
 
Figure 6:  Ashfield District Council Social Value  
Source Ashfield District Council  
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
 
Strategic Policy S2: Meeting the Challenge of Climate Change   
P a g e  40 
    
 
Strategic Policy S2: Meeting the Challenge of Climate Change  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO11, SO13.  
 
1. The Council is committed to tackling the causes and impacts of climate 
change and deliver a reduction in the District’s carbon footprint.  
Development and the use of land/ and buildings will be required to address 
climate change, adapting to anticipated future changes and mitigating 
against further change by reducing greenhouse gas emis sions.  
 
2. The Council will work with partners, stakeholders and developers to:  
 
a. Promote energy generation from renewable and low -carbon sources, 
through supporting new development where it is able to demonstrate that 
its adverse impacts have been satisfacto rily addressed.  
 
b. Mitigate the impacts of climate change through ensuring that new 
development proposals minimise their potential adverse environmental 
impacts during their construction and eventual operation. New proposals 
for development should:  
 
• Ensure that the impacts on natural resources are minimised and the 
use of renewable resources encouraged;  
• Reduce carbon emissions;   
• Be efficient in minimising the consumption of energy, water and other 
resources;  
• Maintaining ecological  resilience.  
 
c. Direct ing development to area at the lowest risk of flooding in the District.  
 
d. Ensure, that development integrates measures for water and flood 
management including:  
 
i) Improving the quality of water resources and the natural features of 
Kings Mill Reservoir, the Rivers Leen, Erewash, Maun, Meden, Idle 
and Doe Lea, their tributary streams, ponds and associated habitats.  
 
ii) Minimising any risk to the quality of the groundwater in the principal 
aquifers or in groundwater source protection zones.  
 
iii) Applyin g a sequential approach to minimise flood risk.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  41 
   iv) Achieving greenfield run -off rates within the catchment of the River 
Leen to minimise the risk of flooding to Hucknall and the City of 
Nottingham.  
 
e. Ensure that surface water is managed so that there is no un acceptable 
impact from surface water flooding to the development, to surrounding areas 
or to the existing drainage regime.  
 
Evidence 
base  • Towards a Sustainable Energy Policy for Nottinghamshire - Nottinghamshire 
Sustainable Energy Planning  Partnership  2009 (NSEPP).  
• Nottinghamshire: Operational Renewal and Low Carbon Energy Schemes 
2009 - Nottinghamshire Sustainable Energy Planning  Partners hip (NSEPP).  
• Towards a Sustainable Energy Policy for Nottinghamshire, Report of 
Consultation 2009 - Nottinghamshire Sustainable Energy 
Planning  Partnership (NSEPP).  
• Low Carbon Energy Opportunities and Heat Mapping for Local Planning 
Areas Across the East M idlands 2011 - Final Report - Land Use 
Consultants, Centre for Sustainable Energy and SQW  
• Ashfield  District Council Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1 2009 . 
Ashfield District Council.  
• Greater  Nottingham and Ashfield Outline Water Cycle Study 2010 - Entec 
Ltd. 
• Sustainability Appraisal August 2019, Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 14: Meeting the challenge of climate change, flooding and 
coastal change.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Climate change as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Flood risk and coastal change as of August 
2021.  
 
 
3.16 Adapting and mitigating against the effects of climate change is one of the key 
challenges facing us all and a core element of sustainable development. As such, 
the Council is committed to supporting proposals and initiatives that seek to 
achieve zero and low carbon development; and implement low carbon and 
renewable energy infrastructure.   
 
3.17 Development in Ashfield should contribute towards the construction and creation 
of well -designed sustainable places  to mitigate against and adapt to climate 
change, and to contribute to national targets on reducing carbon emissions and 
energy use.  
 
3.18 Water m anagement and reducing the risk of flooding from all sources is a key 
aspect of sustainable development. As a substantial area of Ashfield is on a 
principal aquifer there is a particular emphasis on protecting ground water from 
contamination and enhancing the water environment. Evidence from Ashfield’s 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and the Greater Nottingham and Ashfield Outline 
Water Cycle Study inform the specific Development Management Policies on 
these aspects set out in Policy CC2: Water Resource Man agement and Policy 
CC3: Flood Risk.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  42 
    
3.19 Design and Access Statements (DAS) can also be used to explain:  
 
• How the proposal seeks to reduce carbon emissions through reducing energy 
demand by maximising energy efficiency and reducing the need to travel.  
 
• How renewable energy and low carbon development have been incorporated to 
reduce reliance on fossil fuels;  
 
• How trees and soils, are affected by development with  the emphasis on the 
retention of trees as  they provide  a carbon store.  
 
• How the proposal for buildings, the public realm and the wider landscape adapts 
to the implications of climate change which inclu de likely increased 
temperatures, more frequent and severe flooding and extreme weather events.  
 
• How flood risk within areas susceptible to fluvial and surface water flooding has 
been considered.  
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
 
Strategic Policy S3: Location of Development   
  
P a g e  43 
    
Strategic Policy S3: Location of Development   
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO3, SO5, SO6, SO11, SO13, S014.  
 
Development in Ashfield will be located in accordance with the following 
hierarchy of settlements, as identified on the Policies Map:  
 
Hierarchy  Towns/settlements  
Main Urban Areas  
 
 Sutton in Ashfield (Sutton)  
Kirkby -in-Ashfield (Kirkby)  
Hucknall  
Areas in the District adjacent to the  
Sub Regional Centre of Mansfield  
 
New Settlements  Whyburn  Farm, Hucknall.  
Cauldwell Road, Sutton.  
 
Strategic Employment Areas  Sherwood Business Park/M1 
Motorway Junction 27.  
 
Named Settlements  Selston, Jacksdale, Underwood,  
New Annesley, Bestwood, Brinsley, 
Fackley.  
  
Remainder of the  
District  
 Designated Countryside and Green  
Belt, including all other small 
settlements/hamlets  within the 
District.  
 
 
a) Hucknall, Sutton and Kirkby and areas in the District adjacent to the Sub 
Regional Centre of Mansfield, will accommodate the largest scale of 
growth, as identified on the policies map.  
 
b) The proposed New settlements at Whyburn Farm, Hucknall and Cauldwell  
Road, Sutton provide the opportunity for large -scale, long term growth in 
the District which will extend beyond the life of the Local Plan.  
 
c) The strategic employment areas at Sherwood Park and at Junction 27 of 
the M1 will assist in economic growth, whils t maximising the locational 
benefits associated with major transport corridors.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  44 
   d) Selston; Jacksdale; Underwood, New Annesley, Bestwood, Brinsley and 
Fackley will accommodate smaller scale growth, as identified on the 
policies map.  
 
e) The remainder of the District does not have defined boundaries and falls 
within ‘Open Countryside’ for the purposes of the Local Plan. Within this 
area, limited infill development may be appropriate in small 
villages/settlements, provided there is no adver se effect on the scale and 
character of the village/area.  
 
In all other areas, development will only be considered appropriate where 
sites are specifically allocated in this Local Plan or where development is 
appropriate to the Green Belt or Countryside a s set out in Policies EV1 
and EV2 respectively. In this respect development will be restricted to 
that which requires a countryside location, or meets a local need, or 
supports rural diversification in accordance with policies in this local plan.  
 
 
Eviden ce base  • Greater Nottingham (including Ashfield) Accessibility of Settlements Study 
– Nottingham Outer Housing Market Area authorities and Ashfield, 2010.  
• Annual Monitoring Review 2018 -2019  – Ashfield District Council.   
• Background Paper No 1: Spatial Strategy and Location of Development 
2021 - Ashfield District Council  
• Sustainability Appraisal August 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd.  
 
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 3: Plan -making.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 7: Ensuring the vitality of town centres.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 8: Promoting healthy and safe communities.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 9: Promoting sustainable transport.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Plan -making as of August 2021.  
 
 
3.20 An important requirement of a Local Plan is the identification of locations for new 
development. The Local Plan sets out the hierarchy of settlements which will 
assist in the creation of sustainable communities by identifying the areas which 
have the best acc ess to a wide range of services and facilities.   This policy 
provides further clarity about the Plan strategy and reinforces the spatial approach 
to delivering development in the District over the Plan period.  
 
3.21 The hierarchy identifies the existing settlements and town centres as the main 
areas for development. It also promotes sustainability by locating development 
close to the built-up areas of the District and protecting rural and natural 
environments .  
 
3.22 Housi ng Development in the District will be mainly concentrated in and adjacent to 
the larger and more accessible towns of Hucknall, Sutton -in-Ashfield (Sutton) and 
Kirkby -in-Ashfield (Kirkby), alongside opportunities for new settlements which will 
provide for sustainable growth towards the end of the Plan period and beyond. Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  45 
   The villages of Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood have been allocated 
appropriate levels of development to support rural infrastructure and sustain 
vitality, whilst respecting their ‘village’  character.  
 
3.23 The Greater Nottingham Accessible Settlements Study was produced for Ashfield 
and other Nottinghamshire core authority areas in 2010 and has been used to 
establish the hierarchy of settlements in Policy S3. It ranks settlements in terms of 
the level of access to a range of facilities and services . 
 
3.24 The Council must ensure that development is located in the most sustainable 
areas within the District. Sutton, Hucknall, and Kirkby offer the best opportunities 
for existing residential, employment,  services, and facilities within the District.  
 
3.25 Concentrating major new development in these areas will help to reduce the 
carbon footprint of the community because there will be less need to travel to other 
areas for jobs, services, and facilities. The g rowth of the three towns will also 
serve to attract inward investment into these areas, thereby improving the 
opportunities and the lives of people living there.  
 
3.26 Sutton, Hucknall and Kirkby are the largest towns in Ashfield and provide excellent 
public tr ansport links to other major conurbations via the Robin Hood rail line, with 
stations in all three areas. Sutton has a central bus station and there are frequent, 
regular bus services in operation throughout Ashfield and Mansfield. Sutton and 
Kirkby are al so in close proximity to each other, so the services and facilities 
available within each town can be easily accessed from both locations.  
 
3.27 As a sub -regional centre, Mansfield also offers opportunities for larger scale 
growth. Future growth to the south of Mansfield, at Lindhurst, provides 
opportunities to provide quality facilities and infrastructure for further expansion 
within Ashfield Dist rict. 
 
3.28 Sherwood Business Park, Annesley is a former Enterprise Zone, which has been 
developed as a high quality business park.  The development of the Business Park 
reflect s the strategic significance of the site lying close to Junction 27 of the M1 
motorw ay. New sites have also been allocated for strategic employment 
opportunities in this location which capitalise on the M1 corridor.  
 
3.29 In the south, Hucknall has excellent links to Nottingham via the Robin Hood Line 
and the NET tram service, with tram stops within the town centre and to the south 
and east of the centre. Expansion to the south west of Hucknall should bring 
further investment opportunities at Rolls Royce leading to the creation of new jobs. 
The town is surrounded by the Nottinghamshire Derbyshi re Green Belt which 
constrains growth in this area.  
 
3.30 Opportunities for walking and cycling are also good in the three towns and this will 
improve over time through the delivery of plans for Green Infrastructure links.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  46 
   3.31 Huthwaite, Stanton Hill, and Skegby, which form part of Sutton, are key 
settlements located to the north and west of Sutton -in-Ashfield. Their proximity to a 
major centre accompanied by the services and facilities available in each area 
mean that these settlements are capable of expansion. A regular bus service 
operates in each area and there are also fewer restrictions on growth due to the 
fact that they are not surrounded by Green Belt.  
 
3.32 Although Annesley Woodhouse, part of Kirkby -in-Ashfield  main urban area , scored 
reasonably well in the Accessible Settlements Study, there is less opportunity for 
large scale development because it is surrounded by Green Belt. As such, this 
settlement will only be able to accommodate small scale growth.  
 
3.33 In the Named Settlements of Selston, Jacksdale, Under wood, New Annesley, 
Bestwood , Brinsley and Fackley, access to services and facilities is more limited 
because the settlements are more rural in character. There is however scope to 
deliver smaller scale growth within the settlements to meet the needs of th e 
community  and to continue to support the services that are located there.  
 
3.34 The remainder of the District is not defined by any boundaries and is considered to 
be Open Countryside with a limited number of small villages and hamlets, largely 
associated wit h agriculture (Teversal, Bagthorpe, New Westwood, Jubilee and 
New Annesley and Harlow Wood). Teversal village scored the lowest in the 
Accessible Settlements Study due to its location and because there is less 
opportunity for access to services and facilit ies. It should be noted that the 
southern part of the District which lies outside any settlement/strategic 
Employment area boundaries is washed over by the Nottingham/Derby Green 
Belt. 
 
3.35 The villages of Teversal and Bagthorpe are also Conservation Areas and , due to 
the character of the settlements, infill development will be restricted. Development 
in the rest of the District, outside the villages named, is restricted by national and 
local planning policies.  
 
3.36 To the north of the District the countryside form s the setting53 of Hardwick Hall and 
Hardwick Old Hall, both Grade 1 Listed Building , and the associated historic listed 
gardens. Heritage assets “are an irreplaceable resource and should be conserved 
in a manner appropriate to their significance, so that they can be enjoyed for their 
contribution to the quality of life of existing and fut ure generations54 ”.  
Consequently, the potential impact both on the setting and the significance of 
these heritage assets is a major constraint on development in this part of the 
District.  
 
3.37 The Table set out below identifies the dwellings coming forward i n each of the 
Spatial Planning Areas and identifies the dwellings allocated in the named 
settlements .  Housing policies for the provision of land allocations are included in 
 
53 Hardwick Hall Setting Study National Trust, 2016. Atkins  
54 NPPF July 2021 , paragraph 189  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  47 
   Policies H 1 and are identified on the Policies Map , with employment allocations 
also shown on the Policies Map and as identified in Policy E M2. 
 
 
  All 
committed 
sites*  Site allocations 
without 
Planning 
Permission**  All sites  Distribution 
by hierarchy 
% 
Main Urban Areas          
Sutton/Kirkby  1126  2109  3235  28.4%  
Hucknall  946 2156  3102  27.2%  
Adj. Mansfield  0 433 433 3.8%  
Total  2072  4698  6770  59.3%  
      
New Settlements      
Whyburn Farm  0 3000  3000  26.3%  
Cauldwell Road  0 1000  1000  8.8%  
Total  0 4000  4000  35.1%  
      
Named Settlements      
Selston  11 324 335 2.9%  
Jacksdale  7 71 78 0.7%  
Underwood  19 60 79 0.7%  
New Annesley  0 47 47 0.4%  
Bestwood  8 0 8 0.1%  
Brinsley  0 42 42 0.4%  
Fackley  2 10 12 0.1%  
Total  47 554 601 5.3%  
      
Remainder of District  36 0 36 0.3%  
      
Ashfield District 
Total  2155  9252  11407  100.0%  
 
Table 1: Dwelling Coming Forward  
Source: Ashfield District Council  
*    Sites with planning permission, PIP or Prior approval - including losses  
**   As of 1st April 2021  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  48 
   Strategic Policy S4: Green Belt    
 
 
Strategic Policy S4: Green Belt   
  
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO5, SO6, SO13, SO14.  
 
The Green Belt, as shown on the Policies Map, will be protected against 
inappropriate development as identified in the National Planning Policy Framework.  
This includes land around Hucknall, land to the south and east of Kirkby -in-Ashfield 
and land surrou nding the rural villages of Selston, Jacksdale, Underwood and part 
of Brinsley.  The village of Bagthorpe is ‘wash ed over’ by the Green Belt.   
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal August 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd  
• Background Paper 04: Green Belt Harm Assessment 2020, Ashfield 
District Council.  
• Ashfield Green Belt Boundary Review Technical Paper. 20 21, 
Ashfield District Council.  
• Ashfield Strategic Green Belt Re view 2016, Ashfield District Council.  
National 
Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 13: Protecting Green Belt land.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Green Belt as of August 2021.  
 
   
3.38 The main purpose the Nottingham – Derby Green Belt is to contain the outward 
growth of Nottingham City and Derby City and to prevent the coalescence of these 
and other settlements within it by keeping land permanently open; the essential 
characteristics of  Green Belts are their openness and their permanence. This 
original purpose remains important today, and at a local level maintenance of the 
Green Belt ensures that Hucknall and Nottingham in particular, which lie very 
close together, remain physically sep arate.   
 
3.39 When considering proposals for development within the Green Belt, regard will be 
given to the following five purposes:  
 
a)  Check the unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas;  
b)  Prevent neighbouring towns from merging into one another;  
c)  Assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment;  
d)  Preserve the setting and character of historic towns; and  
e)  Assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other 
urban land.  
 
3.40 Due to the nature and loc ation of the built -up areas in Ashfield, the Council 
consider that the five Green Belt purposes should relate to all settlements (rather 
than only to ‘large built -up areas’ and ‘towns/historic towns’), as listed in the 
‘Accessible Settlements Study for Gre ater Nottingham February 2010’. 
Settlements will be considered on the basis of their built form and not on the basis 
of town or parish boundaries.   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  49 
    
3.41 The NPPF highlights that once established Green Belt boundaries should be 
altered only in exceptional circ umstances, when fully evidenced and justified, and 
only when a Local Plan is being prepared or updated.  
 
3.42 Ashfield’s Green Belt has been subject to three sperate reviews as part of the local 
plan process.  In 201 5, the Council produced a Green Belt Boundary  Review 
Technical Paper  which was updated in 202155.   The Technical Paper  reviewed the 
existing green belt and urban/settlement area boundaries within the District.  The 
aim of this review was to identify the locations of any existing anomalies in the 
Green Belt boundaries; and to assess whether there has been any change which 
constitutes exceptional circumstances and should result in an amendment to the 
Green Belt boundary.   Following on from this, in 201 6 the Council undertook a 
Strategic Green Belt Review56 working jointly with Broxtowe, Gedling and 
Nottingham City Councils.  The aim of th e review was to identify the most important 
areas of Green Belt, when assessed against the purposes of Green Belt as set out 
in national policy (NPPF).   The third study was undertaken by the Council in 2021 
– Background Paper 04: Green Belt Ha rm Assessment57.   This study looked at 
the potential harm to the Green Belt, both direct harm via release of Green Belt 
land and indirect harm via impact on adjacent Green Belt land , resulting from the 
release of land for development.   
 
3.43 A number of chang es have been proposed  to the Ashfield Green Belt boundary to 
accommodate the spatial strategy.  These changes are discussed further  in 
Background Paper No 1 : Spatial Strategy and Location of Development , which 
sets out the reasoned justification for why this has been necessary.  The 2015 
Strategic Green Belt Review and the 2021 Background Paper: Green Belt Harm 
Assessment, has assisted the Council in developing its Spatial Strategy and site 
selection.  
 
3.44 Notwithstanding these changes, the majority of the Green Belt in the District 
continues to fulfil the purposes set out in the NPPF. The remaining Green Belt will 
therefore need to be protected for the long term, and opportunities which enhance 
the Green Belt , particularly in terms of public accessibility or enhancement to the 
landscape, visual amenity and biodiversity will be supported.  
 
  
 
55 Ashfield Green Belt Boundary Review. 2021, Ashfield District Council.  
56 Ashfield Strategic Green Belt Review . 2016, Ashfield District Council.  
https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/development -management -documents/  
57 Background Paper 04: Green Belt Harm Assessment 2020  
https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/development -management -documents/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
Strategic Policy S5: High Quality Buildings and Places through Place 
Making and Design 
P a g e  50 
    
 
Policy S5: High Quality Buildings and Places through Place Making and 
Design  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO5, SO6, SO11, SO12.  
 
1. New development must create high quality building and places.  
 
2. To ensure good place making the Council will require:  
  
a. the use of development frameworks, masterplans and other design 
guidance documents, and  
b. will use design codes and the Design Review Panel, where appropriate, 
for strategic scale developments and other large sites.   
3. Neighbourhood plans/orders can have a k ey role in placemaking and allows 
communities to have more influence and control over their local area to 
ensure they get the right type of development for their neighbourhood.   The 
Council is supportive of the production of neighbourhood plans/orders tha t 
are in conformity with strategic policies within the Local Plan.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd  
• Sutton Town Centre Spatial Masterplan  2019.  Ashfield District Council.  
• Kirkby Town Centre Spatial Masterplan  2021.  Ashfield District Council.  
• Hucknall Town Centre Spatial Masterplan  2009. Urbed  
National 
Planning 
Policy & 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2 – Achieving Sustainable Development  
• NPPF 2021, Part 12 – Achieving Well Designed Places  
• Planning Practice Guidance Design: Process and Tools as of August 
2021  
• Planning Practice Guidance Neighbourhood Planning as of August 2021  
 
 
3.45 The design of the built environment has a direct effect upon how places are used. 
The relationship between buildings, spaces and landscape as well as detailed 
design and materials are all relevant factors. Good design will influence how 
people move around our settlements, how they interact and how places make 
people feel.  
   
3.46 The NPPF states that the creation of high quality buildings and places is 
fundamental to what the planning and development process should achieve. Good 
design is a key aspect of sustainable development, creates better places in which 
to live and work and h elps make development acceptable to communities. Urban 
design and architecture can contribute to health outcomes through encouragement 
of more active lifestyles.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  51 
    
3.47 Development should be encouraged to create places that create mixed 
communities catering for  the needs of different types of people, including the 
young and old, encourage walking and cycling, improve access to public transport, 
and ensure that new development connects with existing parks and open spaces 
for recreation. Building exteriors and pub lic realm should be designed in a way that 
contributes to pedestrian friendly environments.  
 
3.48 The Council will expect development to respond to local character and history, 
reflecting the identity of its context whilst allowing for innovative and forward 
thinking design. More detail on this is set out in Policy SD 2.  
 
3.49 Regard will be had to various Council documents in assessing the design of new 
development to ensure that it provides positive benefit in terms of landscape and 
townscape character and  enhance s local distinctiveness. This includes the Town 
Centre Masterplans, the Residential Design Guide SPD and the Landscape 
Character Assessment (LCA).  
 
3.50 The use of the ‘Design Review Panel’ will be used for important new development 
schemes and proposals for im portant public spaces, strategic sites,  and other 
large sites where deemed appropriate.  The Design Review Panel operates 
nationally, providing an impartial, multi -disciplinary, constructive, expert, review 
process during the pre -application stage of the p lanning process, to applicants and 
local authorities.  Feedback from The Design Review Panel is a material 
consideration in the planning application process, as per paragraph 1 33 of the 
NPPF.  
 
3.51 It is important that new housing development is of high quality , in order to enhance 
or create a distinctive sense of place, where people will be proud of their 
neighbourhood. ‘Building for a Healthy Life’ is an established and recognised 
methodology for assessing the design of new housing and neighbourhoods, and 
all new housing development will be expected to perform well against it, or any 
successor standards.   
 
3.52 The Localism Act of 2011 introduced a new right for communities to shape their 
local areas. Neighbourhood Plans provide an opportunity for local people to help 
actively and positively  to make their local area a great place to live and work58. 
The Council will support parish councils and community groups who form 
neighbourhood forums to prepare a neighbourhood plan/order provided that it is 
undertake in accor dance with the regulations and strategic requirements set out in 
the Local Plan.  
 
  
 
58 Impacts of Neighbourhood Planning in England, Final Report to the Ministry of Housing, Communities and 
Local Government, May 2020.  University of Readin g. Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
Strategic Policy S6: Meeting Future Needs - New Settlement: Land at 
Whyburn Farm, Hucknall   
P a g e  52 
    
 
Strategic Policy S6: New Settlement: Meeting Future Needs - Land at 
Whyburn Farm, Hucknall  
  
Strategic Objectives  SO1, S02, SO3, SO4, S06, SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14  
 
Land is allocated at Whyburn Farm, Hucknall, as shown on the Policies Map for 
a mixed use New Settlement to deliver 3,000 new d wellings, 1,600 of which will 
be delivered within the plan period, along with approximately 13 hec tares of 
employment land.  
 
The new settlement will be located to the north of Hucknall, west of the A611, 
east of the proposed HS2 route and south of Park Forest/Wighay Woods  
 
It will create a balanced community together with employment opportunities 
within a high quality and accessible environment through the provision of the 
following:  
 
Housing  
• Affordable housing to meet local needs in accordance with Policy  H3. 
• Provid e a range of tenures, types and sizes of homes together with 
accessible or easily adaptable homes in accordance with Policy H6 . 
 
Employment  
• Provid e up to 13 hectares  of employment land to help meet strategic and 
local employment needs.  
 
Community Facilities  
• Provide an on-site primary school to meet the need for school places arising 
from the development.  
• Contribute towards secondary education provision as appropriate to meet the 
need for school places arising from the development.  
• Provid e a local centre with a range of retail and community uses.  
 
Transport  
• Provide well connected street patterns and walkable neighbourhoods that 
provide high quality, safe and direct walk ing, cycling and public transport 
routes.  
• Access walking and cycling routes to Annesley Woodhouse, Sherwood 
Business Park and Hucknall centre.  
• A comprehensive package of highway improvements to facilitate the new 
settlement.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  53 
   • The potential extension of the existing NET tram link from Hucknall Town 
Centre (Hucknall North) through Top Wighay Development site in Gedling to 
the site.  
• The potential for a Park and Ride site to serve the NET  
 
Environment  
• Conserve the setting of Annesley Hall Grade II* Registered Park and Garden.  
• Provides for high quality design in the form and layout of the development 
buildings and green space, which respond to the landscape and surrounding 
area in accordance with Policy  SD2. 
• Provide accessible and high quality multi -functional green spaces including 
sports pitches, play areas and a destination play park . 
• On site green and blue infrastructure to include a community forest, an 
orchard, allotments, greenways for cycling and  walking, and wildlife 
corridors . 
• The protection and enhance ment of  existing wildlife areas , including the 
adjacent Sherwood Forest possible potential Special Protection Areas 
(ppSPA),  and create a coherent biodiversity network in accordance with 
Policy EV4  
• Provide for significant biodiversity net gain through the delivery of extensive 
woodland and native planting, wildflower meadows and neutral grassland and 
reinforcement of hedgerows with native species.  
• Encourage the development to, where viable, to exceed Building Regulations 
for carbon emissions in accordance with Policy CC1.  
• Requirement for sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) to retain surface 
water flows at greenfield run off rate s.  SuDS should be integrated into the 
green/blue infrastructure.  
• Provision to be made for long term management of green spaces  
 
 
This will be achieved through working with public and private partners and will 
require the following:  
 
• A Development Framework, including delivery and phasing and a masterplan 
informed by a design review panel and community consultation including key 
design principles.  
• A green infrastructure strategy to inform the development of the new settlement.  
• A develop ment brief, design codes or the equivalent to be prepared to inform 
detailed planning applications or reserve matter applications.  
• An infrastructure delivery plan identifying the infrastructure to be delivered in a 
phased manner linked to the planning cons ents.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  54 
   Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group Ltd  
• Strategic Housing & Employment Land Available Assessment, (SHELAA) 
July 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Background Paper No 1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of 
Development, 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Background Paper  No 2: Housing, 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Background Paper No 4: Green Belt Harm Assessme nt 2020, Ashfield 
District Council.  
• Gear change: a bold vision for cycling and walking (2020) Department 
for Transport  
• Securing developer contributions for education, April 2019. Department 
for Education.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 3: Plan Making.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivery a supply of homes.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic land availability 
assessment as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic needs assessment 
as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance : Housing supply and delivery as of August 
2021.  
 
 
3.53 The W hyburn Farm New Settlement is one of two new settlements identified in the 
Plan as being crucial to the delivery of the Plan’s strategy.  The site is located on 
land previously identified as Green Be lt, in close proximity to the settlement of 
Hucknall with accessible links direct to Nottingham City.   It is a large greenfield site 
that is capable of delivering a significant proportion of the Plans identified housing 
need over the Plan period (and beyon d) along with an element of employment 
land.  The site has developer interest  
 
3.54 The purpose of this policy is to set out the site -specific requirements associated 
with the delivery of the new settlement, linked to the accompanying Infrastructure 
Plan and housing trajectory as set out in Appendix 2 . The necessary infrastructure 
(i.e. i nfrastructure that is necessary to make the site acceptable in planning terms, 
such as open space and education provision for example) are set out in the policy.  
Setting out these parameters in a strategic policy clearly identifies the long -term 
vision and expectation for the site, which is outlined further in the accompanying 
site schematic as shown in Figure 7 below .  It also helps to assist with 
placemak ing and ensuring a high-quality  design and environment is provided . 
 
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
P a g e  55 Figure 7:   Whyburn Farm High level Land Use Concept Plan  
Source: Whyburn Farm Vision Document, Westerman Homes and Cuvette Property Consulting  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
Strategic Policy S7: Meeting Future Needs - New Settlement: Land at 
Cauldwell Road, Sutton in Ashfield 
P a g e  56 
    
 
Strategic Policy S7: Meeting Future Needs - New Settlement: Land at 
Cauldwell Road, Sutton in Ashfield   
  
Strategic Objectives  SO1, S02, SO3, SO4, SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14  
 
Land is allocated at Cauldwell Road, Sutton  in Ashfield , as shown on the 
Policies Map for a mixed -use New Settlement to deliver 1,000 new dwellings, 
315 of which will be delivered within the plan period . 
 
The proposed new settlement will be located between Derby Road (A611) 
Sherwood Way (A617), and Coxmoor Road.  (See Concept Plan).  
 
It will create a balanced community within a high quality and accessible 
environment through the provision of the following:  
 
Housing  
• Affordable housing to meet local needs in accordance with Policy H3 . 
• Provid e a range of tenures, types and sizes of homes together with 
accessible or easily adaptable homes in accordance with Policy H6 . 
 
Community Facilities  
• An on-site primary school to me et the need for school places arising from the 
development.  
• Contributions towards secondary education provision as appropriate to meet 
the need for school places arising from the development.  
• Provision of a local centre with a range of retail and community  uses.  
 
Transport  
• Provide well connected street patterns and walkable neighbourhoods that 
provide high quality, safe and direct walking, cycling and public transport 
routes.  
• Access walking and cycling routes to Sutton -in-Ashfield, Mansfield and the 
wider green infrastructure network.  
• A comprehensive package of highway improvements to facilitate the new 
settlement.  
 
Environment  
• Provides for high quality design in the form and layout of the development 
buildings and green space, which respond to the landscape and surrounding 
area in accordance with Policy SD2 . Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  57 
   • The development will provide accessible and high quality multi -functional 
green spaces including play areas and green space;  
• Protect historic/archaeological features on Hamilton Hill with an app ropriate 
buffer.  
• On site green and blue infrastructure to include greenways for cycling and 
walking, and wildlife corridors;  
• Opportunities for creating new green/blue infrastructure links.  
• There will be a requirement to mitigate the impact of light pollut ion affecting 
Sherwood Observatory.  
• Landscape buffers are anticipated to be required to various parts of the site.  
• The protect ion and enhance ment of  existing wildlife areas and create a 
coherent biodiversity network in accordance with Policy EV 4. 
• An assessment of whether a buffer is required of Derby Road (A611) in 
relation to the ppSPA.  
• Encourage the development, where viable, to exceed Building Regulations 
for carbon emissions in accordance with Policy CC1.  
• Requirement for sustainable drainage sy stems (SuDS) to retain surface 
water flows at greenfield rates of run off.  SuDS will be integrated into the 
green/blue infrastructure.  
• Provision to be made for the long -term management of green spaces.  
 
This will be achieved through working with public and private partners and will 
require the following:  
 
• A Development Framework, including delivery and phasing and a masterplan 
informed by a design review panel and community consultation including key 
design principles.  
• A green infrastructure strat egy to inform the development of the new settlement.  
• A development brief, design codes or the equivalent to be prepared to inform 
detail planning applications or reserve matter applications.  
• An infrastructure delivery plan identifying the infrastructure to  be delivered in a 
phased manner linked to the planning consents.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  58 
   Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group Ltd  
• Strategic Housing & Employment Land Available Assessment, (SHELAA) 
July 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Background Paper No 1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of 
Development, 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Background Paper No 2:  Housing, 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• New Settlement Study, 2021. AECOM  
• Gear change: a bold vision for cycling and walking (202 0) Department 
for Transport  
• Securing developer contributions for education, April 2019. Department 
for Education.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 3: Plan Making.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivery a supply of homes.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic land availability 
assessment as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic needs assessment 
as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance : Housing supply and delivery as of August 
2021.  
 
3.55 Cauldwell Road/Derby Road, Sutton in Ashfield is located to the east of Sutton in 
Ashfield towards the border with Mansfield District. It covers approximately 85 
hectares in total. The site is undulating a nd is currently largely utilised for 
agriculture. The highest point of the site is immediately north of the northern 
boundary of the golf course, whilst the land falls away into a dip along the minor 
watercourses towards Cauldwell Dam. The parcel of land n orth west of Cauldwell 
Road is in a dip and highly visible from Hamilton Hill.  
 
3.56 The Cauldwell Road New Settlement is the second new settlement identified in the 
Plan.  This site looks to the future, delivering a limited number of dwellings toward 
the end o f the Plan period.   It will also provide for the delivery of new homes 
beyond the Plans end date.  Like the site in Hucknall, it is a large greenfield site 
located in close proximity to the Sub – Regional Centre of Mansfield and the 
sustainable Main Urban  Area of Sutton in Ashfield.  The land is in multiple 
ownership and at present there is no developer interest in the site.  
 
3.57 The purpose of this policy is to set out the site -specific requirements associated 
with the delivery of the new settlement, linked t o the accompanying Infrastructure 
Plan and housing trajectory as set out in Appendix 2.  The necessary infrastructure 
(i.e. infrastructure that is necessary to make the site acceptable in planning terms, 
such as open space and education provision for examp le) are set out in the policy.  
Setting out these parameters in a strategic policy clearly identifies the long -term 
vision and expectation for the site, which is outlined further in the accompanying 
site schematic as shown in Figure s 8 and  9 below.  It also helps to assist with 
placemaking and ensuring a high -quality design and environment is provided.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  59 
   3.58 The New Settlement Study59 sets out detailed background information and 
analysis of the Site. It is anticipated that approximately 28 hectares is the net 
developable area for housing which is anticipated to provide the opportunity for 
approximately 1,000  dwellings to come forward. The Study sets out an urban 
design driver map. The diagram shows indicative land -uses, high -level access and 
movement arrangements within the site, open space provision and green 
infrastructure connectivity to the wider landscape.  
 
3.59 The Sherwood Observatory  is located approximately 500m from the site to the 
south west along Coxmoor Road. Operated by the Mansfield & Sutton 
Astronomical Society (MSA), the observatory houses a 24 -inch Newtonian 
Reflecting Telescope in its dome. As this is an optical telescope, its use can be 
significantly affected by light. They are planned to expand to include a new 
planetarium on the land next door to the existing observatory and dome. The 
planetarium is planned to have viewing platforms with smaller optical telescopes 
that ca n be used by visitors.  Sherwood Observatory is a unique receptor which is 
expected to need specific consideration by any development. New or changed 
lighting should target limiting effects as much as possible to lower brightness 
characteristics consistent  with environmental zones E0 / E160. 
 
3.60 The concept diagram for Cauldwell Road, sets out the framework for place -making 
to create an attractive new community delivering high quality homes with good 
access to open space, and community facilities with a layout  that encourages the 
uptake of sustainable transport modes.  A range of business parks including 
Summit Park and Oakham Business Park are near the site providing opportunities 
for jobs.  
 
3.61 The New Settlement Study sets out how the new settlement could be del ivered 
and has reviewed a range of potential mechanisms. It identifies that there are a 
range of different models of land promotion and development, available funding 
streams and the potential role of the public and private sectors.   It is anticipated 
that additional work will be required on delivery, consequently, the Council has 
identified that the new Settlement will only delivery limited housing in the Plan 
period.   It is anticipated that there will be a steady evolution of evidence on 
deliverability,  as the various stakeholders make progress with information 
gathering and scheme de -risking  
 
 
59 New Settlement Study 2021.  AECOM.  
60 New Settlement Study 2021. Technical Proforma Site 2 - Cauldwell Road/Derby Road, Sutton in Ashfield.  
AECOM . Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  60 
    
 
Figure 8: Cauldwell Road Design Drives.   
Source: New Settlement Study 2021. AECON . 
 
 
 
                    Figure 9:  Cauldwell  Road Concept Plan  
                        Source New Settlement Study 2021. AECOM).  
 
 
  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
 
Strategic Policy S8: Meeting Future Needs - Strategic Employment 
Allocation Junction 27, M1 Motorway, Annesley 
  
P a g e  61 
    
 
Strategic Policy S8: Meeting Future Needs - Strategic Employment Allocation 
Junction 27, M1 Motorway, Annesley  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, S02, SO3, SO4, SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14  
 
Employment land development will be permitted on land off Junction 27 of the M1 
Motorway as shown on the Policies Map:  
 
• Land to the North East of Junction 27 and west of Sherwood Business Park 
comprising a gross site area of approximately 20.47 hectares.  
 
• Land to the south east of Junction 27 comprising a gross area of approximately 
25 hectares t owards the latter part of the Plan Period.  
 
Land to the North East of Junction 27  
 
The site is of strategic employment importance given its relationship to the principal 
areas of growth and its accessibility via the strategic road network.  It will create  
high quality business space that:  
 
• Provides for the development of business operated substantially within the 
logistics sector.  
• Provides for a high -quality sustainable buildings, which are carbon neutral with 
the design in the form and layout of the buildings and green space, which 
respond to site levels so as to minimise the visual impact on the  landscape . 
• Provides a comprehensive package of highway improvem ents to facilitate the 
employment site.  
• Realignment and improves the exiting right of way.   
• Provides a choice of walking and cycling links to Sherwood Business Park.  
• Ensuring that there are appropriate measures to enhance access and the 
provision of public transport.  
• Create attractive landscaped edges to the boundaries,  
• Retains, where possible, exiting hedges and trees together with enhancement 
of boundary hedges and trees.  
• Protect and enhance existing wildlife areas.  
• Provide for significant biodivers ity net gain through the delivery of extensive 
woodland and native scrub planting, wildflower meadows and neutral grassland 
and reinforcement of hedgerows with native species.  
• Encourage the development to, where viable, exceed Building Regulations for 
carbon emissions in accordance with Policy CC1.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  62 
   • Requirement for sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) to retain surface water 
flows at greenfield rates of run off.  SuDS should be integrated into the 
green/blue infrastructure.  
• Provision to be made for the long -term managements of the green spaces.  
 
 
Land to the South East of Junction 27  
 
This site is of strategic employment importance given its relationship to the 
principal areas of growth and its accessibility via the strategic road network.  It will 
create hig h quality business space that:  
 
• Provides for the development of business operated substantially within the 
logistics sector.  
• Provides for high quality design in the form and layout of the development 
buildings and green space, which respond to the landscap e and surrounding 
area.  
• A comprehensive package of highway improvements to facilitate the 
employment site.  
• Ensuring that there are appropriate measures to enhance access and the 
provision of public transport  
• Integrates the development into the landscape to  create attractive landscaped 
edges to the boundaries.  
• Conserve the setting of Annesley Hall Grade II* Registered Park and Garden.  
• Retention, where possible, of exiting hedges and trees together with 
enhancement of boundary hedges and trees.  
• The development will protect and enhance existing wildlife areas and create a 
coherent biodiversity network in accordance with Policy EV4.  
• Encourage the development to, where viable, exceed Building Regulations for 
carbon emissions in accordance with Polic y CC1  
• Requirement for sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) to retain surface water 
flows at greenfield rates of run off.  SuDS should be integrated into the 
green/blue infrastructure.  
• Provision to be made for the long -term managements of the green spaces.  
 
The site to the south east of Junction 27 is not anticipated to come forward until the 
latter part of the plan as substantial areas are required for a HS2 compound 
associated with the construction of High Speed Railway Phased 2b.   
 
This will be achieved t hrough working with public and private partners to agree a 
development framework.  
 
Evidence Base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group Ltd  
• Background Paper  No1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of 
Development 2021. Ashfield District Council  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  63 
   • Background Paper No 3:  Economy & Employment Land 2021.  
Ashfield District Council.  
• Background Paper No 4: Green Belt Harm Assessment 2020, 
Ashfield District Council.  
• The Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA 
Employment Land Needs Study, 2021.  Lichfield.  
• Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment 
July 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Ashfield and Mansfield - A Plan for Growth 2016 (Joint Economic 
Strategic) Ashfield DC & Mansfield DC.  
• Gear change: a bold vision for cycling and walking (2020) 
Department for Transport . 
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 3: Plan Making.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy.  
• NPPF 2021 Part 11: Making effective use of land.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 13: Protecting Green Belt land  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic land 
availability assessment as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic needs 
assessment as of August 2021.  
 
 
3.62 The employment evidence base for the Local Plan is set out by the Employment 
Land Need Study61.  The Study identified various scenarios to meet future 
employment land needs based on labour demand, labour supply and past take up 
rates.  It was acknowledged in the Study that Ashfield past take up rates, at least 
in part reflected the development of l ogistics units on a number of sites such as 
Castlewood Grange Business Park and Summit Park.    The Study highlighted 
there was a substantial regional demand for distributions facilities along the 
western arc of the M1 corridor (Junctions 28 to Junction 24 ).  This is in the context 
of the evidence indicating there is a limited supply of sites to meet this need.  
 
3.63 The NPPF62  highlights that planning policies should recognise the specific 
locational requirements of different sectors including distribution op erations in 
suitably accessible locations.  Further guidance is set out in Planning Practice 
Guidance63  highlights that strategic policy -making authorities will need to identify 
the scale of any need and the most appropriate locations for meeting these 
identified needs.  The PPG identifies that high tech, engineering, digital, creative 
and logistics as examples of such industries, where clustering can drive 
innovation, productivity and economic growth.  
 
3.64 Based on the evidence , the Council has identified the  need to meet an 
employment requirement of approximately 83 hectares64.    Taken with the sites 
 
61 Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment Land Needs Study, 2021.  Lichfield  
62 National Planning Policy Framework, 2021, paragraph 83  
63 Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic needs assessment.  Paragraph:031 Reference ID: 2a -
031-20190722 and Paragraph:032 Reference ID: 2a -032-20190722  
64 Background Paper No 3:  Economy & Employment Land 2021.  Ashfield District Council.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  64 
   submitted to the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment and the evidence 
from the ELNS the allocations of Junction 27 are regarded as key in meeting 
future employment land needs in the District.   The site is located within the Green 
Belt and it is considered there are exceptional circumstances for changes to the 
Green Belt boundaries in this location.  
 
3.65 This site is adjacent to Junction 27 of the M1 Motorw ay and established Sherwood 
Business Park. The site is split into two portions – the land north of Mansfield 
Road (A608) and land south of Mansfield Road. The site to the south of Mansfield 
Road is substantially impacted by HS2 Safeguarding Land, both in t erms of the 
route and for a major compound and temporary material stockpile.   Under these 
circumstances, it is not anticipated that the site would come forward until the later 
part of the Plan once HS2 route has been constructed in this area.   It is 
anticipated that the gross area after HS2 route has been completed is 
approximately 25 ha , Figure 10 . 
 
3.66 An assessment of the site was undertaken as part of the ELNS which anticipated 
that a ratio of 90% of gross was realistic.  Consequently, for the site to the  north 
east of Junction 27 1 the net developable area is anticipated to be 18.42 hectares.  
Applying a similar ratio to the area to the south east of Junction 27 would result in 
a net developable area of 22.5 hectares.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  65 
    
                     
 
                      Figure 10: Land to the South East Junction 27, M1 Motorway  
                      Source: Ashfield District Council  
 
  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
 
Strategic Policy S9: Meeting Future Housing Provision   
P a g e  66 
    
Strategic Policy S9: Meeting Future Housing Provision  
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO12.  
 
1. A minimum of 8,226 new dwellings will be delivered within the period 2020 to 
2038, dispersed across the District in accordance with the Council’s spatial 
strategy for growth.  This will necessitate the release of land previously 
identified as Green Belt in  order to meet the identified needs. N ew dwelling 
provision will also include an element of Affordable Housing as set out under 
Policy H3 of this Plan.  
 
2. Proposals for new housing for older people and those with disabilities, 
including supported and specia list accommodation, will be encouraged where 
they are in suitable locations in line with the role and size of the settlement.  
 
3. The inclusion of self -build and custom -build properties on sites will be 
encouraged.  
 
4. The Council will support schemes which brin g forward a mix of house sizes 
appropriate to deliver mixed and balanced communities.  
 
5. All new housing development within the area must deliver high quality, 
sustainable design as required by Policy SD 2 and site -specific design policies 
in the Neighbourhoo d Plan, where relevant.  
 
6. The Council will permit, and where necessary identify, sufficient pitches or plots 
to meet the current and any future identified accommodation needs of Gypsies, 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople as set out by national guidance.   
 
Evidence Base  • Standard Method to calculate housing Need, August 2021. NPPF and 
Planning Practice Guidance.  
• Background Paper No 1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of Development 
2021.  Ashfield District Council.  
• Background Paper No 2:  Housing  2021  - Ashfield District Council  
• Strategic Housing & Employment Land Available Assessment, (SHELAA) 
July 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Great er Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs Assessment Final Report 
2020 - Iceni Projects Limited on behalf of the Greater Nottingham Planning 
Partnership  
• Ashfield New Settlement Study Final Report, March 2021 – AECOM.   
• Greater Nottingham and Ashfield District  Council Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment, 2021.  RRR Consultancy Ltd.  
• Brownfield Land Register December 2020.  Ashfield District Council.  
• Housing Land Monitoring Report 2021. Ashfield District Council  
• Employment Land and Monitoring Report 202 0. Ashfield District Council  
• Self-build and custom build monitoring 2020. Ashfield District Council  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.   
National 
Planning • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  67 
   Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021,  Part 11: Making effective use of land.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Effective use of land as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance:  Housing and economic land availability 
assessment as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic needs assessment as 
of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing needs of different groups, as of 
Augu st 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing for older and disabled people as of 
August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance Housing: optional technical standards, as of 
August 2021.  
Planning Practice Guidance: Housing supply and delivery as of August 2021.  
 
 
Strategic Approach to Housing Growth  
 
Quantum of Housing Development  
 
3.67 The NPPF sets out a requirement for strategic policies to be informed by local 
housing need assessments, conducted using the standard method set out in 
National Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)65. The Local Housing Need (LHN) for 
Ashfield District, based on this standard methodology, was 457 dwellings per 
annum (dpa) as of April 2021.  
 
3.68 It has been determined that Ashfield District can meet its own need for housing, 
but thi s will require a review of the Green Belt boundaries in order to address the 
Council’s strategy for growth, as set out in Chapter 3 of this Plan , and in greater 
detail in Background Paper 1: Spatial Strategy and Location of Development.  
Under the duty to co-operate , the Council have agreed with Mansfield and Newark 
& Sherwood Councils that each district will accommodate their own LHN.  
 
3.69 Having assessed the land supply, policy and physical constraints, the Council is 
proposing to adopt a baseline minimum of  457 dwellings per year as its housing 
target. However, the Council recognise the volatility of the LHN figure which can 
change on an annual basis with fluctuations in the variables used to calculate it, 
i.e., a rolling 10 year household projection and dif fering affordability ratios. As 
such, it is proposed that the supply of housing land through allocation and 
planning permissions will exceed the current LHN by a minimum of 10% in order to 
present a risk -based approach and ensure sufficient future provisio n. 
 
3.70 Table 2 below illustrates how the Local Housing Need will be met over the Local 
Plan period of 2020 to 2038. The anticipated supply applies a discount rate to 
planning permissions to account for potential non -delivery, alongside a windfall 
allowance to  reflect small sites which may come forward beyond the first 5 years. 
 
65 The Local Housing Need is assessed using a standard approach based on published data. These include 
household proje ctions and affordability ratios which vary on an annual basis. See 
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/housing -and-economic -development -needs -assessments  for more inform ation.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  68 
   These calculations are based on historic performance over a period of 10 years in 
order to take account of peaks and troughs in the housing market66 . 
 
Table 2: Dwelling Requirement and Provision 2020 -2038     Dwellings  REQUIREMENT  1 Annual Local Housing Need based on Standard Methodology at 
April 2021  457 
2 Houses needed to meet requirement, 1/4/2020 to 31/4/2038 
(18 years)  8,226  
3 Net Houses delivered 1/4/2020 to 31/3/2021  265 
3a Homes delivered through C2 residential institution 
development (dwelling equivalent - see para 3.6) 1/4/2020 to 
31/3/2021  48 
4 Net requirement 2021 - 2038  7,913  SUPPLY  5 Houses deliverable on small sites , 1/4/2021 to 31/3/2038    
    a) With planning permission (including new build, net 
conversions and change of use) at 1st April 2021*  390 
    b) Known permitted development/prior notification schemes 
not yet implemented at 1st April 2021  5 
    c) Demolitions and other losses with planning permission at 
1st April 2021  -4 
    d) Small site windfall allowance beyond 5 years - 1/4/2026 to 
1/4/2038 (based on past delivery)  720 
6 Houses deliverable on large sites  1/4/2021 to 31/3/2038    
    a) Strategic Site Allocations under Policies S6 and S7  1915  
    b) Housing Allocations under Policy H1 ** 5941  
7 Deduction to account for potential lapsed permissions  -159 
8 Provision from C2 residential institutions (dwelling equivalent)  6 
9 Total housing supply 1/4/2020 to 31/3/2038 
(5a+5b+5c+5d+5e+6a+6b -6c+6d+7 +8) 8814  
  10 Over provision 2020 to 2038  901 
      Approximately 
11% Buffer  
* includes an additional 15 dwellings from yield on 'large site' permissions where outstanding balance is less 
than 10 dwellings  
 
66 Background Paper No 2: Housing 2021. Ashfield District Council  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  69 
   ** includes large sites (10 or more dwellings) with planning permission plus SHELAA sites  
 
 
3.71 National planning policy guidance identifies that a potential source of housing 
supply may come forward from derelict land and buildings, including empty homes. 
Whilst the Council have and continue to work to bring forward empty homes, it 
should be recognised that this sourc e deals with existing properties. Those 
brought back into use as a result therefore represent a change in tenure (from 
private to affordable rented) and not additional supply since they are already 
included within the existing housing stock.  
 
3.72 The NPPF req uires local planning authorities to identify and update annually a 
supply of specific deliverable sites sufficient to provide for five years’ worth of 
housing against their requirements.  Details of the five year land supply for 
Ashfield are set out in the  annual Housing Land Monitoring Report67  and in 
Appendix 2.  
 
 
Housing Mix  
 
3.73 Paragraph 6 2 of the NPPF requires that the needs of different groups in the 
community with specific housing requirements are assessed and reflected in 
planning policies. This includes those who require affordable housing, families with 
children, older people, students , people with disabilities, service families, 
travellers, people who rent their homes and people wishing to commission or build 
their own homes68 ). For Ashfield, the following categories have been identified as 
having particular needs in the Greater Nottingham and Ashfield Housing Needs 
Assessment 2020 (HNA) . 
 
Affordable Housing  
 
3.74 The HNA identifies the level of affordable housing need for each aut hority based 
upon current and future projections and the development targets. It assesses the 
need for rented products and affordable home ownership separately as set out in 
Table 2. (these figures form part of the overall housing target of 457 dpa).  
 
3.75 The HNA report provides a starting point in developing an affordable housing 
target, which will also be informed by further analysis including a full Plan viability 
assessment.   
 
 
67 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/local -plan/monitoring/  
 
68 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/media/8d890976f713e6c/2020 -11-10-greater -nottingham -and-
ashfield_housing -needs -assessment_fin al.pdf  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  70 
   Table 2: Ashfield Affordable Housing Net Need, 2020 -38 
Net Need for Rented Affordable (per annum)  237 
Net Need/Surplus for Affordable Home Ownership (per 
annum)  -195 
 
3.76 In addition to the delivery of Affordable Housing provision as part of larger 
developments under Policy H 3, the District Council will also consider Affordable 
Housing schemes on the edge of existing rural settlements as set out in Policy H 4, 
Rural Exceptions. These schemes present an exception to normal planning policy, 
and only Affordable Housing units will be permitted on these sites.  
 
Older Person and those with Disabilities Housing Needs  
 
3.77 Greater Nottingham and Ashfield is projected to see a notable increase in the 
older person population, with the total number of people aged 65 and over 
projected to increase by 37.8% over the 18 years to 2038. This compares with 
overall population growth of 10.6% and a modest increase in the Under 65 
population of 4.8% . The analysis also shows that there is a substantial volume of 
younger adults (aged 65 and under) across the study area with a range of 
disabilities.  
 
3.78 In line with Planning Policy Guidance, some older households, particularly those 
aged over 75, will require specialist housing provision. For Ashfield, the analysis in 
the HNA points to a need for 2,463 units of housing with support, and 948 units of 
hous ing with care.  The analysis also identifies a need for 1,252 additional care 
home bedspaces in Ashfield to 2038  which will fall within a C2 use class.  
 
3.79 There will be a combination of those with disabilities and long -term health 
problems that continue to l ive at home with family, those who choose to live 
independently with the possibility of incorporating adaptations into their homes and 
those who choose to move into supported housing.  Policy H6:2 and the associated 
supporting text sets out the Cou ncil’s approach to specialist housing.  
 
Self-Build and Custom Build Homes  
 
3.80 Self-build or custom build helps to diversify the housing market and increase 
consumer choice. Self -build and custom housebuilders choose the design and 
layout of their home  and can be i nnovative in both its design and construction.  
 
3.81 Ashfield Council has a responsibility for keeping a self -build and custom 
housebuilding register, which is shared with Mansfield and Newark & Sherwood 
District Councils. The level of demand for such sites is monitored against small Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  71 
   sites coming forward thr ough the planning application process in an annual 
monitoring report.69  
 
The Need for Different Sizes of Homes  
 
3.82 The existing housing mix is important in considering what future mix of housing is 
appropriate to deliver a mixed and balanced community. The H NA analysis 
indicates an emphasis on family sized housing within the market sector, with 
family and smaller homes being required within the affordable housing sector.  
3.83 There are instances where adjustments will need to be applied according to the 
local pro file of housing, the character of the local area, the sustainability 
credentials of the site and the viability of providing a particular mix of housing 
dependent on submarket characteristics. Policy H7 sets out the approach to 
housing mix for development m anagement purposes.  
 
Gypsy, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
 
3.84 Planning Policy for Traveller sites (August 2015)70 requires local need for 
accommodation to be based on robust evidence.  Specific deliverable sites should 
be identified in order to meet accommodation needs for 5 years, together with a 
supply of developable sites or broad locations for growth for 6 to 10 years, and 
where possible, for years 11 to 15.  
 
3.85 Under the duty to co -operate, the Council must work collaboratively with 
neighbouring local planning authorities to set targets for Gypsy and Traveller 
accommodation and , where necessary , to identify suitable  sites. The Council 
jointly commissioned the  Greater Nottingham and Ashfield District Council Gypsy 
and Traveller Accommodation Assessment 2021  (GTAA)71 with Broxtowe, 
Erewash, Gedling, Nottingham City and Rushcliffe councils and will continue to 
work with  other neighbouring authorities in determining targets and identifying 
sites to meet need s. 
 
3.86 The GTAA sets out the level of future need for the District for the period 2020 to 
2038 as illustrated in  Table 3 below. These needs will be met through criteria 
based policy H2 and site allocations within policy H2a.  
 
 
 
69 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/building -control -regulations/self -build-custom -
builds/self -build -custom -monitoring/  
 
70 DCLG Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (August 2015) 
https://www.go v.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/457420/Final_planning_and_tr
avellers_policy.pdf   
71 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building-control/development -management -documents/   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  72 
   Table 3: Ashfield Future Pitch/Plot Requirements 2020 to 2038  
Period  Gypsy/Traveller Pitches  Showpeople’s 
Plots/Yards  
2020 to 20125  0 9 
2025 to 2030  1 2 
2030 to 2035  1 2 
2035 to 2038  1 1 
Total 2020 to 2038  3 14 
 
 
3.87 The provision of Traveller sites will be monitored in future Housing Land 
Monitoring Reports on an annual basis.   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
 
Strategic Policy S 10: Delivering Economic Opportunities   
P a g e  73 
    
 
Strategic Policy S 10: Delivering Economic Opportunities  
 
Strategic 
Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO12.  
 
1. The Council is committed to developing a sustainable, diverse and resilient 
economy, reducing low wages and improving skill levels in order to narrow the 
difference between District and national figures by:  
 
a. Providing for the growth of the local and sub -regional economy by ensuring 
sufficient and appropriate employment land is available within the District to 
meet the existing and future needs of businesses.   The Plan makes 
provision for up to 83 ha of employment land  from 2018 to 2038.   
 
b. Protecting and a llocating approximately 38.42 ha (net developable area) of 
employment land at the District ’s Strategic Employment Area of Sherwood 
Business Park / M1 Motorway junction 27 as shown on the Policies Map for 
logistics and distribution.  
 
c. Providi ng a framework to protect the District’s employment allocations, Key 
Employment Areas identified below, and other employment sites /buildings:  
• Calladine Business Park, Sutton in Ashfield , 
• Castlewood Grange Business Park, Sutton in Ashfield , 
• County Estate Nunn Brook Road/Brookside Way, Sutton in Ashfield , 
• Common Road, Industrial Estate, Export Drive, Sutton in Ashfield , 
• Fulwood Industrial Estate, Fulwood Road, Sutton in Ashfield , 
• Hamilton Road, Sutton in Ashfield , 
• Summit Park, Sherwood Way South, Sut ton in Ashfield , 
• Lowmoor Business Park, Kirkby -in-Ashfield , 
• Park Lane Business Park, Kirkby -in-Ashfield , 
• Oddicroft Lane, Kirkby -in-Ashfield , 
• Sherwood Business Park, Annesley , and  
• Land to the south of Watnall Road, including Rolls Royce and 
Harrier Park, H ucknall  
d. Supporting business start -up and growth within the Main Urban Areas , Main 
Settlements and New Settlements as defined by the Location of 
Development Policy.   
 
e. Supporting and encouraging rural businesses to provide local employment 
opportunities, increase local economic prosperity and minimise the need to 
travel for employment.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  74 
   f. Taking advantage of the economic and regeneration opportunities arising 
from:  
• The Maid Marian Line and the Robin Hood Line Stations, having regard 
to the Ashfield Stations Masterplan ,  
• The light railway system, Nottingham Express Transit  , and  
• The development of the HS2 Birmingham to Leeds Est Midlands Hub 
station.  
 
g. Working with educational providers, learning and training bodies, job 
centres and higher ed ucation providers to raise workforce skill levels, and 
improve employability . 
 
h. Working with key stakeholders and providers to improve access to high 
speed information technology infrastructure across the District by 
supporting, enabling and where practical  assisting in its provision . 
 
i. Developing a distinct image and civic pride for the area to promote 
economic progress and increasing awareness of what Ashfield has to offer.  
 
2. The Council will support and enhance opportunities for tourism which reflect 
the local distinctiveness and heritage of the area.  
 
Evidence 
base  • Background Paper  No 1: Spatial Strategy and Location of Development  
2021. Ashfield District Council  
• Background Paper No 3: Economy & Employment Land 2021.  Ashfield 
District Council . 
• The Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment Land 
Needs Study, 202 1.  Lichfield . 
• Employment Land Forecasting Study, Nottingham Core HMA & Nottingham 
Outer HMA  2015 - Nathaniel Litchfield & Partners . 
• Strategic Hous ing and Employment Land Availability Assessment July 
2021. Ashfield District Council . 
• Ashfield and Mansfield - A Plan for Growth 2016 (Joint Economic 
Masterplan Update) . Ashfield District Council & Mansfield District Council . 
• Maid Marian Rail Extension Economic Impact Analysis 2020 . Lichfields . 
• Maid Marian Rail Extension - Ashfield Masterplan Report 2020 . Ryders.   
Ashfield District Council and Mansfield District Council . 
• D2N2 – the Spark in the UK’s Growth Engine Strategic Economic Plan 
2019 -2030 . D2N2 Local Enterprise Partnership . 
• The D2N2 draft Local Industrial Strategy , March 2020. D2N2 Local 
Enterprise Partners hip. 
• D2N2 Local Industrial Strategy Evidence Base - D2N2 Local Enterprise 
Partnership . 
• Employment Land and Monitoring Report  2020.  Ashfield District Counci l. 
• Sustainability Appraisal  August 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd 
• Securing developer contributions for educa tion, April 2019. Department for 
Education.  
National 
Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2 : Achieving sustainable development . 
• NPPF 2021, Part 6 : Building a strong, competitive economy . 
• NPPF 2021 Part 11 : Making effective use of land . Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  75 
   • Planning Practice Guidance : Housing and economic land availability 
assessment  as of August 2021 . 
• Planning Practice Guidance : Housing and economic needs assessment  as of 
August 2021 . 
 
3.86 To maintain and improve the economic performance of the District, it is important 
to make provision for future employment and economic development alongside 
housing growth and protection of the environment. Through the policies in the 
Local Plan the Counci l is committed to supporting and developing the local 
economy by a variety of means including : 
 
• encouraging and facilitating private sector involvement in the development of 
the employment infrastructure of the District (land, premises, communications 
and transport);  
• maintaining a supply of quality land and premises for new and existing 
business es, 
• supporting diversification of rural area s; 
• improving the built environment through high standards of design;  and 
• supporting and increasing soc ial cohesion and community benefits.  
 
3.87 The employment land requirements set out in the policy reflects the evidence from 
the Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA, Employment Land Needs 
Study  (ELNS)  (May 2021 , Lichfields ) and the analysis set out in Background Paper 
No 3, Economy & Employment Land , July 2021.  This includes evidence in relation 
to: 
 
• the functional economic market area s (FEMA) ; 
• the existing stock of land for employment uses within the District . 
• the recent pattern of employment land supply and loss  in the District;  
• D2N2 Local Enterprise Partnership Strategic Economic Plan 2019 -2030 
(SEP) with its emphasis on priority sectors and the draft Local Industrial 
Strategy 2020  requirements;  
• evidence of market demand (including the locational and premises 
requirements of particular types of business);  and 
• wider market signals relating to economic growth, diversification and 
innovation . 
 
3.88 The policy identifies approximately 83 ha of land for employment purposes over 
the plan period. The ELNS sets out a number of scenarios for future demand for 
employment land based on a number of data sources reflecting labour demand, 
labour supply and past take up rate scenarios.  The figure in  the policy is based on 
the adjusted past take up rate scenario, which reflects the logistics development 
already taking place in Ashfield.    This approach will facilitate the priority sectors 
identified in D2N2’s  Strategic Economic Plan72, which aims to tackle the 
productivity gap in order for the D2N2 area to remain a competitive business 
location and to  deliver long term prosperity  
 
72 D2N2 – the Spark in the UK’s Growth Engine Strategic Economic Plan - 2019 -2030’  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  76 
    
3.89 The ELNS also highlights, from wider market signals, that there is significant 
demand for land for logistics along the M1  corridor.  This has been reflected in the 
increased development of logistics units in Ashfield since 2015.  Further work is 
being undertaken to consider the logistic requirements along the M1 in 
Nottinghamshire/Derbyshire but the plan responds to the need  identified in the 
ELNS by allocating 38.42 ha of land at the District’s Strategic Employment Area of 
Sherwood Business park / M1 Motorway junction 27.  Part of t he land allocated to 
the south east of junction 27 comprising approximately 20 ha net developab le area 
is subject to safeguarding directions for HS2 from the Secretary of State.  It is 
anticipated that this land will come forward towards the end of the plan period 
subject to the delivery of H igh Speed Railway Phase 2b . 
 
3.90 The ELNS identifies that the Nottingham Outer Housing Market Area can be 
regarded as a FEMA.  However, Hucknall has strong linkages with the Core HMA 
districts, and particularly Nottingham City with significant commuter flows into 
Nottingham, Gedling and Br oxtowe from Hucknall.73. 
 
3.91 Employment land plays an important role in ensuring that there is sufficient land to 
meet future economic needs of the district.   A framework for protecting 
employment land is important for a number of reasons including:  
 
• Viability – There is the potential for employment land to be lost to the higher 
values of residential or retail uses.   
• Aging stock - It is important that any substantial areas of older stock is not lost 
to non employment uses rather than being redeveloped  for employment 
purposes.  
• Permitted Development Rights (PDRs) – There are potential implication s 
regarding employment premises being permitted  to residential use.   
• Conflict between uses - Residential development in inappropriate areas may 
threaten the on going use of surrounding areas for employment uses.  
 
3.92 The Key Employment Areas  in the policy reflect that the ELNS identifie s a number 
of employment areas that continue  to play an important role in the local economy  
and it is recommended that they should be protect ed to retain their use for 
employment purposes.   
 
3.93 The local economy of the District is faced with a number of issues related to low 
paid and lower quality employment opportunities, a shortage of skills and 
qualifications, and a need to create economic diversity to minimise the reliance on 
the manufacturin g sector.   High levels of deprivation remain within Ashfield; with 
areas ranked in the top 10% and top 20% of most deprived areas in the country.  
The 2019 ONS Indices of Multiple Deprivation ( IMD) ranks Ashfield as the 63rd 
most deprived local authority in England74.  A key message from the Ashfield and 
 
73 Nottingham Core & Nottingham Outer Employment Land Needs Study, May 2021. Lichfield.   Section 4.  
74 Nottingham Core & Nottingham Outer Employment Land Needs Study, May 2021. Lichfield. Paragraph 
3.82 & Figure 3.27 Rank of Indices of Multiple Deprivation in the Nottingham Core - Outer HMA . Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  77 
   Mansfield - A Plan for Growth 2016 (Joint Economic Masterplan Update) is that to 
maximise the ability of the labour supply to drive growth, it is vital that 
opportunities are  open to all to be economically active, through access to 
education, training and employment.   The Council is committed to supporting 
opportunities which assist with the long-term re-skilling of the Ashfield workforce 
which is necessary to ensure the pres ence of a highly -skilled labour pool to take 
advantage of new jobs across the District.  
 
3.94 Safeguarding Directions have been made by the Secretary of State for Transport 
for the route of HS2 phase 2B (Birmingham to Leeds)  through the District.  If 
taken for ward , the land allocated to the south east of Junction 27 of the M1 
Motorway is likely required as a compound for the construction of the railway line.  
Consequently , it is anticipated that this land will come forward towards the end of 
the plan period subject to the delivery of HS2.  
 
3.95 The reopening of the Maid Marian Line and an additional station platform on the 
Robin Hood Line provides opportunities to facilitate economic development.  There 
are a significant number of small to medium sized busi nesses registered in the 
rural areas, particularly Selston.  The reopening of the Maid Marian Line with a 
station platform in the rural area would provide significantly improved access to 
wider business markets.  
   
3.96 The new journey opportunities provided b y a Maid Marian Line service would 
enable residents of Ashfield, Mansfield and Bolsover much improved access to 
leisure and tourism opportunities by interchanging with longer distance services.  
The potential opening of a new station platform at Kings Mill  would provide 
opportunities to access the amenities around the reservoir which are currently 
being enhanced by a £1.45 million Heritage Lottery funded project.  It would also 
facilitate access to Summit Park , occupied by a major warehousing development 
providing up to 2,000 jobs, to Oakham Business Park and Kings Mill Hospital, the 
largest employer in Ashfield.      
 
3.97 New journey opportunities would be available to improve access to education and 
training opportunities in Ashfield, Bolsover and Mansfield wh ich are due to be 
enhanced by Ashfield’s Towns Fund award, which including plans for a new 
regional Automated Distribution and Manufacturing Centre (ADMC) creating a 
regional centre of excellence .  With the support of the County Council this is 
anticipated  to be located close to one of the Stations.   Through Vison West 
Nottinghamshire Collage and Nottingham Trent University , who ha s recently 
opened a campus in Mansfield, a Research & Innovation, and Teaching & 
Learning “platform” is already under development on which to base the ADMC. 
This enables the development of a proposition unlikely to have been imagined in 
the area previously.   
 
3.98 The Lichfield Maid Marian Rail Extension: Economic Impact Analysis concluded 
that increased capacity, connectivity and accessibility brought by the Maid Marian 
Rail Extension would support the delivery of residential and commercial 
development within th e catchments of the four enhanced stations at Mansfield Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  78 
   Woodhouse, Mansfield Town, Sutton Parkway and Kirkby -in-Ashfield. It would also 
benefit employees by allowing them to access a wider range of job opportunities 
and housing choices; employers by giving  them access to a wider labour pool and 
more accessible locations; and will make the two Districts more attractive to 
operators through improved services and facilities, and improved retail and leisure 
offers.  The Station Masterplans build on this economi c analysis by identify several 
development opportunities near Sutton Parkway and Kirkby -in-Ashfield stations on 
the Robin Hood Line.  
 
3.99 While recognising the wider opportunities associated with HS2, the Maid Marian 
Line is being developed as stand -alone sche me which will provide greater local 
connectivity with cross county connections, an alternative route into Nottingham 
and to Derby and beyond. This will support Ashfield’s ambition to be a destination 
for employment, education, and tourism.  
 
3.100  Working in resi dential areas and businesses operated from within built -up areas, 
including residential areas and people’s homes, will be supported, subject to 
highways, access and amenity considerations.  
 
3.101  Past evidence has identified that the re have been negative perceptions of Ashfield 
characterised by the history of coal mining, textiles and heavy industry.    Shaping 
the image of the district away from historical stereotypes would help attract 
investment from home and abroad .  Therefore, emphasising the district’s ‘unique 
selling points’ is imperative in seeking to build a stronger, more extensive ‘brand’ 
and facilitate economic opportunities.  Discover Ashfield was set up in 2017.  It 
celebrates all that is best about living , visiting, working and doing business in 
Ashfield through four themes  to: 
 
• Promote Ashfield in a positive manner; Develop pride and aspiration in our 
communities (Theme 1: Love where you live)  
• Encourage and promote inward investment (Theme 2. Succeed in A shfield)  
• Help people improve their health and wellbeing (Theme 3. Health and 
Happiness)  
• Support tourism and the visitor economy (Theme 4. More to Discover).  
 
Supporting Discover Ashfield remains an important aspect of promoting the 
economic opportunities o f the District.  
 
3.102  To promote and development opportunities for tourism the Council will undertake a 
number of measures including:  
 
• Safeguarding key landscape, ecological sensitive area and heritages asset 
including Old Teversal Village, Brierley Forest Park, Teversal Trails, Silverhill 
Woods, Thieves Wood, Kings Mill Reservoir and Portland Park;  
• Protecting the historic parks and garde ns of Hardwick Hall (those areas within 
Ashfield), Annesley Hall, and Skegby Hal l; 
• Supporting the development of appropriate visitor -related attractions and 
facilities where opportunities arise  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  79 
   • Supporting the development and improvement of rural trails and  cycle routes;  
• Developing and supporting the evening economy in the town centres of 
Hucknall, Sutton in Ashfield and Kirkby -in-Ashfield; and  
• Supporting tourism related initiatives in Hucknall, Sutton in Ashfield and Kirkby -
in-Ashfield including schemes, w hich improve the accessibility of areas 
potentially attractive to tourist.   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
Strategic Policy S11 : Aligning Growth and Infrastructure  
P a g e  80 
    
 
Strategic Policy S11: Aligning Growth and Infrastructure  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, 
SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14  
 
1. The Council will work with partners, neighbouring councils, infrastructure 
providers, developers and stakeholders to facilitate the requirements for 
economic, social and environmental infrastructure to support development.  
Priorities for infrastructure provision in the District include:  
 
a. Provi sion of sufficient school places in the form of expanded or new 
primary and secondary schools with larger developments setting aside 
land and/or contributing to the cost of delivering land for new sch ools 
where required;  
  
b. Facilitat ing and support ing provision of practical vocational training, 
apprenticeships, and further and higher education;  
 
c. Ensur ing that development positively contributes to creating healthy 
communities, where appropriate providing for or contribut ing towards 
essential health care and community infrastructure;  
 
d. Roll-out of full -fibre broadband to secure the earliest availability for 
universal broadband coverage and fastest connection speeds for all 
existing and new developments;  
 
e. Improved connectivity by promoting more sustainable travel patterns, 
increase transport choice, providing better public transport infrastructure 
and services .   The delivery of sustainable transport networks should 
seek to provide : 
 
• Area wide travel demand management (policies to reduce travel by 
private car and incentives to use public transport, walking and cycling 
for appropriate journeys including travel p lanning);  
• Improvements to public transport services, and walking and cycling 
facilities;  
• Optimisation of existing highway network to prioritise public transport 
and encourage walking and cycling;  
• Major highway capacity enhancements to deal with residual ca r 
demand.  
 
f. Develop innovative strategies for the management of private car use and 
parking including support for electric car charging points;  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  81 
   g. Improving railway connections and facilities, on the Robin Hood Line, the 
Maid Marian Line and the light rail system Notti ngham Express Transit.  
   
2. To make a positive contribution to the sustainable growth of Ashfield, 
proposed development, including development adjacent to, but outside the 
District boundary, shall contribute towards the economic, social and 
environmental inf rastructure requirements of the area.   The nature and scale 
of the requirements will be commensurate with the form of the development 
together with its potential impact upon the surrounding area and will include:   
 
a) Meeting the reasonable cost of new infra structure, facilities or services, on 
or off site, required as a consequence of the proposal  enabling the 
cumulative impacts of development to be managed ; 
 
b) Making the most effective use of existing infrastructure, facilities and 
services including the opportunities for co -location and multifunctional use of 
facilities;  
 
c) Safeguarding the requirements of infrastructure providers, including but not 
limited to telecommunications equipment (particularly high speed 
broadband), electricity power lines, high pr essure gas mains, educational 
facilities, health facilities and aquifer protection areas;  
 
d) Facilitating accessibility to facilities and services by a range of transport 
modes . 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Background Paper No 5: Infrastructure Delivery , 2021 . Ashfield District 
Council . 
• Ashfield Transport Study , 2016. Systra .  
• Maid Marian Rail Extension Economic Impact Analysis 2020. Lichfields.  
• Maid Marian Rail Extension - Ashfield Masterplan Report 2020.  
Ashfield District Council and Mansfield District Council.  
• Gear change: a bold vision for cycling and walking (2020) Department 
for Transport  
• Securing developer contributions for education, April 2019. Department 
for Education.  
National 
Planning 
Policy & 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2 : Achieving sustainable development . 
• NPPF 2021, Part 3 : Plan making . 
• NPPF  2021, Part 4: Decision Making . 
• NPPF  2021, Part 5. Delivering a sufficient supply of homes .  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6 : Building a strong, competitive economy . 
• Planning Practice Guidance: Viability as of August 2021.  
 
3.103  Infrastructure has a broad definition including physical, social and green 
infrastructure needed to facilitate the amount of development proposed for the 
area. Infrastructure provision  can be:  
 
• Strategic  -  usually be delivered off -site and outlined in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (some infrastructure needs may cross District boundaries)  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  82 
   • Local  - may be delivered on larger developments through on -site delivery; or 
through off -site investment in existing i nfrastructure within the area of the 
development, necessary to mitigate the cumulative impact of development   
• On-site -  arising from a direct link between the development and the provision 
or improvements to infrastructure.  
 
3.104  All development must take int o account the need to provide necessary 
infrastructure to enable and/ or support development, including (but not limited to) 
transport, education, health, green Infrastructure, utilities, waste facilities, 
wastewater, leisure, cultural and community facili ties. Additionally, sustainable 
development requires facilities and services to support communities and facilitate 
economic development. The coordinated delivery of adequately funded 
infrastructure at the right time and in the right place is key to ensurin g that local 
services, facilities and the transport network can cope with any added demand that 
arises from housing growth and other new development . 
 
3.105  As such, infrastructure  planning and delivery fulfil a key role in the plan making 
process by identifying  where or when deficits or surpluses of capacity exist and 
predict future capacity issues brought about by development.   
 
3.106  Without appropriate measures to mitigate impact and investment to enable the 
provision of infrastructure improvements, development wi ll be neither sustainable 
nor acceptable. New development will therefore be required to  provide or 
contribute towards the provision of the necessary infrastructure, facilities and 
services in a timely manner so as to support the growth of the District.  
 
3.107  The existing 2016 Ashfield Transport Study is currently being updated. The study 
will make an assessment of the transport impact of the Draft Local Plan to provide 
an indication of whether the development proposals are feasible in transport term s 
and, if so, what mitigation is required to accommodate the Local Plan 
developments.   
 
3.108  The upgrading of the existing freight -only line (Maid Marian Line) between the 
Robin Hood Line in Nottinghamshire and the Pye Bridge junction of the Erewash 
Valley Lin e in Derbyshire (between Kirkby Lane End and Ironville Junctions), to 
convert it to carry passenger trains on a regular basis has the potential for positive 
economic impacts by enhancing the viability and attractiveness of key locations 
and sites along the  route.  (See supporting information to Policy S10 Employment 
and Economy).  The benefits are set out in the Lichfield Maid Marian Rail 
Extension: Economic Impact Analysis.  The Station Masterplans build on this 
economic analysis by identifying several dev elopment opportunities near Sutton 
Parkway and Kirkby -in-Ashfield Stations on the Robin Hood Line. Ashfield’s Towns 
Fund award in 2021 has already progressed the Kirkby Station Masterplan with a 
proposal to create a new transport hub at Kirkby Station plan ned for 2024.  
 
 
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  83 
   Strategic Policy S1 2: Improving Transport Infrastructure.  
 
 
Strategic Policy S 12: Improving Transport Infrastructure.  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO11, SO12, SO13  
 
1. The Council will work with other parties to improve transport infrastructure with 
the objective of promoting travel choice and reducing the reliance on the private 
car.  
 
2. Development will be supported and land safeguarded, where it improves the 
connectivit y of and to the following:  
 
a. The Nottingham Express Transit System, including safeguarding land    from 
Hucknall Station to the boundary with Gedling Borough as identified on the 
Policies Map.  
 
b. The Robin Hood railway line and the railway stations at Huckna ll, Kirkby -in-
Ashfield and Sutton Parkway.  
 
c. The r e-opening of the freight only Maid Marian Line between the Robin 
Hood Line and the Erewash Valley Line to carry passenger trains on a 
regular basis . 
 
d. Links to the East Midlands Hub Station, when the HS2 Phas e Two high 
speed rail link from Birmingham to Leeds is constructed . Land safeguarded 
for HS2 is shown on the Policies Map.  
 
e. Bus and coach services in the District . 
 
f. Comprehensive network of high -quality cycle networks .  The main routes  to 
be upgraded and/or created are shown on the Policies Map and include:  
 
i. Hucknall  - Kirkby  – Sutton  - Mansfield  
ii. Sutton – Derbyshire  
iii. Huthwaite – Sutton  
iv. Sutton  - Sherwood Observatory  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  84 
   Evidence Base  • Sustainability Appraisal August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd. 
• Background Paper No 5: Infrastructure Delivery  2021 . Ashfield 
District Council.  
• Ashfield Transport Study, 2016. Systra . 
• Local Transport Plan (LTP3) 2011/12 – 2025/26. 2011, 
Nottinghamshire County Council . 
• Discover Ashfield . 
• Gear change: a bold vision for cycling and walking (2020) 
Department for Transport  
National Planning 
Policy and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 8. Promoting healthy and safe communities.  
• NPPF  2021, Part 9: Promoting sustainable transport.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 14: Meeting the challenge of climate change, 
flooding and coastal change.  
 
3.109  In order to create more sustainable communities and enable transport choice,  
it is important that people living in Ashfield have good access to a range of  
transport modes to enable them to access services, facilities and employment  
opportunities within and beyond the District.  
 
3.110  The Nottingham Express Transit System was developed as a light rail system  to 
serve the public transport needs of Greater Nottingham.   Hucknall Station  currently 
provides an interchange facility with heavy rail and park and ride.  Allocations for 
new housing and employment development are set out in the  Gedling Borough 
Aligned Core Strategy, Part 1 Local Plan75.  While current  proposals do not include 
the development of a NET station, the Council has  been requested to safeguard 
land should this be required in the future to  widen transport choices in the area.  
 
3.111  The Robin Hood Lin e from Workshop to Nottingham was reopened in 1993 by a 
partnership of local authorities led by Nottinghamshire County Council as  part of a 
multi -million pound investment. Ashfield District Council was actively  involved with 
supporting the re -opening of th e line and the provision of  stations at Hucknall, 
Kirkby -in-Ashfield and Sutton Parkway.  
 
3.112  The reopening of the Maid Marian Line for passenger traffic has a number of 
economic, environmental and social benefits.  Information on the  potential 
economic  and ot her benefits from reopening the line to passengers is set out 
under the supporting information to Policy S10.  
 
3.113  The Government plans a new high -speed rail network from Birmingham  to 
Manchester and Leeds, known as HS2 Phase Two. The proposed route of  HS2 
runs through Ashfield. For the scheme to benefit local communities it is  important 
that connectivity improvements to the East Midlands Hub Station  are achieved for 
Ashfield and neighbouring authorities. This would entail the  up-grading of the local 
transpo rt network to the East Midlands Hub Station,  including the opportunity to 
open the mineral railway line from Kirkby -in-Ashfield towards the Pye Bridge 
junction of the Erewash Valley Line for passengers and the provision of station(s)  
 
75 https://www.gedl ing.gov.uk/acs/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  85 
   along the line.   Analy sis undertaken by Nottinghamshire County Council during 
2020 shows that walking and cycling ha s increased in popularity during the 
pandemic, reflecting the national picture. As a former mining area there are miles 
of former railway corridors in the area, p roviding an opportunity to further develop 
the off -road cycling and walking network.  Through the Towns Fund76 award, a 
comprehensive network of high -quality walking and cycling routes will be provided, 
with a first phase being delivered through the acceler ated funding. Upgrading 
sections of existing routes, and the creation of new sections will support the 
development of the visitor economy and provide improved connections to key 
employment areas and public transport links.  
 
3.114  The main routes being upgraded and/or created are: Hucknall  – Kirkby  – Sutton  -
Mansfield, Sutton - Derbyshire, Huthwaite - Sutton and Sutton  - Sherwood 
Observatory. The route navigates through the town centres linking to Sherwood 
and Castlewood Business parks to the south and w est and visitor attractions 
including Mill Waters at Kings Mill Reservoir, the Science Discovery Centre, 
Planetarium and Observatory, and Hardwick Hall to the east and north 
respectively picking up links to residential areas throughout.     
  
 
76 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/business -licensing/support -into-work/towns -fund/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
P a g e  86 Strategic Policy S13 Vibrant Town Centres 
Strategic Policy S1 3 Vibrant Town Centres 
Strategic Objectives  SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10.  
1.Main town centre uses1 will be located in the Town Centres of Sutton in
Ashfield, Hucknall, and Kirkby -in-Ashfield and in local centres having regard
to the retail hierarch y, the Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study and the delivery
of the objectives and schemes set out in the Tow n Centre Masterplans.
Development  should promote the vitality and viability of the centres.
2.The extent of the Town Centres and Primary Shopping Areas are identified
on the Policies  Map.
3.The Council will require a sequential test and, where appropriate, an impact
assessment  for proposed development for main town centre uses which are
outside the town centres.
Retail Hierarchy  
4.Proposals for development within the town centres, local ce ntres and
shopping parades, identified on the Policies Map, will be supported where
the scale and nature of the proposed development will maintain and enhance
the individual role of the centre in accordance with the following retail
hierarchy.
Hierarchy Town/Settlement  
Town Centres Sutton in Ashfield  
Hucknall  
Kirkby in Ashfield  
Local Shopping  
Centres  Outram Street, Sutton  
Stanton Hill  
Huthwaite  
Forest Road, Annesley  
Annesley Road, Hucknall  
Watnall Road, Hucknall  
Jacksdale  
Shopping Parades Skegby  
Nuncargate  
Selston  
Underwood  
a)Sutton in Ashfield - Development should sustain and enhance the centre’s
role by maintaining and extending the range and quality of facilities and
services offered. Development should have regard to objectives and
schemes set out in the Sutton Town Centre Spatial Masterplan.Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  87 
    
b) Hucknall - Development should sustain and enhance the role of Hucknall ,  
strengthen ing the retail offer and provide a mix of suitable uses at an 
appropriate scale with the aim of broadening the town centre's appeal. 
Development should have regard to objectives and schemes set out in 
the Hucknall Town Centre Spatial Masterplan . 
 
c) Kirkby -in-Ashfield - Development that supports the consolidation and 
facilitates in the Town Centre  will be encouraged, particularly where this 
broadens the range, and quality of facilities, services and cultural 
activities. Development should have regard to objective s and schemes 
set out in the Kirkby Town Centre Spatial Masterplan.  
 
d) Development that respects the individual local scale and character of the 
local centre will be supported.   
 
e) Development of an appropriate scale should enhance Shopping Parades.  
 
f) Developm ent of an appropriate design, type and scale will be supported in 
other areas where it meets local needs but does not undermine existing 
centres.  
 
Capacity  
 
5. To support the planned levels of housing and employment growth, proposals 
for convenience and comparison retail will be supported where the scale and 
type of retail development reflects the District’s capacity for it, as set out 
below.  
 
Comparison Goods Capacity in Ashfield District  
Year  Floorspace Capacity (sq m net)  
Minimum  Maximum  
2021  1,300  2,000  
2026  3,700  5,900  
2032  7,800  12,300  
 
 
Convenience Goods Capacity in Ashfield District  
Year  Floorspace Capacity (sq m net)  
Minimum  Maximum  
2016  4,500  5,600  
2021  4,900  6,200  
2026  5,300  6,700  
2032  5,800  7,300  
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  88 
   1 – Main Town Centre uses reflect the definition of main town centre uses set out in the NPPF 
2019 or any subsequent replacement.  
 
Note: Hucknall is defined as a Town Centre in the Nottingham Core Aligned Core Strategy.  
 
Evidence 
base • Background Paper No 1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of Development , 
August 2021.  Ashfield District Council . 
• Sutton Town Centre Spatial Masterplan , 2020.  Ashfield District Council . 
• Kirkby Town Centre Spatial Masterplan , 2021. Ashfield District Council . 
• Hucknall Town Centre Spatial Masterplan – Ashfield District Council . 
• Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study , 2016.  Nexus Planning . 
• Retail Floorspace Survey 2020 . Ashfield District Council . 
• Kirkby -in-Ashfield & Sutton in Ashfield Town Investment Plan  
2021 -2030 .  Ashfield District Council.  
• Sustainability Appraisa l, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2 : Achieving Sustainable Development . 
• NPPF  2021,  Part 7 : Ensuring the vitality of town centres . 
• Planning Practice Guidance : Town centres and retail  as of August 2021.  
 
3.115  Vibrant and viable town centres play an important role in supporting the District’s 
communities, providing jobs, services and facilities. They play a key role in 
delivering sustainable development and the Local Plan will seek to ensure all the 
District’s centres are enhanced during the Plan period, through the development 
and growth of appropriate town centre uses. To further gui de development across 
the three town centres, the Council has undertaken revisions to existing 
masterplans  (2010).  The local plan reflects the NPPF which places an emphasis 
on a strong town centre first approach to the development of town centre uses.  
 
3.116  Sutton in Ashfield is a traditional town centre with a good mix of national and 
independent retailers, along with an indoor shopping centre, leisure centre and a 
market. It is the largest retail centre within Ashfield District and is generally well 
used by the resident population. The historic core of the centre is designated as a 
conservation area. The Sutton in Ashfield Spatial Masterplan sets out the 
framework for future investment and development  (Figure 11 below) . 
 
3.117  Kirkby -in-Ashfield is a traditional small, town centre dominated by independent 
retailers, with a small number of  national operators and a small market operating 
on a number of days. It is generally used by the local resident population and 
workers. Substantial funding has already been invested in Kirkby Town Centre in 
improving the public realm through the civic squa re and the construction of a new 
leisure centre ( Figure 12 below )  
 
3.118  The successful bid for £62.6m from the Towns Fund for Sutton in Ashfield and 
Kirkby -in-Ashfield provides substantial opportunities to create sustainable change 
across the Kirkby and Sutton  area and their respective town centres.  
 
 
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
P a g e  89 Figure 11: Sutton in Ashfield Town Centre Concept Plan 
Source Sutton in Ashfield Masterplan, 2019  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  90 
    
 
 
   Figure 12: Kirkby -in-Ashfield Concept Plan  
   Source : Kirkby -in-Ashfield Masterplan, 2021  
 
 
 
3.119  Hucknall is a traditional town centre with a good mix of national and independent 
retailers, along with a weekly outdoor market. It is the second largest retail centre 
in the Ashfield District and is generally well used by loca l residents. The relocation 
of the market and pedestrianisation of the High Street has facilitate d pedestrian 
access to help support Hucknall’s primary shopping area.  A substantial part of the 
Town Centre is designated as a Conservation Area.  The draft Hucknall Town 
Centre Spatial Masterplan sets out the framework for future investment and 
developmen t of the Town Centre.  
 
3.120  Growth around Hucknall, provides opportunities to enhance the town centre to 
meet the needs of the growing population and to ensuring access to a mix of 
facilities based on local need.  
 
3.121  Local Shopping Centres and Shopping Parades should accommodate small scale 
development which provides for the day to day needs of the community without 
threatening the vitality and viability of Town Centres. At a national level, the NPPF 
promotes strong ne ighbourhood centres because they provide consumer choice 
and reduce the need to travel further distances.  
 
3.122  Sutton, Hucknall and Kirkby provide good public transport links to other major 
conurbations via the Robin Hood rail line. Sutton has a central bus s tation and 
there are frequent, regular bus services in operation to Kirkby, which also has a 
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  91 
   railway station on the edge of the Town Centre.  In the south, Hucknall has 
excellent links to Nottingham via the Robin Hood Line and the NET tram service, 
with tr am stops within the town centre and to the south and east of the centre. As 
a focus for public transport, concentrating new development in these areas will 
have a significant role in reducing the carbon footprint of the community and a 
positive impact in r elation to climate change.   The growth of the three towns will 
also serve to attract inward investment into these areas, thereby improving the 
opportunities and the lives of people living there.  
 
3.123  Proposals for out -of-centre retail development and town cen tre uses will be 
required to strongly demonstrate  the need for such development, and how they will 
mitigate their impact on nearby centres, and any regeneration activities. The 
requirement for a sequential test and, where appropriate, an impact assessment to 
town centre uses outside the town centres and local centres is elaborated in the 
development management policies within the Local Plan.  
 
3.124  The town centre hierarchy has been developed using evidence taken from the 
Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study 2016 an d the Greater Nottingham and Ashfield 
District Accessible Settlements Study  (2010 ) . The existence of the hierarchy will 
help to guide new development to appropriately sized centres across the District 
and ensure that future growth is adequately balanced across Ashfield.  
 
3.125  In order to support the levels of housing and employment growth p lanned for, the 
Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study ( Nexus,  2016) has highlighted the potential for 
comparison and convenience retail expansion across the District. The Policy 
identifies potential future capacity and sets out a floorspace range.   In line wi th the 
Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study (2016), the projected capacity for expansion has 
not been allocated to specific centres. This approach allows an element of 
flexibility, but all future proposals must align with the District’s Town Centre 
Hierarchy,  ensuring proposals do not result in a centre receiving a level of growth 
beyond its stature.  
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  92 
   Strategic Policy S14 Tackling Health Inequalities and Facilitating 
Healthier Lifestyles  
 
 
Strategic Policy S1 4 Tackling Health Inequalities and Facilitating Healthier 
Lifestyles  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, 
SO12, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. The Council will be supportive of programmes and strategies, which aim to 
promote sustainable communities, reduce health inequalities and facilitate 
healthier lifestyles in Ashfield.  
 
2. Development proposals should be designed to contribute to and improve 
healthy communities and wellbeing in Ashfield, thereby reducing health 
inequalities. This can be achieved in a number of ways dependent on the 
nature of development including:  
 
a) Ensuring sufficient and a suitable mix of housing;  
 
b) Promoting job oppor tunities;  
 
c) Promoting healthy neighbourhoods and facilitating active and healthy 
lifestyles;  
 
d) Protect the amenity of residents with regard to noise, smell, light pollution, 
ground instability, ground and water contamination, vibration and air 
quality;  
 
e) Providing good access for all to health and social care facilities;  
 
f) Promoting access to green spaces, sports facilities, play and recreation 
opportunities;  
 
g) Promoting allotments and gardens for exercise, recreation and for healthy 
locally produ ced food;  
 
h) Supporting the provision of community facilities;  
 
i) Measures to close the gap in educational attainment in Ashfield;  
 
j) Improved community safety;  
 
k) Supporting the provision of infrastructure to meet health and wellbeing 
needs.  
Evidence 
base • Sustainability Appraisal , August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  93 
   • Ashfield Local Authority Health Profile 2019 - Public Health England . 
• Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership Strategy Be Healthy, Be Happy, 
2021 – 2025 Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership.  
• Nottinghamshire Health and Wellbeing Board Joint Health and Wellbeing 
Strategy 2018 – 2022 .  Nottinghamshire County Council/ Nottinghamshire 
Health & Wellbeing Board .  
• Marmot Review 'Fair society healthy lives' 2010.  UCL/Marmot . 
• Build Back Fairness in Greater Manchester: Health Equality and Dignified 
Lives, June 2021.  Institute of Health Equity . 
National 
Planning 
Policy  and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2 : Achieving sustainable development . 
• NPPF  2021, Part 8 : Promoting healthy and safe communities . 
• NPPF 2021, Part 12 : Achieving well designed places . 
• Planning Practice Guidance : Healthy and safe communities  as of August 2021  
• Planning Practice Guidance : Open space, sports and recreation facilities, 
public rights of way and local green space  as at August 2021  
 
3.126  Health and wellbeing issues are complex and are cross cutting throughout the 
Local Plan and Planning is just one of many influencing factors on health and 
wellbeing.  The Policy looks to reduce health inequalities, which can be defined as 
differences in he alth status or in the distribution of health determinants between 
different population groups. For example, differences in mobility between elderly 
people and younger populations or differences in mortality rates between people 
from different social classe s. Health inequality relate s to a number of factors such 
as poor housing, poor education and/or unemployment.  The recently published 
Build back Fairer in Greater Manchester Health Equality and Dignified Lives 
Report 2021 sets out a number of measures to t ackle health inequalities which 
would be equally applicable to other areas.  This includes that a strong economy 
can mean high average incomes and good living standards, conditions which 
contribute to people’s health and wellbeing.   
 
3.127  National Planning Pra ctice Guidance77 highlights the importance of planning in 
relation to health and wellbeing and working with Health and Wellbeing Boards, 
Clinical Commissioning Bodies78 and other bodies within the NHS.  
Nottinghamshire Health and Wellbeing Strategy79 and i ts delivery plans sets out 
actions to tackle a number of priorities in relation to health and wellbeing in 
Nottinghamshire. The policies within the Local Plan will make an important 
contribution to improving health and wellbeing for the communities of Ashf ield. 
 
3.128  Working with its partners, the Council will seek to meet the health and wellbeing 
needs of our residents by addressing the key determinants of health including 
deprivation, physical environment and encouraging active lifestyles. In land use 
terms th e way that places are planned and designed has a significant influence 
over whether communities are able to live healthy lives. Local plan policies support 
 
77 Planning Practice Guidance “Health and wellbeing”  Paragraph: 001 Reference ID: 53 -001-20140306 to 
Paragraph: 005 Reference ID: 53 -005-20140306  
78 Mansfield and Ashfield Clinical Commissioning Group and Nottingham North and East Clinical 
Commission Group.  
79 Nottinghamshire Health and Wellbeing Board Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy 2018 – 2022 - 
Nottinghamshire County Council/ Nottinghamshire Health & Wellbeing Board.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
P a g e  94 health and wellbeing by utilising public health evidence to inform policies and to 
ensure that new d evelopment proposals support improvements to the 
health/wellbeing of the population.  
3.129  Development has an important role in providing the necessary infrastructure to 
encourage physical exercise and health, including accessible open space, 
vegetation and landscaping, sport and recreation facilities, cultural facilities and 
safe, well promoted, walking and cycling routes.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  95 
   Strategic Policy S1 5 Protecting and Enhancing Our Green Infrastructure 
and the Natural Environment  
 
 
Strategic Policy S1 5 Protecting and Enhancing Our Green Infrastructure and 
the Natural Environment  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO11, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. The natural environment, including green and blue infrastructure corridors and 
assets, will be protected, conserved and where possible and appropriate 
enhanced, in order to maintain the integrity of the District’s overall Green 
Infrastructure network, and help preserve the character of the District a nd 
biodiversity present within these areas.  
 
2. The biodiversity of Ashfield will be maintained and enhanced by:  
 
a) protecting, connecting and enhancing important habitats,  in particular 
those identified in the District’s Biodiversity Opportunity Maps; and  
 
b) promoting native tree planting, well targeted woodland creation and 
street trees, and encouraging retention of trees, with a view to 
enhancing biodiversity.  
 
Evidence 
base • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd  
• Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project 2016.  Notts BAG.  
• Ashfield Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. Ashfield 
District Council.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development  
• NPPF 2021, Part  15: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, sports and recreational facilities, 
public rights of ways and local green space as of August 2021.  
 
3.130  It is acknowledged that green infrastructure and the natural environment is a key 
element of delivering sustainable development and it is of great importance for 
biodiversity, geo -diversity, education, culture, leisure, tourism and the wider 
economy.  
 
3.131  The District contains a range of green infrastructure, natural and wildlife assets of 
national, regional and local significance, this includes but is not limited to parks, 
open spaces, playing fields, woodlands, allotments, cemeteries, private gardens, 
green roofs and walls, agricultural land, country parks, wasteland and river/canal 
corridors (also known as blue infrastructure).  The Council will seek to protect, 
conserve and where possible and appropriate, enhance these assets in order to 
help preserve th e character of the District and biodiversity . 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  96 
   3.132  The Council has produced a Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper 
for the District. The document examines the connectivity of green infrastructure and 
identifies key strategic and local corridor s and assets. Strategic corridors connect 
key green infrastructure resources and/or run between settlements and across 
district boundaries. Local corridors connect smaller green spaces and/or link 
neighbourhoods to the strategic network.  
 
3.133  The Council has a lso supported the production of the Ashfield Biodiversity 
Opportunity Mapping Project80 (BOM).  The project has created a GIS -map showing 
broad proposals for biodiversity opportunity areas across Ashfield, representing 
areas in which resources should be ta rgeted to maintain, restore, buffer, link and 
expand wildlife habitats at a landscape scale.   
 
3.134  New development can place additional demands on a range of green infrastructure 
and natural assets. As such, development will be required to relate well to the 
overall green infrastructure network, meet the Council’s adopted standards for 
green space provision, and provide further green infrastructure assets, where 
possible and appropriate, suitable for the site as detailed by Policy EV4 .   
 
3.135  Development proposals  should particularly seek to contribute towards the protection 
and preservation of priority habitats and species listed in Section 41 of the Natural 
Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006, and the  objectives for priority 
habitats and species identified  in the Nottinghamshire Biodiversity Action Plan 
(BAP)81.  Proposals should also seek the protection, enhancement and linking of 
areas identified in the Ashfield Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical 
Paper and the Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project (BOM).  
 
 
  
 
80 Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project  2016.  Nottinghamshire Biodiversity A ction Group  
81 Local Biodiversity Action Plan for Nottinghamshire & Updates.  Nottinghamshire Biodiversity Action Group  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  97 
   Strategic Policy S1 6 Conse rving and Enhancing Our Historic 
Environment  
 
 
Strategic Policy S16 Conserving and Enhancing Our Historic Environment  
 
Strategic 
Objectives  SO1, SO7, SO8, SO14.  
 
The Council will ensure that the significance of heritage assets within the District are 
conserved and, where appropriate, enhanced to ensure the continued protection and 
enjoyment of the historic environment.  This includes all heritage assets, archaeological 
sites and historic landscapes, designated and non -designated assets, and their setti ng 
in accordance with legislation and national policy.  
 
Evidence Base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Ashfield Criteria for Local Heritage Asset Designation 2013.  Ashfield District 
Council.  
• Listed Buildings at Risk Register, Historic England.  
• Hardwick Hall Setting Study. 2016, ATKINS (for National Trust).  
• Greater Nottinghamshire Landscape Character Assessment 2009. TEP (for 
Nottinghamshire County Council & Greater Nottingham Authorities).  
• Annesley Conservation Area. Adopted 1999, Ashfield District Council.  
• Lower Bagthorpe Conservation Area. Adopted 1975, amended 2007, 
Ashfield District Council.  
• Kirkby Cross Conservation Area. Adopted 1975, amended 2004, Ashfield 
District Council.  
• Sutton in Ashfield Church and Market P lace Conservation Area. Adopted 
2015, Ashfield District Council.  
• Teversal Conservation Area. Adopted 1970, amended 2012, Ashfield District 
Council.  
• Hucknall Town Centre Conservation Area. Adopted 2019, Ashfield District 
Council.  
National Planning 
Policy a nd Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 16: Conserving and enhancing the historic environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Historic Environment as of August 2021.  
 
3.136  The Council is committed to conserving and enhancing the historic environment, 
including both designated and non -designated heritage assets, as it acknowledged 
that it is of great importance for education, culture, leisure, tourism and the wider 
economy.  
 
3.137  The historic environment has tremendous vis ual appeal, provides inspiration and 
enjoyment and helps reinforce a sense of local identity. However, this environment 
can be fragile and once gone it cannot be replaced. Careful management is 
necessary to ensure its importance is recognised and that it c an contribute to the 
success and growth of the District.  
3.138  Heritage assets are buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes of 
historic, archaeological, architectural or artistic interest, whether designated or not, 
that have a degree of signifi cance. The term ‘significance’ can be defined as “the Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  98 
   value of a heritage asset to this and future generations because of its heritage 
interest”82. In measuring the significance of an asset,  a number of factors are 
assessed, including, but not restricted t o, an asset’s rarity, representativeness, 
association, integrity, evidential value, historical value, aesthetic value, and 
communal value.  
 
3.139  Heritage assets include listed buildings, conservation areas, world heritage sites, 
historic parks and gardens and scheduled monuments. The definition also covers 
non-designated assets including buildings of local interest, areas of archaeological 
interest, unregistered parks and gardens and landscape features as defined in the 
Nottinghamshire Landscape Character Asses sment.  
 
3.140  The Council will work with partners, stakeholders and developers through a variety 
of approaches to sustain and enhance the significance of heritage assets include  
 
• Designating new and reviewing existing conservation area appraisals and 
producing and implementing related management plans;  
 
• Working with owners, Historic England and Nottinghamshire County Council to 
bring heritage identified at risk or vulnerable to risk, back into use;  
 
• Facilitating  and supporting  the identification  and review of heritage  assets  of local 
historic,  architectural  and archaeological  significance  in accordance  with the 
Council's  agreed  procedures83; 
 
• Supporting  appropriate  interpretation  and promotion  of the heritage  assets  
throughout  the District.   
  
 
82  • Conservation Principles Policies and Guidance for the Sustainable Management of the  Historic 
Environment, Historic England , 2008  
     • Understanding Place Historic Area Assessments: Principles and Practice, H istoric England , 2010  
83    Criteria for Local Heritage Asset Designation, Ashfield District Council, Adopted 2013, Revised 2018.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 3 – Sustainable Development  
 
  
P a g e  99 
   Strategic  Policy S1 7 Safeguarding Mineral Resources  
 
 
Strategic Policy S1 7 Safeguarding Mineral Resources  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO13, SO14.  
 
In Minerals Safeguarded Areas, the Minerals Planning Authority will be consulted 
on non -exempt development proposal.  Planning permission in Minerals 
Safeguarded Areas will not be granted for non -exempt development unless the 
requirements set out in the minerals safeguarding policies of the Minerals Local 
Plan have been met.  
 
Evidence 
base • The Nottinghamshire Minerals Local Plan  2021.  Nottinghamshire County 
Council.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 17: Facilitating the sustainable use of minerals  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Minerals as of August 2021.  
 
 
3.141  Nottinghamshire is a two -tier area for local government and under the Town and 
Country Planning legislation Nottinghamshire County Council is the Minerals 
Planning Authority.  The County Council adopted The Nottinghamshire Minerals 
Local Plan in March 2021 and the Minerals Local Plan forms the land use planning 
strategy for mineral development within the County up to 2036.    
 
3.142  The Minerals Local Plan recognises important mineral res ources with Mineral 
Safeguarding Areas identify the mineral resources which are worthy of 
safeguarding and the Minerals Consultation Area identify the areas within 
Nottinghamshire where the District and Borough authorities are required to consult 
the Miner al Planning Authority over non -minerals development.  
 
3.143  Whilst the responsibility for dealing with minerals in Ashfield lies with 
Nottinghamshire County Council, Strategic Policy 1 7 looks to ensure minerals 
resources of local and national importance are not sterilised by non -mineral 
development and it ensure that the presence of an important mineral resource is 
taken into consideration during the decision -making process.  
 
3.144  Further inf ormation is available from Nottinghamshire County Council as the 
authority responsible for the Minerals Local Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  100 
   Chapter  4  
 
Meeting the challenge of climate change and adapt to 
its effects.  
 
Policy CC1:  Zero and Low Carbon Developments and Decentralised, 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
 
Policy CC1:  Zero and Low Carbon Developments and Decentralised, 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14.  
Zero and Low Carbon Development  
1. Proposals for carbon neutral development are strongly supported.  All 
development proposals will be expected to mitigate against and adapt to climate 
change, to comply with the national target to bring greenhouse gas emissions to 
net zero by 2050 and contribute to any local targets for reducing carbon 
emissions and energy use unless it can be demonstrated that compliance wit h the 
policy is not viable or feasible.  Development proposals should:  
 
a) Maximise opportunities to reducing demand by taking account of landform, 
location, layout, building orientation, design, massing and landscaping.  
This includes:  
 
➢ Opportunities for bot h natural heating and ventilation through the 
orientation and location of buildings;  
➢ Incorporating blue and green infrastructure, trees and other planting, to 
provide opportunities for cooling, shading of amenity areas, connect 
habitats, using native plant s that are carefully selected so they can be 
managed and sustained to meet the predicted changed climatic 
conditions;  
➢ Incorporating water efficiency measures and include appropriate 
sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) to minimise and manage surface 
water r unoff and its impacts;  
➢ Optimise energy efficiency measures including, where feasible,  the use 
of decentralised renewable and low carbon energy;  
➢ Include other measures including incorporating vehicle charging facilities, 
and the potential for communal heating systems.  
 
b) Development should be designed to minimise the generation of waste and 
energy consumption in the design, construction, use and lif e of buildings 
and promote sustainable approaches to waste management, including the 
reuse and recycling of construction waste.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  101 
    
c) Development should enable occupants to minimise their need to travel and, 
where travel is necessary, to maximise opportunities for sustainable modes of 
travel.  
 
d) Provide for carbon offsetting, incorporating multi -functional green 
infrastructure and habitats, which can provide carbon storage including 
multi -functional woodland or grassland.  
 
e) Maximise the opportunities that potentially arise from the use of renewabl e 
heat from mine water . 
 
2. The Council will support non -residential development of 1,000 sq. m or more that 
incorporates sustainable construction design, materials and methods to achieve 
BREEAM standard ‘excellent’.  
 
Proposals for non -wind Decentralised, Ren ewable and Low Carbon Energy 
Generation  
 
3. The development of stand -alone renewable energy schemes1 will be supported 
in appropriate locations, including biomass power generation, combined heat 
and power, and micro generation systems and where individually, or 
cumulatively, there are no significant adverse effects in relation to other policy 
requirements.  Proposals should demonstrate how they:  
a) Connect to the existing national grid infrastructure, unless it can be 
demonstrated that energy generation would be used on -site to meet the needs 
of a specific end user;  and  
 
b) Provide for the removal of the infrastructure and reinstatement of the site, 
should the facilities cease to be operational;  
 
Energy Storage  
 
4. Proposals for energy storage units will be supported where they assist with 
balancing of the electricity grid, support renewable and low carbon energy and 
where:  
• they are located on previously developed areas and/or in industrial areas, and  
• individually, or cumulatively, there are no significant ad verse effects in relation 
to other polic y requirements.  
 
Note  
1 –  Under national planning policy, the Council cannot include provision for wind energy unless:  
• the proposal is in an area that has been identified as suitable for wind energy development in 
an adopted development plan (i.e the local plan or a neighbourhood plan), and  
• following consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning impacts identified by affected 
local communities have been fully addressed and therefore the prop osal has their backing.  
•  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  102 
   Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Towards a Sustainable Energy Policy for Nottinghamshire 2009 - 
Nottinghamshire Sustainable Energy Planning  Partnership 
(NSEPP) Nottinghamshire: Operational Renewal and Low Carbon 
Energy Schemes 2009 - Nottinghamshire Sustainable Energy 
Planning  Partnership  (NSEPP).  
• Towards a Sustainable Energy Policy for Nottinghamshire, Report 
of Consultation2009  - Nottinghamshire Sustainable Energy 
Planning  Partnership (NSEPP).  
• Low Carbon Energy Opportunities and Heat Mapping for Local 
Planning Areas Across the East Mid lands 2011 - Final Report - 
Land Use Consultants, Centre for Sustainable Energy and SQW.  
 
National Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021,  Part 14: Meeting the challenge of climate change, flooding 
and coastal change.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Climate change as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Renewable and low carbon energy as 
of August 2021.  
 
 
Zero and Low Carbon Developments  
4.1 There are six main greenhouse gases (GHGs) as set out in the Kyoto protocol:  
Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide, Hydrofluorocarbons, Perfluorocarbons, 
and Sulphur Hexafluoride.  GHGs emissions are converted into CO 2 and referred 
too as ‘Carbon Emissions’.  
 
4.2 It is widely acknowledged that climate change is occurring across the planet, and 
one of the primary causes of this relates to the amount of carbon dioxide being 
released into the atmosphere. As a result, the Government has committed to 
reducing the countr y’s carbon dioxide emissions by 100% of 1990 levels by 2050, 
as set out in the Climate Change Act 2008. On the 4th December 2020 the 
Government’s stated target was to achieve a reduction of 68% in greenhouse gas 
emissions from the 1990 baseline by 2030.   
 
4.3 In order to help achieve this target, the Government has implemented a number of 
initiatives and regulations aimed at the development industry and property owners 
to enhance the energy efficiency / carbon emissions of new and existing properties. 
The Gove rnment has announced that by 2025, the Future Homes Standard will 
deliver homes that are zero -carbon ready to be delivered through the Building 
Regulations.  At the same time, the Government has indicated that an interim uplift 
in Part L standards will be published around October 2021 to encourage houses to 
be future -proofed and move the industry towards the Future Homes Standards.    
 
4.4 Creating low and zero carbon developments has a key role in helping to achieve 
these carbon reduction commitments and the C ouncil is committed to ensuring all 
new developments are as low carbon as possible. The Council acknowledges that 
Building Regulations should be the primary means of introducing and enforcing 
carbon reductions, but considers development should , wherever po ssible, apply Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  103 
   carbon and energy reduction  measure s beyond the Building Regulations. Low 
carbon developments will not only have environmental benefits but will lead to 
longer term financial savings for the owners/occupants via lower energy 
requirements.  
 
4.5 In designing their schemes, the Council will expect designers to appropriately utilise 
the assets of a particular site such as landform, orientation and landscape featu res, 
coupled with a development layout that utilises building orientation, massing and 
landscaping to help reduce energy consumption, utilise solar gain and resilience to 
temperature increases. Consideration should also be given to a development’s 
ability to retrofit renewable and decentralised energy technologies. It is important 
that buildings are designed and laid out in a way that enables occupants to install 
such technologies in the future if they wish. In seeking to achieve low and zero 
carbon buildin gs, the Council will support the use of innovative materials and 
building designs where it can demonstrate that they actively contribute to achieving 
the desired carbon reductions.  
 
4.6 Ashfield mining heritage provides opportunities for the utilisation of mi ne water as a 
heat source.  Mine water is typically at a temperature around 12 and 20°C, with little 
to no seasonal variation.  Therefore, it is a potential source of low carbon heating or 
cooling for heat networks using wate source heat pumps.  The Counci l will work 
with the Coal Authority and developers to maximise the potential for renewable heat 
from mine water.  
 
4.7 Adaption for climate change will require lifestyle and behavioural change.  The 
Policy requires development to encourage sustainable lifestyles.  For example, 
layout should minimise the use of the private car and prioritise safe and attractive 
routes that benefits pedestrians and cyclists.  Street design, which, is pedestrian, 
and cycle friendly as opposed to just routes for vehicles to pass through.  The 
Government has announced the phasing out of petrol and diesel cars by 2030 with 
the likelihood that ele ctric vehicles would become the norm over the plan period.  
This places an emphasis on electric vehicle charging points in new homes.      
 
4.8 The Council fully supports developments that actively pursue the creation of highly 
efficient, zero carbon developme nts via recognised standards such PassivHaus and 
BREEAM Excellent or Outstanding. Developments that strive to achieve such 
sustainable design excellence will be acknowledged by the Council, with a 
presumption in favour of development.  
 
Decentralised, Renew able and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
4.9 It is widely acknowledged that tackling the challenges posed by climate change will 
necessitate a radical increase in the proportion of energy generated from renewable 
sources.  Whilst the country’s carbon reduction commitments are one driver of this 
chang e, the increasing cost of centralised and fossil fuel derived energy is also 
influencing the growth in decentralised, renewable and low carbon energy sourcing 
for commercial and domestic users.    
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  104 
   4.10 The Council actively encourages the development of viable t echnologies and 
infrastructure across the District. However, this has to be seen in the context of the 
potential impact on the following:  
 
a) Residential amenity (including noise, low-frequency noise,  fumes, odour, shadow 
flicker, reflected light, traffic an d broadcast interference);  
b) Highway, Aviation, Defence, radar or power line safety;  
c) Existing building s in relation to fall over distance of wind turbines;  
d) The surrounding landscape, townscape and heritage assets;  
e) Designated nature conservation or biodiversi ty considerations;  
f) Species protected under national and international law, including those that occur 
outside protected areas.  
 
The Council will seek to ensure such issues are satisfactorily assessed and where 
appropriate, addressed via effective mitigation measures. As part of this process the 
Council will require development proposals to undertake appropriate pre -application 
consultation with relevant bodies and agencies. They should also submit 
appropriate assessments and studies to support the assessment of the proposal. 
This should include an Environmental Statement that details the environmental 
impacts of the proposal and the total amount of energy that is expected to be 
generated. The statement must also provide details of site restoration f ollowing 
infrastructure installation and/or the end of its lifecycle, addressing issues such as 
the removal of redundant buildings, plant and access roads, where appropriate. 
Details of the post -use restoration are likely to be conditioned as part of the 
application.  
 
4.11 Design must be a key consideration when creating development proposals. Whilst 
the Council acknowledges there may be design limitations on certain technologies 
and infrastructure, the Council will encourage developers to utilise new technologi es 
and innovative solutions to achieve the highest quality design achievable. In helping 
to address potential impacts on landscape, residential amenity, heritage and 
townscape the design of the proposal will be an important consideration.  
 
Low Carbon Ener gy Opportunities in Ashfield  
4.12 A ‘Low Carbon Energy Opportunities and Heat Mapping for Local Planning Areas 
Across the East Midlands’ Study84 was undertaken by Land Use Consultants, 
Centre for Sustainable Energy and SQW on behalf of East Midlands Councils in  
2011. The study sets out an evidence base of the technical potential for renewable 
and low carbon energy technologies within the East Midlands.  
 
4.13 The results of the study indicate that Ashfield has potential for microgeneration; in 
particular, heat pumps, solar thermal and solar photo voltaics and these uses are 
particularly encouraged. The study also highlighted that, whilst Ashfield District has 
 
84 Land Use Consultants, Centre for Sustainable Ener gy and SQW (2011) Low Carbon Energy Opportunities 
and Heat Mapping for Local Planning Areas Across the East Midlands: Final Report. Prepared for East 
Midlands Councils.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  105 
   good  average wind speeds, the potential for commercial scale wind energy 
developments is limited by constraints relating to the presence of existing 
infrastructure, properties and bird sensitivity issues.  
 
 
Policy CC2: Water Resource Management  
 
Policy CC2:  Water Resource Management  
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO11, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. Development proposals must demonstrate that there is an adequate supply of 
water, appropriate sewerage and surface water infrastructure and there is 
sufficient  sewage treatment capacity to ensure that there is no deterioration of 
water quality.  
 
2. In relation to water quality:  
 
a) Development should have regard to the actions and objectives of the Humber 
River Basin Management Plans and the Water Framework Directive in 
protecting and improving the quality of water bodies and ecological systems in 
and adjacent to the District.  
 
b) Development will be not be permitted where it:  
 
• Has a negative impact on water quality, either directly through pollution of 
surface or groundwater or indirectly through overloading of the sewerage 
system and Wastewater Treatment Works.    
 
• Poses a significant risk to the quality of the groundwater in the p rincipal 
aquifers or in groundwater source protection zones.  
 
• Fails to minimise the impact on or provide for net gains for biodiversity and 
the natural water environment. The Council will seek opportunities to 
restore and enhance all watercourses, to impro ve water quality and to 
extend the connectivity and biological complexity of watercourses and their 
wider environment.  
 
• Has an adverse effect on the natural watercourse profile.  
 
• Is not set back by an appropriate distance from a watercourse to allow 
access  for riparian owners and to enhance habitat and ecological 
benefits.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  106 
   c) Development located in the proximity or upstream of water related 
environmentally significant sites will be required to demonstrate that it will 
not have an adverse effect on the sites.  
 
d) A management plan for a construction site should ensure contaminated  
surface water is prevented from leaving the site by overland flow, through 
highway drainage or the public surface water sewer system so as to 
discharge into a watercourse.  
 
3. In relation to Water Efficiency : 
 
a) Residential development proposals will implement water efficiency 
measures to minimise water consumption, to achieve a requirement of not 
exceeding 110 litres per person per day.  
 
b) Business/ Commercial development should seek to be water efficient, 
which can be demonstrated through the British Research Establishment 
Environmental Assessment Methodology (BREEAM) standards.  
 
c) New development that incorporates water efficient features and equipment 
will be supported and encouraged.  Rainwater should be harvested and 
retained for re -use on site as ‘grey water’.  
Evidence 
base • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Humber River Basin Management Plan, 2015.   Environment Agency  
• Greater Nottingham and Ashfield Outline Water Cycl e Study 2010 - Entec 
Ltd. 
• Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project 2016. Notts BAG.  
Ashfield District Council .  
• Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1, 2009 - Ashfield District Council  
National 
Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021,  Part 14: Meeting the challenge of climate change, flooding and 
coastal change . 
• NPPF 2021 Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Water supply, wastewater and water quality as of 
August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Natural environment as of August 2021.  
 
4.14 The policy covers both water quality and water efficiency .  It reflects the guidance for 
policy aspects set out in the National Planning Policy Guidance Water Supply, 
Wastewater and Water Quality.   
 
Water Quality  
4.15 The quality and quantity of surface and gr ound water is vitally important to a wide 
range of uses and users including domestic, industrial and agricultural. It is also of 
great importance to general amenity, as a source of drinking water, water based 
recreation, fisheries and nature conservation. Ground water resources in particular 
are susceptible to a wide range of threats from land use policies and once 
contaminated it is difficult, if not impossible, to rehabilitate them.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  107 
   4.16 The Council, in conjunction with the Environment Agency, will seek to r esist 
development that threatens water quality and quantity, and will encourage initiatives 
that result in an improvement of water quality and the capacity of surface waters to 
support wildlife. The  Water Framework Directive has the primary objectives of 
achieving good ecological status in water bodies and  providing protection for 
drinking water sources and protected sites. The Government’s 25 Year Plan85 sets a 
framework of strategic goals which incl udes a requirement for “Clean and plentiful 
water” with at least three quarters of our waters to be close to their natural state as 
soon as is practicable”  
 
4.17 The Environment Agency's Humber River Basin Management Plan 2015  sets out 
the main issues for the w ater environment, and actions needed to be taken. The 
following catchments relate to Ashfield:  
 
• The Idle and Torne Catchment (Sutton in Ashfield, Stanton Hill, Skegby, north east 
of Kirkby -in-Ashfield);  
• The Lower Trent and Erewash Catchment (south & east o f Kirkby -in-Ashfield, 
Selston, Underwood, Jacksdale,  New Annesley, Annesley Woodhouse, Hucknall);  
• Don and the Rother Catchment (covers a small area to the north of the District);  
• The Derbyshire Derwent Catchment (Huthwaite).  
 
4.18 Much of Ashfield is located on principal aquifer namely the Lower Magnesian 
Limestone and Triassic Sherwood Sandstone where groundwater is sensitive to 
pollution. Principal aquifers are geological strata that exhibit high permeability and 
usually provide a high level of water  storage. These aquifers have strategic 
significance for water resources, often supporting large abstractions for the public 
water supply. They are also of major importance, supporting river base flow.   
 
4.19 It is important that standards of design, materials specification and of on -site 
construction practices respect the vulnerability of these aquifers as well as all 
watercourses, and environmentally sensitive areas. During and post construction , it 
is possible that contamination could be mobilised and find it s way into the aquifer. 
The Council will need to be satisfied that any risk has been properly assessed and 
viable remediation is in place. Once groundwater is polluted the resource may be 
lost for many years and the protection of these resources from poten tially polluting 
development will be strictly enforced.  
 
4.20 The ‘no deterioration’ policy of the Water Framework Directive requires that current 
environmental conditions are maintained or improved. This necessary may require 
phasing new development so that wa ter and wastewater infrastructure is in place 
when and where needed. The impact on designated sites of importance for 
biodiversity should be considered to ensure the required infrastructure is in place 
before any environmental effects occur.  
 
4.21 A watercourse  should follow its natural profile and meandering reflecting the 
character of the surrounding landscape.  Therefore, the emphasis is upon retain this 
 
85 A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment, 2018.   HM Government . Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  108 
   aspect and avoiding engineering solutions that straighten or culvert the watercourse.   
Buffer zones shoul d be provided adjacent to rivers, streams and ponds in order to 
protect and, where necessary, enhance biodiversity, in particular the value of the 
adjacent terrestrial habitat. These zones provide valuable habitats and help support 
improved habitat connect ivity.    Under the Environment Agency’s Midlands Land 
Drainage Bylaws for ‘main rivers’ this buffer area is 8 metres measured horizontally 
from the foot of any bank of the river on the landward side or, where there is no such 
bank, within 8 metres measure d horizontally from the top edge of the batter 
enclosing the river.   
 
4.22 Development should not adversely affect the profile of natural watercourses and 
should take the opportunity to improve the water environment.    Wherever possible, 
culverts should be opened up.   It will not generally be acceptable for development to 
result in the loss of open water features through draining, culverting or enclosure by 
other means.   Land should be provided adjacent to the top of both banks of any 
watercourse for mainte nance purposes which should be appropriately landscaped 
for open space and biodiversity benefits  
 
 
Water efficiency  
4.23 The N PPF requires local planning authorities to adopt proactive strategies to adapt 
to climate change that take full account of water supply and demand considerations. 
National Planning identifies that where there is a clear local need, Local Plan 
policies can requir e new dwellings to meet the   Building Regulations optional 
requirement of a maximum of 110 litres/person/day.  
 
4.24 The Watercycle Study for Greater Nottingham and Ashfi eld86 indicates that the 
water resource situation in the East Midlands is significantly constrained with little 
opportunity to develop new water resource schemes. Consequently, the Policy 
includes water efficiency measures which for residential developments are  a 
requirement of a maximum 110 litres/person/day.  
 
4.25 For commercial buildings, BREEAM (BRE Environmental Assessment Method) is 
widely accepted as a means to establish environmental sustainability for systems 
within buildings. Water usage is one of the areas  that BREEAM assesses, with 
extra credits given when water saving equipment is installed. This could include 
reducing water consumption through the use of meters, leak detection, water 
efficient appliances, or other appropriate measures.  
 
4.26 Water conservatio n measures are also important in terms of water demand.  The 
Policy incorporates a degree of flexibility on the exact methods to be utilised, which 
could include water butts, water saving devices, rainwater harvesting or greywater 
recycling. Garden water c an be particularly important as garden hoses can use 280 
litres of water in 30 minutes. Using rainwater or grey -water for gardening can result 
in substantial savings with a relatively low impact in terms of carbon load. In certain 
 
86 Entec (2010) Greater Nottingham and Ashfield Outline Water Cycle Study  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  109 
   parts of the District, wa ter conservation needs to be balanced against issues of low 
flows within local rivers and streams.  
 
4.27 It is recognised that developments have to be economically viable and ecologically 
sustainable. The Council will work with developers to introduce water eff iciency and 
conservation measure whilst not undermining the viability of development. The 
implication is that requirements can change over time with both national and local 
water efficiency requirements and the state of the local market for development.  
 
 
Policy CC3: Flood Risk and Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDs)  
 
 
Policy CC3: Flood Risk and SuDS  
Strategic Objectives  SO4, SO11, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. The Council will follow a sequential approach to flood risk management with 
the aim of locating development on land with the lowest risk of flooding.  
 
2. All development proposals will be required to consider the effect of the 
proposed development, including access and egress, on flood risk from all 
sources, both on -site and off -site, commensurate with the scale and impact of 
the development.  Where appropriate87 this should be demonstrated through a 
Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) which demonstrates how flood risk will be 
managed now and over the development’s lifetime, taking climate change into 
account, and with regard to the vulnerability of its users.  
 
3. Development will not be permitted unless:  
 
a) In the functional floodplain (Flood Zone 3b), it is water compatible or essential 
infrastructure . 
 
b) In Flood Zones 2 or 3, other than sites allocated in this Plan, the Sequential 
Test, and, if necessary, the Exceptions Test is satisfied as required by national 
policy . The Sequential Test to flooding will be applied district wide unless a 
smaller area of search could be justified to deliver local needs iden tified in 
other Local Plan policies.  
 
 
87 In accordance with national policy. Currently, under the National Planning Policy Framework 2021 in Flood 
Zone 1, a FRA will only be required for sites over 1ha.  
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  110 
   c) Where appropriate, it  can be demonstrated through a Flood Risk Assessment 
that the development, including access/egress, will be safe, without increasing 
flood risk elsewhere.  
 
4. For surface water, development will not be permitted unless there is no net 
increase in surface wate r run-off for the lifetime of the development on all new 
development. Run -off rates for development on greenfield sites should not be 
exceeded and where possible should be reduced from existing. P roposed 
development within the catchment of the River Leen, including Hucknall should 
be designed to reduce surface water flows to a ‘greenfield rate’ of run -off.  For 
all other areas of the District r un-off rates for development on previously 
developed land should be reduced from the current rate of surface water run-
off with the objective, where feasible, of achieving greenfield run -off rates.  
Surface water run -off should be managed at source wherever possible, 
avoiding disposal to combined sewers.  
 
5. Development will not be permitted unless:  
 
a) It incorporates Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) to manage surface 
water drainage, in accordance with national and any local SuDS standards, 
unless it is proven that SuDS are not appropriate in a specific location.   
 
b) It is satisfactorily demonstrated how the long term maintenance of the SuDS 
scheme will be secured.  
 
c) Where technical appropriate and viable, hard engineering solutions are  
avoided with SuDS being incorporated into the green/blue infrastructure 
network.  
 
6. The Council will take opportunities to remove problems from the drainage 
network and increase the capacity of the floodplain, wherever this can be 
achieved safely, in connection with new development.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1, 2009.  Ashfield District Council.  
National 
Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 20 21, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 20 21, Part 14: Meeting the challenge of climate change, flooding and 
coastal change.  
• NPPF 20 21, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Flood risk and coastal change as of August 
2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Natural env ironment as of August 2021.  
 
4.28 The Council will work in partnership with the appropriate agencies (the Environment 
Agency, Nottinghamshire County Council as Lead Local Flood Authority, Severn 
Trent Water and the Canal and River Trust), developers and landow ners to 
minimise the risk from flooding.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  111 
   4.29 Flooding, if it occurs, has a devastating impact on residents, business and provision 
of services.  Consequently, t he Policy aims to minimise vulnerability and provide 
resilience in relation to flooding and the impacts arising from climate change. 
Inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding will be avoided by directing 
development away from areas at highest risk. The Council has placed an emphasis 
on a sequential approach to site selection and development  within the Plan  to 
minimise flood risk.  
 
4.30 The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment’s conclu des that, relatively against other 
areas, the risk of flooding from watercourses in Ashfield is low.  Nevertheless, 
properties in parts of Hucknall are at risk of flooding from the Baker Lane Brook and 
some properties in Jacksdale are at risk from flooding from the River Erewash and 
the Bagthorpe Brook. Small areas of Sutton -in-Ashfield, Kirkby -in-Ashfield and 
Annesley Woodhouse are identified as having a medium to high probability of 
flooding from watercourses.   Additional water run -off from development in Hucknall 
into the River Leen and its tributary streams has significant implications for flooding 
downstream in the  City of Nottingham; reflected in the need to keep run -off in 
Hucknall to greenfield rates or lower if possible. Similarly, additional water into the 
River Erewash has the potential to flood parts of Pinxton and other areas outside 
the District . 
 
4.31 In Sutton -in-Ashfield there is a problem of low flows in watercourses, and the advice 
from the Environment Agency is, where possible, to utilise infiltration to increase 
ground water levels.  In relation to the Cauldwell Brook, water quality and habitat is 
importan t due to the presence of the white -clawed crayfish.   
 
4.32 Flood risk is increased by an urbanised environment, from impervious soils, 
potential infrastructure failure, groundwater located near the surface and steep 
gradients often associated with old soil hea ps. Where appropriate, evidence should 
be sought from local sources regarding past flooding and the location of springs.  
The impact of climate change and topography is anticipated to result in an 
increasing risk from surface water flooding in the District .   
 
Sequential and Exception Tests  
4.33 The aim of the Sequential Test is to steer new development to areas with the lowest 
probability of flooding. Development should not be permitted if there are reasonably 
available sites appropriate for the proposed development in areas with a lower 
probability of flooding. Given the level of flood risk in Ashfield , it is considered  
appropriate that the sequential test for flooding should be applied district wide 
unless it can be demonstrated by the developer  why a smaller area of search could 
be justified to deliver local needs.  If, following application of the sequential test, it is 
neither possible nor consistent with wider sustainability objectives for the 
development to be located in zones with a lower p robability of flooding, the 
Exception Test will be applied.  
 
4.34 National policy and guidance set out tables and further information on the 
application of the respective tests. The Tests will not apply to minor development, 
but there may be individual circumst ances, such as regeneration projects, where Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  112 
   the Sequential Test may not be applied but the Exception Test is applicable.    It is 
essential that the potential impact of climate change is taken into account over the 
lifetime of the development. Climate chang e requirements will be considered 
against the provisions in the National Guidance.  
 
4.35 There may be circumstances where the development is in Flood Zone1 but the only 
or main access is through Flood Zone 2 or 3.  In these circumstances it will be 
necessary t o demonstrate that safe access and egress to and from the 
development can be achieved, include access and egress by emergency vehicles.  
 
Flood Risk Assessments  
4.36 Any Flood Risk Assessment should have regard to a number of requirements 
including: flood hazards from all sources, the probability of flooding including 
allowances for climate change, flood risk management measures, including how 
SUDS will be incorporated into the design, ensuing the development is safe from 
flooding during its lifetime, safe access and egress, off site impacts, residual risks, 
opportunities to reduce flood risk and, where appropriate, include a drainage 
assessment in accordance with the SUDS Manual or any updates or amendment.  
 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS)  
4.37 SUDS is a non-traditional, environmentally friendly method of dealing with surface 
water run -off by providing a drainage system that:  
 
• manages surface water run -off as close to the source as possible;  
• mimics natural drainage;  
• minimises pollution and flood risk resul ting from new development.  
 
4.38 SUDS includes taking into account long term environmental and social aspects in 
decision making about drainage systems; thereby increasing the value of properties 
affected and encouraging people to use external space. SUDS schem es bring 
multiple benefits by reducing flood risk, improving water quality, providing amenity 
areas, improving and providing habitats and creating attractive places.  
 
4.39 The SUDS approach is presented in The SUDS Manual which includes 
methodologies for both o utline and detailed drainage assessments for the site.  
Ideally, water should be dealt with at the individual property where it falls (source 
control) and appropriate measures can include green roofs, permeable surfaces 
and rainwater harvesting. Run -off from larger areas such as part of a housing 
estate, major roads or business parks may be dealt with by swales and detention 
basins.  
 
Agriculture  
4.40 Agricultural practices can have substantial impacts on the ability of land to store 
water, regulate and balance river flows and remove pollutants. However, agriculture 
practice is largely outside the planning system and flooding issues in relation to 
agric ulture are dependent on other legislative control measures and other policy 
actions .  
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 4 – Climate Change  
 
  
P a g e  113 
    
Chapter 5  
 
Protecting and enhancing Ashfield’s  character through 
its natural environment and heritage.  
 
Policy EV1: Green Belt  
 
5.1 This policy aims to protect the Green Belt from inappropriate development, except 
in very special circumstances.  The essential characteristic of Green Belts are their 
openness and their permanence.  The Policy is a restatement of national advice, 
included  in the Local Plan for completeness.  
 
 
Policy EV1:  Green Belt  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO6, SO12, SO13, 
SO14.  
 
1. In the Green Belt, as defined on the Policies Map, permission for any inappropriate 
development which is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt, should not be 
approved except in very special circumstances. Very special circumstances will not 
exist unless the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and 
any other harm resulting from the proposal, is clearly outweighed by other 
considerations.  
 
2. The Council will regard the construction of new buildings as inappropriate in the 
Green Belt, other than:  
 
New Buildings & Facilities  
a. The construction of new buildings for agriculture and forestry .  
b. The provision of appropriate facilities (in connection with the existing use of land or 
a change of use) for outdoor sport, outdoor recreation, cemeteries and burial 
grounds and allotments, as long as the facilities preserves the openness of the 
Green Belt and does not conflict with the purposes of including land within it.  
 
Extension or Alteration  
c. The extension or alteration of a building within the Green Belt, where the proposal 
does not result in disproportionate additions over and above the s ize of the original 
building.  
 
     Replacement of an Existing Building  
d. The replacement of a building within the Green Belt, where the proposed new 
building is in the same use and is not materially larger than the building it is 
replacing.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  114 
    
     Infill in Villages  
e. Limited infilling in villages, and limited affordable housing for community needs 
under policies set out in the Local Plan.  
 
      Infill, partial or complete redevelopment  
f. The limited infilling or the partial or complete redevelopment of previou sly 
developed (brownfield) sites whether redundant or in continuing use (excluding 
temporary buildings), where the proposal would:  
 
i. not have a greater impact on the openness of the Green Belt than the existing 
development; or  
ii. not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt, where the 
development would re -use previously developed land and contribute to meeting 
an identified affordable need within the area.  
 
3. Certain other forms of development are also not inappropriate in Green Belt provided 
they preserve the openness of the Green Belt and do not conflict with the purpose of 
including land in Green Belt. These are:  
a. mineral extraction;  
b. engineering operations;  
c. local transport infrastructure which can demonstrate a requirement for a 
Gree n Belt location;  
d. the re -use of buildings provided that the buildings are of permanent and 
substantial construction; and  
e. material changes in the use of land (such as changes of use for outdoor sport 
or recreation, or for cemeteries and burial grounds); and  
f. development brought forward under a Community Right to Build Order or 
Neighbourhood Development Order.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal August 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd  
National Planning 
Policy and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 13: Protecting Green Belt land  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Green Belt as of August 2021.  
  
 
5.2 Consistent with national policy, the construction of new buildings is inappropriate in 
the Green Belt (as defined on the Policies Map); exceptions to this are set out at 
Policy EV1 and paragraph 14 9 of the NPPF. Certain other forms of development 
are also not inappropriate provided they preserve the openness of the Green Belt 
and do not conflict with the purposes of incl uding land in the Green Belt; these are 
set out at paragraph 1 50 of the NPPF.  
 
5.3 Although the policy criteria may be seen as a restatement of national advice, they 
are contained within Policy EV1 for completeness and to aid the user who wishes to 
see and ful ly understand the Council’s approach to proposed development in the 
Green Belt.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  115 
   5.4 The implication of national policy on the Green Belt is that the Council, in 
considering a planning application for development in the Green Belt, must give 
“substantial weigh t” to “any harm to the Green Belt”. However, establishing the 
status of a proposed development – inappropriate or appropriate – remains only the 
first step. Thereafter, the application has to be considered against other policies in 
the Local Plan, in parti cular Policy EV1 0: ‘Protection and Enhancement of 
Landscape Character’, as well as national planning policy.   
 
New Buildings and Facilities  
5.5 EV1:2a) Many agricultural and forestry buildings are covered by The Town and 
Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995 and are permitted 
development. Where new buildings require planning permission, they should be 
restricted to cases wher e they are demonstrably essential and where the need for 
the proposed location has been established.  
 
5.6 Where possible agricultural and forestry buildings should normally form part of a 
group, rather than stand in isolation and should relate to existing bui ldings in size 
and materials.  
 
5.7 EV1:2b)  New building s and facilities that do not fall within agricultural or forestry 
uses, will only be considered if  it can be demonstrate d that the proposal is to be 
used in connection with the existing use of land or a c hange of use for outdoor 
sport, outdoor recreation, cemetery, burial ground or allotment uses. Any proposals 
that cannot demonstrate this or fall within another use, must successfully 
demonstrate the very special circumstances for justifying the developmen t, as 
required by national planning policy.   
 
Extensions and Alterations  
5.8 EV1:2c) The NPPF indicates that the extension or alteration of a building is not 
inappropriate in the Green Belt provided that the proposal does not result in 
disproportionate additi ons over and above the size of the original building.   
 
5.9 The phrase 'disproportionate additions' cannot be clearly defined, as much will 
depend upon the individual circumstances of the site and what type of addition is 
proposed. In determining applications , the Council will take into account factors 
such as the size of the original building, the scale, form, and prominence of the 
extension or alteration, and the impact of the proposal on the openness of the 
Green Belt. Proposals must not result in a large, bulky or intrusive building  which 
would adversely impact on the openness of the Green Belt. Typically, an extension 
or alteration below an increase of 30% volume of the original building would not be 
considered disproportionate, provided the above factors are met.  
 
5.10 There will inevitably be cases where ‘very special circumstances’ may be present 
which may be taken into account in considering applications. Such circumstances  
include:  
 
• the size of the dwelling - a typical 30% extension to a very small dwelling could 
be extremely small and not result in an extension of any practical value ;  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  116 
   • the extent to which the extension is justified in bringing a small dwelling up to 
modern standards of floorspace and accommodation ; 
• the design and relationship of the building to the type, scale and character of 
adjoining development ;  
• whether any buildings are to be demolished as part of the development, the 
volume of which can be offset against the proposed extension.  
5.11 Extensions or alterations to s mall dwellings in the Green Belt should not result in the 
provision of large houses of suburban appearance, out of character with their rural 
setting and reducing the supply of smaller rural houses. In order to minimise impact, 
the proposed development wil l need to respect the design of the existing property, 
adjoining properties and the setting of the building. Advice on appropriate design 
principles for residential extensions is contained in the Ashfield Design 
Supplementary Planning Guidance88. 
 
5.12 Regard w ill be given to previous extensions on the site, either allowed through 
Permitted Development Rights or through planning approvals. The original 
character of a building can be lost if the property is extended in an unsympathetic 
way through the addition of  numerous extensions. The Council will take into account 
the original proportions of the building, prior to extensions being added. In some 
circumstances, it may be more appropriate to provide one new extension as a 
replacement for several existing extensi ons, especially where these are in poor 
condition or do not reflect the original character of the building. All applications will 
need to consider the impact of the cumulative extensions on the original building.  
 
5.13 The design of any development should be sy mpathetic to the existing building, the 
plot size upon which the building it sited, the area adjacent to the site and its wider 
setting. Proposed changes, either individually or cumulatively should not over 
dominate the existing building.  
 
5.14 The total floor  area of the original dwelling will include any garage or domestic 
outbuilding within the curtilage of the dwelling that is used ancillary to the main 
dwelling and that was erected as part of the original development and still remains 
intact on site. Outbu ildings added at a later date, regardless of whether planning 
permission was required, will not be included as part of the original dwelling.  
 
5.15 Planning application proposals for ancillary residential buildings such as garages 
and other outbuildings that do  not constitute permitted development under Schedule 
2 Part 1 Class E of The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted 
Development) Order) or any superseding legislation, shall be treated as an 
extension.  
 
5.16 Where ancillary domestic buildings are required  in the Green Belt, they should be 
clearly subservient to their associated residential dwelling in terms of their function, 
 
88 Residential Ext ensions Design Guide Supplement Planning Guidance, 2014. Ashfield District Council  
https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/development -management -documents/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  117 
   design and scale in order to safeguard the appearance and character of the 
countryside and to ensure the impact on the openness of t he Green Belt is 
minimised. In granting planning permission for ancillary domestic buildings in the 
Green Belt, the Council may impose conditions preventing their conversion to 
residential accommodation without planning permission.  
  
5.17 The Council will give consideration to the removal of permitted development rights 
when assessing proposals to extend a dwelling in the Green Belt.  
 
Replacement of Existing Buildings  
5.18 EV1:2d) The replacement of existing buildings need not be inappropriate providing 
that the new building is in the same use, is not materially larger than the original 
building it replaces, and where it can be demonstrated that the existing building is 
not of architectural or historic merit. Replacement buildings should be sited on or 
close to the position of the building it is replacing, except where an alternative siting 
within the curtilage demonstrably improves the openness of the Green Belt. 
Proposals f or significantly different siting will only be supported where they result in 
a substantial visual improvement to the immediate setting. It is essential that such 
replacement buildings make a clear improvement to the surrounding area and the 
impact of gene rated traffic. This policy is not intended to formalise or give 
permanency to buildings of a clearly temporary nature.  
 
5.19 Where an existing building is derelict or is structurally unsound, permission will not 
be granted for its replacement unless this has r esulted from accidental damage, for 
example by fire, or subsidence, and in the case of replacement for residential 
purposes, where it can be demonstrated that the residential use has not been 
abandoned.  
 
Infill in Villages  
5.20 EV1:2e) The NPPF states that lim ited infilling in villages is not inappropriate 
development in the Green Belt, provided it preserves the openness of the Green 
Belt. The only villages ‘washed over’ by Green Belt is Bagthorpe (including Lower 
Bagthorpe and New Bagthorpe). Other smaller ham lets and outlying isolated 
settlements or extensions of other settlements within the Green Belt are not 
regarded as villages for the purpose of Policy EV1.  
 
5.21 The Council defines limited infill development as the completion of an otherwise 
substantially buil t up frontage by the filling of a small gap normally capable of taking 
one or two dwellings only. A substantial built up frontage is defined as an otherwise 
continuous and largely uninterrupted built frontage of several dwellings visible within 
the street scene.  
 
5.22 Not all small gaps are appropriate for infilling. Part of the character of Bagthorpe is 
made up of gardens, paddocks and other breaks between buildings, which is 
reflected in the Conservation Area designation of large parts of the village. Infill 
development may also not be desirable if it would consolidate groups of houses 
which are isolated from the main body of the village, or if it would consolidate a 
ribbon of development extending into the open countryside.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  118 
    
5.23 The above principles may also appl y to infill for commercial, industrial, recreational 
or tourism purposes providing this would be in keeping with the character of the 
village and would not adversely affect residential amenity.  
 
Infill, partial or complete redevelopment  
5.24 EV1:2f) The NPPF s tates that limited infilling or the partial or complete 
redevelopment of previously developed sites, whether redundant or in continuing 
use, is not inappropriate development in the Green Belt, provided it would not have 
a greater impact on the openness of the Green Belt than the existing development 
and the purpose of including land within it than the existing development; or not 
cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt, where the development 
would re -use previously developed land and contri bute to meeting an identified 
affordable need within the area.  
 
 
 
Policy EV2: Countryside  
 
 
Policy EV2: Countryside  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO6, SO12, SO13, SO14.  
1. Where proposed development falls within Green Belt, Policy EV1 criteria will 
take precedent over the countryside criteria as set out below.  
2. In the countryside permission will only be given for appropriate development 
that is suitably  located and designed so as not to adversely  affect  the character 
and appearance of the countryside.   
Appropriate development comprises:  
Rural Uses  
a) Rural uses including agriculture (including farm diversification), forestry, 
engineering operations, mineral extraction and waste disposal to reclaim 
mineral workings, cemet eries, outdoor sport and recreation and tourism;  
Business Uses  
b) Business uses where it can be demonstrated that:  
• there is a need for a particular rural location; and  
• there is a contribution to providing or sustaining rural employment to meet 
local needs.  
 New Buildings  
c) Well designed new buildings which are essential for uses appropriate to 
the Countryside, and the need for the proposed location has been 
established;  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  119 
   Utilities and Infrastructure  
d) Utility installations and local transport infrastructure which can 
demonstrate a requirement for a rural location;  
Extension and Alteration  
e) Limited extensions or alterations of existing buildings where the resultant 
scale, form, and general design is in keeping with the host building, and its 
surroundings;  
Replacement of Existing Buildings  
f) Replacement of existing buildings provided that the new building is in the 
same or an appropriate rural use, is not materially larger than the one it 
replaces, and can be demonstrated that the existing building i s not of 
architectural or historic merit;  
Infill Development  
g) Limited infill development which is sustainably located and does not have 
an adverse effect on the scale and character and appearance of the area.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd . 
• Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project 2016.  Notts BAG.  
• Ashfield Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. 
Ashfield District Council.  
National Planning 
Policy and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development . 
• NPPF 2021, Part 3: Plan -making.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy  
• NPPF 2021, Part 8: Promoting healthy and safe communities.  
• NPPF  2021, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural 
environment . 
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, sports and recreational 
facilities, public rights of ways and local green space as of August 2021  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Natural environment as o f August 2021  
 
 
5.25 The Location of Development Policy S3  limits development outside the existing 
built-up areas or specific allocated sites to that which has an essential need to be 
located in the countryside.  The purpose of this policy is to protect the co untryside 
from inappropriate development.  
 
5.26 Policy EV2 shows the types of development which are appropriate in the 
Countryside areas not designated as Green Belt. It supports the intention to locate 
most new residential and employment development within urban areas.  Further, it 
responds to national  government planning advice which supports sustainable 
economic growth, farm diversification and tourism and leisure developments that 
benefit rural businesses, communities and visitors and which respect the character 
of the countryside.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  120 
   5.27 The Council will  ensure that the character of the Countryside is protected and, 
where possible, enhanced. Any proposed development will need to be considered 
against other policies in the Local Plan, in particular Policy EV11: ‘Protection and 
Enhancement of Landscape Char acter’, as well as national planning policy.  
 
Rural Uses  
5.28 EV2:1a)  Appropriate uses must preserve the character of the Countryside, with 
those uses considered appropriate, designed to minimise the impact the 
development may have on its surroundings.  
 
5.29 The Council recognises that diversification into non -agricultural acti vities is vital to 
the continuing viability of many farm enterprises. The Council will be supportive of 
well-conceived schemes for business purposes that contribute towards sustainable 
development objectives and help sustain the agricultural enterprise and  are 
consistent in their scale with their rural location. Policy EM4: Rural Development , 
provides further details on this matter.  
 
5.30 Certain recreational uses, such as country parks, golf courses and playing fields, 
need extensive areas of land, but generall y preserve the openness of the 
Countryside. Such uses would be appropriate on suitable sites within the 
Countryside subject to considerations relating to loss of the best and most versatile 
agricultural land (see Policy EV8). Certain tourism uses, can also  be appropriate 
provided that they are designed and located in a way which complements and does 
not adversely affect the character of the Countryside.  
 
5.31 Cemeteries are acceptable in the Countryside, being large space users that are 
substantially open in cha racter. Other appropriate development may include that for 
public utilities, such as the extension or construction of electricity transmission lines 
and pylons, railway installations, pumping stations and water reclamation works, 
which may need to be locat ed in the Countryside.  
 
5.32 Waste disposal operations may take place in rural locations as a means to use 
former mineral workings as voids for landfill, although this will be a matter for 
consideration by the Waste Authority, Nottinghamshire County Council. Th e 
responsibility for determining planning applications for waste disposal rests with the 
County Council and the District Council being a consultee on any relevant waste 
planning application  
 
Business Uses  
5.33 EV2:1b)  National planning policy indicates that eco nomic growth should be 
supported in rural areas in order to create jobs and prosperity by taking a positive 
approach to sustainable new development. Whilst this approach would be 
restricted in the Green Belt, within the Countryside, support will be given t o 
encourage the sustainable growth and expansion of small scale businesses and 
enterprises. Policy EM4: Rural Development  provides further details on this matter.  
 
5.34 Other than for small scale proposals, new businesses should investigate the 
availability of  existing sites, and new build development in the countryside will only Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  121 
   be supported where no alternative sites are available or there is a justification 
specific to the particular proposal.  
 
5.35 Expansion of viable business and recreational uses will be supp orted subject to site 
specific assessment. It should be recognised that the expansion of any given site is 
likely to be limited at some point by its impacts on the Countryside.  
 
5.36 Small rural businesses have traditionally supported each other and the rural 
economy through providing products and services and consequently employment 
closely related to their location. In recognising the contribution that such businesses 
make to achievi ng sustainable development through delivering the aims of the 
Spatial Strategy, the Council will support the expansion of existing businesses and 
establishment of appropriate new business.  
 
5.37 Proposals to expand viable businesses will be supported where the y can 
demonstrate an ongoing contribution to sustaining rural employment. This policy is 
not intended to allow the unlimited expansion of existing businesses. The visual or 
operational impacts may at some point outweigh the benefits of expansion.  
 
5.38 Proposa ls for new businesses should be able to demonstrate both a need for a 
particular rural location and a contribution to sustaining rural employment.  In the 
interests of minimising visual impact, new buildings should be restrained to the 
minimum necessary to  sustain the business.  
 
New Buildings  
5.39 EV2:1c)  New buildings will be restricted in the Countryside to cases where it is 
essential for an appropriate Countryside use and the need for the proposed 
location has been established. Any new building should be at a  scale which is 
appropriate to the nature of the site and its setting.  
 
5.40 Unless there is an overriding need, residential dwellings are usually best sited 
within existing towns or villages. One of the few circumstances in which an isolated 
new dwelling in a  rural area may be justified is when accommodation is essential to 
enable a full -time agriculture, or forestry worker to live at, or in the immediate 
vicinity of their place of work (NPPF, paragraph 80). Whether this is essential in any 
particular case wil l depend on the needs of the enterprise concerned and not on 
the personal preference or circumstances of any of the individuals involved.  For 
any new dwelling, a functional test will be necessary to establish whether it is 
essential (rather than merely de sirable) for the proper functioning of the enterprise 
for one or more workers to be readily available at most times to deal with animals 
or agricultural processes which require essential care at short notice or to deal 
quickly with emergencies that could o therwise cause serious loss of crops or 
products. The Council will also require the application of a financial test to show 
that the agricultural enterprise is financially sound. It may be necessary to provide 
business accounts or financial projections in support of an application to a basic 
level to assist a financial appraisal. All proposals will be considered against advice 
contained in Appendix 5 of this Plan.   
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  122 
   Utilities and Infrastructure  
5.41 EV2:1d)  Utility installations and local transport infrastructu re, such as electricity 
transmission lines or railway installations which can demonstrate a requirement for 
a rural location will generally be supported by the Council. It is important to ensure 
that these installations are sensitively located in order to minimise the adverse 
impact on the landscape or neighbouring properties.  Careful siting, design and 
landscaping will normally be required, particularly in sensitive locations.  
 
  Extension or Alteration of Existing Buildings  
5.42 EV2:1e)  Extension or alteration of a building is not inappropriate in the Countryside, 
where the resultant scale, form and general design is in keeping with the host 
building and its surroundings.  
 
5.43 Extensions or alterations to small dwellings in the Countryside should not result in 
the provision of large houses of suburban appearance, out of character with their 
rural setting and reducing the supply of smaller rural houses. In order to minimise 
impact, the proposed development will need to respect the design of t he existing 
property, adjoining properties and the setting of the building.  Advice on appropriate 
design principles for residential extensions is contained in the Ashfield Design 
Supplementary Planning Guidance.  
 
5.44 In determining applications,  the Council will also take into account factors such as 
the size of the original building,  the scale, form, bulk and prominence of an 
extension or alteration, and the impact of the proposal on the character of the 
Countryside. Proposals must not result in  a large, bulky or intrusive building  which 
would adversely impact on the character of the Countryside.  
 
5.45 Regard will be given to previous extensions on the site, either allowed through 
Permitted Development Rights or through planning approvals. The origin al 
character of a building can be lost if the property is extended in an unsympathetic 
way through the addition of numerous extensions. The Council will take into 
account the original proportions of the building, prior to extensions being added. In 
some ci rcumstances, it may be more appropriate to provide one new extension as 
a replacement for several existing extensions, especially where these are in poor 
condition or do not reflect the original character of the building. All applications will 
need to cons ider the impact of the cumulative extensions on the original building.  
 
5.46 The design of any development should be sympathetic to the existing building, the 
plot size upon which the building it sited, the area adjacent to the site and its wider 
setting. Propo sed changes, either individually or cumulatively should not over 
dominate the existing building.  
 
5.47 In the case of extensions to a dwelling, “original” means the dwelling as existing on 
1st July 1948, even if the original dwelling has since been replaced. If  no dwelling 
existed on that date, then “original” means the dwelling as first built after 1st July 
1948. Extensions will only be allowed under the policy where the dwelling proposed 
to be extended remains intact on site.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  123 
   5.48 The total floor area of the orig inal dwelling will include any garage or domestic 
outbuilding within the curtilage of the dwelling that is used ancillary to the main 
dwelling and that was erected as part of the original development and still remains 
intact on site. Outbuildings added at a later date, regardless of whether planning 
permission was required, will not be included as part of the original dwelling.  
 
5.49 Planning application proposals for outbuildings that do not constitute permitted 
development under Town & Country Planning Schedul e 2 Part 1 Class E of the 
Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development Order) or any 
superseding legislation, shall be treated as an extension.  
 
5.50 The Council will give consideration to the removal of permitted development rights 
when assessing p roposals to extend a dwelling in the Countryside.  
 
  Replacement of Existing Buildings  
5.51 EV2:1f)  The replacement of existing buildings need not be inappropriate providing 
that the new building is not materially larger than the original building it replaces, 
and where it can be demonstrated that the existing building is not of architectural or 
historic merit. Proposals for significantly different siting will only be supported where 
they result in a substantial visual improvement to the immediate setting. It is  
essential that such replacement buildings make a clear improvement to the 
surrounding area and the impact of generated traffic. This policy is not intended to 
formalise or give permanency to buildings of a clearly temporary nature.  
 
5.52 Where an existing bui lding is derelict or is structurally unsound, permission will not 
be granted for its replacement unless this has resulted from accidental damage, for 
example by fire, or subsidence, and in the case of replacement for residential 
purposes, it can be demonst rated that the residential use has not been abandoned.  
 
  Infill Development  
5.53 EV2:1g)  Limited infill for residential development may be acceptable in the 
Countryside, provided it preserves the character of the Countryside and is 
sustainably located. Regard should be made to the scale and character and 
appearance of the area when assessing development.  
 
5.54 In determining whether a site is sustainably located regard should be had to the 
services and facilities within the area and whether or not these are accessible  in 
relation to walking, cycling and public transport .  If it determined that it will be 
necessary to travel, by private motor vehicle, further afield to access a greater level 
of service provision to meet day -to-day needs, it is likely that the site is not in a 
sustainable location.   
 
5.55 The Council defines l imited infill development as the completion of an otherwise 
substantially built up frontage by the filling of a small gap normally capable of taking 
one or two dwellings only. A substantial built up frontage is defined as an otherwise 
continuous and largel y uninterrupted built frontage of several dwellings visible 
within the street scene.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  124 
   5.56 Not all small gaps are appropriate for infilling, for example where it would result in 
new development in an unsustainable location. Any proposal for infill development 
will need to have particular regard to Policy S1:  Sustainable Development 
Principles and Policy SD 2: Good Design Considerations for Development.  
 
5.57 The above principles may also apply to other purposes providing this would be in 
keeping with the character of  the area and would not adversely affect residential 
amenity.  
 
 
 
Policy EV3: Re -use of Buildings in the Green Belt and Countryside  
 
5.58 This policy supports the re -use of appropriately located and suitably constructed 
buildings in the Green Belt and countryside where this would meet sustainable 
development objectives . 
 
 
Policy EV3: Re-use of Buildings in the Green Belt and Countryside  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO3, SO5, SO6, SO11, SO12, SO13.  
1. The re -use of buildings in the Green Belt and countryside will be supported 
where:  
 
a) The buildings are in keeping with its surroundings by reason of their form, 
bulk and general design  
 
b) The buildings are of a permanent and substantial construction, are 
structurally sound* and are capable of re -use with out major alterations, 
adaptations or reconstruction, other than limited extension  
 
c) The conversion works would not be detrimental to the character of the 
building itself  
 
d) There is no materially greater impact than the present use on the openness 
and character of the Green Belt and Countryside.  Within the Green Belt 
such proposals must not conflict with the purposes of including land in it  
 
e) The proposed use would not resul t in an unacceptable proliferation of  new 
farm buildings elsewhere on the site, or inappropriate outside storage of 
any materials, machinery and/or vehicles  
 
f) The proposed re -use is not a building which has been built for agricultural or 
equine use within the last 10 years  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  125 
    
g) In the case of a building of historic or architectural value, the proposed 
scheme will preserve and enhance the building.  
 
2. Where the re -use of buildings in the Green Belt and Countryside is for 
employment uses, the business should be of a scale and type that is 
appropriate and consistent with the specific location, providing jobs and/or 
services to the local community.  
 
3. Where the re -use or a daptation of buildings in the Green Belt and Countryside 
is for residential purposes, this should not result in the creation of an isolated 
home.  Where a re -use or adaptation for residential purposes is appropriate, 
the creation of a residential curtilage  should not adversely affect the openness, 
character, or visual amenity of the area.   
 
4. Proposals that support employment, recreational and tourism uses will be 
treated favourably by the Council.  
 
*Applications should normally be accompanied by a structural survey and a 
Conversion Method Statement, effectively demonstrating that the building is capable 
of re-use without significant major alteration, adaptations or reconstruction.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK  Ltd. 
National Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development . 
• NPPF 2021, Part 3: Plan -making.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy . 
• NPPF 2021, Part 8: Promoting healthy and safe communities.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural 
environment . 
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, sports and recreational 
facilities, public rights of ways and local green space as of August 202 1. 
• Planning Practice Guidance: Natural environment as of August 2021 . 
 
5.59 The Council will support the reuse of appropriately located and suitably constructed 
buildings in the Green Belt and countryside where this would meet sustainable 
development objectives. Preference will be given for the re -use of buildings for local 
business and commercial uses, as opposed to residential use, and this will be a 
material consideration in determining applications.  
 
5.60 Considerable change has occurred in rural areas and in the methods and type of 
agricultural production. The reuse of rural buildings may help to reduce demands 
for new buildings in the countryside, encourage new enterprises and provide new 
jobs. The above policy includes detailed criteria to ensure that  the proposal does 
not cause significant harm to the openness, character and appearance of the 
surrounding Green Belt or countryside.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  126 
   5.61 Development in the Green Belt and countryside is strictly controlled by Policies EV1 
and EV2. Where it is appropriate in principle and involves the reuse of existing 
buildings it is important to ensure that the resultant form, bulk and general design of 
the building is in keeping with the surroundings and that the overall character and 
quality of the building is retained.   
 
5.62 Buildings which are not of permanent and substantial construction; are not 
structural ly sound and are not capable of re -use without ma jor alteration, 
adaptations or reconstruction, are considered unsuitable. Additionally, buildings 
should be physically capable of providing adequate accommodation without the 
need for significant extensions which would adversely affect the character of the  
building or its locality.    
 
5.63 The conversion of buildings in rural areas to uses not originally intended in their 
design can result in visual intrusion and/or increased traffic and activity, resulting in 
a significant adverse impact on the Countryside. Th e Council will seek to ensure 
that any proposal is appropriate both for the building itself and for the area in which 
it is located. Proposed new uses should not have a materially greater impact on the 
openness and character of the Green Belt or Countrysid e, than the present use.   
 
5.64 The re -use of agricultural buildings can result in the need for new farm buildings 
elsewhere on the farm or inappropriate outside storage of materials, machinery 
and/or vehicles. In certain areas new farm buildings and outside s torage can 
adversely affect the local and wider landscape and it may be appropriate to control 
their proliferation by using planning conditions or negotiating a planning obligation.  
 
5.65 In order to discourage abuse of the planning process, the Council will n ot consider 
favourably applications for the change of use of agricultural buildings to non -
agricultural purposes, within ten years of their completion.  
 
5.66 Listed buildings and buildings of architectural or historic interest will require special 
consideration , as detailed in Policy EV 9. All proposals to reuse such buildings must 
be designed to protect their value or significance. This would usually involve 
minimal internal or external alterations.   
 
5.67 Unused and underused buildings, especially those of traditio nal design and 
construction, provide habitats for some protected species, notably barn owls and 
some species of bats. This possibility should be considered during the preparation 
of schemes of conversion and provision made to retain and protect any nest or  
roost site which may be identified. This is a statutory requirement under the Wildlife 
and Countryside Act 1981.  
 
5.68 In cases where the reuse of a building is for employment uses, the business should 
be of a scale and type that is appropriate and consistent  with the location. Careful 
consideration will need to be made regarding the need for external storage, 
hardstanding, car parking and boundary treatments, to ensure that they do not 
have an adverse effect on the surroundings.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  127 
   5.69 Where the re -use of a buildi ng within the Green Belt and countryside for residential 
purposes would result in the creation of a new isolated home, the Council will need 
to be satisfied that there are special circumstances such as those set out in 
paragraph 80 of the NPPF. Where speci al circumstances exist, the buildings 
should be physically capable of providing adequate accommodation without the 
need for disproportionate additions over and above the size of the original building, 
which would adversely affect the character of the build ing or its locality. The 
provision of a garden area to serve a converted building can also have an adverse 
impact on the local environment due to its position, extent, boundary treatment and 
the erection of additional buildings such as garages, sheds and g reenhouses.   
 
5.70 Where permission is granted for the residential re -use of buildings in the Green 
Belt, the Council may consider applying conditions which restrict permitted 
development rights.  
 
 
 
Policy EV4: Green Infrastructure, Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
 
5.71 This policy will deliver, conserve and enhance Green Infrastructure.  It will also 
protect and enhance biodiversity, through the protection of Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest, Local Nature Reserves, Local Wildlife Sites and sites support ing 
Priority Habitats and Priority Species.  
 
 
Policy EV4: Green Infrastructure, Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
 
Strategic  Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO11, SO13, SO14.  
 
     Green Infrastructure  
1. The delivery, conservation and enhancement of Green Infrastructure will be achieved 
through the establishment of a network of green corridors and assets, having regard 
to the Council’s Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. This 
approach requires that:  
 
a. Existing Green Infrastructure corridor s and assets are protected and enhanced to 
maintain the integrity of the overall Green Infrastructure network. Priority for the 
creation of new or enhanced strategic Green Infrastructure will be given to 
strategic and local links;  
 
b. Alternative scheme designs, including locations that minimise the impact on 
Green Infrastructure networks, should be considered before the use of mitigation 
(either on or off -site, as appropriate). Where new development has an adverse 
impact on Green Infrastructure (where no  alternative is available), the need and 
benefit of the development will be weighed against the harm caused;  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  128 
   c. Linkages between Green Infrastructure assets will be preserved, enhanced or 
created to improve public access and biodiversity value; and  
 
d. New or e nhanced corridors and assets should be multi -functional, where 
appropriate. Proposals should demonstrate which functions will be delivered 
through the creation or enhancement of assets.   
 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
2. Development proposals should protect and, where possible and appropriate enhance 
biodiversity and geodiversity, and minimise fragmentation of habitats. Development 
should facilitate opportunities for the preservation, creation, restoration, 
enhancement and connection of priority habitats, hav ing regard for habitats identified 
in the District’s Biodiversity Opportunity Maps and for the recovery of priority species.  
 
3. In considering development proposals affecting biodiversity and geodiversity the 
following will apply:  
 
a. Development proposals like ly to have an adverse effect on, Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest will not normally be permitted. An exception will only be made 
where the benefits of the development clearly outweighs the nature conservation 
value of the site and the broader impact on  the national network of Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest;  
 
b. Development proposals on, or affecting, Local Wildlife Sites, sites supporting 
priority habitats, or sites supporting protected or priority species, will not normally 
be permitted. Development  may be permitted where it is clearly demonstrated 
that the need for the development outweighs the adverse impact on the nature 
conservation value of the site;  
 
c. Development proposals on, or affecting, national and locally designated sites and 
protected species shall be supported by an up to date ecological assessment with 
any significant harmful ecological impacts avoided through the design layout and 
detailing of development, with mitigation, and as a last resort, compensation 
(including off -site measures), provided where they cannot be avoided.  
 
d. Development proposals on, or affecting, national and locally designated sites and 
notable species should be supported by an up to date Ecological Assessment;  
 
e. Development proposals affecting biodiversi ty will be required to undertake a 
biodiversity assessment, using the most up -to-date Defra approved Biodiversity 
Matrix. A minimum net gain of 10% will be sought on -site. Only when all 
possibilities for on -site mitigation have been exhausted will off -site compensation 
be considered.  
 
4. Having regard to Natural England’s Advice Note to Local Planning Authorities, a risk 
based approach will be adopted to all planning applications in relation to the possible 
potential Special Protection Area for the Sherwood F orest Region.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  129 
   5. Where there is a reason to suspect the presence of protected species or 
geodiversity, a survey assessing their presence will be required to support a planning 
application.  
 
Designated sites including Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSS I) and Local Nature 
Reserves (LNR) are listed in Appendix 6 and are identified on the Policies Map. Local 
Wildlife Sites (LWS) are listed in Appendix 6 and are identified on the map for 
information purposes. This Policy will also apply to any new sites ide ntified after the 
Local Plan is adopted but  will not be illustrated on the Policies Map.  
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd  
• Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project 2016. Notts BAG.  
• Ashfield Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. Ashfield 
District Council.  
National Planning 
Policy & Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development  
• NPPF 2021, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, sports and recreational facilities, 
public rights of ways and local green space as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Natural environment as of August 2021  
 
 
5.72 Planning applications should take into account, at an early stage, the evidence 
base set out for the Local Plan for green infrastructure and biodiversity mapping as 
well as other relevant maps available on these opportunities including those 
provided by th e Environment Agency and Natural England.   
 
 Green Infrastructure  
5.73 Green Infrastructure comprises networks of multi -functional green space, including 
green stepping stones, which sit within and contribute to, the type of high quality 
natural and built environment required to deliver sustainable communities. In the 
context  of the Policy,  it includes what is sometimes referred to as blue 
infrastructure; that is, the river and water environment. Development should seek to 
create, through new and improved green infrastructure, opportunities to improve 
flood risk management and  to deliver multiple environmental benefits to assist in 
meeting the aims and objectives of the England Biodiversity Strategy and Water 
Framework Directive (WFD).  
 
5.74 With climate change and the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems, water will need 
to be take n increasingly into account within the wider green infrastructure 
environment. Well designed development which takes water into account can 
potentially result in multiple benefits including the provision of a broader ecosystem.  
 
5.75 Delivering, protecting and  enhancing these Green Infrastructure networks requires 
the creation of new assets to link with river corridors, woodlands, nature reserves, 
urban green spaces, historic sites and other existing assets.  Green Infrastructure 
planning involves the identific ation of strategic networks of existing and proposed 
green spaces or corridors, to provide benefit to both communities and wildlife. 
Through the management, enhancement and extension of these networks, multi -
functional benefits can be realised for local co mmunities, businesses, visitors and Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  130 
   the environment. In some cases,  there may be a greater value for assets being uni -
functional, such as where the highest priority is to protect and conserve sensitive 
species and habitats that might be damaged by recreati onal disturbance.  
 
5.76 The local approach to Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity is set out in the 
Council’s Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. This examines the 
connectivity of green spaces at a local level and identifies green infrastru cture 
network opportunities and ensures that the Green Infrastructure network is 
protected and enhanced.  
 
5.77 New residential development will place additional demands on current Green 
Infrastructure assets and generate demands for new assets. In some cases,  new 
residential development may impact directly on Green Infrastructure corridors and 
assets. When considering a proposal for development, the need for development 
and the benefits it will bring to the area should be weighed against any negative 
impacts. Th is could include looking at whether the assets are surplus to 
requirements, whether the development will only impact on a small area of a major 
asset or corridor, or if a wider need exists for the development and there is no 
better location for it.   
 
5.78 If the benefits of proposed development outweighs adverse impacts, designs that 
minimise negative impacts will be sought. The form and nature of proposed 
mitigation, whether on or off -site, will depend on the context of the site and will be 
determined on a cas e-by-case basis, with reference to the Council’s Green 
Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper and the Public Open Space 
Strategy. This will ensure that new provision relates well to the overall Green 
Infrastructure network, meets the locally adopt ed standards, and is suitable for the 
site.  
 
 Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
5.79 Ashfield is recognised as one of the most biodiverse areas in Nottinghamshire, due 
largely to its varied geological context of Magnesian Limestone, Triassic Sandstone 
(to the east ) and coal measures (to the west). It is an area heavily scarred by the 
industrial development of recent centuries, which has both damaged and 
fragmented habitats, while also creating new opportunities for wildlife in the form of 
disturbed and restored sit es.  
 
5.80 The District supports a broad range of habitats, including heathland, ancient 
woodland dumbles, calcareous grasslands (often on post -industrial sites) and fields 
rich in wildflowers . The east is characterised by small fields and streams, while the 
west and south contains large blocks of tree planting. The rivers and streams within 
the District provide habitat for significant populations of water vole and native 
crayfish.  
 
5.81 In Nottinghamshire, more than 100 species have been lost during the last centur y, 
with many more species and habitats at risk. These losses can have severe 
repercussions for complex and often fragile ecosystems and key threats have been 
the intensification of agriculture and the pressures for built development. In Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  131 
   addition, climate c hange poses a significant threat and some species and habitats 
may be at risk of dying out unless they can keep pace with the impact of a 
changing climate, while others may suffer from increased competition for water 
resources. Avoiding fragmentation of ha bitats is likely to be significant in enabling 
wildlife to adapt to climate change.  
 
 Possible Potential Special Protection Area  
5.82 The UK government is required to identify how it can contribute to the conservation 
of particular bird species across their na tural range in Europe through the 
protection of suitable sites. In doing this exercise it has identified that the 
populations of nightjar and woodlark in Sherwood may warrant such protection. A 
final decision has not been made and it remains under consider ation as part of a 
UK-wide SPA Review Programme being led by the Joint Nature Conservation 
Committee. The Council will utilise Natural England’s  the “Advice Note to Local 
Planning Authorities” regarding the consideration of likely effects on the breeding 
population of nightjar and woodlark in the Sherwood Forest region as the basis of 
its approach to planning applications potentially impact on the possible potential 
Special Protection Area (ppSPA).  
 
 Sites of Special Scientific Interest  
5.83 Ashfield has nine Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), representing some of 
the County’s richest habitats and covering 92 hectares. These are spread across 
the area, and based on varied geology of limestone, coal measures and sandstone. 
SSSIs are p rotected by specific legislation which includes a requirement for positive 
management.  
 
 Local Wildlife Sites  
5.84 The protection and enhancement of locally designated wildlife areas such as ‘Local 
Wildlife Sites’ (LWS), is vital. They represent sites that are  of at least County -wide 
importance, and form a crucial framework of ‘stepping stones’ for the migration and 
dispersal of species. In 20 21, Ashfield was recorded as having 217 LWS although  
the number varies as new sites meeting the agreed criteria are iden tified while 
others are known to have deteriorated and may be removed. These sites are on 
both public and private land and are identified and surveyed by the local Biological 
and Geological Records Centre, based on criteria set by the Nottinghamshire LWS 
panel, and are subject to regular review.  
 
 Local Nature Reserves  
5.85 Local Nature Reserves (LNR) are sites mainly under the control of the local 
authority, designated in consultation with Natural England to encourage public 
access and enjoyment of the natural environment. Ashfield currently contains four 
LNRs as well as one on the boundary with Nottingham City.   
 
 Regionally Important Geological Sites  
5.86 Geodiversity is the variety of rocks, minerals, fossils, landforms, sediments and 
soils, together with the natural processes which form and alter them.  Regionally 
Important Geological Sites (RIGS) are part of a national system to raise the profile 
and off er some protection to sites that contain important examples of the local Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  132 
   geology. Ashfield has twelve of the 133 recognised RIGS in Nottinghamshire, 
which are currently designated as LWS.  
 
 Development Proposals  
5.87 All development proposals should consider pr otection and enhancement of 
biodiversity and geological diversity from the outset and seek to protect features 
such as trees, hedgerows, ponds and woodland. Planning applications should 
identify how these features will be managed in the long term.    
 
5.88 Buildings should be designed to include roosting or nesting sites, where 
appropriate, and include landscaping within sites and along boundaries which can 
provide feeding and nesting opportunities as well as acting as habitat corridors 
aiding the passage of wil dlife between sites. Developments can enhance 
biodiversity by incorporate bat, swift or bird nest bricks into their design. These are 
cheap, easy to maintain and effective way of encouraging wildlife to use new 
buildings. Good design for biodiversity can h elp bring wildlife into urban areas and 
be of benefit for quality of life, health and wellbeing as well as contribute to 
achieving Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) targets. Planting and landscape designs, 
where possible, should predominately consist of nativ e plants, grown from seeds of 
local provenance.  
 
5.89 Development proposals should particularly seek to contribute towards the 
protection and preservation of priority habitats and species listed in Section 41 of 
the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act  2006, and the objectives for 
priority habitats and species identified in the Nottinghamshire Biodiversity Action 
Plan (BAP) .  Proposals should also seek  and the protection, enhancement and 
linking of areas identified in the Ashfield Green Infrastructure  and Biodiversity 
Technical Paper and the Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project (BOM). 
Proposals that could affect a site of value for biodiversity or geological conservation 
must be accompanied by sufficient information to assess the effects o f 
development on protected sites, species, biodiversity or geology, together with any 
proposed prevention, mitigation or compensation measures.  
 
5.90 It should be noted that knowledge of valuable sites and their condition is constantly 
changing and decisions wi ll be based on the most up to date information available. 
The Nottinghamshire Biological and Geological Records Centre can provide 
general data for development sites, where appropriate and further information may 
also be available from the Nottinghamshire Wildlife Trust and any local nature 
groups.  
 
 Biodiversity Net Gain  
5.91 DEFRA consulted on the concept of implementing biodiversity net gain in 
December 2018. The Chancellor subsequently confirmed in his 2019 Spring 
Statement ‘that new developments must deliver an overall increase in biodiversity’. 
This mandating of net gain i s an important step change in planning policy and 
requires development that leaves biodiversity in a better state than before.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  133 
   5.92 It can be challenging to establish new habitats, and this will be taken into account 
when assessing the appropriateness of prop osed mitigation measures. It is 
essential that the most important and irreplaceable habitats in the district, such as 
ancient woodland, are protected, so mitigation rather than retention will not be 
appropriate in some circumstances. It will also be import ant to ensure that invasive 
species such as Japanese Knotweed are controlled.  
 
5.93 It will be important not just to protect the biodiversity resources that already exist, 
but also to support restoration schemes and secure further enhancements in the 
area’s nat ure conservation value where possible. This reflects the overall strategic 
importance of this area both within Nottinghamshire and as part of a wider 
ecological network.   In consultation with the Council and other relevant bodies, the 
applicant will be required to demonstrate how they are achieving net gain in a 
measurable way.  
 
5.94 It is already a requirement that an Ecological Impact Assessment (EcIA) is 
submitted with most types of planning applications (the exceptions are when 
dealing with householder ap plications or sites with very low value ecological 
features – in which case a written statement or Preliminary Ecological Appraisal 
may still be acceptable). Where an EcIA is required there should be a specific 
section titled “Net gain for biodiversity”  which clearly show s how the site has been 
assessed using the Defra Biodiversity Metric. This will demonstrate the baseline 
value of the site (before development) and the post -development value – where it is 
suspected that the baseline value of the site has b een affected negatively prior to 
assessment the Council  will require an assessment of the site based on the 
condition before such an occurrence (this may need to be based on previous aerial 
photos and/or historic information) and if there is any doubt of t he Distinctiveness or 
Condition it will be assumed that the highest likely value will apply.               
 
5.95 The objective should always be to deliver 10% Net gain for biodiversity on -site and 
therefore it will be essential to appoint an Ecological Consulta nt at the earliest 
stage to be involved in the iterative design stage of the layout, the Ecological 
Consultant should work closely with the Landscape Architect and Urban Designers 
to consider which options of the layout lead to the best possible outcome fo r 
achieving Net gain for biodiversity on -site. This type of information should be 
included in the Design and Access Statement (if appropriate) whereby different 
Options of layout are shown with their corresponding different Biodiversity Unit 
impacts – together with an explanation why one option has been chosen over 
another where the layout resulting in the lowest impact on biodiversity has not been 
taken forward to the proposed layout stage.               
 
5.96 Evidence is required in the EcIA to demonstrate the Ecological Consultant has 
been involved in the initial design of the layout in a meaningful way to help achieve 
a Net gain for biodiversity.  As set out in paragraph 180 of the NPPF, t his should 
include r eference to the Mitigation Hierarchy of avoiding damage to sensitive 
ecological features, Minimising impacts on such sensitive ecological features, and 
where these first two steps cannot be achieved (with an explanation to justify why Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  134 
   not) finally consider what level of compensation will be requi red either on -site or off -
site (or both) , this could take the form of a Section 106 Agreement.   
 
 
 
Policy EV5: Protection of Green Spaces and Recreation Facilities  
 
5.97  This policy aims to protect green spaces and recreational facilities and sets out the 
criteria against which the loss or partial loss would be considered.   
 
Policy EV5: Protection of Green Spaces and Recreation Facilities  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO5, SO14.  
 
1. Green spaces and recreation facilities will be protected by restricting development to 
appropriate recreation uses or recreation facilities that are of a scale appropriate with 
the size of the space.  
 
2. The Council will resist the los s or fragmentation of accessible green space and 
recreation facilities identified on the Policies Map and listed in Appendix 7.  
 
3. The Council will resist the loss or fragmentation of green space not identified on the 
Policies Map, which meet one of the foll owing criteria:  
 
a. Contribute to the distinctive form, character and setting of a settlement;  
b. Contribute to the visual quality of the locality;  
c. Create a focal point within the built up area;  
d. Provide the setting for heritage assets;  
e. Form part of an area of value for wildlife, sport or recreation, including areas 
forming part of a 'green corridor'; or  
f. Form the only accessible green space (as identified within the Public Open Space 
Strategy) for some residents.  
 
4. Development that would lead to the loss or parti al loss of a green space or recreation 
facility will be permitted where it meets one of the following criteria:  
 
a. An assessment has been undertaken which clearly shows the green space or 
recreational facility to be surplus to requirement;  
b. It is ancillary to  the recreation use, or it would assist in the retention and 
enhancement of the recreational use of the site;  
c. Adequate replacement provision of new green space is provided in the locality;  
d. It is proposed to make significant improvements to the overall qual ity of the 
recreation provision in the locality; or  
e. In the case of school playing fields the development is essential for educational 
purposes.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  135 
   Sites may be subject to review and regard will be had to any update in the Council’s 
Public Open Space Strateg y and Playing Pitch Strategy. Any new green spaces 
developed after the Local Plan is adopted will be protected under this Policy.  
Evidence Base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd  
• Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project 2016. Notts BAG.  
• Ashfield Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. Ashfield 
District Council.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development  
• NPPF 2021, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural 
environment  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, sports and recreational 
facilities, public rights of ways and local green space as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Natural environment as of August 2021  
 
5.98 Green Spaces co ntribute towards quality of life in the district through providing 
opportunities for formal and informal recreation. They also contribute towards the 
overall green infrastructure and the range of social, economic and environmental 
benefits this provides. P olicy EV5 will increase opportunities for pursuing a healthy 
lifestyle, by maintaining and enhancing recreation opportunities, while also 
protecting the integrity of the Green Infrastructure network.  
 
5.99 The current network of green spaces and recreation facilities within Ashfield’s towns 
and villages makes a significant contribution to their character and attractiveness. 
Green space takes many forms including town parks, formal gardens, country 
parks, inf ormal woodland, restored landscapes, play areas, recreation grounds and 
sports facilities, school playing field, local small green spaces, green routes, 
reservoirs, allotments, cemeteries and church yards, undeveloped parcels of land, 
and semi -natural area s. Many provide important recreational and sporting facilities 
and whatever their size, function and accessibility they all contribute to local 
amenity and biodiversity.  
 
  Protection of Accessible Green Space  
5.100  It is important to prevent the loss of green space where this would harm the 
character of a settlement or the visual quality of the locality. Sites are shown on the 
Policies Map and listed in Appendix 7.  
 
5.101  Ashfield’s Public Open Space Strategy and Playing Pitch Strategy provides 
evidence on the existing green space network and its recreational values. It 
provides a basis for improving the quality and potential uses of green spaces to 
cater for increasing future demand arising from growth and the changing needs of 
the community. The Strategies set  out standards for the provision of green spaces 
and identifies deficiencies in the quantity, quality or accessibility of green spaces. 
Prospective developers will be expected to make appropriate provision to address 
deficiencies in green spaces, and for t he needs arising from their development, in 
accordance with these standards or subsequent review of standards.  
 
5.102  Outside the Main Urban Areas, Named Settlements and Villages, development 
proposals affecting green spaces or recreational facilities should ini tially comply 
with Policy EV1 - Green Belt and Policy EV2 – Countryside. These policies identify Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  136 
   the limited types of development which may be appropriate in the rural parts of the 
District.  
 
5.103  Proposals which are ancillary to the recreation use of the site  and which add to its 
recreation value such as football changing rooms or a cricket pavilion may be 
acceptable if they are sited to minimise effects on the open character of the area. 
On private green spaces in particular, it may be appropriate to allow li mited 
development on a small part of the site where this would result in retention of the 
majority of the green space including upgrading of the facility and improved public 
use of the site.  
 
Protection of Other Green Space  
5.104  In addition to the protection of  accessible green space and recreational facilities, 
area EV5/206 to the south of Hucknall is considered to be an important area of 
green space. The area is important for several reasons including its effectiveness 
as a buffer between the existing developm ent and the Hucknall Bypass (A611), and 
for its visual amenity within the built -up area.   
 
5.105  The Council will resist the loss or fragmentation of other Green Spaces not 
identified on the Policies Map where it would harm the character of a settlement or 
the visual quality of the locality.  This approach accords with the Council’s Public 
Open Space Strategy aims and objectives, which state that adequate protection of 
other smaller, valuable green spaces should be introduced through the Local Plan 
process.  
 
Exceptions  
5.106  Existing green spaces and recreational facilities, including playing fields, should not 
be built on unless an assessment has been undertaken which clearly shows that 
the green space is surplus to requirement.   
 
5.107  In some circumstances the loss of an  area may be acceptable where a 
replacement facility is provided in the immediate locality serving the same local 
resident population. This may include, for instance, cases where a site is required 
to enable the comprehensive development of an area. Where replacement formal 
sports facilities such as football pitches are to be provided these should be 
available for use prior to loss of the ground or pitch to be replaced. This will be 
negotiated and secured through a Section 106 Planning Agreement.  
 
5.108  Exceptionally, the loss of green space may also be acceptable where it is proposed 
to make a significant improvement in the type, quality and general availability of 
green space in the locality. This may include the loss of an area with restricted 
public a ccess, or an area with no formal play provision and the subsequent 
improvement of an existing nearby area through the provision of formal sports 
facilities that are much needed in the locality and where general public access will 
be allowed. The loss of an  existing area and subsequent provision of an off -site 
replacement or improvement of facilities will need to be negotiated with the Local 
Planning Authority and will be secured by a planning condition or developer 
contribution as appropriate.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  137 
    
5.109  The Council will resist the loss or fragmentation of green space and recreation 
facilities identified on the Policies Map and listed in Appendix 7; and other green 
space not identified on the Policies Map which contribute to the distinctive form, 
character and setting  of a settlement or an area. This approach accords with the 
Council’s Public Open Space Strategy aims and objectives, which state that 
adequate protection of smaller, valuable green spaces should be introduced 
through the Local Plan process.  
 
5.110  In the case o f school playing fields, development essential for educational 
purposes will be permitted where it can be demonstrated that sufficient suitable 
outdoor space remains on the site.  
 
5.111  Where the educational use of the site ceases, proposals for the development  of its 
playing fields will only be considered favourably where it can be demonstrated to 
meet the criteria set out in Policy EV5.  
 
 
 
 
Policy EV6: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
 
5.112  This policy is intended to protect the natural environment, including biodiversity, by 
minimising the loss of trees, woodlands and hedgerows where development is 
proposed.  
 
 
Policy EV6: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO5, SO11, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. New development shall make provision for tree retention and planting within the 
application site, particularly on the street frontage, or off -site in appropriate 
situations, to improve the level of tree coverage within the District.  The Council will 
expect 2 new trees to be planted in lieu of each on e lost on site in order to maintain 
and enhance the character and appearance of the area, to provide for biodiversity, to 
contribute to measures to reduce carbon and to adapt to climate change.  Measures 
must be in place to ensure that these trees are adeq uately maintained over the 
lifetime of the development.  
 
2. Development proposals will not be permitted where they would:  
 
a. Result in the loss of trees or woodland which are subject to a Tree Preservation 
Order, within a Conservation Area, designated as Ancient Woodland, are aged or 
veteran, or of visual or nature conservation value;  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  138 
   b. Give rise to a threat to the continued wellbeing of trees, woodlands or hedgerows 
of visual, historic or nature conservation value; or  
 
c. Involve development within the canopy  or root zone of trees considered worthy of 
retention, unless:  
 
• there are sound arboriculture  reasons to support the proposal; or  
• the work would enable development to take place that would bring sufficient 
benefits that clearly outweigh the loss of the tre es, woodland or hedges 
concerned, and  
• suitable replacement trees and/or hedgerows are provided for on site or if 
necessary, off site at a minimum ratio of 2 new trees for every 1 lost.  
 
3. To ensure existing trees and hedgerows are appropriately protected dur ing the 
construction process, the Council will require development proposals to submit 
details of the tree protection measures to be utilised on site during the construction 
process.  
 
4. Where the benefits of the development clearly outweigh the harm resulting from the 
loss of trees, woodlands or hedgerows provision should be made for appropriate 
mitigation measures, reinstatement of features and/or compensatory planting, 
landscaping and habitat creation to ensure no net loss of valued features. 
Replac ement planting should use native species and complement the landscape 
character of the area.  
 
Existing Ancient Woodland sites are listed in Appendix 8 and shown on the Policies 
Map. Any new sites identified after the Local Plan is adopted will be protected  by this 
Policy.  
 
Evidence Base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project 2016. Notts BAG.  
• Ashfield Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. Ashfield 
District Council.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, sports and recreational facilities, 
public rights of w ays and local green space as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Natural environment as of August 2021  
 
 
5.113  Trees, woodland and hedgerows are important to the quality of Ashfield’s 
environment , facilitating health and wellbeing. They also have multiple wildlife 
benefits in providing habitat, habitat links and foraging areas for numerous flora and 
fauna. The protection of these both in the public and private realm, within 
development proposals, w ill be sought in order to meet the Council’s duties in 
relation to  biodiversity. New development should seek to ensure that new 
landscaping is primarily of wildlife friendly species and adds to the linking of green 
areas across the District.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  139 
   5.114  Development proposals will be expected to avoid harm to existing trees , woodland  
and hedgerows , and incorporate them within a landscape scheme, except where 
their long -term survival would be compromised by their age or physical condition or 
there are excep tional and overriding benefits in accepting their loss.  
 
5.115  The retention of existing trees, woodlands and hedgerows can assist in integrating 
new development into the local environment by providing some mature, established 
elements within landscaping scheme s. Mitigation, replacement or compensatory 
measures will be required when this cannot be achieved, to ensure that there is no 
net loss of environmental value as a result of development; these should be 
secured by condition or through S106 Agreement. Policy  SD2: Good Design 
Considerations for Development, provides details on the provision of new planting 
within development sites.  
 
5.116  To comply with Policy EV6 and to provide an informed basis for decisions, it is 
essential that development proposals commission a detailed tree and hedgerow 
survey. These should be submitted before validation of a planning application. This 
applies to all sites on which trees and hedgerows are growing and those proposals 
that will affect neighbouring trees and hedgerows. A pre -deve lopment survey 
should be carried out by a competent arboriculturist and record information on trees 
and hedgerows on a site independently of and before any specific layout or design 
is produced.  
 
 Trees and Woodland  
5.117  Whilst Ashfield has some important woodl ands and areas with substantial numbers 
of trees, other areas lack tree cover. It is therefore vital to ensure that important 
trees and woodlands are protected and canopy cover extended in areas lacking 
cover, including in conjunction with new development.   
 
5.118  Trees can add great beauty and a sense of place and character to our District’s 
landscape. They enhance the structure and layout of our towns and villages, and 
many provide important landmarks. They offer a variety of form, texture, colour, 
shape and se asonal change; they also complement the built environment by 
providing screening, perspective, focal points, privacy and seclusion, and they 
define and separate open spaces. Trees are often greatly valued by the local 
community and visitors.  
 
5.119  Trees can als o make a positive contribution towards reducing the effects of future 
climate change by dissipating the impact of heavy rainfall, reducing urban 
temperatures and providing shade and protection against the detrimental effects of 
sunlight. New development sh ould seek to incorporate strategically sited trees that 
will provide shade and cooling to developments, particularly to street frontages, 
large hard landscaped areas and other areas of public realm. Off -site tree provision 
will be appropriate in some cases  where it has been demonstrated that acceptable 
development cannot provide an appropriate level of mitigation planting (where trees 
are to be removed) and/or new planting within the site. There will be a need to use 
appropriate large canopy species that ar e adaptable to future predicted climatic 
conditions (native species if possible and where appropriate in order to deliver Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  140 
   biodiversity benefits), particularly the higher temperatures and potential drought 
conditions predicted in summer. Tree stock should e ither be UK grown or sourced 
from a domestic nursery that retains its trees for a minimum of one year (a full 
growing season) within the UK before sale to ensure plant health and non -infection 
by foreign pests or disease.  
 
5.120  Where specific trees or groups o f trees within a development site are of particular 
value (such that their removal would have a significant impact upon the local 
environment and its enjoyment by the public), and are potentially under threat, the 
Council will make Tree Preservation Orders  to protect them. Where trees are 
covered by Tree Preservation Orders, the policy is intended to safeguard them 
from damage or destruction unless there are overriding reasons for their removal.  
 
 Ancient Woodland  
5.121  An ancient woodland is an area which has ha d continuous cover of native trees 
and plants since at least 1600 A.D., neither having been  cleared nor extensively 
replanted since then. The date is adopted as marking the time when forestry began 
to be widely adopted and when evidence in map form began to become available. 
Ancient woodlands in particular are exceptionally rich in wildlife, and  often contain 
important archaeological and heritage features relating to their past management. 
Planning Practice Guidance identifies that both Ancient Semi -Natural Woodland 
(ASNW) as well as Plantations on Ancient Woodland Sites (PAWS) are ancient 
woodla nd. Both types should be treated equally in terms of the protection afforded 
to ancient woodland in the N PPF. Eleven Ancient Woodland sites have been 
identified by Natural England within Ashfield (see Appendix 8).   
 
  Hedgerows  
5.122  Hedgerows are the most traditional types of field boundaries in many areas and 
make an important contribution to the landscape of the District. They are often of 
considerable historic and wildlife interest and, particularly in the case of older 
hedgerows, often contain a great diversity of plant and wildlife species. The loss of 
hedgerows from the countryside landscape is a continuing cause for concern.  
 
5.123  On the 1st June 1997 the Hedgerows Regulations came into force under Section 
97 of the Environment Act,  1995. They introduced new arrangements for local 
planning authorities to protect "important" hedgerows in the Countryside, by 
controlling their removal through a system of notification.  
 
5.124  The Hedgerows Regulations set out criteria that must be used by the  local planning 
authority in determining which hedgerows are "important". The criteria relate to the 
value of hedgerows from an archaeological, historical, landscape and wildlife 
perspective. There is a strong presumption that "important" hedgerows and oth er 
hedgerows, will be protected and wherever possible incorporated into open space 
and landscaping proposals for new development.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  141 
   Policy EV7: Provision and Protection of Allotments  
 
5.125  This policy aims to protect existing allotments and provide new allotments in order 
to meet a locally identified need.  
 
 
Policy EV7: Provision and Protection of Allotments  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO14.  
 
1. The Council will support the provision of new allotments in order to meet a locally 
identified demand. Where residential development results in an additional demand 
for allotments in a locality, new provision could form part of the on -site open space 
requirement, or a planning contribution may be required towards either improving 
existing  allotments or providing new allotments elsewhere, as set out under Policy 
H5. 
 
2. Development on allotment land for alternative uses will only be permitted where:  
 
a. it can be demonstrated that the allotments are no longer required through a lack 
of demand, the green space is surplus to requirements in the locality and the 
benefits from the proposed development outweigh the impacts on biodiversity, or  
 
b. there are overriding sustainability benefits from the proposed development and 
appropriate alternati ve provision of allotments will be made in the locality.  
 
Protected allotments are listed in Appendix 9  and identified on the Policies Map. Any 
new allotments developed after the Local Plan is adopted will be protected under this 
Policy.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Ashfield Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. Ashfield 
District Council.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 202 1, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, sports and recreational facilities, 
public rights of ways and local green space as of August 2021.  
 
  Allotment provision  
5.126  Allotments are an important component of open space and offer a diverse range of 
benefits for people, communities and the environment. An allotment provides 
opportunities for people to grow their own produce and  enjoy a healthier lifestyle 
and diet. It als o offers the opportunity for community interaction, they are socially 
inclusive and provides environmental benefits through green space and wildlife 
habitats.     
 
5.127  The Ashfield Allotment Strategy identifies that the District’s population is set to grow 
over the next fifteen years and it is therefore vital to ensure sufficient allotment Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  142 
   gardens are available for the increasing population. Where appropriate, new 
residential development should facilitate opportunities for local food growing and for 
major resid ential development this may include the provisions of new or expanded 
allotments.  
 
5.128  The requirements for allotments as part of any major residential development 
proposals will be assessed in relation to local provision and the potential demand 
created by th e residential development. Information on demand is set out in the 
Council’s Allotment Survey Technical Paper and Allotment Strategy.  The National 
Society of Allotments and Leisure Gardens recommend a standard plot size of 250 
sq. metres and 20 allotments per 1,000 households (i.e. 1 allotment  per 50 
households). Based on an average household size of 2.2 this equates to 20 
allotments per 2,200 people. This will be utilised as a basis to agree any required 
provision of allotments.  
 
5.129  Allotment sites are an imp ortant component of green space provision and  can have 
benefits for biodiversity. The N PPF stresses the important contribution that open 
space makes towards the health and wellbeing of local communities. It identifies 
that open space should not be built on  except in specific circumstances. This is 
reflected in the policy, which stresses that the loss of allotment land will only be 
permitted where it can be clearly demonstrated that there is no longer a demand for 
allotments in the locality and it does not h ave a detrimental impact on the provision 
of green space or biodiversity in the locality.  
 
5.130  In exceptional circumstances, the development of an allotment site may be 
permitted, even where there is a demand for the allotments, provided it can be 
demonstrated  that there are overriding sustainability benefits from the proposed 
development. Under these circumstances, the developer will be required to provide 
an alternative suitable site for allotments to serve the local community. In this 
context, an alternative  site must be of a similar amount of land with similar or 
improved facilities (such as a water supply) the soils are of a similar or improved 
fertility, the site is readily accessible by foot, bicycle and car to the residential area 
the existing allotment site serves and, where appropriate, provides adequate 
parking within or adjacent to the site.  
 
  Private allotments  
5.131  The Parliament Select Committee Reports on the provision of allotments have 
identified that there can be problems with blight on some private allotments. The 
actual loss of a site is only the final step in a complex and often lengthy process. 
Prior to the change of use, there will often have been many months or years of 
uncertainty about the future of the site. Constant rumours and repea ted planning 
applications for development of a site impact upon the morale of the allotment 
holders and, ultimately, increase the number of untended plots. The approach of 
non-maintenance and running down of allotments will not provide evidence of a 
lack o f demand for allotments in the locality.  
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  143 
   Policy EV8: Agricultural Land Quality  
 
5.132  This policy is intended to protect the best and most versatile agricultural land – 
Grade 1, 2 and 3a (There is no Grade 1 land in Ashfield).  
 
 
Policy EV8: Agricultural Land Quality  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO13, SO14.  
Agricultural land of grades 1, 2 and 3a of the  Department for Environment, Food 
and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) Agricultural  Land Classification is the best and most 
versatile agricultural land and  should be  conserved as a finite resource for the 
future.  Development on the best and most versatile agricultural land will only be 
permitted if it can be demonstrated that there is an  overriding sustainability benefit 
from the development and there are no realistic opportunities for accommodating 
the development elsewhere.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural 
environment.  
 
5.133  The global demand for food production is likely to increase in future years and in 
this context high quality agricultural  land is an important resource. Once developed, 
returning land to viable agriculture is rarely feasible. Consequently, it is important to 
protect the best and most versatile agricultural land and minimise its loss to 
development to safeguard this resource for future generations.  
 
5.134  The Agricultural Land Classification system assigns five grades (Grade 3 being 
subdivided) dependent on climate, site and soil characteristics. The best and most 
versatile land is classified as Grades 1, 2 and 3a. There is no identified Grade 1 
land in Ash field. Grade 2 land and Grade 3 land is located around Hucknall, to the 
south and east of Annesley Woodhouse, to the west of Kirkby -in-Ashfield and 
Sutton -in-Ashfield and to the north of Sutton -in-Ashfield. The location of the better -
quality  land on the ur ban fringe means that there may be a requirement for land to 
be used for other purposes and these issues should form part of the determination 
of sustainable development through the Local Plan. Land outside these allocations 
should remain as an important a gricultural resource.  
 
5.135  Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a should only be developed if there is an overriding need 
for the development, and either previously developed land or land in lower 
agricultural grades is unavailable or available lower grade land has envir onmental 
value recognised by a landscape, wildlife, historic or archaeological designation 
which outweighs the agricultural considerations. If land in grades 1, 2 or 3a does 
need to be developed, and there is a choice between sites of different grades, 
development should be directed to land of the lowest grade.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  144 
    
5.136  Agricultural Land Classification maps are typically only available at 1:250 000 scale 
and do not identify the subdivision of Grade 3 land. Under these circumstances, 
before planning applications are  considered on land within the best and most 
versatile land, the applicant will need to undertake survey work to identify the 
Agricultural Land Classification. Field surveys are usually time consuming and 
should be initiated well in advance of the intended  date of any planning application . 
 
Policy EV9: The Historic Environment  
 
5.137  This policy aims to protect, conserve and, where appropriate, enhance the historic 
environment, including Listed Buildings, Conservations Areas, Scheduled 
Monuments, Historic Parks and Gardens, Areas of Archaeological Interest and 
Local  Heritage Assets.  
 
 
Policy EV9: The Historic Environment  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO3, SO7, SO8, SO11, SO13, SO14.  
 
All Heritage Assets  
 
1. A proposal must have regard to its impact on the historic environment and will be 
expected to be in line with advice and guidance contained within conservation area 
appraisals, characterisation studies and other relevant guidance.  A proposal will be 
consi dered acceptable where it will conserve and, where appropriate, enhance the 
historic environment, including designated and non -designated heritage assets and 
their setting.  
 
2. Proposals that affect designated and non -designated heritage assets should be 
accompanied by a Heritage Statement that provides a proportionate assessment of 
the significance of the heritage asset, and where appropriate its setting, and an 
assessment of the impact of the proposal on the significance.  
 
3. Proposals that conserve or enhance the significance of designated and non -
designated heritage assets and their settings, through appropriate scale, siting, high 
quality design and materials will be supported.  
 
4. Proposals for the change of use of heritage assets, especially heritage a ssets at risk, 
will be supported where their new use conserves or enhances the heritage asset. 
New uses that harm the significance of a heritage asset will only be supported where 
it is demonstrated that the harm is justified to realise the optimum viable use.  
 
Designated Heritage Assets  
 
5. Designated Heritage Assets in Ashfield include:  
 
a. Conservation Areas;  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  145 
   b. Listed Buildings (including attached and curtilage structures)1; 
c. Scheduled Monuments;  
d. Registered Parks and Gardens.  
 
6. Proposals, including demolition, th at are likely to result in substantial harm to or loss 
of Grade I, Grade II* Listed Buildings, Grade I or Grade II* Registered Parks and 
Gardens or Scheduled Monuments and their setting, will only be permitted in wholly 
exceptional circumstances.  
 
7. Proposal s that will result in the substantial harm to or loss of the significance of a 
Grade II Listed Building, Grade II Registered Park and Garden, and Conservation 
Areas, will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances.  
 
8. Proposals that will result in substantial harm to or loss of the significance of a 
designated heritage asset will be refused unless it is demonstrated that the 
substantial harm or loss is necessary to achieve substantial public benefits that 
outweigh that harm or loss, or all of the fo llowing apply:  
 
a. the nature of the heritage asset prevents a reasonable use of the site and the site 
cannot be developed in a less harmful way; and  
b. through marketing there is no viable use of the heritage asset, and grant funding 
is not available; and  
c. the benefit of bringing the site back into use outweighs the harm or loss.  
 
9. Proposals that result in less than substantial harm to the significance of a designated 
heritage asset will only be permitted where it is demonstrated that the proposal shall 
deliver p ublic benefits that outweigh the harm, including securing the heritage asset’s 
optimum viable use.  
 
Non-Designated Heritage Assets  
 
10. Non-Designated Heritage Assets in Ashfield include:  
 
a. Local Heritage Assets2; 
b. Sites or Areas of Archaeological Interest3; 
c. Unregistered Parks and Gardens3; 
d. Landscape features as defined in the Landscape Character Assessment (2009) 
including ancient woodlands and veteran trees, field patterns, watercourses, 
drainage ditches and hedgerows of visual and historic value.  
 
11. A balanced judgement shall be taken with proposals that affect directly or indirectly 
non-designated heritage assets, having regard to the scale of the harm or loss and 
the significance of the heritage asset.  
 
Demolition will only be permitted where it is de monstrated:  
 
a. that the architectural or historical significance of the non -designated heritage 
asset is minimal; or  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  146 
   b. through an up to date structural report, that the non -designated heritage asset is 
not capable of viable repair; or  
c. through appropriate marke ting, that the non -designated heritage asset has no 
viable use.  
 
Existing Conservation Areas are detailed in paragraph 8.127 and shown on the Policies 
Map.  Listed Buildings, Scheduled Monuments and Registered Parks and Gardens are 
listed in the National Heritage List for England, Scheduled Monuments are also listed in 
Appendix 10 and shown on the Policies Map.  Registered and Unregistered Parks and 
Gardens are listed below in paragraph 8.150 and shown on the Policies Map.  Any new 
sites identified after t he Local Plan is adopted will be protected under this Policy.  
 
1 Any object or structure fixed to the principal listed building or any object or structure within its curtilage 
that has formed part of the land since before 1st July 1948 is also protected.  
2 As identified in the Nottinghamshire Historic Environment Record (HER) or by the District Council using 
the guidance publication Local Heritage Assets in Ashfield: Criteria.  
3 As identified in the Nottinghamshire Historic Environment Record (HER).  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Ashfield Criteria for Local Heritage Asset Designation 2013.  Ashfield 
District Council.  
• Listed Buildings at Risk Register, Historic England.  
• Hardwick Hall Setting Study. 2016, ATKINS  (for National Trust)  
• Greater Nottinghamshire Landscape Character Assessment 2009. TEP 
(for Nottinghamshire County Council & Greater Nottingham Authorities).  
• Annesley Conservation Area. Adopted 1999, Ashfield District Council  
• Lower Bagthorpe Conservation A rea. Adopted 1975, amended 2007, 
Ashfield District Council  
• Kirkby Cross Conservation Area. Adopted 1975, amended 2004, Ashfield 
District Council  
• Sutton in Ashfield Church and Market Place Conservation Area. Adopted 
2015, Ashfield District Council  
• Teversal Conservation Area. Adopted 1970, amended 2012, Ashfield 
District Council  
• Hucknall Town Centre Conservation Area. Adopted 2019, Ashfield District 
Council  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 16: Conserving and enhancing the historic environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Historic Environment as of August 2021.  
 
5.138  The historic environment is an important asset for Ashfield District and provides us 
with an understan ding of both the past and the present. It is a physical record of our 
history and is central to our cultural heritage  and provid es a sense of place. The 
Council is committed to protecting, conserving and enhancing the District’s historic 
environment.  
 
5.139  The Council has a duty to conserve and enhance the significance, character and 
appearance of the District’s historic environment when carrying out its statutory 
functions and through the planning system. It is recognised that the historic 
environment contribut es to the enjoyment of life in the District and provides a 
unique sense of identity. Policy EV 9 reflects this duty in line with national planning 
guidance.    Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  147 
    
5.140  The historic environment is all aspects of the environment which have resulted from 
the interaction between people and places through time, including all surviving 
physical remains of past human activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and 
landscaped planting or managed flora.  Those elements of the historic environment 
that hold signi ficance are called heritage assets.  
 
5.141  Heritage assets are buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes of 
historic, archaeological, architectural or artistic interest, whether designated or not, 
that have a degree of significance. The term ‘sign ificance’ (for heritage policy) can 
be defined as “the value of a heritage asset to this and future generations because 
of its heritage interest”. In measuring the significance of an asset,  a number of 
factors are assessed, including, but not restricted to , an asset’s rarity, 
representativeness, association, integrity, evidential value, historical value, 
aesthetic value, and communal value. Heritage assets identified after the Local 
Plan is adopted or during the course of a development application will be p rotected 
under Policy EV 9. 
 
5.142  Heritage assets include listed buildings, conservation areas, world heritage sites, 
historic parks and gardens and scheduled monuments. The definition also covers 
non-designated assets including buildings of local interest, areas of archaeological 
interest , unregistered parks and gardens and landscape features as defined in the 
Nottinghamshire Landscape Character Assessment. The significance of these 
‘non-designated assets’ is a material consideration in determining planning 
applications.  
 
 Conservation Ar eas 
5.143  Ashfield’s six designated Conservation Areas are :  
• EV10 Ca - Kirkby Cross  
• EV10 Cb - Lower Bagthorpe  
• EV10 Cc - Teversal  
• EV10 Cd - New Annesley  
• EV10 Ce - Sutton in Ashfield Church and Market Place  
• EV10  Cf - Hucknall  
5.144  For each Conservation Area, with the  exception of New Annesley  and Hucknall , the 
Council has prepared a Conservation Area Appraisal (including Management 
Plans) based on an analysis of the area’s particular character and requirements.  
The Council will review all Conservation Area Appraisals  as and when necessary.  
In preparing development proposals applicants will be expected to take full account 
of these documents. Planning applications will be required to contain sufficient 
detail to allow aesthetic and environmental aspects to be fully ev aluated. Where 
necessary, the Council will employ article 4 directions where the identified 
character of the Conservation Area is at risk from Permitted Development.  
  
5.145  A key consideration in assessing development proposals will be the effect new 
developmen t would have on the character and appearance of these areas and in Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  148 
   particular whether they assist in both preserving or enhancing their special 
character. New development should respect the character of the existing 
architecture in terms of scale, grouping  and materials. The overall character of the 
area will also be an important consideration, applying to features such as walls, 
paving, verges, trees, street furniture and spaces between dwellings which can be 
as significant as the buildings themselves.  Ou tline planning applications will not 
normally be acceptable for development in Conservation Areas and proposals to 
lop, top or fell trees in these areas which, although not specifically comprising 
development, will only be acceptable with the prior approva l of the Authority.  
 
5.146  Where a development proposal involves total or substantial demolition of a building 
in a conservation area, consideration will be given to the significance of the building 
and the contribution it makes to the significant character and appearance of the 
area. Generally, buildings should be retained where they make a positive 
contribution in this respect but there may be cases where the removal or 
replacement of a building would benefit the character or appearance of an area.  
 
5.147  The condit ion of the existing building and the potential for viable alternative uses 
will be relevant considerations, as will the potential benefits of redevelopment for 
the community compared with the effects the building’s loss would have on the 
Conservation Area.  All proposals for demolition and redevelopment will need to 
include full and detailed plans indicating what is proposed for the site after 
demolition.   
 
5.148  To ensure that sites do not remain undeveloped for long periods of time, conditions 
may be imposed on  planning permissions to ensure that redevelopment occurs 
within specified time limits. This may require that demolition does not take place 
until a contract for the carrying out of redevelopment works has been made and 
planning permission for those works granted.  
 
 Listed Buildings  
5.149  Listed Buildings are buildings that appear on the Secretary of State's 'List of 
Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest', prepared by the Department 
of Culture, Media and Sport. In England the statutory body responsible for 
maintaining ‘the list’ is Historic England. The National Heritage List for England 
(NHLE) is the only official and up -to-date database of all listed and designated 
heritage sites.  
 
5.150  Listing is a process of recognition of architectural and hi storic interest, which 
includes both the exterior and interior, including pre -1948 buildings within the 
curtilage. Listed buildings are graded to show their relative architectural or historic 
interest, as follows:  
 
• Grade I buildings are of exceptional inte rest (two in Ashfield);  
• Grade II* buildings are particularly important buildings of more than special interest 
(four in Ashfield);  
• Grade II buildings are of special interest, warranting every effort to preserve them.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  149 
   5.151  Ashfield has a limited stock of statuto rily listed buildings. They represent a finite 
asset and for that reason their loss will not be permitted unless the Council is 
satisfied that every possible alternative approach for restoration, conversion or re -
use has been thoroughly explored. The fact that a building has become derelict will 
not in itself be regarded as sufficient reason to permit its demolition. In most cases, 
the Council will seek demonstrable proof that every possible effort has been made 
to secure an alternative use for a building b efore considering any proposals to 
demolish. This would normally include evidence of the offer of the unrestricted 
freehold of the building on the open market at a realistic price and for a reasonable 
period (this could be as much as five years in some cir cumstances, dependent 
upon local market conditions), proof of relevant and recent exploration of charitable 
use and grants with a range of heritage bodies and local organisations. Policy SD 6: 
Assessing Development Viability, and Development Demand and its supporting 
text, provides details on the Demand test and/or the Viability Test.  
 
5.152  The best use for a listed building is normally that for which it was designed.  In 
many cases it must be accepted that the continuation of the original use is now not 
a practicable proposition and it will often be essential to find appropriate alternative 
uses to secure the future of the building. Alternative uses should respect the fabric 
and appearance of the building and require minimum internal and external 
alteration . 
 
 Heritage at Risk  
5.153  Heritage at risk includes buildings or sites that are at risk of being lost as a result of 
neglect, decay or inappropriate development. Heritage at risk is monitored by 
Historic England, Nottinghamshire County Council and Ashfield Dist rict Council. 
The Council will support the repair and re -use of heritage assets at risk especially 
where proposals will conserve them in a manner appropriate to their significance.   
 
5.154  Proposals for enabling development to provide for the repair of listed buildings will 
be considered against criteria contained in Historic England’s Policy Statement: 
Enabling Development and the Conservation of Significant Places 2008, or any 
subsequent guidance, and all other material considerations.  
 
5.155  The Council wil l record and monitor heritage assets that are at risk and work 
proactively with owners and stakeholders, or take action where necessary, 
including the use of statutory powers, to help secure their long -term viable use.  
 
 Non-Designated Heritage Assets  
5.156  Non-designated heritage assets can still be of great importance to the historic 
environment locally. The Council has introduced a scheme by which historic assets 
of local importance are identified, using local selection criteria.  This status would 
be a materi al consideration in assessing planning applications affecting such 
buildings or assets.  
   
5.157  Currently identified local heritage assets are mapped on the Council’s website, 
together with a criteria based document to enable the identification of future local 
heritage assets at any given time. The mapping system will be maintained and kept Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  150 
   under review by the Council. The absence of any particular local heritage asset on 
the mapping system should not be taken to imply that it has no heritage value, 
simply that it has yet to be identified or it does not currently meet the selection 
criteria.  
 
5.158  The loss of non -designated heritage assets, including local heritage assets, would 
be detrimental to the appearance, character, townscape quality or heritage of the 
Distric t. Therefore, the Council will seek to encourage the retention, restoration and 
continued beneficial use of these assets wherever possible. Proposals to alter them 
should, for example, be architecturally compatible with the style of the original 
asset. Whe re planning permission is required (not prior notification for demolition), 
the Council will resist the loss of non -designated heritage assets, including local 
heritage assets, where there is no clear and convincing justification for their 
removal. This wo uld normally include evidence that the asset is in incapable of 
viable repair or evidence that the building/asset has no viable use in the medium 
term through appropriate marketing. Policy SD 6: Assessing Development Viability, 
and Development Demand its su pporting text, provides details on the Demand test 
and/or the Viability Test.  
 
5.159  The setting of local heritage assets may contribute to their intrinsic qualities, and 
the Council will seek to protect both the character and setting of such assets.  
 
 Scheduled  Monuments and Areas of Archaeological Interest  
5.160  Archaeological remains provide crucial links to the past and can provide useful 
information about local heritage. Appropriate steps must be undertaken to identify 
and protect them as they are easily damaged o r destroyed when development 
takes place. To protect the integrity of archaeological remains, preservation should 
take place in situ wherever possible.  
 
5.161  Archaeological remains are important for their historical and educational interest 
and may also be impo rtant features in the landscape. The Nottinghamshire Historic 
Environment Records (HER) is maintained and updated by the County Council and 
contains details of all known sites, structures, landscapes or other areas of 
archaeological interest in Ashfield.  The HER should be consulted on all planning 
applications within or near to areas of known archaeological interest.  
 
5.162  The District has nine Scheduled Monuments under the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act, 1979 ( see Appendix 10).  These are consid ered to be of 
national importance and will be protected from deterioration and demolition. Any 
work to a scheduled monument requires Scheduled Monument Consent, 
applications should be made to Historic England. Elsewhere within the District there 
are many s ites and areas regarded as being of archaeological interest, including 
historic landscapes.  
 
5.163  Early consideration should be given by developers to the question of whether 
archaeological remains exist on a site and the implications for a proposed 
developmen t. This process can involve different levels of staged assessments, 
specific to the site and its history. The initial stage should undertake a desk -based Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  151 
   assessment of the site but  may also require (where necessary) a range of 
additional assessments includ ing, but not limited to, geophysical survey, geo -
archaeological modelling, field walking, test pitting, trial trenching and/or setting 
studies. This initial stage may need to be followed by a full archaeological 
evaluation of the site. The County Archaeolo gist should be contacted for advice on 
locations where remains are known or thought to exist. Advice can be given on the 
best means to preserve and enhance remains that have been previously identified. 
Archaeological Assessments should be undertaken by a s uitably qualified person.  
 
5.164  Where sites are of known or potential archaeological significance developers may 
be required to submit the results of an archaeological evaluation with any planning 
application. Evaluations of this kind help to define the charact er and extent of the 
archaeological remains, and thus indicate the weight which ought to be attached to 
their preservation. The level of importance of the site can then be assessed against 
the need for the proposed development. Such evaluations should be s ubmitted to 
the Council at the earliest possible stage of the planning application process, to 
ensure an informed decision can be made. The Council will not support the 
postponing of appropriate evaluations via conditions or secondary detailed planning 
applications. If archaeological remains are discovered during development, 
developers should contact the Local Authority immediately for advice.  
 
5.165  The preservation of archaeological sites in -situ will nearly always be preferred to 
"preservation by record". There are often opportunities to avoid the disturbance of 
remains by raising ground levels under a proposed new structure, introducing raft 
founda tions, or by the careful siting of landscaped or open areas. This will secure 
their long term preservation even though they will remain inaccessible for the time 
being. Where the physical preservation of archaeological remains in -situ is not 
possible the C ouncil will ensure that adequate provision is made for the survey, 
excavation and recording of remains, where appropriate, through the use of 
planning conditions or a planning obligation.  
 
 Historic Parks and Gardens  
5.166  Registered Historic Parks and Gardens are important in historical and landscape 
terms and may also be of wildlife and recreational value. Ashfield has two designed 
landscapes on the Historic England Register of Parks and Gardens of Special 
Historic Interest, including:  
 
• EV10 Pa  Annesle y Hall, Annesley - Grade II*  
• EV10 Pb  Hardwick Hall Grounds (that part within Ashfield) – Grade I  
            The District also has a locally designated Historic Park and Garden:  
 
• EV10 Pc  Skegby Hall, Skegby, Sutton in Ashfield.  
5.167  The significance of parks and gardens may extend beyond the defined boundary 
with regards to views towards or away from the park and garden or in how the park 
and garden is experienced, for example on approach.  Development proposals that 
would result in t he harm or loss of a designated historic park or garden or its Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  152 
   setting, would only be permitted by the Council if it can be appropriately 
demonstrated that the harm or loss is out -weighted by the substantial public benefit 
resulting from the development. W here this public benefit cannot be demonstrated, 
proposals must align with the requirements of national planning policy. Any 
development impacting on a designated historic park or garden should seek to 
support the long -term preservation of the park or gard en and its setting through 
sensitive restoration, adaptation and/or re -use. In particular, care should be taken 
to avoid the loss of trees, woodland or significant views, that contribute to the 
asset’s significance. Any proposed loss of trees or woodland w ill need to be 
assessed against Policy EV6.   
 
 Historic Landscape Features  
5.168  The landscape of Ashfield today is the result of both natural and man -made actions 
which have taken place over many years. Activities such as settlement, farming, 
industry and recr eation have all left behind physical traces that help to give 
individual parts of the District their own special character.  
 
5.169  More than any other part of the historic environment, the landscape is 
characterised and enriched by centuries of change and modif ication. It is essential 
that any new development is of a scale and type which is appropriate and does not 
harm the intrinsic value of the particular landscape in which it is to be located. 
Development proposals should appreciate an area’s sensitivity, vul nerability and 
capacity for change in the context of specific proposals.  
 
5.170  The Landscape Character Assessment for Ashfield (2009) sets out 3 landscape 
character areas which broadly influence the scale and form of development across 
the District. Development  proposals should respect the fundamental character of 
these and not introduce any incongruous elements. Policy EV1 0 – Protection and 
Enhancement of Landscape Character, should be assessed when determining new 
development proposals in the countryside. The policy seeks to protect historic 
landscape features including ponds, trees, hedgerows, ridge and furrow patterns, 
meadows and orchards as these all add value to the character of the area and help 
to make Ashfield’s landscape distinctive.  
 
5.171  “Important” hedge rows are protected under the Hedgerow Regulations,1995. The 
Regulations set out criteria that must be used by the local planning authority in 
determining which hedgerows are "important". The criteria relate to the value of 
hedgerows from an archaeological,  historical, landscape and wildlife perspective. 
There is a strong presumption that "important" hedgerows and other hedgerows, 
will be protected and wherever possible incorporated into open space and 
landscaping proposals for new development.  
 
5.172  A qualitati ve judgment about the landscape affected should be informed by either a 
Landscape and Visual Appraisal or a Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment, 
as appropriate, in accordance with the most up to date guidance, taking into 
account the specific contributi on that heritage and the setting of heritage assets 
makes to landscape character.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  153 
    Shopfronts  
5.173  Shopfronts of architectural or historical value exist across the District in a variety of 
settings sometimes individually and sometimes as part of a group. In re cognition of 
the contribution that they make to the character of the District, the Council is keen 
to see them retained and incorporated into new development wherever possible. 
Proposal s for alterations to shopfront s or for new shopfront s should accord wit h 
Policy SH 3 of the Town Centre and Retail  Chapter of this Plan  
 
 Statements of Heritage Significance and Archaeological Evaluations  
5.174  In cases where it is necessary for an applicant to submit a Statement of Heritage 
Significance and/or archaeological evalu ation (following a desk -based 
assessment), the scope and degree of detail necessary will vary according to the 
particular circumstances of each application. The level of detail required should be 
proportionate to the importance of the heritage asset, the s ize of the development 
and the level of its impact on the heritage asset.    
 
5.175  All development proposals that would affect any heritage asset will need to be 
accompanied by a Statement of Heritage Significance which, as a minimum, should 
cover the following:  
 
• describe and assess the significance of the asset and/or its setting;  
• identify the impact of works on the special character of the asset; and  
• provide a clear justification for the works, especially if these would harm the 
asset or its setting,  so that the harm can be weighed against public benefits.  
 
5.176  Applicants are advised to discuss proposals with the Council prior to submitting an 
application.  
 
 
 
 
Policy EV10: Protection and Enhancement of Landscape Character  
 
5.177  This policy is intended to conserve and enhance the district’s unique landscape 
character and is informed by the Landscape Character Assessment for Ashfield – its 
role is to ensure that change does not undermine the characteristics or features of 
value within a landscape.  
 
 
Policy EV10: Protection and Enhancement of Landscape Character  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO5, SO11, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. Proposals for development outside the Main Urban Areas and Named Settlements 
should recognise the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside, and be 
informed by and sympathetic to, the distinctive landscape character areas identified 
in the Landscape Character Assessment for Ashfield.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  154 
   2. Where  necessary, development proposals should demonstrate that their location, 
scale, design and materials will protect, conserve and where possible, enhance:  
 
a. The special qualities and local distinctiveness of the area (including its historical, 
geological, bi odiversity and cultural character);  
b. Local character through appropriate design and management;  
c. Gaps between settlements, and their landscape setting;  
d. The pattern of distinctive landscape features, such as watercourses, woodland, 
trees and field boundaries,  and their function as ecological corridors for wildlife;  
e. Visually sensitive skylines, ridgelines, hillsides, valley sides and geological 
features;  
f. Important views; and  
g. The setting of, and views to and from, Listed Buildings, Scheduled Monuments, 
Conservation Areas and Historic Parks and Gardens.  
 
3. Proposals that have an adverse effect will not be permitted unless the public benefits 
of the development clearly outweigh any adverse impacts, and it can be 
demonstrated that they cannot be located on al ternative sites that would cause less 
harm.  
 
4. Development deemed acceptable in accordance with the above criteria will be 
supported in the countryside provided that it enhances landscape character and 
provides:  
 
a. Suitable mitigation to restore any damaged la ndscape and features in poor 
condition; and  
b. Mitigation proportionate in scale to the proposed development and/or suitable off -
site enhancements.  
 
Evidence Base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Ashfield Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Project 2016. Notts BAG.  
• Ashfield Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Technical Paper. Ashfield 
District Council.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, sports and recreational facilities, 
public rights of ways and local green space as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Natural environment as of August 2021  
 
 
5.178  People value the countryside and its landscape for many different reasons, not all 
of them relat e to traditional concepts of aesthetics and beauty. It can provide 
habitats for wildlife and evidence of how people have lived on the land and 
harnessed its r esources.   
 
5.179  Landscape has a social and community value, as an important part of people’s 
day-to-day lives. It also has an economic value, providing the context for economic 
activity and often being a central factor in attracting business and tourism. Nati onal 
Planning Guidance states that valued landscapes should be protected and Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 5 - Natural Environment & Heritage  
 
  
P a g e  155 
   enhanced  and requires Local Plans to include criteria -based  policies against which 
proposals for any development on or affecting landscape areas will be judged.   
 
5.180  The Council, in partnership with five neighbouring Local Authorities, carried out a 
Landscape Character Assessment in 2009 to evaluate and record the landscape 
quality of the Greater Nottingham area. The study covers the whole of Ashfield, 
excluding urban areas. The Assessment is an important decision -making  tool, 
which systematically classifies the landscape into distinctive areas based on the 
interaction between topography, geology, land use, vegetation pattern and human 
influence. Its role is to ensure t hat future change does not undermine the 
characteristics or features of value within a landscape. Landscape Character 
Assessment is an approach that makes a significant contribution to the sustainable 
objectives of environmental protection; prudent use of natural resources; and 
maintaining and enhancing the quality of life for present and future generations.  
 
5.181  The results of the assessment have identified three landscape types in Ashfield: 
Magnesium Limestone Ridge, Nottinghamshire Coalfields and Sherwood. Each of 
these areas has been further sub -divided into component landscape character 
areas know as Draft Policy Zones (DPZ). Each DPZ identifies and lists the key 
features which make it special and provides a judgement on the condition of the 
landscape and its strength of character.  When considering new development these 
will enable judgments to be made regarding what landscape actions are required to 
conserve, enhance, restore or create distinctiveness within each DPZ.  
 
5.182  Policy EV1: Green Belt, and Policy EV2: Countryside, explains the limited types of 
development which may be appropriate in the rural parts of the District. Under 
Policy EV1 0, should a proposal be acceptable in principle based upon Policies EV1 
and EV2, the actual form of the development wil l need to have regard to the 
particular landscape characteristics of importance to that locality, as identified in the 
Landscape Character Assessment.   
 
5.183  A Landscape Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) may be required to assess the 
effects on the landscape and  visual resources that may result from a development 
proposal.  In an LVIA the assessor is required to identify the degree or level of 
change that is significant in accordance with the requirements of Environmental 
Impact Assessment Regulations 2017, as we ll as type, nature, duration, and 
geographic extent of the effect.  The scope and viewpoints for the LVIA should be 
agreed with the Council prior to the commencement of work.  
 
5.184  On all new developments the Council will require the provision of suitable mitigation 
measures to restore any damaged landscape and features in poor condition as 
identified in the Landscape Character Assessment’s ‘landscape actions’ for each 
character area .  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  156 
   Chapter 6  
 
Meeting local housing needs and aspirations.  
 
Introduction  
 
6.1. The Government, through the NPPF, emphasises the importance of providing a 
supply of housing required to meet the needs of present and future generations as 
a means to support strong, vibrant and healthy communities. Broadly, the plan 
process for managing housing delivery falls into two parts:  
 
• Setting o ut housing requirements – ensuring that the Local Plan meets the 
identified housing need (both market and affordable housing); and  
• Allocation of housing land – Identifying a supply of specific achievable (i.e. 
deliverable or developable) housing sites for the entire Plan period (2020 to 
2038).  
 
6.2. It also requires that the Council plans to deliver a mix of housing to meet the 
needs of current and future generations based on demographic trends and the 
special needs of specific parts of the community. In doing so, development should 
offer a wide choice of high quality homes whilst broadening opportunities for home 
ownership, and creating sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities.  
 
6.3. Strategic Policy S9 sets out the overarching housing requirements for the  District. 
This section identifies and allocates a number of housing sites that will be 
developed to ensure that the housing target of 8,226 homes is met during the plan 
period. As set out below, an additional allowance is being provided to ensure that 
there is flexibility in case any of the sites expected to come forward do not for any 
reason. Policies S6 and S7 also allocates  two new settlements which will deliver 
an additional 1,915 homes within the Plan period.  
 
6.4. This section also sets out policies to gu ide Development Management decision 
making in respect of housing, including  the type of homes that should be built, the 
provision of open space in new developments, and a policy related to the provision 
of accommodation for gypsies and travellers, and trav elling showpeople.  
 
 
 
Policy H1: Housing Site Allocations  
 
6.5. Policy H1 allocates large housing sites ( those  capable of accommodating ten or 
more dwellings) which will contribute towards providing the assessed housing 
need identified in Strategic Policy S9. New Settlements  are also allocated at Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  157 
   Whyburn Farm, Hucknall  and Cauldwell Road, Sutton, and under Poli cies S6 and 
S7 respectively . 
 
 
Policy H1:  Housing Allocations  
Strategic Objectives  SO3, SO5, SO11, SO12, SO13  
 
Residential development will be permitted on the sites listed below as shown on the 
Policies Map, subject to detailed planning consent where it has not already been 
granted, or where it has lapsed.  
 
Hucknall Area  
 
Site 
Ref. Site Name  Greenfield/ 
Brownfield  Planning 
Permission * Potential 
Yield 
(Dwellings)  
H1Ha  Seven Stars PH, West 
Street / Ogle Street, 
Hucknall  B No 24 
H1Hb  Linby  Boarding Kennels, 
East of Church Lane, 
Hucknall  G/B Part 43 
H1Hc  Land north of A611 / South 
of Broomhill Farm, Hucknall  G No 633 
H1Hd  Land adjoining Stubbing 
Wood Farm, Watnall Road, 
Hucknall  G No 198 
H1He  Phases 5 (part) and 9, land 
at Rolls Royce, Watnall 
Road, Hucknall  B No 105 
H1Hf  Phases 10,11,12, land at 
Rolls Royce, Watnall Road, 
Hucknall   B No 100 
H1Hg  Hucknall Town football Club, 
Watnall Road  B Yes 108 
H1Hh  Rolls Royce, Watnall  Road 
(remaining phases of Outline 
pp) B Yes 186 
H1Hi  Rolls Royce, Watnall Road  B Yes 48 
H1Hj  Land to the East of, Hurricane 
Road RR  B Yes 19 
H1Hk  Parcel 8, Land at Rolls Royce, 
Watnall Road  B Yes 61 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  158 
   H1Hl  Land at, Shepherd Street 
(Rolls Royce site) B Yes 100 
H1Hm  South of former international 
clothing centre, Annesley Road  G Yes 56 
H1Hn  (Phase 2) Land at, Broomhill 
Farm,  G Yes 217 
    1898  
 
 
 
Kirkby Area  
 
Site 
Ref. Site Name  Greenfield/ 
Brownfield  Planning 
Permission * Potential 
Yield 
(Dwellings)  
H1Ka  Beacon Farm, Derby Road, 
Kirkby -In Ashfield  G/B No 41 
H1Kb  Land off Millers Way, 
Kirkby -In Ashfield  G Yes 54 
H1Kc  Land at Doles Lane, 
Kirkby -In Ashfield  B No 54 
H1Kd  Off Walesby Drive  G No 187 
H1Ke  Land off Diamond Avenue, 
Kirkby -In-Ashfield  G No 63 
H1Kf  Warwick Close, Kirkby -In-
Ashfield  B No 23 
H1Kg  Land behind 126 Skegby 
Road, Kirkby -In-Ashfield  G No 15 
H1Kh  Land Off Hucknall Road, 
Newstead  G No 47 
H1Ki  Annesley Miners Welfare 
Institute, Derby Road  G/B Yes 45 
H1Kj  Former Wild Orchid Public 
House, Southwell Lane, 
Kirkby  B Yes 12 
    541 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  159 
    
Sutton Area  
 
Site 
Ref. Site Name  Greenfield/ 
Brownfield  Planning 
Permission * Potential 
Yield 
(Dwellings)  
H1Sa  Rear 211 Alfreton Road, 
Sutton  G Yes 110 
H1Sb  Cauldwell Road, Sutton -In-
Ashfield  G No 208 
H1Sc  West of Fisher Close, 
Sutton -In-Ashfield  G No 73 
H1Sd  Adj Oakham Business 
Park, off Hamilton Road, 
Sutton -In-Ashfield  G No 225 
H1Se  Priestic Road, Sutton -In-
Ashfield  G No 19 
H1Sf  Rear 23 Beck Lane, 
Skegby  G No 23 
H1Sg  Former Miner's Welfare 
Sports Ground, Stanton 
Hill, Sutton -In-Ashfield  G No 85 
H1Sh  Pasture Farm, Alfreton 
Road, Sutton -In-Ashfield  G No 34 
H1Si  Rear Kingsmill Hospital, 
Sutton -In-Ashfield  G No 264 
H1Sj  Clegg Hill Drive, Huthwaite  G No 104 
H1Sk Sunnyside Farm, Blackwell 
Road, Huthwaite  G No 283 
H1Sl North of Fackley Road, 
Teversal  G No 115 
H1Sm Land adjacent 88 High 
Hazels Drive, Sutton -In-
Ashfield  G No 11 
H1Sn Adj Molyneux Farm, 
Fackley Road, Teversal  G No 14 
H1So Off Fackley Road, Teversal  G No 12 
H1Sp Off Tibshelf Road, Fackley  G No 10 
H1Sq Hardwick Lane Recreation 
Ground, Sutton -In-Ashfield  G No 40 
H1Sr Land off Clare Road, 
Sutton -In-Ashfield  G Yes 69 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  160 
   H1Ss Land to the east off A6075 
Beck Lane, Skegby  G No 212 
H1St Land off Blackwell 
Road/Main Street, 
Huthwaite  G No 99 
H1Su Rear 113 to 139 Beck 
Lane.  G No 100 
H1Sv Station House, Outram Street,  B Yes 28 
H1Sw Off Gillcroft  Street/St Andrews 
Street & Vere Avenue, Skegby  G Yes 177 
H1Sx rear 249, 251 Alfreton Road, 
Sutton  G Yes 113 
H1Sy off Brand Lane, Stanton Hill  G Yes 137 
H1Sz Junction of Outram 
Street/Park Street, Sutton  B Yes 24 
H1Sa a Land at, Beck Lane, Skegby  G Yes 322 
H1Sa b Land Off, Davies Avenue  B Yes 22 
H1Sa c The Quarry, 57, Stoneyford 
Road  G Yes 48 
H1Sa d The Pattern House, Crossley 
Avenue, Huthwaite  B Yes 23 
    3004  
 
Selston Jacksdale and Underwood Area  
 
Site 
Ref. Site Name  Greenfield/ 
Brownfield  Planning 
Permission * Potential 
Yield 
(Dwellings)  
H1Va  Land at Plainspot Farm, 
New Brinsley, Underwood  G No 42 
H1Vb  Off Westdale Road, 
Jacksdale  G No 49 
H1Vc  Land adj. Bull & Butcher 
PH, Selston  G No 149 
H1Vd  Adj 149 Stoney Lane, 
Selston  G/B No 6 
H1Ve  Land off Park Lane/ South 
West M1, Selston  G No 169 
H1Vf  Between 106 -132 Main 
Road, Underwood  G No 14 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  161 
   H1Vg  Land North of Larch Close, 
Underwood  G/B No 37 
H1Vh  Rear of 64 -82 Church Lane, 
Underwood  G No 10 
H1Vi  Westdale Road, Jacksdale  G No 22 
    498 
 
* Sites with current planning permission at 31st August 2021  
Evidence Base  
 • Strategic Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (SHELAA), 
2021, Ashfield DC  
• Backgro und Paper No  2: Housing  2021,  Ashfield District Council . 
National Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Effective use of land  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and Economic Land Availability 
Assessment  as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing supply and del ivery  as of August 
2021  
 
6.6. Potential housing allocations have been selected from a ‘pool’ of sites which are 
assessed as being ‘available’, ‘suitable’ and ‘deliverable’ in the Strategic Housing 
Land and Economic Availability Assessment (SHELAA). The Sustain ability 
Appraisal (SA) has further assessed these sites. The purpose of the SA is to 
promote sustainable development through the efficient use of existing 
infrastructure, whilst protecting landscape and biodiversity assets and facilitating 
social and econo mic benefit. The SA is therefore an essential tool in the selection 
of deliverable sites and provides part of the evidence base for the housing site  
allocations. Further details on the approach to allocating sites can be found in the 
Council’s Housing Site Selection Technical Paper  and the SA report can be found 
on the Council’s webpages.  
 
6.7. Further details regarding the approach to allocating sites can  be found in the 
Council’s technical paper on Site Selection89. Allocations include sites both with 
and without planning permission.  Where these are under construction, only the 
remaining dwellings have been identified in Policy H1. Further information an d 
considerations for those sites without the benefit of planning permission are set 
out in the technical paper .  Appendix 2  illustrates the anticipated delivery of 
 
89 Housing Site Selection Technical Paper (Ashfield DC Sept 2016)  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  162 
   housing on each site over the plan period, together with a summary of small site 
provision.  
 
6.8. In order to help guide development on the largest housing sites, the Council will 
prepare in due course development briefs to guide development which will outline 
known site constraints, characteristics and design considerations that future 
development mu st successfully address, utilise and overcome.  
 
 
 
Policy H2: Provision for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
 
6.9. Policy H2 will be used to determine  planning applications for traveller pitches/sites 
and Showpeople’s Plots/yards  and also sets out criteria to guide the process of 
future site identification.  
 
 
Policy H2: Provision for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO12, SO14.  
 
1. When determining planning applications for Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling 
Showpeople sites, the Council will consider the following:  
 
a. The proposed occupants must meet the definition of Gypsy, Traveller, or 
Travelling Showpeople as defined by national policy.  
b. Development of all Traveller sites in the Green Belt are considered to be 
inappropriate development.  
 
2. The following criteria will be used to guide the process of future site identification, 
and to help inform decisions on planning applications:  
 
a. Development will not lead to the loss, or adverse impact on, important heritage 
assets, nature conservation, biodiversity sites or the best and most versatile 
agricultural land;  
b. The site should be served, or be capable of being served by adequate sewerage 
disposal methods and mains water;  
c. The site has safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular access to the highway 
network, and adequate spac e for vehicle parking, turning and servicing;  
d. The site will offer a suitable level of residential amenity to any proposed occupiers 
and have no adverse impact on the amenity of nearby residents or other 
neighbouring land uses;  
e. The site is capable of being designed to ensure that it would not have a 
significant adverse effect on visual amenity;  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  163 
   f. In the case of any development proposal which raises the issue of flood risk, 
regard will be had to advice contained in national and local policy/guidance. 
Where floo ding is found to be an issue, the Council will require the completion of 
a site specific Flood Risk Assessment;  
g. Proposed sites in rural areas should respect the scale of, and not dominate, the 
nearest settled community, and avoid placing an undue pressure on the local 
infrastructure.  
h. Proposed sites will not have an adverse impact on public rights of way.  
 
3. New traveller site development in open countryside that is away from existing 
settlements or outside areas allocated in the plan will be very strictly lim ited. Any 
planning permission granted in the countryside will restrict the construction of 
permanent built structures to small amenity blocks associated with each pitch and to 
small buildings for appropriate associated business use.  
  
4. Existing authorised permanent gypsy/ traveller and  travelling showperson’s sites will 
be safeguarded from alternative development, unless the site is no longer required to 
meet any identified traveller needs, or it is demonstrated the site is no longer suitable 
for such a use. Any new site subsequently granted permanent planning permission 
for gypsy/traveller or travelling showperson’s accommodation will also be 
safeguarded in accordance with this policy.  
 
Evidence Base  • Greater Nottingham and Ashfield District Counc il Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment, 2021 - RRR Consultancy Ltd.  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, 2015 -  DCLG  
• NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and Economic Land Availability 
Assessment  
 
6.10.  H2:2  sets out criteria to guide broad locations for any future requirements arisin g 
from evidence adopted by the Council. T he assessment of accommodation need90 
will be subject to regular monitoring and update, with a review at least every five 
years. Where necessary t he Council will seek to secure any future allocations 
based on this information through a review of the Local Plan or a Gypsy and 
Traveller DPD. Th e policy  facilitates provision of Gypsy and Traveller sites in 
accordance with sustainable development principles and criteria set out in H2:2 
will also guide decision making on planning applications. These criteria are not 
intended to be an exhaustive lis t and are cross -cutting with other policies in this 
document.  
 
6.11.  Travelling Showpeople  do not in general share the same culture or traditions as 
Gypsies and Travellers. Due to the nature of their business, sites often need to 
accommodate large amounts of fairground equipment to enable storage when not 
in use and for maintenance. These requi re much larger plots, rather than pitches, 
 
90 Add link to website when published  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  164 
   and can have a greater impact on the surrounding area both visually and in terms 
of noise.   
 
6.12.  With reference to flood risk, it should be noted that caravans, mobile homes and 
park homes intended for permanent resi dential use are classified as highly 
vulnerable in flooding terms and should not be permitted in Flood Zone 3. This 
approach is supported by Policy CC3 which requires development to meet the 
sequential test set out in the Technical Guidance to the NPPF.  
 
6.13.  Policies EV4, EV 8 and EV 9 refer to nature conservation and biodiversity, high 
quality agricultural land and heritage assets in more detail.  
 
6.14.  In general terms the Council will look favourably upon applications that:  
 
• involve the development of previously developed  untidy or derelict land;  
• are well planned or soft landscaped in such a way as to positively enhance the 
environment and increase its  openness;  
• ensure adequate landscaping and play areas for children;  
• Do not enclose a site with so much hard landscaping, high walls or fences that 
the impression may be given that the site and its occupants are deliberately 
isolated from the rest of the co mmunity.  
 
6.15.  The use of planning conditions or obligations should be considered in order to 
overcome planning objections to particular proposals, for example:  
 
• limiting which parts of a site may be used for any business operations, in order 
to minimise the visual impact and limit the effect of noise;  
• specifying the number of days,  the site can be occupied by more than the 
allowed number of caravans (which permits visitors and allows attendance at 
family or community events);  
• limiting the maximu m number of days for which caravans might be permitted to 
stay on a transit site.  
 
6.16.  H2:3 seeks to limit development very strictly in the open countryside in 
accordance with national policy91. However, where the District has an identified 
unmet pitch or plot  need, the Council will apply a presumption in favour of 
development for sustainably located proposals outside of the Green Belt. This 
presumption will only apply where there is an unmet need identified within an up -
to-date Traveller Accommodation Assessme nt for Ashfield District.  
 
6.17.  H2:4  of this policy safeguards both existing and future authorised gypsy/traveller 
or travelling showperson’s  sites. It aims to ensure that the permitted use is not lost 
through the grant of any subsequent planning permission, or relaxation of planning 
 
91Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, 2015 - DCLG  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  165 
   conditions which may allow alternative types of development or uses. It is 
important that sites are retained to meet identified traveller needs within the 
District, and any wider unmet needs under the Duty to Co -operate.  
 
 
 
Policy H2a: Travelling Showpeople  Site Allocations  
  
6.18.  Policy H2a allocates sites for use by the Travelling showperson community which 
will contribute towards providing the assessed need identified in Strategic Policy 
S9. 
 
Policy H 2a:  Travelling Showpeople  Site Allocations  
Strategic Objectives  SO3, SO5, SO11, SO12, SO13  
Development of plots to meet the needs of Travelling Showpeople will be permitted 
on the sites listed below as shown on the Policies Map.  
 
 
Site 
Ref. Site Name  Greenfield/ 
Brownfield  Planning 
Permission*  Potential 
Yield 
(plots ) 
H2a(a)  Land off Park Lane (Phase 
2), Kirkby -in-Ashfield  G Yes 7 
H2a(b)  Land off Park Lane (Phase 
3), Kirkby -in-Ashfield  G No 7 
    14 
 
Evidence Base  • Greater Nottingham and Ashfield District Council Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment, 2021 - RRR Consultancy Ltd.  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, 2015 - DCLG  
• NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a suffic ient supply of homes  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and Economic Land Availability 
Assessment  
 
6.19.  Whilst Policy H2a meets the full assessed need of 14 additional plots for Travelling 
Showpeople accommodation over the plan period, the District Council has not 
been able to identify any available and suitable sites to meet the future needs of 
Gypsys and T ravellers in the District. However, it should be noted that this need is 
particularly  low, amounting to only 3 additional pitches in the period to 2038  with 0 
in the first 5 years . As a result, the Council will rely on the criteria based policy set 
out in policy H2 which allows sufficient flexibility to meet need where it might arise.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  166 
   6.20.  It is proposed that the Council monitors the longer -term need for pitches and plots 
in light of future updated turnover rates and sites granted planning permission 
through th e development management process which will count towards meeting 
the longer -term need.  
 
Policy H3: Affordable Housing  
 
6.21.  The Policy set out below is a reflection of the result from the Nationwide CIL 
Viability Study , 201692.   It is acknowledged that the requirements of the Policy will 
need to be reviewed through an up -to-date viability assessment .  Consequently,  
the percentage requirements set out in the Policy are anticipated to be amended .    
 
6.22.  The Policy will need to reflect the provisions of NPPF paragraph 65, which 
identifies that major housing development proposals should make provision for at 
least 10% of the overall number homes to be available for affordable home 
ownership.   The government introduction of First Homes also requires that  
councils ensure that at least 25% of all affordable homes delivered through 
developer contributions will be First Homes.  
 
6.23.  Based on the finding of the Iceni Housing Need Study93 and planning practice 
guidance set out for First Homes , it is considered the provision for affordable 
homes for sale will be reduced while the need for social  rented properties will 
increase.  This alternative mix of affordable units will have viability implications as 
it will reduce the capital value of these forms of afforda ble homes as a percentage 
of the value of market homes  when compared to the 2016 Viability Study 
assumptions which was based on Starter Homes and affordable homes for rent.  
In addition, infrastructure requirements, such as the potent ial requirement for new 
school places  will also affect viability.  Consequently, it is anticipated that the 
viability results will identify that fewer affordable housing units can be achieved 
due to viability considerations than is set out in the draft pol icy.  However, based 
on previous viability studies for Ashfield and the Iceni Study it is anticipated that:     
 
• The level of affordable housing that can be achieved will be higher in Hucknall 
and the rural part s of the district (area on the west of the M1)  tha n in Sutton in 
Ashfield or Kirkby -in-Ashfield.   Figure 13. 
 
• The policy will need to reflect the different viability aspects of greenfield sites 
against previously developed land .  
 
 
92 Ashfield Whole Plan and CIL Viability Assessme nt 2016. Nationwide CIL Services.  
93 Greater Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs Assessment Final Report 2020. Iceni Projects Limited on 
behalf of the Greater Nottingham Planning Partnership.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  167 
    
 
Figure  13: Ashfield Viability Zones  
Source:  Ashfield Whole Plan and CIL Viability Assessment 2016. Nationwide CIL Services.  
 
 
 
 
Policy H 3: Affordable Housing  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO12.  
 
1. Affordable housing contributions will be required on new housing 
developments other than where affordable housing requirements are 
exclude d by national planning policy.  
 
2. The Council will seek the following tenure mix:  
  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  168 
   Area  Affordable 
homes for 
ownership  on all 
sites (Greenfield 
& Brownfield) . % Affordable 
Homes for Rent 
required on 
Greenfield sites.  
% Affordable  
Homes for Rent 
required on 
previously 
developed sites. 
% 
Hucknall Wards  20% 20% 5% 
The Rurals Wards 
(Selston, Jacksdale, & 
Underwood)  20% 20% 5% 
Sutton in Ashfield and 
Kirkby -in-Ashfield Wards  20% 10% 0% 
 
N.B.   It is anticipated the percentage requirements will need to be amended once an 
update viability study has been undertaken.  
 
3. Affordable housing should be delivered on site and integrated with market 
housing.  In exceptional circumstances, off site or commuted sum 
contributions may be accepted in lieu of on -site provision.  
 
4. Proposals that do not meet the policy requirements must provide a clear 
justification supported by an independent viability assessment that a 
different level or mix of affordable housing is required to make the 
development viable.  It must be satisfactorily demonstrated to the Council 
that any alternatives approach will contri bute towards sustainable 
development.  
 
5. Developers are expected to make efficient use of land and attempts to 
artificially reduce the scale of development to below the threshold for 
providing affordable housing will not be acceptable.  
 
Evidence Base  • Greater Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs Assessment Final 
Report 2020 - Iceni Projects Limited on behalf of the Greater 
Nottingham Planning Partnership.  
• Greater Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs Assessment Final 
Report 2020. Iceni Projects Limited on behalf of the Greater 
Nottingham Planning Partnership.  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.   
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient suppl y of homes.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: First Homes as of August 2021.  
 
 
6.24.  This policy aims to  be responsive to local circumstances and support housing 
developments that reflect local needs. It enables a landowner to provide a site at 
below housing market value on the basis the land is used to build affordable 
homes for local people . These schemes are the exception to normal planning 
policy and only Affordable Housing units will be permitted on these sites.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  169 
    
6.25.  The role of affordable housing is to meet local housing needs which are not being 
met by the market.  It is a reflection of the difference betw een local housing prices 
and household income.  New residential developments should provide for a 
proportion of affordable housing to contribute towards delivering a wide choice of 
high quality homes and create sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities.  
 
6.26.  The N PPF categorises affordable housing into four main types :  
 
a. Affordable housing for rent: owned and managed by a Council or other 
Registered Provider which meet the criteria set out by the Government 
definition of affordable housing for rent.   This will include social rents and 
affordable rents.    
 
b. Starter homes: are defined by the Housing and Planning Act 2016.  They are 
new dwellings which are available for purchase by qualifying first -time buyers 
and are sold at a discount of at least 20% of the market value, subject to a 
price cap and with restrictions on sale or letting.  
 
c. Discounted market sales: housing which is sold at a discount of at least 20% 
below local market value with eligibility determined by local incomes and house 
prices and with pr ovisions to ensure housing remains at a discount for future 
eligible households.  
 
d. Other affordable routes to home ownership: for those who could not achieve 
home ownership through the market including shared ownership, equity loans, 
low cost homes for sale  and rent to buy.  
 
6.27.  The Iceni Housing Need Assessment  identified a need in Ashfield for rented 
accommodation of 237 dwellings per annum.  It is also indicated that social rents 
will be affordable to a greater proportion of households than affordable rents, 
although some households claiming benefits will be able to access an affordable 
rent as long as the rent is fully covered by Housing Benefit. Low income working 
households are likely to benefit most from a social rent.  
 
6.28.  In relation to own er occupation the analysis identifies that there are households in 
Ashfield who are being excluded from this sector. However, the analysis would 
suggest that a key issue is access to capital (e.g. for deposits, stamp duty, legal 
costs) as well as potential ly mortgage restrictions (e.g. where employment is 
temporary) rather than simply the cost of housing to buy.  Therefore, it 
recommends that if affordable home ownership is provided shared ownership is 
the most appropriate option. This is due to the lower d eposit requirements and 
lower overall costs (given that the rent would also be subsidised).  
 
6.29.  The N PPF states that major housing development proposals should make 
provision for at least 10% of the overall number homes to be available for 
affordable home own ership . (Affordable Homes categories b, c and d above). 
Based on the evidence from the Iceni Study, this is more than sufficient to meet Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  170 
   the need for affordable home ownership in the District.   The government’s 
preferred form of discounted market sale ho using (category c) is First Homes.  
First Homes are a specific kind of discounted market sale housing which are 
discounted by a minimum of 30% against the market value, sold to a person or 
persons meeting the First Homes eligibility criteria set out in the  Planning Practice 
Guidance and cost no more than £250,000 (outside Greater London). This 
discount (30%) will apply to any subsequent sales of the property.  Under national 
planning policy , councils will be required to ensure that at least 25% of all 
affordable homes delivered through developer contributions will be First Homes.  
 
6.30.  What can be provided through private sector development is related to viability 
and the demand for other infrastructure requirements.  The current policy is 
informed by the approach taken in the Nationwide CIL Viability Study which will 
need to be updated.  
 
6.31.  Affordable housing should be provided on site as part of sustainable and mixed 
communities.  It should be distributed in an appropriate manner within any 
development and s hould avoid an over -concentration in one part of the site, i.e. it 
should be ‘pepper -potted’ throughout the development and be indistinguishable 
from the market housing.   
 
6.32.  Under exception circumstances, the Council will consider alternative options94.    In 
some instances, off site provision or a financial contribution in lieu of provision may 
be justifiable or will be preferable, for example to enable the Council to tackle an 
empty homes problem, or where provision would not result in mixed sustainable 
communities. This will be of a broadly equivalent value to a viable provision made 
on-site.  
 
6.33.  The Council will seek to ensure that any  affordable housing provision (excluding 
Starter Homes) will remain at an affordable price and be occupied in perpetuity by 
those in need of affordable housing. In imposing occupancy controls the Council 
will use planning agreements/ conditions setting out clear eligibility criteria for 
potential occupants. In any circumstance where this may become impractical, the 
subsidy will  be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.  
 
6.34.  Where a developer considers a site is financially unviable, the applicant will be 
required to provide a viability appraisal in accordance with Policy SD6 and 
Planning Practice Guidance  on Viabilit y. 
 
6.35.  Currently, national planning policy generally excludes small sites of less than 10 
dwellings from contributing towards affordable homes.   Any attempt to circumvent 
the requirement for affordable homes through the inefficient use of sites or 
subdividin g development sites is not acceptable will be resisted.  
 
 
 
94 Affordable Housing Delivery Strategy 2019 -21 Review https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/your -council/strategies -
plans -policies/housing -strategy -research/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  171 
   Policy H4: Rural Exceptions Sites  
 
6.36.  Opportunities for delivery of affordable housing under Policy H3 will be limited 
where there is less potential for large sites to come forward, typically in the smaller 
settlements. Any development schemes coming forward under Policy H4 will 
therefore cont ribute towards the overall level of affordable housing whilst 
supporting the District’s more rural communities. The Housing Strategy for 
Ashfield 2016 -2020 recognises Rural Exception Site Development as a potential 
future supply of affordable housing in As hfield.  
 
 
Policy H4: Rural Exceptions Sites  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO12.  
1. As an exception to normal housing policy, the provision of affordable housing 
immediately adjoining rural settlements* will be permitted provided that:  
 
a) Development is of a small scale not exceeding 9 dwellings and consisting of 
100% affordable housing ; 
b) There is robust evidence of local need for affordable housing for people with a 
local connection to the area;  
c) The type of housing provided reflects the nat ure and scale of the identified 
need;  
d) Arrangements exist to ensure that the housing will remain affordable in 
perpetuity ; 
e) The development site immediately adjoins rural settlements and is accessible 
to services sufficient to support the daily needs of new residents via public 
transport, walking or cycling.  
 
2. Proposals for exceptions sites should be capable of management by an 
appropriate body, e.g., a Registered Social Landlord, Local Authority or any other 
organisation or body whose principle business is th e provision of affordable 
housing.  
 
* ‘Named Settlement’ or settlement located within the ‘Remainder of the District’ as identified under Policy 
S3 and its immediate surrounds generally associated with that settlement.  
 
Evidence Base  
 • Greater Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs Assessment Final 
Report, 2020 – Iceni Projects Ltd  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and Economic Land Availability 
Assessment  
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  172 
   6.37.  NPPF paragraph 78 requires local planning authorities to be responsive to local 
circumstances and plan housing development to reflect local needs, including 
through rural exception sites where appropriate. Rural Exception policies are a key 
means of providing affordable homes in rural areas and enable small sites, 
generally on the edge s of rural settlements, to be used specifically for affordable 
housing that would not normally be used for housing due to other policies of 
restraint.  
 
6.38.  Although the construction of new buildings is considered inappropriate in the 
Green Belt, limited affordable housing for local community needs under policies 
set out in the Local Plan is regarded as an exception under NPPF paragraph149.  
 
6.39.  Rural areas can face particular difficulties in securing an adequate supply of land 
for affordable housing f or local needs and are unable to compete against high land 
prices for private housing developments. Under Policy H4, a landowner provides a 
site at below housing market value on the basis the land is used to build affordable 
homes for local people. Landown ers commonly have strong multi -generational ties 
to their communities, are often local employers, and wish to sustain that 
community for future generations.  
 
6.40.  The housing market is fairly strong in Ashfield’s rural areas with prices generally 
higher than co mparable properties in the towns and suburbs95. This can cause 
difficulties for people who want to live close to their families in such areas, and for 
those whose employment and livelihoods are based within the rural area. It can 
also push younger people o ut of the rural areas and lead to an imbalance in the 
age structure of the rural population.  
 
6.41.  For the purposes of the rural housing exceptions policy, local need is defined as 
identified needs in the individual rural settlement or the local area it serves.  Before 
the Local Planning Authority will grant planning permission for affordable housing 
on a rural exception site, it must be satisfied that there is a genuine need for 
affordable housing in the locality. To establish that a genuine need does exist, the  
Local Planning Authority will require evidence from a local level Housing Needs 
Survey that is sufficiently recent to provide reliable evidence or some other 
objective proof of local need, proportionate to the scale of the development being 
proposed.  
 
6.42.  In assigning rural affordable housing, priority will be given to people that have a 
connection to that settlement and who are unable to afford market housing. Local 
connections are typically taken to be based on the following:  
 
• applicant was born in the area  and has lived there for more than 3 years  
• applicant lives in the area and has done so for more than 3 years  
 
95 Housing Strategy for Ashfield 2016 -2020. Ashfield  District Council https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/your -
council/strategies -plans -policies/housing -strategy -research/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  173 
   • applicant used to live in the area for more than 3 years but had to move away 
because of the lack of affordable housing  
• applicant has been per manently employed in the area for more than 3 years  
 
6.43.  Although priority is given to applicants with a local connection, if there are still 
properties remaining, allocation will be opened up to surrounding local areas and 
then to the whole of the local authority area. This ensures that the homes are 
occupied by residents as local to the area as possible.  
 
6.44.  Rural Exceptions developments should be small in scale and reflect the dwelling 
size and tenure identified by the local needs survey, consistent with t he provisions 
of the NPPF. For planning purposes, a ‘small’ site is taken to be one consisting of 
less than 10 dwellings. In order to minimise visual impact and provide reasonable 
access to local services and facilities, rural exception sites should be sit uated 
within or physically adjoining existing rural settlements and comply with all other 
relevant policies in the Local Plan . 
 
 
 
Policy H5: Public Open Space in New Residential Developments  
 
6.42 This policy acknowledges the important contribution access to good quality public 
open spaces can make to the health and wellbeing of communities. It requires new 
residential developments to contribute to green open space provision either by the 
creation of additional areas or the improvement of existing facilities i n the locality . 
 
 
Policy H5: Public Open Space in New Residential Developments  
 
Strategic 
Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO5, SO7, SO8, SO9, S011, S012, SO14.  
 
1. New residential development will be required to provide for public open space 
according to the following criteria:  
 
a. On sites of two hectares or more, a minimum of 10% of the gross housing area 
will be provided as public open space.  
 
b. On sites of less than two hectares and more than five dwellings, the extent of 
public open space required will be asse ssed by taking account of house types 
and the extent and accessibility of the site to existing open space in the locality.  
 
c. On sites where it is inappropriate to provide new public open space within the site 
boundary, a planning obligation will be negotiat ed towards one or a combination 
of the following:  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  174 
   • improvement of existing public open space provision/improved access to 
existing open space;  
• new open space to be provided elsewhere;  
• town centre and public realm improvements.  
Evidence Base  • Ashfield public Open Space Strategy 2016 -2026, Ashfield DC . 
• Ashfield Playing Pitch Strategy 2017 -2026, Ashfield DC . 
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning 
Policy and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 8: Promoting healthy and safe communities  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Healthy and safe communities  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Open space, Sports and Recreation facilities, 
public rights of way and local green spa ce 
 
6.43 Provision of Green Infrastructure and public open space plays a vital role in 
helping to create sustainable communities. Accessible open spaces, sport and 
recreation facilities are all highly valued assets to Ashfield’s communities and new 
residential  developments should, where appropriate, contribute to open space 
provision either by the creation of additional areas or the improvement of existing 
facilities in the locality.  
 
6.44 In providing for new or improved public open space with regard to new 
develop ment proposals, early discussions with the Council are encouraged in 
order to secure the right amount and type of open space in locations which provide 
most benefit to communities and the Green Infrastructure Network.  Further detail 
and information on the  criteria noted in the Policy may be found in Ashfield District 
Council’s Public Open Space Strategy96, Allotment Strategy97, Green Infrastructure 
and Biodiversity Technical Paper98, Playing Pitch Strategy99 and Town Centre 
Masterplans100. 
 
6.45 The Ashfield Public Open Space Strategy identifies the Council’s aims and 
objectives for improving the quality and access to open space within the District. It 
sets out Standards for the provision of informal recreational o pen space (including 
parks, amenity green space and green corridors), outdoor sports facilities, play 
space and natural green space. The Strategy aims to ensure a consistent 
approach to the planning of open space, enabling the development process to 
achiev e the right type, quantity and quality of open space.  
 
6.46 Informal recreational open spaces should, wherever possible, link to existing open 
spaces, rights of way and cycle routes. Where spaces incorporate landscaping 
and planting, these should be provided in  accordance with Policies SD2 Design 
Considerations for Development and, in particular, provide opportunities to make a 
 
96 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/media/8d850ab97b714fe/public -open -space -strategy.pdf  
97 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/media/8d85a7c7e283 019/allotment -strategy -final-2016 -2020 -003.pdf  
98 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/media/8d850ab08570685/ashfield -green -infrastru cture -and-biodiversity -
technical -paper.pdf  
99 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/media/8d850ab1f08d9d2/ashfield -playing -pitch -strategy -2017 -2020.pdf  
100 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/local -plan/  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  175 
   net contribution to tree cover, habitat creation and connectivity to surrounding 
biodiversity networks.  
 
6.47 In the future football pitches and other outdoor sports facilities will be concentrated 
on one or two sites within each area (Hucknall, Kirkby, Rurals and Sutton) in order 
to provide better quality facilities which where possible meet the relevant national  
governing body standards.   
 
6.48 H5:1a)  Public open space (including informal recreational open space, outdoor 
sports facilities, play space, cemeteries, allotments, natural spaces, and areas of 
public realm) are integral to sustainable communities.  Where ex isting Green 
Infrastructure and public realm provision is inadequate in terms of providing for the 
quantity, quality, and accessibility to meet projected needs arising from future 
occupiers of new development, those occupiers' needs must be met by the new 
development on -site.  
 
6.49 Provision for subsequent management and maintenance of public open space 
must also be made. Generally, the Council will require an area of land not less 
than 10% of the gross housing area to be laid out as public open space with 
asso ciated footpaths, boundary treatment, planting and other features. Specific 
areas for children’s’ play and young peoples’ areas may be required, depending 
on whether such provision is needed to meet the standards set out in the Public 
Open Space Strategy. The area must be well related to dwellings for safety and be 
of a shape and gradient to facilitate maximum usage and ease of maintenance.  
 
6.50 H5:1b)  On some developments, including those with a gross area of less than two 
hectares and more than five dwellings , it may be inappropriate to require on -site 
public open space, for example, where small unmanageable sites may result; 
where proposed development is unlikely to generate the need for public open 
space; or where such sites may be in close proximity to exis ting provision.  
 
6.51 H5:1c)  Where public open space provision on any site is inappropriate, 
unnecessary, or better provided elsewhere, the Authority will require a financial 
contribution to facilitate off -site provision. This could take the form of 
enhancement s to existing public open space in the locality or provision of new 
facilities close by, (including Green Infrastructure projects), in accordance with 
national guidance and standards, in order to create a more acceptable proposal.  
 
6.52 It is recognised that s mall developments of less than six dwellings and certain 
types of new residential development (such as elderly sheltered accommodation 
and residential care facilities where residents are unlikely to benefit directly from 
local public open space provision) have different viability, functional and 
operational requirements. In such cases neither the provision of public open space 
nor the payment of a commuted sum will be required.   Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  176 
    
Policy H6: Housing Mix  
 
6.53 This policy aims to ensure that housing provision meets the needs of all sectors in 
the community including families with children, older people and people with 
disabilities by providing a range of house types and sizes as part of new 
residential developme nts. 
 
 
Policy H6: Housing Mix  
 
Strategic 
Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO7, SO8, SO9.  
 
1. Proposals for new residential development should maintain, provide, and contribute 
to a mix of housing tenures, types and sizes in order to create mixed and balanced 
communities, having regard to the most up -to date evidence of need.  
 
2. Developments of 10 or more dwellings will be expected to provide 10% of dwellings 
that are accessible or easily adaptable for occupation by the elderly or people with 
disabilitie s (Category 2).  
 
3. The inclusion of self -build and custom -build properties on sites will be encouraged.  
 
Evidence Base  • Greater Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs Assessment Final Report, 
2020 – Iceni Projects Ltd  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning 
Policy and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic needs assessment  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing needs of different groups  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing for older and disabled people  
 
6.54 H6:1  The housing market is dynamic, and it is therefore inappropriate to establish 
inflexible targets for the mix of dwelling size and type that needs to be provided. 
Developers are therefore encouraged to discuss with the Council the appropriate 
mix of house size, type and tenure within any new housing development at an 
early stage in the application process. Requirements will b e informed by the 
following, along with any additional up -to-date evidence:  
 
• Evidence contained within the Greater Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs 
Assessment  2020, or subsequent assessment of local housing need;  
• Local Housing Strategy;  
• Context in relation to site location and existing neighbouring residential 
development;  
• Site issues and design considerations.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  177 
   6.55 The Greater Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs A ssessment 2020  (HNA)  
analysis takes into account how people of different ages occupy homes, market 
evidence and modelled outputs.  The analysis has also factored in the projected 
growth of family households in order to ensure that prospective development 
responds to the need for family -sized housing in particular areas; and the 
assessment has also reviewed recent development trends to better understand 
particular market strengths and identify any gaps in the market .  
 
6.56 Estimates of future requirements  by dwelling size are set out in Table 4 and will 
be used as a starting point to inform negotiations between the District Council and 
applicants in determining the appropriate mix of housing on schemes of 10 or 
more dwellings.  
 
Table  4: Recomm ended Housing Mix  
Housing Type  1 Bed  2 Beds  3 Beds  4+ Beds  
Market  4% 27% 45% 24% 
Affordable Home 
Ownership  23% 38% 24% 15% 
Affordable Rented  35% 37% 25% 3% 
 
 
6.57 There are instances where adjustments may need to be applied according to the 
local profile of housing, the character of the local area, the sustainability 
credentials of the site and the viability of providing a particular mix of housing 
dependent on submarket characteristics . The final mix of housing/types will be 
subject to negotiation  and applicants will be expected to provide robust evidence 
relating to the identified level of housing need, financial viability or deliverability to 
support their proposals.  
 
6.58 H6:2  Greater Nottingham and Ashfield is projected to see a notable increase in the 
older person population, with the total number of people aged 65 and over 
projected to increase by 37.8% over the 18 years to 2038. This compares with 
overall population growth of 10.6% and a modest increase in the Under 65 
population of 4.8%.  
 
6.59 Projections linked to the standard method show an expected increase of the older 
population with dementia by 1,044 and those with mobility problems by 2,426 in 
Ashfield.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  178 
   Table 5: Projected Change to Older Population with Disabilities  
Council  Disability  2020 2038  Change  % Change  
Ashfield  Dementia  1,619  2,663  1,044  64.5%  
Mobility 
problems  4,413  6,839  2,426  55.0%  
 
6.60 The analysis also shows that there is a substantial volume of younger adults (aged 
65 and under) across the study area with a range of disabilities. Invariably, there 
will be a combination of those with disabilities and long -term health problems that 
conti nue to live at home with family, those who choose to live independently with 
the possibility of incorporating adaptations into their homes and those who choose 
to move into supported housing.  
 
Table 6: Projected Change to Younger Adults with Disabilities  
Council  Disability  2020  2038  Change  % Change  
Ashfield  Impaired 
Mobility  4,348  4,327  -21 -0.5%  
Common 
Mental 
Disorder  14,529  15,029  500 3.4%  
Autistic 
Spectrum 
Disorders  755 779 24 3.2%  
Learning 
Disabilities  1,972  2,056  84 4.3%  
 
 
 
6.61 The projected change shown in the number of older persons and younger adults 
with disabilities provides clear evidence justifying delivering ‘accessible and 
adaptable’ homes as defined in Part M4(2) of Building Regulations, subject to 
viability testing and sit e suitability and, where possible, ‘fully adapted homes’ as 
defined in Part M4(3) of the same document.  
 
6.62 The PPG for Housing for Older and Disabled People [63 -006] refers only to 
specialist housing for older people; however, the Council acknowledges the 
importance of supporting specialist housing schemes for younger adults which 
could come forward – particularly those aimed at supporting those with autistic 
spectrum disorders and learning disabilities given these disabilities are expected 
to see an increase . 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  179 
   6.63 In line with the PPG, some older households, particularly those aged over 75, will 
require specialist housing provision. For Ashfield, the analysis points to a need for 
2,463 units of housing with support, and 948 units of housing with care.  
 
6.64 A need for  around 3,203 wheelchair accessible dwellings for wheelchair users 
across the Greater Nottingham and Ashfield area has been identified, equivalent 
to 5% of the total housing need identified through the standard method. The 
Council consider that it would be  appropriate to seek provision as part of major 
new-build schemes, subject to support from viability evidence studies and 
evaluation on a site -by-site basis.  
 
 
Table 7: The Need for Specialist Accommodation for Older People, 2020 -
38 
Council  Accommodation  Rented  Leasehold  Total  
Ashfield  Housing with 
Support  1,037  1,426  2,463  
Housing with 
Care  507 441 948 
 
 
6.65 It is important to support the delivery of specialist housing in particular as a by -
product of doing so will be the release of existing mainstream housing, including 
family housing, for other groups within the community. This may include sheltered 
housing, retirement schemes and extra care housing101. It is also considered that 
the provision of adaptable dwellings will make a valua ble contribution towards 
meeting the future needs of the elderly or those with disabilities, enabling them to 
stay in their own home if desired.  For many vulnerable older people, having the 
chance to avoid residential care and live in specially designed h ousing as tenants 
or owner -occupiers is an important element in retaining independence and dignity 
in older age. Many such individuals can be cared for in their own homes, 
particularly with the development of assistive technology (telecare and 
telemedicine ), use of appropriate aids or adaptations to the dwelling, and new 
models of housing related care and/or support services.  
 
6.66 In light of the above evidence, the Council will require that 10% of new housing 
built as part of major housing developments (10 dwe llings and over) is accessible 
and easily adaptable for occupation by the elderly or people with disabilities (to 
comply with Building Regulations M4 (Category 2). Site specific factors such as 
vulnerability to flooding and site topography may make it less  suitable for M4 (2) 
compliant dwellings, particularly where  step-free access cannot be achieved or is 
not viable. Where step -free access is not possible, the requirement will not be 
applied.  
 
101 Housing which enables older people with longer term health conditions to live independently in self -
contain ed accommodation as an alternative to residential care . Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  180 
    
6.67 The requirement for 10% adaptable dwellings on large sites will  contribute towards 
future needs for specialist housing.  The Council will also encourage proposals 
which include supported/specialist accommodation and residential institutions, 
where they are in suitable locations . It is acknowledged that applications for this 
type of accommodation will contain mainly one -bed and two bed homes. The final 
mix of housing on such schemes will therefore be determined on a site by site 
basis according to identified needs in the locality (in consultation with the Council’s 
Housing Strategy team).  
 
6.68 The HNA also identifies a need for 1,252 care home bedspaces across Ashfield to 
2038.  For the avoidance of doubt, these are additional bedspaces and fall within a 
C2 use class. Netting off 85 new bed spaces delivered 2020 -2021, the balance of 
requirement for 2021 to 2038 will be 1157. As of April 2021, the District has 
outstanding planning approvals for an additional 11 bedspaces on C2 schemes 
which will contribute towards the supply, giving a final requirement for 1,146  
bedspaces over the remainder of the plan period . Having assessed the 
hectarage/bedspace ratio of recen tly delivered C2 schemes in Ashfield, this 
equates to approximately 6.7 hectares of land.  
 
6.69 Although the HNA identifies the need for additional C2 schemes to 2038, it is 
considered inappropriate to apportion this need equally as an annual requirement 
over t he plan period. Evidence held by Nottinghamshire County Council (NCC 
Market Position Statement 2016/2018) and information supplied by the Clinical 
Commissioning Groups (CCGs) indicate a current over -provision of this type of 
development in Ashfield. The st rategic direction of both the CCG and the County 
Council is to support people in their own homes for as long as is possible and 
feasible rather than placement in a care home. It is likely therefore, that any new 
delivery will come forward later in the plan  period (anticipated beyond the first 10 
years) as demographic changes and market dictates the need demand.   
 
6.70 In the light of current evidence, it is not proposed to allocate land specifically for 
residential care homes, but to ensure that a supply of general housing land is 
provided sufficient to meet the LHN which includes the forecast need from this 
sector.  
 
6.71 H6:5  The development of self -build properties by individuals or community groups 
(including Community Land Trusts) can contribute to meeting the need for 
additional housing within the District and provide a more diverse housing stock. 
The Council, working with Mansfield District Council and Newark and Sherwood 
District Council, have set up a custom/self -build register for the Nottingham Outer 
Housing Market Area. The level of demand for such sites is monitored against 
small sites coming forward through the planning application process in an annual 
monitoring report102.  Should demand exceed that which it is possible to 
 
102 https://www.ashfield.gov.uk/planning -building -control/building -control -regulations/self -build -custom -
builds/self -build -custom -monitoring/  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  181 
   accommodate through either voluntary measures or through Council owned sites, 
an SPD may be required setting out how development sites outside  of the Council 
control can contribute to meeting established demand in line with government 
policy.  
 
6.72 This policy aims to promote efficient use of land through optimising density, whilst 
reflecting the specific characteristics of a site and its surroundin g area. F actors 
affecting density may include on -site constraints, the type of development 
proposed, and the level of transport accessibility. Whilst higher densities may be 
appropriate as part of major developments, or in town centre locations with good 
public transport and dense urban form, lower densities may be appropriate in 
established suburban areas or villages, in areas with an open character, or on the 
edge of settlements.  
 
 
 
Policy H7 : Housing Density  
 
 
Policy H7: Housing Density  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO12, SO14.  
 
1. To promote efficient use of land proposals for housing developments will be 
expected to optimise density, whilst reflecting the specific characteristics of the site 
and its surround ing area (in terms of built form and landscape). Proposed residential 
development on sites of 0.4 hectares or greater, within distances indicated below 
from district shopping centres and major public transport nodes will be permitted 
subject to the followi ng minimum density requirements:  
 
a. Within 400m  - 40 dwellings per hectare  
b. Within 1Km   - 34 dwellings per hectare  
c. Over 1km       - 30 dwellings per hectare  
2. Development schemes on sites delivering greater than 500 dwellings will be 
expected to provide a range of housing densities throughout the site.  
 
Evidence Base  • Background Paper No 2 Housing 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes.  
NPPF 2021, Part 11: Making effective use of land.  
Planning Practice Guidance: Supporting more effective use of land as of 
August 2021.  
 
 
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  182 
   6.73 H7:1  Developments carried out at a higher density in accordance with this policy 
will bring more people within walking/cycling distance of the District Shopping 
Centres, railway stations and tram stops. This will encourage a subsequent 
reduction in private car journeys and improved usage of these services. The policy 
will also assist in encouraging the development of an increased number of smaller 
and more affordable properties.  
 
6.74 Walking distances in the two density zones have been established at 400 metres 
within which it is likely that many people will choose to walk to District Shopping 
Centres and rail stops, and 1 kilometre within which a smaller but still significant 
number of people are likely to choose to walk. The 1 kilometre zone is also 
considered to b e the principal catchment of the Public Transport Corridor. Outside 
of these two zones a higher proportion of people are likely to use a private car 
rather than walk and as such a lower target density is appropriate.  
 
6.75 Development densities in all major hou sing developments should normally be no 
lower than an average 30 dwellings per hectare (net). Densities below this will 
need to be justified, taking into account individual site circumstances.  
 
Table 8: Density of recently delivered large housing sites in 
Ashfield (201 1 to 20 21) 
Below 30 dwellings per hectare (dph)  19% 
Between 30% -50% dwellings per hectare (dph)  75% 
Above 50 dwellings per hectare (dph)  6% 
 
6.76 Typical densities achieved on recent housing development across Ashfield are set 
out below. It can be seen that the vast majority of large housing sites delivered 
over the past 5 years have a density of 30 and above.  
 
6.77 H7:2  Major schemes  of over 500 dwellings should include a range of different 
housing density areas, to ensure varied charac ter, appearance,  and house types  
in accordance with agreed Masterplans.   
 
6.78 The density levels set by H6 are based on the net developable area of sites which 
will vary depending on the land taken by open space, infrastructure and facilities. 
The ratios detailed within the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment 
should be us ed as a guide. Net residential density is measured as the number of 
individual dwelling units per hectare of land developed specifically for housing and 
directly associated uses. This includes access roads within the site, private garden 
space, car parking  and incidental open space/landscaping. It does not include 
distributor roads, open space serving a wider area, significant landscape buffer 
areas and other facilities such as schools, shops and community buildings . 
 
6.79 In considering appropriate densities, a ccount will be taken of any relevant local 
appraisals, plans or strategies, including, but not restricted to : Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  183 
    
• Neighbourhood Plans,  
• Landscape Character Assessments,  
• Conservation Area Appraisal or Character Appraisal approved or adopted by 
the District Cou ncil.  
 
6.80 The Council’s Residential Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document 
(SPD) gives further useful information.  
 
 
 
Policy H8: Houses in Multiple Occupation, Flats and Bedsits  
 
6.81 This policy aims to ensure that an appropriate mix of housing is provided to meet 
the needs of the District in a way that does not create concentrations of particular 
types of housing in an area and therefore undermine the creation and 
maintenance of sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities.  
 
 
 
Policy H8: Houses in Multiple Occupation, Flats and Bedsits  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO12, SO14.  
 
1. Planning permission for the following development will only be granted where it 
does not conflict with Policy H6 , and does not undermine local objectives to 
create or maintain sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities:  
 
a. Changes of use and / or the erec tion of buildings to create new Houses in 
Multiple Occupation (HMOs); and  
b. Extension / alteration of existing HMOs including development that facilitates 
an increase in the number of occupiers / bedspaces.  
 
2. In assessing the development’s impact on local obj ectives to create or maintain 
sustainable, inclusive and mixed use communities, regard will be given to all of 
the following relevant criteria:  
 
a. The existing proportion of HMOs in the area and whether this proportion 
amounts or will amount to an over concentration;  
 
b. The individual characteristics of the building or site and immediate locality;  
 
c. Any evidence of existing HMO and purpose -built accommodation provision 
within the immediate vicinity of the site that already impacts on local character 
and am enity;  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 6 – Local Housing  
 
  
P a g e  184 
   d. The impact the proposed development would have on the character and 
amenity of the area or site having particular regard to the criteria set out in 
Policies SD1 and SD2. External staircases and large extensions which reduce 
the amenities of adjoin ing occupiers and/or the private amenity space 
available to future residents to an unacceptable degree will not be supported;  
 
e. Whether the proposal would incorporate an appropriate level of car and cycle 
parking having regard to the location, scale and nat ure of the development in 
line with Policy SD10; and  
 
f. Whether the proposal would result in the positive re -use of an existing vacant 
building or site that would have wider regeneration benefits.  
 
3. Any planning application for a House of Multiple Occupation (HMO) will be 
required to produce a HMO Management Plan, as part of the application process, 
to demonstrate how the proposal is to align with the Management of Houses in 
Multiple Occupation (England) Regulations 2006.  
 
Evidence Base  
 • Greater Nottingham & Ashfield Housing Needs Assessment Final 
Report, 2020 – Iceni Projects Ltd  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 5: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes  
• Planning Practice  Guidance: Effective use of land  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Healthy and safe communities  
 
 
 
6.82 This policy seeks to manage the number and distribution of HMOs to prevent the 
development of concentrations within the District.  
 
6.83 The conversion of existing residential units to provide houses in multiple 
occupation, bedsits and flats can provide a needed source of accommodation.  
HMOs play an important role in providing accommodation for many groups on 
lower incomes as well as a large proportion of y ounger members of the population 
for whom entry onto the property market as a first -time buyer is becoming 
increasingly delayed and all those displaced as a result of family change . 
 
6.84 However, where concentrations of such uses develop, this can have a disto rting 
effect on neighbourhoods with many residents not having a long -term stake in the 
community and some service needs of longer -term residents, such as schools 
becoming unsustainable.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  185 
   Chapter 7  
 
Building a strong economy which provides 
opportunities for local people.   
 
Policy EM1: Business and Economic Development  
 
 
Policy EM1: Business and Economic Development  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO12.  
 
1. The Council will give significant weight to proposals for business development, 
which provide for, or assist the creation of, new employment opportunities and 
inward investment.  Business and economic devel opment proposals will be 
directed towards town centres (where appropriate), employment sites, and 
employment allocations.  
 
2. The Council will sustain and enhance Ashfield’s employment capacity by 
supporting the following uses on allocated employment allocations sites and 
Key Employment Area  as identified on the Policies Map :  
 
a) Office, light industrial and research and development, general industrial and 
storage and distribution;  
 
b) Sui generis uses where it can be demonstrated that the proposal is compatible 
with the predominant use, is of a scale, nature and form appropriate to the 
location and there are no other sites/buildings that could meet the use in 
question;  
 
c) Educational or training purposes which will assist in improving skills in the 
working age population where:  
 
• it can be demonstrated that no suitable sites are available in town centre;  
• provision is made for access by a range of means of transport; and  
• the development would not conflict with the employment function of the 
estate or area;  
 
d) Ancillary uses including workplace nurseries and catering facilities where there 
is robust justification that it serves the needs of employees on the business 
park/industri al estate,  it does not adversely affect the operations of other 
industrial uses in the vicinity of  the site and will not result in significant levels 
of visitor traffic into the business park/estate.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  186 
   3. Business start -ups and small scale employment working from home through 
using part of a dwelling or a building within the curtilage of a dwelling will be 
supported providing that:  
 
a) The proposal would not have an unacceptable impact on the amenity of any 
nearby residential occupiers;  
 
b) The di rect and indirect effects of the scale of the business activity, including 
the employment of non -residents at the business, remains incidental to the 
overall use of the site for residential purposes;  
c) There are no detrimental effects to parking or traffic generation in the area; 
and 
d) There are no direct sales from the site to visitors.  
 
Evidence base  • Background Paper No 1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of Development 
2021. Ashfield District Council  
• Background Paper No 3:  Economy & Employment Land 2021.  Ashfield 
District Council.  
• The Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment 
Land Needs Study, 2021.  Lichfield.  
• Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment July 
2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Ashfield and Mansfield - A Plan for Growth 2016 (Joint Economic 
Masterplan Update). Ashfield District Council & Mansfield District 
Council.  
• Maid Marian Rai l Extension Economic Impact Analysis 2020. Lichfields.  
• Maid Marian Rail Extension - Ashfield Masterplan Report 2020.  Ashfield 
District Council and Mansfield District Council.  
• D2N2 – the Spark in the UK’s Growth Engine Strategic Economic Plan 
2019 -2030. D2 N2 Local Enterprise Partnership.  
• The D2N2 draft Local Industrial Strategy, March 2020. D2N2 Local 
Enterprise Partnership.  
• D2N2 Local Industrial Strategy Evidence Base - D2N2 Local Enterprise 
Partnership.  
• Employment Land and Monitoring Report 2020. Ashfield  District Council.  
• Sustainability Appraisal August 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd  
National 
Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy.  
• NPPF 2021 Part 11: Making effective use of land.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic land availability 
assessment as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic needs assessment as 
of August 2021.  
 
 
7.1 In ensuring business and economic development across the District successfully 
contributes to delivering sustainable growth and productivity, the Council will seek to 
direct development to the most sustainable and appropriate location for the given 
uses. These locations will include town centres for appropriate office development, Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  187 
   Key Employment Areas and other existing employment sites and buildings.  The 
Policy also re cognises the benefits of home working, placing an emphasis on the 
ability to work or start new business from home.  
 
7.2 The economic implications of a development proposal will be seen in the context of 
the evidence and objectives of The Ashfield and Mansfield Joint Economic 
Masterplan, the D2N2 economic strategy other appropriate evidence from economic 
analysis of the Ashfield and Mansfield or Greater Nottingham economic area 
(including any subsequent reviews). The economic significance of any applica tion 
will depend upon:  
 
• the scale and location of the proposed development; for example, the creation of 
ten jobs within a small village location can have a significant impact at a local level  
• the short, medium or long term implications of the proposal, wi th a greater weight 
in favour of applications for long term sustainable development.  
 
7.3 Where appropriate, planning applications should be supported by sufficient 
information about the positive and negative economic implications of the proposal to 
enable th e Council to make an informed assessment of the potential economic 
impact.  
 
7.4 Specific industrial parks/estates, identified as Key Employment Areas, are 
considered as having a key role in providing for opportunities for jobs and new 
investment derived from office, light industrial and research and development, 
general industrial and storage and distribution uses.  Together with other 
employment sites, they will continue to play a crucial role in the economy of the 
area.   These sites can also help to support less -skilled jobs for less -skilled workers 
in and near deprived areas.   The Policy does allow for flexibility in relation to a 
number of uses:  
 
• While it is anticipated that most of the uses on allocated employment sites or Key 
Employment Areas will fall within  office, light industrial and research and 
development, general industrial and storage and distribution uses, the 
development of a sui gener is employment use may be appropriate where they 
have similar characteristics. Any such uses will need to be considered against the 
following considerations:  
 
➢ economic implications including the impacts on local  employment, deprived 
areas, physical regene ration of the area and the local and sub regional 
economy;  
➢ compatibility with the future operation of an existing or approved economic 
development use;  
➢ infrastructure requirements associated with the development and their impact 
on and off the estate;  
➢ whet her they are town centre uses and the sequential and/or impact test have 
been applied;  
➢ promotion of skills provision and levels.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  188 
    
• Meeting education and training infrastructure needs, reflecting the importance to 
improved education qualification and skills in meeting the future needs of the local 
economy.  
 
• The provision of ancillary services on these estates where the inten tion is to meet 
the needs arising from workers on the estates.  However, this does not allow for 
uses which are directed towards meeting a wider need and results in significant 
visitors to the estate.   Any applications of this nature will need to demonstrate 
that the need for ancillary services, arises principally from the estate/business 
park in question.   
 
 
 
Policy EM2: Employment Land Allocations  
 
 
Policy EM2: Employment Land Allocations  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO12.  
 
In addition to the employment land identified in the strategic policies at Junction 27 
and Whyburn Farm, the following land, as shown on the Policies M ap, will be 
allocated for use for office, light industrial, research and development, general 
industrial and storage/distribution:  
 
Site 
Reference  Site Name  Approximate 
net area  
EM2 S1 Castlewood Business Park, Sutton in Ashfield  7.70 
EM2 S2 Fulwood Road North, Sutton in Ashfield  1.23 
EM2 S3 Hamilton Road , Sutton in Ashfield  3.34 
EM2 S4 South West Oakham, Sutton in Ashfield  1.52 
EM2 S5 West of Fulwood, Export Drive, Sutton in Ashfield  4.54 
EM2 K1 Kings Mill Road, Kirkby -in-Ashfield  1.99 
EM2 K2 Park Lane, Kirkby -in-Ashfield  1.84 
EM2 K3 Portland Industrial Park, Kirkby -in-Ashfield  1.76 
EM2 H1 Aerial Way, Hucknall  0.83 
EM2 H2 Blenheim Park, Hucknall  3.16 
EM3 H3 Butlers Hill, Hucknall  1.78 
EM4 H4 Harrier Park , Hucknall  15.50  
 
Evidence base  • Background Paper No 1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of Development 
2021. Ashfield District Council  
• Background Paper No 3:  Economy & Employment Land 2021.  Ashfield 
District Council.  
• The Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment 
Land Needs Study, 2021.  Lichfield.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  189 
   • Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment July 
2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Sustainability Appraisal August 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd  
National 
Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy.  
• NPPF 2021 Part 11: Making effective use of land.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic land availability 
assessment as of August 2021.  
 
7.5 The supply of employment land s ites is derived from existing employment land 
allocations, land submitted for employment purposes through the Strategic Housin g 
and Employment land Assessment and from existing planning permissions.  
 
7.6 The Plan makes provision for up to 83 ha of employment land from 2018 to 2038.   
This reflects:  
 
• Protecting and allocating approximately 38.42 ha (net developable area) of 
employment land at the District’s Strategic Employment Area of Sherwood 
Business Park / M1 Motorway junction 27 as shown on the Policies Map for 
logistics and distribution.  Part of this allocation is required by High Spe ed 
Railway Phase 2b as a compound f or the construction of HS2. Consequently, it 
is unlikely to come forward until the latter stages of the Plan period.  
 
• Two new allocations at Hamilton Road, Sutton in Ashfield comprising 
approximately 3.4 ha . 
 
• Exist ing employment land of 41.85 ha (net developable area). This reflects sites 
allocated under the Ashfield Local Plan Review 2002 for employment land or 
land which has planning permission for office, light industrial, general industrial 
or distribution uses.  
 
 
Policy EM3: Retention of Employment Sites and Allocations  
 
 
Policy EM3: Retention of Employment Sites and Allocation s 
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO12.  
 
1. Development proposals which would result in the loss of an allocated 
employment site will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated to the 
Council that there is no reasonable prospect of an application coming forward 
for the use identified in the Policy EM2 and the proposed use would contribute 
to meeting an unmet need for development in the area.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  190 
   2. Development proposals which would result in the loss of a site/building within a 
Key Employment Area will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated to the 
Council that there is no reasonable prospect of an application coming forward for 
office, light industrial and research and development, general industrial and 
storage and distribution and the proposed use would contribute to meeting an 
unmet need for development in the area.  
 
3. Development proposals which would result in the loss of other existing 
employment sites or employment buildings will only be permitted where the 
applicant can demonstrate that:  
 
a) Retention of the uses for employment development would cause unacceptable 
environmental problems; and/or  
 
b) Taking into account market conditions and anticipated longer term demand 
requirements, the building/site is no longer physically suitable for employment 
uses and there is no realistic pro spect of the re -use or redevelopment for such 
uses.   
 
4. Within the rural areas of the District there are limited employment sites and the 
Council would not support these sites being used for alternative purposes.  
Evidence base  • Background Paper No 1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of 
Development 2021. Ashfield District Council  
• Background Paper No 3:  Economy & Employment Land 
2021.  Ashfield District Council.  
• The Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA 
Employment Land Needs Study, 2021.  Lichfield.  
• Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability 
Assessment July 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Sustainability Appraisal August 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy.  
• NPPF 2021 Part 11: Making effective use of land.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Housing and economic land 
availability assessment as of August 2021.  
 
 
7.7 Ashfield's existing employment areas, primarily the main industrial estates, will 
continue to play a crucial role in the economy of the area. These employment areas 
not only provide space for current employers and business but also opportunities for 
new inv estment and rejuvenation, through intensification or re -use.  
 
7.8 The purpose of the Policy is to ensure that the existing employment areas are 
provided with some element of protection.  This reflects the need to ensure a range 
and choice of employment land a nd premises are available across the District to 
assist economic competitiveness, encourage entrepreneurship, promote the growth 
of indigenous businesses of all types and size and attract inward investment.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  191 
   7.9 A critical factor in maintaining a supply of emp loyment land will be the ability to 
protect some protection for land and premises for employment from being lost to 
alternative uses.  
 
7.10 There has been growing pressure over recent years for the 
development/redevelopment of employment land and premises for o ther uses 
(predominantly residential).  Such development proposals can result in significant 
losses to the District’s stock of employment land and premises.  
 
7.11 The NPPF emphasises the need to consider the changing economic environment 
and provide flexibility  in relation to employment opportunities. Consequently, in 
exceptional circumstances, the Policy enable development, which provide an unmet 
need in that area to be considered on allocated employment sites or Key 
Employment Areas. In these cases, it will be  necessary for:  
 
• the applicant to demonstrate to the Council that there are substantial economic 
and employment benefits from allowing such a use on the site through an 
economic assessment of the implications of the development proposal, and  
 
• That there is substantial evid ence that there is a lack of demand for  office, light 
industrial and research and development, general industrial and storage and 
distribution u ses. (See Policy SD 6 Assessing Development Viability and 
Development Demand ). 
 
7.12 For other employment sites and buildings, where economic circumstances change, 
the Policy allows for changes to other uses in specific circumstances, which are 
usually reflected in a lack of demand  for the site in question. In these 
circumstances, the Council will require the development to meet the provisions set 
out under Policy SD 6. 
 
 
 
Policy EM4: Rural Development  
 
 
Policy EM4:  Rural Development  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO12, SO14.  
 
1. The Council will support rural development for employment or appropriate 
recreational uses within Named Settlements and, where appropriate, within 
the countryside, p rovided that:  
 
a) It can be d emonstrated that the scale, and character of development is 
designed and operated so as to cause no detriment to the character and 
appearance of the countryside;  
b) It is of a scale appropriate to the nature of the site and its setting;  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  192 
   c) It is sensitively sited to protect the amenity of exis ting neighbouring uses in 
the locality;  
d) It can be accommodated by the transport network in the locality and would 
not be detrimental to highway safety;  
e) It is not inappropriate development within the Green Belt; and  
f) Individually, or cumulatively, there ar e no significant adverse effects in 
relation to other policy requirements.  
 
2. In addition to Policy EM4 – 1.  proposals for agricultural, forestry or 
horticultural or other land use development should demonstrate that:  
 
a) The proposed development is necessary for the purpose of agriculture, 
forestry, horticulture or other land based use within the unit.  
b) Adequate provision will be made for the storage and disposal of slurries 
and manures without polluting any watercourse or water supply sources.  
c) For fa rm diversification:  
 
i. The proposal is ancillary to and operated as part of an established 
agricultural enterprise; forms part of a comprehensive farm 
diversification scheme and will contribute to making the holding viable;  
ii. Where a retail use is proposed it is directly related to the farm unit, it 
provides adequate access and parking arrangements, and the proposal 
must be of a scale appropriate in a rural location.  
 
3. In addition  to Policy EM4 – 1, proposals for equestrian development should  
demonstrate that : 
 
a) Priority has been given to the re -use of existing buildings.   
b) Where new buildings or structures are justified in relation to the proposed 
development, they will use appropriate materials, are well related to existing 
buildings, and consist only of essential facilities necessary for the proposed 
use. 
c) There is sufficient provision of land for the proper care of horses1 including 
stabling, grazing and exercise having regard to appropriate guidelines .  
d) Adequate provision w ill be made for the storage and disposal of waste 
materials from horses.  
 
In determining any application for equestrian purposes, the Council will 
consider the cumulative impact with other existing equestrian developments or 
equestrian developments for which there is planning permission in the local 
area, on the wider landscape and environment.  
 
4. Planning permission for the removal of a restrictive occupancy condition on a 
dwelling for an agricultural, forestry or other similar worker will only be given 
where the following can be evidentially shown:  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  193 
    
a) That there is no longer a cont inued need for the property on the holding or for 
the business;  
b) There is no long term need for a dwelling with restricted occupancy to serve a 
need in the area.  
1 ‘Horse’ is used as a generic term. The policy and supporting justification applies to develo pment 
relating to all sizes, types and breeds of equines.  
 
Evidence base  • Background Paper No 1: Spatial Strategy and Location of 
Development 2021. Ashfield District Council . 
• Background Paper No 3:  Economy & Employment Land 2021.  
Ashfield District Council.  
• The Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA 
Employment Land Needs Study, 2021.  Lichfield.  
• Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment 
July 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Sustainability Appraisal August 2021, Wood Group UK  Ltd 
National Planning 
Policy and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy.  
• NPPF 2021 Part 11: Making effective use of land.  
 
 
7.13 The 2011 Rural -Urban Classification for Local Authority Districts in England 
identifies Ashfield as falling within the “Urban with city and town”. This means that it 
is predominantly urban as more than 74% of the resident population lives in urban 
areas. However, beyond these urban areas the District contains a number of rural 
areas that contribute significantly to its character.   
 
7.14 The NPPF identifies that the countryside should be protected for its intrinsic value 
and beauty. However, this has to be balanced against the need to promote 
appropriate development within rural areas to ensure that they remain viable and 
sustainable, meeting the needs of their resident population.   The Policy is intended 
to provide flexibility in providing premises whilst protecting the Green Belt and 
countryside .   
 
7.15 The size, siting, material used, and appearance of any building or structure will be 
an important consideration.   New buildings should integrate with existing features 
and should normally be located as closely as possible to existing b uildings, although 
in some cases this may not be possible or appropriate. Opportunities to re -use 
existing buildings or previously built sites will be preferred except in the case that 
removal of an existing structure and re -building in a more appropriate location is 
more beneficial . In the context of sustainable development, it should be recognised 
that the private car can have an important role to play in rural areas as it may be the 
only real option for travel.  
 
7.16 Applicants will be required to provide sufficient information to demonstrate a level of 
involvement commensurate with commercial activity.   For agricultural, f orestry or 
horticultural  enterprise this may require all or some of the following: business Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  194 
   acco unts, County/Parish holding number, movement records for animals, identifying 
that land is register with the Rural Land Register, registration with food 
standards/accreditation (such as Red Tractor, Soil Association organic certification),  
evidence that th e business is register for the Basic Payment Scheme (or any 
replacement scheme), or such other evidence that establishes the existence of the 
business.   For equine businesses, such information could include a statement of the 
commercial rates history for t he business, copies of appropriate insurances, copies 
of horse passports (if applicable) and any other information considered relevant to 
demonstrating it is a commercial business.  
 
Agriculture  
7.17 The demands on the agricultural sector are likely to increase  into the future 
reflecting:  
 
• food security;  
• the expansion of non food crops; and  
• the impact of climate change with rising global temperatures and changing 
patterns of precipitation.   
 
7.18 Buildings and structures associated with agriculture are necessarily located in the 
countryside and many are large to meet the functional agricultural requirements. 
The agricultural need has to be balanced against the value of the countryside for its 
lands cape, and its contribution to biodiversity and conservation.   The Council will 
consider whether a proposed agricultural building is necessary in relation to the 
needs of a Holding and where appropriate will obtain advice from an agricultural 
adviser.  
 
7.19 Farm diversification is anticipated to be increasingly important to the continuing 
viability of farm enterprises in the future.  The Council supports farm diversification 
schemes where it can be demonstrated that the scheme is financially viable from an 
econo mic perspective, the project is part of an existing farm holding, and is capable 
of satisfactory integration into their rural location.   Diversification schemes must be 
capable of supporting the farm economy in the long term  and be compatible with the 
main  farming activities of the farm business. The Council will expect an appropriate 
farm diversification plan to be submitted with the  proposal, which must set out the 
short and long term business plan of the existing farm  business and explain how in 
function al and financial terms the proposal will support the  long-term viability of the 
farm business.  
 
7.20 One form of diversification is a farm shop. A farm shop can make an important 
contribution toward the viability of an agricultural holding; by reducing food miles, 
adding to the vibrancy of the rural economy and responding to customer 
requirements for quality local products.  The success of a farm shop may be 
dependent on the correct product mix reflecting the seasonality of farm production, 
the ability to acce ss and provide quality niche products from small local providers 
for customers, as well as providing a basic range of products for those customers. Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  195 
   In assessing application for farm shops, the Council will have regard to advice from 
the National Farmers' R etail & Markets Association (FARMA), when assessing the 
appropriate product mix to be sold by the proposal. Their recommendation is that:  
 
• 20% of products should be sourced and produced from the Farm;  
• 20% of products sourced and produced with 30 miles of t he Farm;  
• 40% of products should be sourced and produced within the Region;  
• 20% of the products are sourced and produced from elsewhere.  
 
7.21 Where permission is granted for a farm shop, conditions may be applied in relation 
to limits on the broad type of goods  sold and the scale of development, to ensure 
that the shop is not run independently of the farm and to ensure adequate car 
parking and landscaping is provided. Depending on the scale of the shop proposed, 
there may also be a requirement to undertake an im pact assessment.   
 
7.22 The use of land for equestrian purposes, may be for business or recreational 
activity.  The Policy emphasises the use of existing building as far as possible to 
minimise the impact on the countryside. For equestrian use this will includ e for 
stables, tack rooms, and feed stores.  If new buildings are necessary, the buildings 
should be constructed in good quality appropriate materials and designed clearly for 
their intended purpose. In the countryside (including the Green Belt) or Green B elt 
the Council anticipates that buildings will be of timber construction and of a small 
scale so as to minimise the impact on the countryside. Buildings of permanent 
construction such as bricks/block walls and tile roofs would normally only be 
considered appropriate where required to preserve or enhance a Conservation Area 
or if it is sited within a group of existing traditional buildings.   
 
7.23 In terms of scale, the number of stables/loose boxes/sheds should be proportional 
to the accommodation of reasonable leisure needs of a householder or occupier or 
of the business requirement.  This will be balanced against the need to protect the 
countryside and character of the landscape. In addition, the land associated with the 
buildings will also be a dete rminate of the size of any buildings. However, it is not 
anticipated that recreational uses of stables for non -commercial purposes will 
typically require more than four loose boxes.  
 
7.24 Well-managed horse pasture can contribute positively to the landscape cha racter 
and openness of the countryside and Green Belt. However, horse keeping can also 
have detrimental impacts through excessive subdivision of fields, unsightly built 
development (stables, horse shelters, jumps and other structures), there can be 
waste m anagement issues, overgrazing of pasture, loss of soil structure, and poor 
quality fencing.   DEFRA’s Code of practice for the welfare of Horses, Ponies, 
Donkeys and their hy brids, The British Horse Society, Equine Industry Welfare 
Guidelines and other wel fare organisations set out standards regarding well 
managed grazing land required per horse. The availability of sufficient well 
managed grazing land associated with a development is considered by the Council 
to prevent over -grazing, which is detriment to animal welfare, and the character and 
appearance of the landscape. The Council will utilise information from the British Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  196 
   Horse Society, Equine Industry Welfare Guidelines and other equine and welfare 
organisations in considering the pasturage, and the stab ling welfare requirements 
for horses.  
 
7.25 Where appropriate buildings should be a suitable distance away from dwellings to 
avoid problems of smell, noise, and pests, if necessary taking account of wind 
directions and other relevant factors.  
 
7.26 The Water Framework Directive requires all water bodies to achieve good 
ecological status by 2027. This requires that everyone works together to protect and 
improve water environment.  Diffuse pollution of water (DPW) arises from numerous 
pollution sources including  agriculture and horses.  An average horse will produce 
20.4 kilos (or 45 pounds) of manure each day, equating to 7.5 tonnes annually. This 
quantity does not include the addition of soiled stable bedding material.  Although 
individually minor, such polluti on on a catchment scale can be significant in terms of 
the cumulative effect on the environment.  Animal waste is a potential threat to the 
environment and human health, especially if it is stored or spread near water and 
one of the key elements of good ma nagement is the correct storage and 
consideration of the disposal of waste.    Ashfield is within a Nitrate Vulnerable Zone 
and the regulation requirements will be applicable to animals kept on agricultural 
holdings or enterprises.  
 
7.27 Where the need to provi de accommodation to enable farm, forestry or other workers 
to live at or near their place of work has been accepted as providing the special 
justification required for new, isolated residential development in the countryside, it 
will be necessary to ensure  that the dwellings are kept available for meeting this 
need for as long as it exists103.  For this purpose,  planning permission should be 
made subject to appropriate occupancy conditions.  This will ensure that the 
dwelling is not subsequently sold on the open market and ensures that sporadic 
development is carefully controlled.   Changes in the scale and character of farming 
and forestry may affect the longer -term requirement for dwellings for which 
permission has been granted subject to an agricultural or  forestry occupancy 
condition.  Such dwellings, and others in the countryside with an occupancy 
condition attached, should not be kept vacant.  Consequently, if the Policy 
requirements are met, the conditional may be released.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103 See Policy EV1 Green Belt, EV2 Countryside and Appendix 5 Agricultural, Forestry and Other 
Occupational Dwellings . Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  197 
   Policy EM5: Education, Skills and Training  
 
 
Policy EM5:  Education , Skills and Training  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO12.  
 
1. The Council will support development that contributes towards raising the level 
of skills and opportunities for all ages in the District.  Development of education 
and skills will be promoted through:  
 
a) Supporting the growth, development and improvement of Vison West 
Nottinghamshire College , Nottingham Trent University and other educational 
institutions  within Ashfield . 
 
b) Supporting new educational facilities to improve local skills and training in the 
working age population, including on sites allocated for employment uses 
where:  
 
• it can be demonstrated that no suitable sites are available in town centre;  
• provision is made for access by a range of means of transport; and  
• development would not conflict with the economic development function of 
the estate or area.  
 
c) Utilising training and employment agreements to secure employment and skills 
development for the local workforce.   
 
2. The Council will support the renovation, redevelopment and expansion of the 
District’s schools.  Where additional school places are anticip ated to be 
required as a result of a development proposal, the Council will require the 
provision of:  
 
a) A primary school on site or contributions towards the expansion of existing or 
new primary school provision; and/or  
b) A secondary school on site or contributions towards the expansion of existing 
or new secondary school provision.  
 
Evidence base  • Backgroun d Paper No 1: Spatial Strategy and Location of 
Development 2021. Ashfield District Council  
• Background Paper No 3: Economy & Employment Land 2021.  
Ashfield District Council.  
• The Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment 
Land Needs Study, 2021 .  Lichfield.  
• Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment 
July 2021. Ashfield District Council.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  198 
   • Securing developer contributions for education, April 2019. 
Department for Education.  
• Sustainability Appraisal August 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd 
National Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 8: Promoting healthy and safe communities.  
 
7.28 Improving skills is a national priority for strengthening productivity performance 
given.  It is important to improve both school performance and skills in the existing 
workforce. With economic restructuring there is an increasing need for people with 
high skill levels and the Council wi ll support development proposals which seek to 
raise skill levels.  
 
7.29 Vison West Nottinghamshire College (VWNC) play a key role in improving local 
skills. The Construction and Logistics Skills Academy off Lowmoor Road, Kirkby -in-
Ashfield provides some of the best training facilities in the sector, allowing students 
to gain valuable practical experience using state -of-the-art technology and industry 
standard equipment.  These facilities are proposed to be expanded through the 
Ashfield Civil Engineering Centre.   This is part  of VWNC’s development programme 
support ing the future requirements for skills for more  special ist construction areas 
and seeks to address the skills shortage in a rapidly changing  construction industry.  
 
7.30 The Vision University Centre at the main campus operated by Nottingham Trent 
University delivers Higher Education including Nursing and Allied Hea lthcare.   The 
partnership between the college and the university has  significantly enhanced skills 
provision and includes a wide range of foundation degrees to increase accessibility 
for local people to achieve key and higher level skills, including social care; 
paramedic training; business; computing and technology.   This  is helping to create 
a growing pool of highly skilled local people who can work in growth sectors helping 
to re-balance Ashfield’s economy towards higher value and skilled jobs, making it 
more resilient and more able to capitalise on higher value opportun ities to attract 
investment.  It is important that the skills of the graduates from this and other centres 
of learning are retained within the area to facilitate inward investment and economic 
growth.  
 
7.31 Work is ongoing for the development of the Automated Di stribution and 
Manufacturing Centre (ADMC) in the District. It aims to create a national centre of 
excellence focussed on promoting and providing access to the latest technologies 
and best practice in automated distribution. The concept of a purpose -built 
innovation facility has been developed, targeted at improving international 
competitiveness and inward investment attractiveness. The ADMC will support the 
adoption, integration and expansion of automated technologies for businesses; 
locally and across the  Midlands region in a sustainable manner.     It will provide 
access to skills training to meet the increasing need for talent and upskilling by 
employers to meet the requirement of automation technology. This will link to Vision 
West Nottinghamshire Colle ge’s (VWNC) Automation and Robotics programme and 
the emerging higher -level education programmes being developed by Nottingham 
Trent University (NTU).  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 7 – Economy  
 
  
P a g e  199 
    
7.32 Construction is an important sector in Ashfield and labour demand is forecast to 
grow significantly ove r the next five years.  Ashfield Construction Centre  is a 
partnership project with Vision West Nottinghamshire College, Inspire, Portland 
College and Sutton Academy to provide a new Level 1 construction facility at a 
gateway site in Sutton which complemen ts VWNC higher level courses at its campus 
in Kirkby.   The Portland College campus will provide a satellite education centre for 
students with complex disabilities.   The Construction Centre will help to meet th e 
demand for construction workers by increasing the number  of qualified learners.  
 
7.33 To improve skills and economic inclusion in the District, the Council will, where 
appropriate, look to negotiate planning agreements to secure local labour 
agreements for development.  These are anticipated to relate to:  
 
a. developments of 10 or more dwellings  
b. On 0.5 hectares or more of land (excluding residential)  
 
7.34 Education attainment is a crucial driver in terms of determining life choices, 
particularly ‘employability’ and resulting livelihoods. Poor edu cation and a lack of 
basic skills often prevent people from reaching their full potential and contribute to 
deprivation. Spatial planning can have a direct positive impact on education and 
learning by helping to improve the location and quality of learning  facilities. It can 
also have wider impacts such as raising aspirations and skills, increasing 
opportunities for work and enterprise, improving the quality of life and environment 
in the District and contributing to reducing worklessness. Good quality educ ational 
is an important criterion in anchoring families in the area, as a good quality 
education, particularly in secondary schools, impacts on where people look to live.  
 
7.35 There Is a requirement to improve qualifications in Ashfield.  The Council will work 
with Nottinghamshire County Council, as the Education Authority, and local schools 
in: 
 
• Planning for infrastructure to support development, to ensure that the provision of 
schools reflects the anticipated population implications arising from developme nt.    
• Monitoring the supply and demand for primary and secondary school places to 
determine whether a development will result in a requirement for the expansion 
of local school places.   
 
7.36 Housing allocations set out in the Local Plan will be required to c ontribute towards 
the provisions of the primary pupil place arising from the development.  This may be 
through the expansion of existing schools or the provision of new schools.    
 
 
 
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  200 
   Chapter 8  
 
Placing vibrant town and local centres at the heart of 
the community.  
 
8.1 Town centres play an important role within the District, contributing to the local 
economy and providing a range of services and facilities. Supporting the growth and 
regeneration of the District’s centres is a key element of the Plan’s Vision and the 
Council want to ensure all new development within the centres positively contributes 
their regeneration.  
 
8.2 The Council aims to promote  competition and consumer choice within each town 
centre and Local Shopping Centre by supporting proposals which create a mix of 
uses appropriate in scale for each area. In areas outside the town centres and Local 
Shopping Centres, the day to day needs of the community will be met through 
parades of shops and small scale convenience shops of an appropriate size.  
 
8.3 Town and local centres enable access to local goods, services, and leisure facilities, 
enable social interaction and provide employment and busine ss opportunities.   
They are also a place to live, which is well located for access to local facilities .  
Consequently, town and local centres form a focal point for communities.  
 
 
 
Policy SH1: Retail, Leisure, Commercial and Town Centre Uses  
 
 
Policy SH1: Retail, Leisure, Commercial and Town Centre Uses  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10.  
 
1. Within the town centres of Sutton in Ashfield, Kirkby -in-Ashfield and Hucknall, 
the Council will support development for main town centre uses1, residential, 
health care and educational development that:  
a. Is of a scale which reflects the role, function and distinctive qualities of 
the town centre having regard to the delivery of the vision, objectives 
and projects set out in the Town Centre Masterplans.  
b. Will not adversely affect the character, quality, ame nity and safety of any 
area within the Town Centre.  
c. Widens the range of main town centre uses in the centre.  
d. Provides a diverse range of day and evening uses.  
e. Maintains street frontage activity which encourages footfall within the 
Centre and does not resul t in the core retail function of the Primary 
Shopping Area, identified on the Policies Map, being undermined.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  201 
   f. Maintains retail as the core uses at ground floor level within Primary 
Frontages identified on the Policies Map.  
g. Makes use of above ground floor spaces, particularly for residential 
purposes.  
h. Ensures that proposed signage does not detract from the charact er and 
appearance of the surrounding area.  
i. Is well designed and enhances or complement the street scene;  
j. Ensures servicing arrangements are maintained or improved and the 
proposed development does not conflict with the day to day activities of the 
area.  
 
2. Subject to the provisions of Policy SH1 – 1., the Council will support the 
conversion of surplus shop units to residential use where:  
 
a. The unit is appropriately sited and designed so as not to impact on the 
street scene or create conflict between users;  
b. It can be demonstrated there is a lack of demand for the unit for town 
centre uses.  
 
3. Proposals that result in clusters of hot food takeaways or pubs/drinking 
establishments will not be supported, taking account of the concentration and 
proximity of existin g such establishments in the immediate area.  
 
4. The Council will apply the sequential test and, where appropriate, the impact 
test to the location of main town centre uses.  
 
a. Sequential Test - The sequential test requires main town centre uses to be 
located in town centre locations.  Only where no suitable and available 
sites exist, or expect to become available within a reasonable period will 
alternative locations be considered, taking into account proximity and 
access to Primary Shopping Areas.   If  no suitable sites within a town 
centre location are available, development should be located to edge of 
centre location, and, if neither town centre locations nor edge of centre 
locations are available, to out of centre locations.  Flexibility will be 
required on the format and scale of the development proposed with 
preference given to accessible sites, which are well connected to the town 
centre.  Where an application fails to satisfy the sequential test it will be 
refused.  
 
If after applying the sequenti al test, out -of-centre sites are necessary, 
preference will be given to sites that are, or will be, served by a choice of 
means of transport, which are close to the centre and have a high 
likelihood of forming links with the town centre.  
 
b. Impact Test – Where considered necessary by the Council, an impact test 
will be required  for retail or leisure proposals exceeding 300 square 
metres gross of floorspace.  This will include significant extensions to Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  202 
   existing facilities for retail or leisure uses falling ou tside the designated 
town centres (or local centres). Where the development  is likely to have a 
significant adverse impact on:  
 
a. existing, committed and planned public and private investment in a 
centre or centres in the catchment area of the proposal , and/or 
 
b. town centre vitality and viability, including local consumer choice and 
trade in the town centre and the wider retail catchment (as applicable 
to the scale and nature of the scheme) ,  
 
it will be refused.  
 
1. Main Town Centre Uses – reflect the NPPF 2021, Annex 2: Glossary definition of Main Town 
Centre Uses.  
Evidence base  • Background Paper No 1: Spatial Strategy and Location of Development, 
August 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Sutton Town Centre Spatial Masterplan, 2020.  Ashfield District Council.  
• Kirkby Town Centre Spatial Masterplan, 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Hucknall Town Centre Spatial Masterplan , 2009.  Urbed.  
• Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study, 2016.  Nexus Planning.  
• Retail Floorspace Survey 2020. Ashfield Dist rict Council.  
• Kirkby -in-Ashfield & Sutton in Ashfield Town Fund.  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving Sustainable Development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 7: Ensuring the vitality of town centres.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Town centres and retail as of August 2021.  
 
 
8.4 To enhance the vitality and viability of town and local centres development will be 
supported where it provides a range of uses, that encourage a strong day time and 
evening economy, and enhance local employment opportunities. This includes 
appropriate residential uses within centres, particularly at upper floor levels, to 
enhance activity, footfall and natural surveillance.  
 
8.5 Hucknall, Sutton in Ashfield and Kirkby -in-Ashfield will be the focus for larger scale 
retail and leisure developments, in line with Strategic Policy 13,  as they serve wider 
catchment areas.  In considering the appropriateness and scale of proposed 
develop ment, the Council will have regard to the following matters:  
 
• the role and function of the centre within the wider hierarchy and the catchment 
served;  
• the pattern of existing development within the centre;  
• the scale of existing development.  
 
8.6 The Council recognises the importance of supporting appropriate diversification of 
uses within a town centre but  considers that retail uses should form the principle 
use within all the District’s centres, supported by complementary non -retail uses.  
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  203 
   8.7 The C ouncil will support proposals which deliver the objectives of the Masterplans 
for Hucknall104, Sutton in Ashfield105 and Kirkby -in-Ashfield106, provided that there 
are no adverse effects on neighbouring sites or on the area as a whole. The design 
of town cent re developments, including architectural style, functionality, materials, 
accessibility arrangements and colour scheme, should enhance the street scene.  
 
8.8 National policy107 identifies that policies should define the primary shopping areas 
and where appropri ate the primary108 and secondary retail frontages where their 
use can be justified in supporting the vitality and viability of particular centres. The 
Primary Frontages, as defined by the Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study 2016109, 
contain the highest concent ration of retail units and form a fundamental element of 
a centre’s retail element. As such, the Council will seek to retain and strengthen the 
retail offer within these Frontages.   Secondary Frontages also play an important 
role within a centre’s retail circuit, but often contain a greater level of non -retail uses 
and may not contain a large number of national retailers. Whilst secondary in terms 
of retail provision, these areas can play an important role in diversifying the use 
mixes of centres and provi ding units for smaller, independent retailers. Within these 
Secondary Frontages the Council will support a greater diversity of town centre 
uses, to create mixed use areas that can complement the retail within the Primary 
Frontages.   
 
8.9 Residential and B1 o ffice uses are an important element of a diverse and vibrant 
centre, providing vibrancy and customers to a centre.  The Policy has to be seen in 
the context that there are permitted development rights110 for various use which 
grant permission for development without the requirement for a planning 
application .  This includes the potential conversion of retail units into residential use 
subject to specific requirements and considerations set out in the prio r approval.  
However, where possible, within the Primary Shopping Area the Council will seek to 
locate such uses at first floor levels. Where these uses are proposed at ground 
floor, designs should e ffectively integrate the uses within the existing street scene 
and create an appropriate environment for future users and residents.    Fu rther 
information on this aspect is set out in supplementary planning guidance111. 
 
Hot Food Takeaways  and P ubs/Drinking Establishments  
8.10 Hot food takeaways provide an important facility in centres and can support local 
evening  economies. However, the over concentrations of hot food takeaways, 
particularly on prominent streets or retail frontages, can detract from the overall 
appearance of centres due to their predominant evening use.  It can also result in a 
 
104 URBED with Gordon Hood Regeneration & Simon Fenton Partnership (2009) Hucknall Town Centre 
Masterplan  
105 Sutton Town Centre Spatial Masterplan, March 2019. Ashfield District Council.  
106 Kirkby -in-Ashfield Spatial Masterplan, 2021.  Ashfield District Council.  
107 National Planning Policy Framework 2021 , paragraph 86 b)  
108 Planning Practice Guidance Town Centre  and Retail. Paragraph: 002 Reference ID: 2b -002-20190722  
109 Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study 2016. Nexus Planning.  
110 The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development etc.) (England) (Amendment) Order 
2021.  
111 Guide for Converting Shops to Resid ential Supplementary Planning Document 2019. Ashfield District 
Council  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  204 
   lack of street activ ity and limit footfall in the daytime, consequently, detracting from 
the vitality and viability of the town centre.  
 
8.11 A harmful concentration of pubs/drinking establishments is considered to arise 
when the cumulative impacts are likely to have harmful effec ts on the amenity of a 
centre. This is likely to occur when the pubs/drinking establishments and their users 
have a detrimental effect on the quality and character of a centre that in turn 
diminishes the attractiveness of the centre to other users for shop ping, working, 
socialising and living. The point when that harmful concentration is reached will vary 
from place to place depending on the character of the area and specific local 
circumstances.   
 
8.12 When assessing development proposals for hot food takeaway or pub/drinking 
establishments, the Council will assess a range of issues to ensure the develop 
proposed will not result in a negative impact on the surrounding environment and 
existing uses. The assessment will include:  
 
• The number, distribution and prox imity of other food and drink uses, including 
those with unimplemented planning permission;  
• Impact on the street scene;  
• Potential for an increase in anti -social behaviour and crime;  
• The impacts of noise and general disturbance, fumes, smells, litter and late night 
activity, including those impacts arising from the use of external areas;  
• Highway safety;  
• The availability of refuse storage and disposal facilities; and  
• The appearance of any associated extensions, flues and installations.  
 
Sequential Test and Impact Test  
8.13 The NPPF endorses a ‘town centre first’ approach to all retail activity (including 
leisure). It stipulates that where retail and leisure proposals cannot be 
accommodated within, or, adjacent to the town centre applicants hav e to 
demonstrate through the application of dual impact test and the sequential test that 
the development will not impact negatively upon the vitality and viability of town 
centres.  
 
8.14 The sequential test should align with the requirements of NPPF and natio nal 
planning practice guidance.  If after applying the sequential test, out -of-centre sites 
are necessary, preference will be given to sites that are, or will be, served by a 
choice of means of transport, which are close to the centre and have a high 
likelihood of forming links with the town centre.   Developers should demonstrate 
that they have been flexible in their approach to site selection by submitting a report 
which sets out the following as a minimum:  
 
• a detailed description and plan of the developm ent 
• a reasoned justification for the location of the development  
• the scale of the development  
• a sequential test for sites outside or on the edge of the Town Centre  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  205 
   • the scope for flexibility in the format and/or scale of the proposal  
• what contribution more central sites are able to make individually to 
accommodate the proposal.  
• an impact test for sites over the specified threshold.  
 
8.15 On edge -of-centre, or out -of-centre sites, the Council  will require an impact 
assessment to be undertaken for retail, and leisure developments beyond the 
threshold outlined in Policy SH1.   This assessment should align with the 
requirements of NPPF and national planning practice guidance; assessing potential 
impact on existing, planned and committed investment and a centre’s vitality and 
viability.   National guidance dictates that the impact test should be  undertaken in a 
proportionate and locally appropriate way, commensurate to the scale of   
development proposed. The level of detail would typically be agreed with Council 
officers during  the pre -application process in order to avoid overly onerous 
requirements.   Where proposals seek to extend existing out of centre premises, the 
total gross flo orspace of the unit (including the extension) will be taken into account 
when determining whether an impact assessment is required.  
 
8.16 The Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study 2016112 concluded that each of the three 
primary centres (Town Centres) are potential ly vulnerable to competing edge -of-
centre and out -of-centre retail developments of 300 sq. m. Consequently, the 
recommended local threshold of 300 sq. m has been set out in the P olicy across the 
District’s three town c entres.  
 
Policy SH2: Local Shopping Centres, Shopping Parades and Single 
Shops  
 
 
Policy SH2: Local Shopping Centres, Shopping Parades and Single Shops  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO5, SO6, SO10.  
 
1. Local Shopping Centres set out below and on the Policies Maps, have been 
identified to protect them from alternative development and to enable change 
to be managed appropriately:  
 
a. Stanton Hill, Huthwaite and Outram Street , Sutton -in-Ashfield;  
b. Forest Road, Annesley Woodhouse;  
c. Annesley Road and Watnall  Road in Hucknall; and  
d. Village Centre, Jacksdale.  
 
 
 
112 Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study 2016, Nexus  Paragraph 9.60 & 9.61  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  206 
   2. The Council will support well designed town centre uses1 in Local Shopping 
Centres provided that:  
 
a. It is of a scale and character which reflects the role, function and distinctive 
qualities of the local c entre;  
b. It would have a positive effect and not harm the health, vitality and viability 
of the local centre . 
 
3. The change of use of ground floor retail/commercial units to residential use will 
only be supported where:  
 
a. It is appropriately sited and designed so as not to impact on the street 
scene or create conflict between users;  
b. It will not negate the role of the local centre in providing a range of goods 
and services;  
c. It can be demonstrated there is a lack of demand for the unit for town centre 
uses.  
d. The dwelling will be consistent with other policies and standards relating to 
housing and design.  
 
4. Proposals that result in clusters of hot food takeaways or pubs/drinking 
establishments will not be supported, taking account of the concentrati on and 
proximity of existing such establishments in the immediate area.  
 
5. The Council will apply the sequential test and, where appropriate, the impact 
test.  An impact test will be required for retail or leisure proposals exceeding 
200 square metres gross of floorspace  in relation to Local Shopping Centres . 
Where the development proposal fails to satisfy the sequential test or is likely 
to have a significant adverse impact on the local centre it will be refused.  
 
6. The Council will protect convenience food stores which provide for the day to 
day needs of the community unless it can be demonstrated that:  
 
a. alternative shopping facilities that are similarly accessible by walking, cycling 
or public transport exist to meet the needs of the area;  
b. there is no demand for the current use; and  
c. the site has been marketed effectively for the current use, for an appropriate 
period.  
 
7. Where a unit has been vacant for a long period, community uses appropriate to 
the Local Shopping Centre will be supported.  
 
8. Retail and leisure development proposals should not have a significant adverse 
effect on the amenity of existing residents through noise, odour, litter or 
disturbance.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  207 
   9. In the settlements of Nuncargate, Skegby, Selston  and Underwood small scale 
retail development will be supported where it would not adversely affect the 
character, quality, safety or amenity of the environment.  
 
Shopping Parades and single shops  
10. Alternative uses to retail will not be favoured in areas where there are 
established shopping parades or single shops, unless it can be demonstrated 
that there is no demand for the retail use, or the proposal will not impact on 
core retail function of the parade or shop.  
11. Retail development to meet local sh opping needs will be permitted where : 
a. It primarily involves the sale of convenience goods, and  
b. The floorspace is below 200 sq m.  
 
1 – The National Planning Policy Framework 2021, Annex 2:Glossary identifies that reference to 
town centre includes local centres.  Therefore, it would include the definition of Main Town Centre 
Uses set out in the Glossary.  
Evidence base  • Background Paper No 1:  Spatial Strategy and Location of Development, 
August 2021. Ashfield District Council.  
• Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study, 2016.  Nexus Planning.  
• Retail Floorspace Survey 2020. Ashfield District Council.  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK  Ltd. 
National Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving Sustainable Development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 7: Ensuring the vitality of town centres.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Town centres and retail as of August 
2021.  
 
 
8.17 Ashfield has a high percentage of households (23.7%) without access to a private 
vehicle (Census, 2011) and local centres and small out of centre shops provide a 
convenient, vital lifeline to local communities within many areas of the District. As 
such, this policy seeks to protect local and minor shopping centres and smaller 
scale out of centre convenience shops . 
 
8.18 Local Shopping Centres and Shopping Parades should  provide for the day to day 
needs of the community without threatening the vitality and viability of Primary 
Shopping Areas. At a national level, the NPPF promotes strong neighbourhood 
centres because they provide consumer choice and reduce the need to tra vel. 
 
8.19 Local Planning Authorities are required to plan positively for the provision of 
facilities, such as local shops and other local services, which serve the community’s 
day-to-day needs. The Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study 2016113, which forms the 
evidence base for policies relating to retail in the Ashfield Local Plan, recommends 
that small scale local facilities should be promoted in Local and Minor Shopping 
Centres and in areas less well served within Ashfield District.  
 
 
113  Nexus Planning (2016) Ashfield Retail Study  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  208 
   8.20 The Council will require evidence of a lack of demand for main town centre uses 
within the local centre before residential development is considered.   Further 
advice on converting shops to residential is set out in a supplementary planning 
document114. 
 
8.21 The Ashfield Retail  and Leisure Study 2016 and its predecessor retail study 
recommended a local threshold of 200 sq. m , which is reflected in the Policy.  
 
8.22 Small convenience shops have an important role in meeting local needs.  Larger 
housing developments may justify the provision of additional local shopping 
facilities. However, the demand for such provisions is difficult to quantify.   
Propos als for smaller shops, either as new development or change in the use of an 
existing building will generally be favourably consider ed.   The policy limits the 
floorspace to 200 sq m. in line with the recommendations from the retail studies in 
relation to the threshold for an impact test.  
 
 
 
Policy SH3: Shopfronts  
 
 
Policy SH3: Shopfronts  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO14.  
 
1. Premises shall provide and retain clear views into and out of shop window(s). 
Inset entrances on shopfronts should be glazed and well lit, to contribute to the 
attractiveness, safety and vitality of shopping areas and avoid blank frontages to 
the street.  
 
2. The Council will resist the removal of shopfronts of architectural or historic 
interest.  
 
3. The Council will expect proposals for new shopfronts and alterations to existing 
shopfronts to demonstrate a high quality of design, which complements, and is in 
proportion with, the architectural style of the whole building and the street scene.  
 
4. Canopies and blinds, where acceptable in principle, must be appropriate to the 
character of the shopfront and its setting.  
 
5. External securit y shutters and grilles will only be permitted in exceptional 
circumstances.   Security provisions  must  have some visual permeability.  
 
 
114 Guide for Converting Shops to Residential Supplementary Planning Document 2019 . Ashfield District 
Council  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  209 
   6. Illumination to shopfronts must be sited and designed so as not to negatively 
impact on the street scene or cause visual intrusion from light pollution into 
adjoining or nearby residential properties.  Flashing internal or external lighting, 
and/or internally illuminated box signs will not normally be permitted.  
 
7. Shop signage should form an integral part of a shop front desi gn, but it must not 
have an overbearing effect on the building or the surrounding street scene.  
Signage should generally be limited to appropriately designed and located fascia 
boards and/or projecting signs. Further guidance is detailed within Policy SD1 1. 
 
8. New shopfronts must be designed to allow equal access for all users, while 
having regard to a Best Practice approach to access and inclusion.  
 
Evidence base  • Ashfield Retail and Leisure Study, 2016.  Nexus Planning.  
• Retail Floorspace Survey 2020. Ashfield District Council.  
• Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving Sustainable Development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 7: Ensuring the vitality of town centres.  
• NPPF 2021, Part12: Achieving well -designed places.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Town centres and retail as of August 
2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Design: process and tools.  
• National Design Guide Planning practice guidance for beautiful, 
enduring and successful places, 2021.  Ministry of Housing, 
Communities & Local Government.  
 
 
8.23 Ashfield has many important shopping areas and groups of shops which are 
popular public places with their own distinctive character and history.  However, the 
character and quality of many of Ashfield’s traditional shopping streets has been 
eroded by poor,  careless and unsympathetic alterations to shopfronts. Widespread 
use of inappropriate materials and standardised shopfront designs has led to a loss 
of local distinctiveness and a negative impact on the streetscape.  
 
8.24 The design of new shopfronts and alter ations to existing shopfronts is important to 
the appearance of the individual property, to the character and appearance of 
shopping areas, and provides visual connections between ground floor shops and 
the street. The council will expect well designed, ac cessible shopfronts that respect 
the character of the area and the architectural unity and integrity of the shop 
building of which they form part.  
 
8.25 The presence of poorly designed shopfronts in the vicinity will not be accepted as 
justification for a lesse r standard of design. The introduction of well -designed shop 
fronts can often act as a catalyst for the same within a street or area with economic 
benefits.  
 
8.26 The design of a new shopfront within a modern building should reflect the design of 
the building o f which it forms part but  should also consider the appearance of Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  210 
   neighbouring shopfronts in terms of fascia lines, stall riser height, materials and 
other architectural features.  
 
8.27 The design of a shopfront where the traditional surround and shopfront rema in 
complete should be repaired and conserved wherever possible. These repairs must 
preserve the character of the original shopfront and be of matching style, materials 
and construction, whilst delivering a contemporary standard of amenity that meets 
curren t access standards. Where shopfronts are part of, or affect, a heritage asset, 
Policy EV 9 is applicable . 
 
Canopies and Blinds  
8.28 Canopies and blinds give some protection to the shoppers and shop window 
against rain and sun and can be a lively addition to the street scene, provided that 
they are designed as an integral part of the shopfront and are confined to it. Care 
should be take n to ensure that their size, shape, and position is compatible with the 
character of the building. Architectural details should not be obscured when 
canopies or blinds are installed. The colour and materials should be in keeping with 
the materials of the s hopfront and building.   
 
Security Shutters/Grilles  
8.29 It is important to strike a balance between protecting property, ensuring that the 
vitality of an area is not undermined, and ensuring that the perception of crime is not 
increased.   
 
8.30 Many retail frontage s have been blighted by long stretches of solid aluminium 
shutters. At night these shut off light from within the shops creating an intimidating 
atmosphere. They prevent observation of break -ins and attract graffiti. External 
shutters often retract into ex ternal boxes below the fascia and vertical runners 
attached to the pilasters. These both harm the appearance of a shopping street 
scene and also the street’s trading potential.  
 
8.31 When designing a new shopfront,  it is essential to build into the design adequ ate 
security arrangements. The preferred solution to physical security is the use of 
security glass, if necessary, combined with internal retractable grilles. These should 
be of an open mesh design to allow the shop window display to be visible and light 
to filter through. They should be the same colours as the shopfront. Internal grilles 
do not normally require planning permission, however , Listed Building Consent may 
be required if the building is Listed.  
 
8.32 On new shop developments shutters should be designed as part of the building and 
located internally to prevent retrofitting of security measures to the detriment of the 
property. Security measures should be incorporated at design stage to prevent the 
installation of shutter housing at a later stage.  
 
8.33 External security shutters and grilles will only be permitted in exceptional 
circumstances, for example shops that have an open frontage such as 
greengrocers or for shops that have special security needs such as jewellers.  
Where a proposal includes exte rnal security shutters or grilles, applicants will need Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 8 – Town Centres  
 
  
P a g e  211 
   to demonstrate why the products or services they are providing require external 
shutters, and/or details of crime rates that support their rationale for the proposed 
shutter system.   
 
Illumination  
8.34 As with any part of a shop front, lighting must be appropriate designed into a shop 
front and not considered as an afterthought. A well -lit window display or simply lit 
fascia sign is an effective method of advertising, it can aid security and  make a 
positive contribution to the street at night. However, illumination that dominates a 
building and/or negatively impacts on the surrounding street scene, such as 
illuminated box fascia  or projecting signs will not be supported . In assessing 
possible  negative impacts, the Council will consider the potential cumulative 
impacts that may arise as a result of the proposal.  
 
8.35 The intensity of the illumination should also be considered. Illumination should allow 
the sign to be easily read, but not cause a di stracting glare or adversely affect 
homes above or near the shop. Flashing signs must not be used where they could 
be a distraction to traffic.  
 
Signage  
8.36 Shop front signage plays an important role in advertising the business within a 
property and contributi ng to the street scene of its surroundings. In designing and 
locating shop front signage, proposals must successfully  balance these aspects. 
The Council acknowledges that businesses require signage, but this must not be to 
the detriment of the surrounding street scene or other uses. Further guidance on 
signage is detailed within Policy SD11 . In the future, this may be supplemented by 
supplementary planning guidance.  
 
Access  
8.37 Wherever it is practicable, alterations should ensure access for all through the main 
entrance by creating a clearly defined, well lit, unobstructed and level approach.  
 
Shopfront Design Guide  
8.38 The Council intends to prepare a Shopfront Design Guide  to assess proposals for 
shopfronts and shop signage. Sufficient details regarding shopfr onts should 
therefore be provided at planning application stage to enable assessment of the 
proposal in the context of this policy, the Shopfront Design Guide  and other relevant 
planning considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  212 
   Chapter 9  
 
Achieving successful development through well 
designed places.  
 
Policy SD1: Social Value  
 
Policy SD1: Social Value  
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO6, SO11, SO12, SO13.  
 
All development in Ashfield will maximise social value in order to deliver as many 
public benefits as possible.  All major developments will be required to submit a 
Social Value Strategy (SVS) demonstrating how social value is achieved throughout 
the lifec ycle of the development.  
The SVS will need to demonstrate how the development contributes positively to:  
1. Placemaking  
2. Health and wellbeing  
3. Local employment, regeneration and growth,  
4. Community resilience, and   
5. Safeguarding the environment and responding to climate change  
 
Further detail about the SVS will be clarified by a Social Value Supplementary 
Planning Document.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Ashfield Social Value Policy, 2020.  Ashfield District Council  
• Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership Strategy Be Healthy, Be 
Happy, 2021 – 2025 Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership.  
• Ashfie ld Community Partnership Strategic Plan 2019 -2022  
• Ashfield Community Partnership Strategic Assessment 2019 -2022  
 
National Planning 
Policy and Guidance  • NPPF 2019, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
 
 
9.1 Within the Public Services (Social Value) Act 2012 social value is described as the 
‘economic, social and environmental wellbeing’ that is created by a service (or 
development) and is delivered as both direct and indirect outcomes or benefits 
arising from an intervention over a period of ti me. This is consistent with the 
provisions of the NPPF  which has as its three core dimensions of sustainable 
development - social, economic, environmental.  
 
9.2 Ashfield District Council (ADC) adopted its corporate social value policy on the 23rd 
March 2020  following the introduction of The Public Services (Social Value) Act Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  213 
   (2012) on the 31st January 2013.   In line with the definition of social value in the 
Act, the Council defines social value as economic, social and environmental 
wellbeing.  A social value approach gives greater thought to how we can best use 
limited resources more strategically, to produce a wider benefit than would 
otherwise have been achiev ed.  Our goal in Ashfield through the adopted social 
value policy is ‘for every £ that Ashfield spends, we will aim to deliver at least the 
same value of return in social value’.  
 
9.3 The adopted corporate social value policy not only sets out how we embed soc ial 
value in how we operate our public services but also seeks to build social value into 
planning services.  One way of doing this is via the local plan and setting out the 
parameters, as identified in this Local Plan Policy, which need to be demonstrated  
when submitting a major  planning application in the district.  
 
9.4 Planning can play a key role in ensuring that social value is maximised, by 
encouraging all relevant development proposals to engage with the concept and 
consider whether doing things differe ntly can lead to additional benefits; for 
example, by utilising local supply chains so money spent on developments stays in 
the local economy; and taking steps to recruit local people for construction of 
development and in any resulting employment use.  
 
9.5 Social value is linked directly to the achievement of sustainable development as is 
set out in paragraph 8 of the NPPF. The Social Value Policy seeks to further the 
achievement of sustainable development by requiring the social value return of a 
development  throughout its lifecycle(from construction through to the operational 
phases) to be considered by the submission of a Social Value Statement (SVS).    
The statement should be positively prepared and informed by both pre – application 
participation and con sultation with stakeholders and the community, focussing on 
placemaking, health and wellbeing, local employment, regeneration and growth, 
community resilience and the environment and climate change.  These elements of 
social value can be directly influence d by the planning system through 
considerations in relation to the design and accessibility of spaces.  Further 
considerations may also include thinking about how the development could reduce 
inequality for the people of Ashfield and contribute to improvin g their health and 
wellbeing? How can the development make the best use of local labour, businesses 
and supply chains? Will there be any training opportunities for local people as a 
result of the development either during construction or as a result of the  end user?  
Thinking about development in this way helps decision makers evaluate the social 
value of a development.   
 
9.6 In order to support the submission of a SVS, the Council will prepare a 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) to set out how the SVS sho uld be 
prepared along with further guidance on what it should contain. Commitments made 
in the SVS can be secured via planning condition.  
 
 
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  214 
   Policy SD2: Good Design Considerations for Development  
 
9.7 The NPPF identifies that “ good design is a key aspect of sustainable development, 
creates better places in which to live and work and helps make development 
acceptable to communities ”. This policy requires all new development to be of a 
high quality sustainable design that ensures attractive, usable an d durable places 
which help deliver economic and social prosperity; in turn helping to attract inward -
investment.  
 
 
Policy SD2: Good Design Considerations for Development  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO11, SO12, 
SO13, SO14.  
 
1. Through its layout and design, the Council will expect all new development to 
contribute to place making and be of high quality that contributes to a healthy, safe 
and sustainable environme nt. Proposals must have regard to the National Design 
Guide, and successfully integrate with and enhance their surroundings, be innovative 
where appropriate, and be adaptable to the evolving effects of climate change.  
 
Development Form  
2. Development proposals will be expected to respect, take advantage of and reinforce 
distinctive, local character and features.  Development proposals should 
demonstrate that account has been taken of the following factors:  
 
a. The character of the area, includ ing local materials (where deemed appropriate), 
architectural style and detailing;  
 
b. Existing land forms, orientation, natural and historic landscape features;  
 
c. Existing uses and activities;  
 
d. The local pattern and grain of development, with respect to the arrangement of 
street layout and open spaces, block size, plots and building patterns;  
 
e. The scale, shape, form and proportion of existing buildings, building lines and 
heights within the street scene;  
 
f. The scale in relation to the surrounding topography, v iews, vistas and skylines;  
 
g. Local landmarks, focal buildings and features, particularly heritage assets;  
 
h. Important views into, out of and through the area;  
 
i. Landscape character and features;  
 
j. Green and blue infrastructure assets; and  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  215 
    
k. Opportunities to enhance gateways.  
 
Movement  
3. Development proposals should create permeable and legible layouts that provide 
clear and direct access to, through and within the development for all potential users, 
including those with impaired mobility. In achieving this, proposals should ensure:  
 
• They create effective pedestrian and cyclist routes / movement;  
 
• Creation of links to public transport routes;  
 
• Integration, retention and/or reinstatement of existing footpaths, cycle routes and 
bridleways; and  
 
• Where appropriate, creation of new routes linking to existing green and blue 
infrastructure networks, including rights of way within the countryside.  
 
Public Realm & Open Space  
4. The public realm elements  of a development proposal must complement the 
proposed building/s and seek to enhance its surroundings. Proposals must apply an 
appropriate balance of hard and soft landscape that contributes to the overall design 
of the scheme. When creating public realm  strategies for a site, proposals should 
apply and consider the following:  
 
a. Locate public spaces on main lines of movement (pedestrian or vehicular);  
  
b. Spaces must present imaginative, high quality design and contributes to the 
District’s wider green infra structure framework;  
 
c. Spaces and routes must be overlooked from surrounding buildings, with active 
frontages onto spaces where appropriate;  
 
d. Creation of incidental and/or small areas of grass / open space with little function 
will not be accepted;  
 
e. Prioritise the retention of key natural features, such as mature trees, hedgerows 
and land forms;  
 
f. Provide new trees, including street trees, hedgerows and additional native 
species planting as part of the overall landscaping framework throughout a site;  
 
g. Strengthen and protect existing boundary hedgerows around the site;  
 
h. Provide appropriate landscaping and screening to aid residential amenity; and  
 
i. Potential impact of artificial lighting on wildlife.  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  216 
   Safety  
5. Through the application of secure -by-design, balanced with urban design principles, 
development proposals should incorporate measures to help reduce crime and the 
fear of it (including appropriate infrastructure).  Applying layout principles that 
enhance natural surveillance, create active frontages and clearly delineate private 
and public space can considerably aid this process.  
 
Standards  
6. Development proposals will be expected to demonstrate how they have been 
designed to perform to a high standard.  
 
Evidence Base  • Sustainability Appraisal 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd  
• Sutton Town Centre Spatial Masterplan 2019.  Ashfield District Council.  
• Kirkby Town Centre Spatial Masterplan 2021.  Ashfield District Council.  
• Hucknall Town Centre Spatial Masterplan 2009. Urbed.  
• Cycle infrastructure design (LTN 1/ 20) (2020), Department for Transport.  
National Planning Policy 
& Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2 – Achieving Sustainable Development  
• NPPF 2021, Part 12 – Achieving Well Designed Places  
• Planning Practice Guidance Design: Process and Tools as of August 
2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance Neighbourhood Planning as of August 2021.  
 
9.8 The NPPF makes clear that creating high quality, beautiful and sustainable 
buildings and places is fundamental to what the planning and development process 
should achieve.  As suc h, the Council will not accept designs for new development 
that are inappropriate to its context or do not take opportunities to improve the 
character and quality of an area . 
 
9.9 The NPPF is supported by a suite of planning practice guidance that is relevant to 
both design quality and quality in delivery, including the National Design Guide , 
which illustrates how well -designed places that are beautiful, enduring and 
successful can  be achieved in practice.  
 
Development Form   
9.10 In terms of place making the quality of places has a major influence on the quality of 
life for people living and working in the district. Through high quality and sustainable 
design developers should be able to create strong, locally -distinctive places that are 
safe, inclusive and accessible to all, that promote social interaction and a healthy 
and active lifestyle.  
 
9.11 To ensure development proposals,  represent high quality design the Council 
encourages arc hitects and designers to take appropriate design cues from the 
character and architecture of the surrounding area. Where appropriate, this should 
include the use of locally produced or recycled materials, to aid integration . 
 
9.12 The components of a developmen t, including its integration with its surroundings 
and its mix, layout and form, will be assessed to ensure that development makes a 
positive contribution to achieving the qualities of a successful place.  Considered Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  217 
   layouts aid effective movement and prov iding the opportunity to utilise solar gain 
through building orientation.  
 
9.13 Inclusiveness and accessibility need to be considered from an early stage of design, 
preferably including consultation with a wide range of potential users.  
 
9.14 A Design and Access St atement should be submitted for all relevant proposals that 
describes the design approach undertaken including how it has utilised an 
appropriate character assessment to inform the proposal’s design. Such an 
assessment should consider and appraise a number  of elements within the 
surrounding area including orientation of buildings, their scale and mass, height, 
architectural styles, periods and detailing, access and parking arrangements, plot 
widths and size, landscape form, street and building lines and mat erials. Architects 
and designers should then utilise these characteristics to influence the form of their 
design, to help ensure the visual connection to its surroundings.  
 
9.15 Whilst acknowledging local character is important, this does not mean new 
developm ent must be a pastiche of existing buildings. The Council will consider, 
and where appropriate promote contemporary designs that effectively respond to a 
site’s constraints, promote innovation and make a positive contribution to the 
surrounding area.   
 
9.16 Existing character areas are areas which are important because of their similar 
characteristics and the contribution they make collectively to the local environment. 
These may be historical areas, areas with a particular character of buildings, areas 
with a particular layout, or areas where established soft landscaping is particularly 
important, such as tree lined avenues and mature hedgerows.   
 
9.17 In mixed character areas, where there is a greater variety in character, contextual 
features are likely to be dive rse. This may allow for a more flexible architectural 
approach, albeit one which still follows the key components of design such as 
building line, widths, height and scale.   
 
9.18 In fragmented character areas, where the context is less cohesive or undesirable , 
the response can be more creative. This can help in achieving a new character for 
the area but  should still respond to the basic characteristics of the site such as 
topography or natural features.  
 
Infill Developments  
9.19 Any proposal for infill development should be of a comparable scale, character and 
size to surrounding properties. The Council defines limited  infill development as the 
completion of an otherwise substantially built up frontage by the filling of a small gap 
normally capable of ta king one or two dwellings only. A substantial built up frontage 
is defined as an otherwise continuous and largely uninterrupted built frontage of 
several dwellings visible within the street scene. Not all gaps within existing 
development are suitable for i nfill development, particularly where these are not in 
sustainable locations.  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  218 
    
Movement, Public Realm & Open Space  
9.20 Coupled with a well -designed building, public realm plays an important role in the 
urban and rural environment, creating spaces for public i nteraction, amenity and 
movement. Public realm can also provide biodiversity benefits, flooding 
infrastructure and solar shading.  
 
9.21 Public realm comprises a range of streets, squares and spaces much of which we 
interactive with on a daily basis. Attractive and well designed environments can help 
attract inward investment and users to a town centre; encourage sustainable forms 
of travel; promote health activity; and discourage antisocial behaviour and crime. It 
is therefore important that such spaces are desi gned to function well, whilst 
complementing and enhancing their surroundings. They should be appropriately 
located and surveyed from surrounding properties / uses.  
 
9.22 In designing new streets, development proposals should apply standards and 
guidance from M anual for Streets, which sets out guidance for residential street 
design and aims to ensure streets are places that people want to spend time in, 
rather than just transport corridors.  
 
9.23 The quality of materials play an important role in the effectiveness of  public realm, 
creating attractive spaces that invite safe use. The Council will therefore require 
new development to design its public realm with an appropriate palette of high 
quality materials that seek to enhance the environment. Proposals should apply  a 
mix of hard and soft landscaping, appropriate to the setting. Wherever possible, and 
particularly in relation to large scale developments, a landscaping framework 
utilising native species should be provided, reflecting the objectives of the Public 
Open Space Strategy. Proposal should also effectively use and enhance existing 
landscape features such as mature trees, hedgerows and land forms to help add 
character to the development and increase opportunities for wildlife.  
 
9.24 Planting that blends with its sur roundings, contributes positively to the creation of a 
sustainable quality environment. It also mitigates against the impacts of climate 
change, facilitate health and wellbeing and enhance the character and appearance 
of the District. Design considerations  for new planting should:  
 
• ensure the continuance of tree cover by incorporating a mix of existing trees and 
new planting in the design.  
 
• design for a hierarchy of different types of planting including avenue planting, 
trees in gardens, boundary planting and open space planting.  
 
 
• consider the size and species of trees to be planted. Often a mixture of sizes is 
best. Planting larger trees creates an instant effect but young trees and whips 
transplant better and will develop faster.  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  219 
   Major developm ent proposals should provide for the planting and maintenance of 
street trees of appropriate species at intervals appropriate to the site, except where 
the site’s location requires a clearly building -dominated design approach that would 
be prejudiced by th e inclusion of street trees.  
 
Safety  
9.25 The NPPF requires planning policies to promote safe and accessible environments 
where crime and disorder and the fear of crime, do not undermine the quality of life 
or community cohesion.  Developers should therefore ensure that ‘Secured by 
Design’  principles are incorporated within all schemes where appropriate, balanced 
with good urban design.   
 
9.26 Where appropriate, public areas should be clearly visible from adjoining buildings 
and the design and landscaping should provide for clear sight -lines on public rout es 
(for example, paths and cycle ways), and not create unnecessary concealed areas.  
For development proposals generating public assembly or relating to the night time 
economy, an assessment of the potential for crime or anti -social behaviour will be 
requi red. Where potential adverse impacts are identified, these should be 
addressed as part of the proposal. This may include design measures forming part 
of the proposal such as boundary treatments or off site measures such as 
contributions towards CCTV.  
 
Local Evidence and Supplementary Guidance  
9.27 Local evidence will be used to inform and guide decisions, including the following 
Council documents:  
 
• District -Wide Design Supplementary Planning Document;  
• Greater Nottingham Landscape Character Assessment, TEP & NCC (2009)  
• Kirkby Cross Conservation Area Appraisal (adopted 1975, amended 2004)  
• Lower Bagthorpe Conservation Area Appraisal (adopted 1975, amended 2007)  
• Teversal Conservation Area Appraisal (2012)  
• Sutton in Ashfield Church and Market Pl ace Conservation Area (adopted 2015)  
• Hucknall Conservation Area Appraisal (adopted 2019)  
• Sutton Town Centre Masterplan (2019)  
• Kirkby Town Centre Masterplan (2021)  
• Hucknall Town Centre Masterplan (2009)  
 
9.28 Future design guidance may include masterplans, desig n briefs, design codes, 
village statements or informal planning guidance. The Council may also utilise a 
Design Review where it could aid the design process.  
 
9.29 The Council may also use characterisation techniques promoted by Historic 
England to understand better the character of places and help to ensure the Local 
Plan is sound and locally distinctive. This more detailed guidance will assist in the 
implementation  of this policy, and address particular design issues or provide more 
detail, such as defining locally important views.   
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  220 
   Standards  
9.30 All new developments should aspire to the highest standards of design, including 
construction methods and materials, and th ese issues should be integrated into the 
development process at an early stage, along with consideration of community 
safety, residential amenity and sustainable access.  
 
9.31 Development should take account of the following design standards and guidance 
(and any future updates of these) which will be used (but not exclusively) to help 
assess the quality of design:  
 
• Building for a Healthy Life 12 (for residential developments o f 10 or more 
dwellings).   
• Secured By Design/ Safer Places - the Planning System and Crime Prevention.   
• Manual for Streets (for residential developments).   
• Manual for Streets 2 - Wider Application of the Principles (which takes this 
guidance beyond just r esidential developments).   
9.32 The sustainability of the buildings themselves are guided by the National Housing 
Standards, administered through Building Regulations. Over the plan period, these 
standards are expected to require regular improvements in the en vironmental 
performance and efficiency of new buildings. Whilst applied through building 
regulations it is important that any design implications resulting from these 
standards are resolved at the planning stage. Policy CC1 sets out how new 
development sho uld contribute to mitigating and adapting to climate change.  
 
 
 
Policy SD3: Amenity  
 
9.33 This policy aims to protect and enhance amenity to maintain quality of life and 
ensure the successful integration of new development into existing neighbourhoods. 
It will ensure that new development takes account of community and individual 
privacy, safety considerations and potential for crime or anti -social behaviour. 
Ashfield’s Residential Design Guide SPD offers greater detail on many aspects.  
 
 
 
Policy SD 3: Amenity  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. The Council will support development that safeguards conditions for users or 
occupants of adjoining or nearby properties, and future users/occupants of 
new development proposals. Proposals should:  
 
a. Provide protection from over massing and overshadowing;  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  221 
   b. In the case of residential care homes, ensure that the outlook from bedrooms 
and communal rooms are adequate, and that the site has level access to a 
garden or sitting out area;  
 
c. In respect of all residential development, ensure adequate access to sufficient 
open space and garden space;  
 
d. Not result in overlooking that would result in loss of privacy;  
 
e. Avoid potential for pollution, in cluding air quality, light spillage, noise and 
disturbance, and contamination of land, groundwater or surface water;  
 
f. Achieve effective traffic movement to, from and within the site;  
 
g. Be appropriate in terms of appearance, scale and siting, including resultant 
physical relationships being oppressive or overbearing;  
 
h. Provide an acceptable boundary treatment in terms of privacy and visual 
amenity; and  
 
i. Demonstrate that they will not undermine the quality of life or community 
cohesion of their s urroundings through increased levels of vandalism, anti -
social behaviour criminal activity and/or the fear of crime by:  
i. incorporating elements of Secured By Design or similar standards;  
ii. enabling passive surveillance of public spaces and parking;  
iii. distingui shing clearly between public and private areas; and  
iv. incorporating appropriate security measures, such as lighting, CCTV 
and hard and soft landscape treatments.  
v. Where appropriate, submission of a crime impact assessment.  
 
2. The Council will not support development where, through consultation with the 
Police and other relevant bodies, it is considered it will have the potential to 
exacerbate vandalism, anti -social behaviour and/or the fear of crime.   
Evidence Base  • Sustainability Appraisal 2021, Wood Group UK Ltd  
 
National Planning Policy 
& Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2 – Achieving Sustainable Development  
• NPPF 2021, Part 12 – Achieving Well Designed Places  
• Planning Practice Guidance Design: Process and Tools as of 
August 2021  
• Planning Practice Guidance Neighbourhood Planning as at 
August 2021  
 
9.34 National planning policy promotes more intensive forms of development to make 
more efficient use of land and buildi ngs and this increases the importance of careful 
design, layout and orientation to ensure proposals do not adversely affect others. 
Such considerations apply equally to proposals to extend or alter existing buildings 
as they do to new developments.  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  222 
   9.35 Protection and enhancement of amenity is essential to maintaining quality of life and 
ensuring the successful integration of new development into existing 
neighbourhoods. A vital part of this is to ensure that new development takes 
account of community and  individual privacy, safety considerations and potential for 
crime or anti -social behaviour.  
 
9.36 The above Policy sets out the criteria that will be used to assess whether a proposal 
will have a significant impact upon amenity. Further guidance on how this is detailed 
within the Residential Design Guide Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) . 
 
9.37 The Council will not permit any development which has a seriously detrimental 
effect on neighbouring properties by reasons of overlooking, massing or 
overbearing impact. Equally, proposals that do not provide adequate amenity for its 
proposed users / residents will not be supported.  
 
Care Homes  
9.38 Proposals for new or extensions to existing Care Homes should ensure that all 
bedrooms and communal rooms, such as lounge s and dining rooms, will normally 
have a pleasant and interesting outlook and a minimum unobstructed view of 4.5 
metres. The pleasantness and safety of the outdoor environment is known to be 
significantly associated with people’s perception of their qualit y of life. It is therefore 
important to consider the design features to be adopted both in the grounds of the 
scheme and in the immediate vicinity. A private garden on a level site should be 
provided, with either a minimum total area of 150 square metres, or a minimum of 6 
square metres per resident, whichever is the greater . 
 
Open Space & Gardens  
9.39 Access to good quality public open spaces and opportunities for sport and 
recreation can make an important contribution to the health and wellbeing of 
communities . The Ashfield Public Open Strategy  identifies the Council’s aims and 
objectives for improving the quality and access to public open space within the 
District and sets out Local Standards for provision through new development. The 
Strategy aims to ensure a consistent approach to the planning of public open space, 
enabling the development process to achieve the right type, quantity and quality of 
public open space.  
 
9.40 In addition to public open space, adequate garden space should normally be   
provided within the curtilage of new dwellings as set out in Ashfield’s Residential 
Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document. Garden size is an essential part 
of the amenity of residential development and new houses should ordinarily have 
gardens that are comparable with those of adjacent properties, providing adequate 
private space for drying laundry, sitting out and for children’s play. Proposals which 
arithmetically achieve the required area of private garden ground, but only by 
aggregating an assort ment of irregular pieces of land, i.e. narrow strips or verges to 
the side of the house or ground which is significantly sloping, will not be acceptable . 
 
 
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  223 
   Privacy Distances  
9.41 To minimise loss of privacy from overlooking, minimum distances between the main 
aspects of proposed developments should be maintained as set out in Ashfield’s 
Residential Design Guide SPD . 
 
Access  
9.42 Development proposals should provide for safe access and egress for vehicles, 
including larger delivery vehicles and emergency vehicles suc h as ambulances and 
fire appliances. In the case of care home developments, an internal manoeuvring 
area for all vehicles to leave in forward gear should also be provided. Adequate off -
street parking space should be provided to avoid on -street congestion, as set out in 
Policy SD 10. 
 
Pollution and contamination  
9.43 All development proposals will be considered in respect of the potential for pollution, 
including air quality, light spillage, noise and disturbance, and contamination of land, 
groundwater or surface water. Policies CC2: Water resource management and 
SD8: Environmental Protection contain further details in this respect.  
 
Boundary Treatments  
9.44 The provision of satisfactory boundary treatment can help to create and maintain 
amenity. Where screening  is necessary to provide adequate standards of privacy, 
or to preserve the street scene, and sited adjacent to the public highway, the 
Council will normally expect such boundary treatment to take the form of either brick 
walling and fencing or appropriate hedge planting in combination with temporary 
fencing. Walling and fencing should be no more than two metres high and be in 
place prior to occupation  on new developments . 
 
9.45  Where boundaries of new development abut open countryside or areas of public or 
private open space, appropriate hedge and tree planting should be implemented 
and supported by temporary fencing where appropriate.  
 
Crime and the fear of crime  
9.46 It is important that future developments seek to enhance the quality of life of the 
District’s residents and does not have a negative impact on existing uses or  
exacerbate the potential for crime or fear of it.  
 
9.47 Under the Ashfield Community Safety Partnership, geographical action groups and 
associated delivery plans have been created for Priority A reas across the District. 
The Community Partnership set out a Strategic Plan  identifying for three year 
period how the Partnership plans to tackle local community safety issues that matter 
to the local community.  Priority Areas based upon severity plans produced by 
Nottinghamshire Police analysts.  
 
9.48 The Council will require development proposals that it considered could have the 
potential to exacerbate elements of crime, or conflict with the project work within the 
Priority Areas, to submit a crime impact  assessment. This assessment should seek 
to highlight any potential crime or anti -social behaviour issues that may arise as a Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  224 
   result of the proposed use and outline mitigation measure the proposal will put in 
place to reduce the potential of it occurring a nd/or the span of its impact on 
surrounding uses.  
 
9.49 Beyond the potential for crime related to the proposed use, development proposals 
should seek to apply appropriate Secure -By-Design and urban design principles to 
help ensure the design of the proposed dev elopment enhances the surrounding 
environment and does not provide opportunities through its design for crime to 
occur. The aim should be to design a physical environment that positively influences 
human behaviour. This should help people feel safe and sec ure within their built 
environment, while simultaneously make criminals at greater risk of being caught, 
and therefore less inclined to offend.  
 
 
 
Policy SD4: Recycling and Refuse Provision in New Development  
 
9.50 This policy sets out the criteria for the provision and location of recycling and refuse 
provision in new development s. 
 
 
Policy SD4: Recycling and Refuse Provision in New Development  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO7, SO8, SO9.  
 
1. The Council will require all new development to take full account of the location and 
design of recycling and refuse provision. The following criteria should be met in 
assessing recycling and refuse provision:  
 
a. For proposed residential house developments, space should be provided for the 
storage of refuse bi ns and recycling facilities of sufficient capacity to serve the 
proposed development as a whole, as agreed with the Council (to include whole 
street solutions where appropriate). Proposed development with private garden 
areas should also include space for the storage of an additional bin for garden 
waste or composting facilities;  
 
b. For proposed flats and non -residential developments, space should  be provided 
for the storage of shared refuse bins and recycling facilities of sufficient capacity 
to serve the p roposed development, as agreed with the Council;  
 
c. For proposed large scale commercial developments which draw significant 
numbers of visitors, the developer may be expected to provide an element of 
appropriately sited and designed recycling provision for public use, as agreed 
with the Council. Proposals to extend this provision to serve the wider community 
will be encouraged.  
 
2. In assessing the recycling and refuse provision, regard will be had to the following 
considerations:  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  225 
    
a. The level and t ype of provision, having regard to the above requirements;  
 
b. The location of the provision, having regard to the need to provide and maintain 
safe and convenient access for occupants, while also providing satisfactory 
access for collection vehicles and oper atives;  
 
c. The impact of the provision on visual amenity, having regard to the need to 
minimize the prominence of the facilities and screen any external provision;  
 
d. The impact of the provision on the amenity of neighbouring development and the 
proposed devel opment;  
 
e. The security of the provision against scavenging pests, vandalism and 
unauthorized use.  
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning Policy 
& Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 12: Achieving well designed places.  
 
9.51 The Council is required to meet the Waste Framework Directive  target of recycling 
50% of waste from households by 2020. This will require significant co -operation 
from householders in waste separation; part of achieving such involvement is the 
designing -in of appropriate storage in all new development.  
 
9.52 Poorly sited or designed recycling and refuse storage provision has the potential for 
considerable adverse impact on the visual appearance of an area as well as its 
general amenity, for instance by odours, obstruction of footways and cluttering the 
public realm. An untidy proliferation of bins in streets and forecourts is often one of 
the most  visible signs of higher residential densities when development is poorly 
designed, particularly when houses are subdivided.  
 
9.53 Policy SD 4 sets out requirements for recycling and refuse provision in all new 
development proposals by ensuring that adequate pro vision for waste storage, 
separation of recyclables and access for collection is designed into all new 
buildings, re -developments, conversions (including where houses are subdivided) 
and changes of uses. Recycling and refuse provision should be discussed w ith the 
Council at an early stage to ensure that proposed systems are compatible with its 
requirements.  
 
9.54 For the Council to be able to collect all of the waste generated by new 
developments in a sustainable manner improved disposal facilities will need to be 
available and vehicular access will need to be considered with all new 
developments particularly where there will be multi occupancy waste disposal 
requirements.  
 
9.55 To meet current recycling requirements a dwelling is provided with one 180 litre bin 
for general waste, one 240 litre bins for dry recyclables, and one 44 litre box 140 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  226 
   litre bin for recycling glass. However, this may increase in the future with potentially 
higher recycling rates and therefore additional bin requirements.  Where residential 
developments are proposed with gardens, including communal gardens in 
apartment developments, consideration should be given to the use of a composting 
facility. Composting facilities are preferable to garden waste bins, as treatment of 
waste at source is rec ognised as the most sustainable method of treatment. 
However, consideration needs to be given on the sitting of such facilities in relation 
to odour and vermin prevention.  
 
9.56 Large scale commercial developments which draw large numbers of visitors, such 
as shopping centres, leisure centres or tourist attractions may be expected to 
provide an element of appropriately sited and designed recycling provision for public 
use. Proposals to extend this provision to serve the wider community will be 
encouraged by the Council. Developers should seek guidance on these 
requirements at early design stage.  
 
9.57 Where a development is seeking to accommodate refuse bins in a detached bin 
store, this must be appropriately designed and secure. If a residential proposals, the 
store  must be constructed of complementary material and be sited to not impact on 
property or street frontage. Wherever possible, stores should be incorporated into 
the primary building.  
 
9.58 The Council will require the submission of a waste storage and collectio n plan for 
major residential or commercial developments. The plan should include the 
following information:  
 
• for residential properties; how the managing agent will work with tenants to 
ensure that recycling takes place;   
 
• for commercial properties; how the managing agents will ensure that recyclable 
waste is separated from general refuse, details of the locatio n of waste 
receptacles, and how litter will be controlled at the site when the development is 
in use; an d 
 
• details on how waste will be managed during the construction period.  
 
 
Policy SD5: Developer Contributions  
 
 
Policy SD 5: Developer Contributions  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO11, SO12, 
SO13, SO14.  
 
1. Developer contributions towards infrastructure will be based on the demands 
created by the development. This includes provision of new, or enhancement Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  227 
   of the existing infrastructure and facilities, including where appropriate, but not 
limited to:  
 
a) Affordable housing;  
b) Education provisions/facilities;  
c) Regeneration of town centres;  
d) Provision of appropriate sport and recreation facilities, new and improved 
open space, improving quality and access to green and blue infrastructure;  
e) New and expanded health and/or community facilities;  
f) Improving accessibility to transport infrastructure including public transport, 
cycleway and pedestrian access to, town centres;  
g) Tackling climate change including flooding or water quality;  
h) Cross -boundary infr astructure to help deliver and mitigate the effects of 
development;  
i) Supporting service infrastructure.  
 
Requirements may be clarified by supplementary planning documents where 
considered necessary.  
 
2. The Council will require on -site or off -site provision  of developer contributions  
through planning obligations (financial, in -kind or a combination of both), the 
Community Infrastructure Levy  (if adopted) , planning conditions or other 
relevant mechanisms.  
 
3. Any attempts to sub divide sites to avoid thresholds for developer contributions 
will be resisted.  
 
4. Where the delivery of a proposed scheme is threatened on the basis of 
viability, the Council may consider whether a reduction in the extent of the 
developer contributions can be justified.   
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Background Paper No 5: Infrastructure Delivery  2021 . Ashfield 
District Council.  
• Ashfield Transport Study, 2016. Systra.  
• Securing developer contributions for education, April 2019. 
Department for Education.  
National Planning 
Policy & Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 3: Plan making.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 4: Decision Making.  
• NPPF  2021, Part 5. Delivering a sufficient supply of homes.   
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy.  
 
9.59 Strategic Policy 1 1 identifies that infrastructure has a key role in meeting the 
requirements for sustainable development.    Developer contributions can be used 
as a means of offsetting the impa ct of a development on infrastructure either by 
seeking the developer to undertake the necessary work or via a financial 
contribution that cannot be secured by a planning condition.  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  228 
   9.60 The current regulative requirements115, which are also set out as part of  national 
planning policy , identify that a planning obligation may only constitute a reason for 
granting planning permission for the development if the obligation is — 
 
a. necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
b. directly related to the development; and  
c. fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.’  
 
9.61 If a site has been sub divided in an attempt to avoid contributions towards 
affordable housing and other infrastructure, the Council will refuse the application . 
 
9.62 The Plan sets out the contributions that can be expected from development. This 
includes the levels and types of affordable housing provision required, along with 
other infrastructure.    However, it is recognised that viability change over time.  If 
viabili ty is considered to be an issue any planning application should be 
accompanied with a viability  assessment together with any other evidence setting 
out why the proposed development is no longer  deliverable.  Where the viability of a 
site is in dispute, the  Council will require developers to meet the requirements set 
out under Policy SD 6. 
 
 
 
Policy SD6: Assessing Development Viability and Development Demand   
 
 
Policy SD 6: Assessing Development Viability and Development Demand  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO3, SO4, SO5.  
 
Development Viability  
 
1. Development proposals that are unable to meet the Policy and infrastructure 
requirements set out in the Local Plan, must be supported by viability evidence 
that establishes why any departure from policy or a deficit in infrastructure 
contributions is necessary to make the scheme viable and that the wider planning 
benefits for the development to go ahead out  weight s the shortfal l in contributions.   
 
2. The viability assessment should:  
 
• set out and justify the methodology, the inputs and assumptions applied in the 
assessment;  
• apply sensitivity analysis and/or scenario analysis of the results; and  
• set out an explanation and interpretation of the viability calculations and 
results have regard to risk and returns.  
 
115 Community Infrastructure Regulations 2010 (as amended).  Paragraph 122  & National Planning Policy 
Framework 2021, para. 57  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  229 
    
Any viability assessment to support an application will be tested by a viability 
specialist appointed by the Council with the cost of the assessment being met by 
the applicant.   
 
3. In considering the viability assessment, regard will be had to national planning 
policy guidance on viability and other guidance issues issued by the professional 
bodies such as the RICS and RTPI.    
 
4. Where appropriate, if planning contributions are reduce d below the requirements 
set out in Local Plan policies on major developments, the developer will be 
required to enter into an agreement on how policy compliance on those 
contributions can be sought to be achieved over the lifetime of the project.      
 
5. The Council will consider the timing and level of planning obligations that can be 
supported as a part of the viability assessment process.  Where safeguards are 
necessary to make a development acceptable in planning terms and these cannot 
be secured, planni ng permission will be refused.  
 
6. A viability assessment should be prepared on the basis that it will be made 
publicly available. If any aspects of the assessment are considered to be 
commercial sensitive the developer should agree with the Council what 
information will release and in what format.  
 
Lack of Demand  
 
7. Where policies in the Local Plan or national planning policy require the 
demonstration of a lack of demand for a building or site, the Council will require 
the applicant to demonstrate:  
 
a. the building or site has been openly marketed for an appropriate period at an 
appropriate asking price, and there is no demand for the proposed use, and  
 
b. Re-development of the building or land for the existing use is not viable on the 
site. 
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal August 2021.  Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Background Paper  No 5: Infrastructure Delivery  2021 . Ashfield 
District Council . 
• Ashfield Local Plan and Community Infrastructure Liability Viability 
assessment, 2016.  Nationwide CIL Service.  
• Guidance Note - Assessing Viability in planning under the National 
Planning Policy Framework 2019 for England, 1st Edition 2021.  
RICS  
• Viability Testing Local Plans Advice for planning practitioners, 2012. 
Local Housing Delivery Group Chaired by S ir John Harman.  
National Planning 
Policy & Guidance  • NPPF 2021, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2021, Part 3: Plan making.  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  230 
   • NPPF 2021, Part 4: Decision Making.  
• NPPF  2021, Part 5. Delivering a sufficient supply of homes.   
• NPPF 2021, Part 6: Building a strong, competitive economy.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Viability as of August 2021.  
 
Viability  
9.63 National planning policy sets out that the Local Plan has to be subject to a whole 
plan viability assessment to ensure that policies are realistic, and that the total 
cumulative cost of all relevant policies will not undermine deliverability of the plan. 
However, viability will change over time such as economic conditions or there may 
be exceptional costs associated with a specific site.   In these circumstances, 
applicants will be required to demonstrate how planning obligations and policies 
result in the development being unviable by preparing a viability assessment.  Any 
viability assessment will be subject to an independent assessment , the cost of 
which will be made by the applicant.  
 
9.64 In considering issues of viability, the Council will have regard to:  
 
• The quality and value of a scheme in the context of how the development 
contributes towards the vision, objectives and policies for the locality.  It will 
need to be established  that the benefits from the development significantly 
outweigh the harm of not providing for full infrastructure contributions;  
 
• National Planning Practice Guidance on viability and other  guidance on 
viability particularly derived from the Royal Institution of Character Surveyors 
or the Royal Town Planning Institute.  
 
• The e viden ce submitted must include an appropriate and robust viability 
assessment based on realistic assumptions and up -to-date baseline 
information prepared by a suitably qualified independent surveyor.   This 
should include:  
➢ supporting evidence from applicants t o justify proposed rates of profit , 
taking  into account the individual characteristics of the scheme, including 
property market conditions and a development’s risk profile, and profits 
achieved on comparable schemes.  
➢ Hypothetical current use schemes, whic h maximise the redevelopment 
potential of the site, should be appraised to prove their lack of viability. 
Mixed use schemes should also be appraised and in both circumstances, 
market evidence should be used to support them.  
➢ A technically robust case for a variation of obligations which examines 
value, cost and profit assumptions;  
➢ A justification for the input and outputs used in the appraisal;  
➢ Whether the land value can be justified. (Landowners and site purchases 
should consider policy requirements when agreeing land transactions);  
 
• Given the sensitive to changes of inputs /outputs  into viability appraisals,  the 
Council will require sensitivity analysis and/or scenario analysis to demonstrate 
the implications of changes to the inputs/outputs  into the appraisal .   Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  231 
    
• Whether a deferred scheme is possible to claw back as much as the deficit in 
contributions as possible should market conditions improve.  These schemes 
may reflect a variety of forms such as short life planning consents, 
reassessment of land values during the development period (overage), 
reversion to a policy compliant level of provision after a specified period within 
planning agreements and deferred payments.  
 
9.65 The diagram below illustrates in broad terms, the approach that the Council will 
adopt to plann ing applications and infrastructure requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.66 The availability of information is an important part of the planning system.  Planning 
Practice Guidance Viability emphasises that any viability assessment should be 
prepared on the basis that it will be made publicly available other than in 
exceptional circumstances.  The Council will consider exceptions to this in limited 
circumstances where there is a convincing case that information is commercially 
sensitive.  If aspects of any assessment are considered to be commercial sensitive STEP ONE  
As part of the pre -application discussions the Council will work with 
the developer and infrastructure providers to establish infrastructure 
requirements in relation to the application.  
 
STEP TWO  
If there are viability issues from the proposal considering  infrastructure 
provision, the applicant submits a viability  
assessment to be independently reviewed.  
 
If viability is a marginal issue 
the Council will negotiate on 
specific contributio ns. 
 
 
 
 
 If viability is a major issue the 
Council, developer and 
infrastructure providers will:  
• consider whether the use of  
deferred obligations to support 
infrastructure provision long 
term 
• investigate whether any 
alternative sources to fund 
infrastructure.  
STEP THREE  
Agree Developer Contributions and the terms of the S106 
Agreement or if agreement cannot be reached or the application  
does not meet the requirements for sustainable development the 
application will be refused.  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  232 
   the developer should agree with the Council what information will release and in 
what format.  
 
A Lack Of Demand  
9.67 There is generally a presumption in favour of retaining existing and allocated future 
uses, as such land or buildings may contribute towards econo mic or social 
objectives of sustainable development.   Consideration should only be given to 
alternative uses where an applicant is able to clearly  demonstrate that there is no 
demand for the site and that it is unviable to retain the site in  the current u se.   
Evidence should be included within a supporting statement that  accompanies the 
planning application and demonstrates that there is no reasonable prospect of the 
site or buildings being used or reused for these purposes.   The evidence should 
include , where relevant : 
 
• The length of time the property has been unused for the use classes in question . 
 
• That the existing or recent business is not financially viable, as evidenced by 
trading accounts for the last three years in which the business was operating as 
a full -time business;  
 
• A range of measures were tried or explored to increase trade and diversify use;  
 
• The facility has been adequately marketed, including internet, and local and 
national publications.  
 
• The length of time durin g which the property has been actively marketed.  In 
order to prove that there is a significant lack of demand for the existing 
premises, it is anticipated that the landowner should have openly marketed the 
site for sale or let for a period of at least 12 m onths. Depending upon the 
location of the premises, it may be more appropriate to increase this period to 18 
months, especially if in a secondary location where  demand is consistently slow 
to emerge.  (This will depend upon the location of the premises and the state of 
the market).  
 
• That the site has been marketed  at an appropriate price to reflect the current use 
and the price should be justifiable given market conditions over time. If the site 
represents an employment redevelopment opportunity, an open request for 
offers may be more suitable in order to attract t he widest interest.   The prices at 
which the land and buildings have been marketed during this period should 
reflect that obtained for similar property in the locality and the evidence should 
identify the appropriate comparable evidence.  
 
• A full record of  enquiries, interested parties and bids should be recorded, with 
explanations and substantiation of why they have not been progressed.  
    
• An evaluation of why it is considered that the property has failed to attract 
interest from potential occupiers or fo r redevelopment.  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  233 
   • Why the site or buildings are physically unsuitable for the use classes even after 
adaptation (including subdivision  into smaller units) refurbishment or 
redevelopment, in terms of siting, design, access, layout and relationship to 
neighb ouring buildings and uses.  
 
 
 
Policy SD7: Communications Infrastructure  
 
 
Policy SD7: Communications Infrastructure  
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO12, 
SO14.  
 
Telecommunications  
1. Telecommunications development proposals will be permitted where:  
 
a) The siting and external appearance of any installation is designed to minimise 
the impact on the character or appearance of the building on which, or space 
in which, the equipment is located.  
 
b) Options for sharing of exis ting equipment, and erecting masts on existing tall 
buildings or other structures have been fully explored;  
 
c) the significance, appearance, character and setting of heritage assets are 
conserved;  
 
d) there is no significant adverse impact upon biodiversity, ecology, geodiversity 
or best and most versatile agricultural land;  
 
e) they are appropriately designed, minimising size and scale and camouflaging 
appearance wherever possible;  
 
f) All masts or base stations and additions there to are certified to  meet 
International Commission on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) 
standards;  
 
g) Consultations have been undertaken with organisations with an interest in the 
proposed development and their views have been taken into account in the 
development prop osal. This is particularly relevant where a mast is to be 
installed near a school or college or within a statutory safeguarded zone 
surrounding an aerodrome or technical site;  
 
h) Provision is made to ensure that equipment that has become obsolete or that 
is no longer in use is removed as soon as practicable and the site restored to 
its former condition.  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  234 
   Broadband  
2. The rollout and continued improvement of affordable, high speed, high capacity 
digital infrastructure serving all parts of the District will be supported.    
 
3. New development should enhancement of Ashfield’s digital infrastructure  with 
new development demo nstrating the anticipated connectivity of the proposed 
use. 
 
4. Major development proposals will be supported where broadband infrastructure 
is to be made available to all residents and / or users of the development.  
 
5. Major development proposals should incor porate a bespoke duct network, 
designed and implemented in cooperation with a recognised network provider, 
and where viable, a fibre to the premises (FTTP) solution.  
 
6. Where appropriate, other forms of infrastructure, such as facilities supporting 
mobile br oadband and Wi -Fi, should be included in major development 
proposals and designed in a sympathetic and appropriate way in order to 
reflect the character of the surrounding area.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2019, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2019, Part 10: Supporting high quality communications.  
 
 
9.68 The communications sector is important to economic growth and productivity in 
Ashfield as well as residents’ social relations and access to information.   From an 
economic perspective, new technology allows companies to download and transmit 
substantially greater amounts of data, reduce their costs, satisfy more customers 
and gain access to new markets. It offers a number of valuable social and 
educational benefits for residents.  A good telecommunication infrastructure can 
help reduce the need to travel an d hence reduce vehicle emissions and congestion, 
for example by enabling home working’. It also enables the development of ‘real 
time’ driver information systems which can lead to better use of roads and reduced 
congestion.  The Council’s aim is to promote  the growth of new and expanding 
telecommunications systems in ways which do not prejudice amenity and 
environmental quality.   However,  the Council will take into account in determining 
applications that c ertain locations are particularly sensitive to the impact of 
telecommunications equipment. These include:  
 
• Locations within the Green Belt and open countryside,  
• Sensitive landscape areas, including but not limited to valued landscapes, sites 
of special scientific interest, local wildlife sites and local nature reserves, and  
• Heritage assets including conservation areas, historic buildings and Historic 
Parks including, where applicable, the potential effects on their setting.  
 
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  235 
   9.69 The Policy has to be seen in the context that there are permitted development 
rights116 for electronic communications infrastructure.  At present, most electronic 
communications apparatus can be installed and maintained as permitted 
development. However, limits are set out in legislation on the scale of developm ent 
that can be deployed in this way and the circumstances in which prior approval is 
required.  
 
9.70 The availability of fast and reliable broadband is now seen as an essential 
component of everyday life and supports economic growth.  The Government’s 
objectiv e through Building Digital UK (BDUK), part of the Department for Digital, 
Culture, Media & and Sport is to delivering broadband networks to the nation.   The 
Policy aims to strike a balance between what is reasonable and proportional for 
developers to prov ide, with the essential need for a certain standard of broadband 
within all new developments.  
 
9.71 Developers should engage with broadband providers at the earliest opportunity to 
enable the highest possible internet connection speeds to be provided in new 
developments.  Applications for major development should be supported by a 
connectivity strategy that delivers future -proofed infrastructure and supports 
sustainable communications services having regard to the latest appropriate BDUK 
strategy and other relev ant industry guidance.  
 
9.72 Exceptions will be made to the Policy requirements, where applicants can provide 
evidence through consultation with broadband infrastructure providers, that this 
would not be possible, practical or economically viable.  
 
9.73 Modern communications also mean that all kinds of businesses may be undertaken 
in rural areas and this includes home working, particularly where broadband can be 
improved. Consequently, diversification of the economic base of the rural areas is 
more achiev able as technology allows greater workplace flexibility. As such, the 
Council will continue to support the roll out superfast broadband within rural 
communities.  
 
Policy SD8: Contaminated Land and Unstable Land  
 
 
Policy SD 8: Contaminated Land and Unstable Land  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. When considering applications for development on sites which are:  
 
a) Contaminated or potentially contaminated;  
b) On unstable land or potentially unstable land; or  
c) Within a Coal Mining Referral Area;  
 
116 The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 , as amended.  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  236 
    
the prospective developer must demonstrate that any existing contamination or 
instability of the land will be addressed by appropriate mitigation measures to 
ensure that the site is suitable for the proposed use and does not place the 
devel opment, its users and the wider environment at unacceptable risk. 
Development will not be permitted if mitigation cannot be provided to an 
appropriate standard with an acceptable design.  
 
2. Issues to be addressed by prospective developers should include but not be 
limited to:  
 
a) Avoiding exposing the occupiers of the development and neighbouring land 
users to significant risk;  
b) Any threats to the structural integrity of any building or structure on the site or 
any adjoining site;  
c) Avoiding the contam ination of any watercourse, water body, groundwater or 
aquifer;  
d) Having an adverse effect upon natural habitats and/or ecosystems.  
 
3. Proposals for development will be considered in the context of the cumulative 
impact. The extent of the area over which the  cumulative impact will be taken 
into account will be determined on a site to site basis.  
 
4. Where appropriate, proposed development should demonstrate that it will not 
cause the land to become contaminated to the detriment of future use or 
restoration of the site or so that it would cause pollution in the surrounding area.  
 
5. The responsibility for ensuring a safe development rests with the developer 
and/or landowner. Where considered necessary, the developer will be required 
to enter into conditions or planning obligations to undertake further 
investigative works, remedial measures, or to ensure that development does 
not take place until appropriate measures are completed.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National 
Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2019, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2019,  Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural 
environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Hazard ous substances as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Land affected by contamination as of August 
2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Land stability as of August 2021.  
 
 
9.74 Contaminated land may be regarded as any land which is in such a condition by 
reason of substances in, on or under the land, that it can result in risks to human 
health, property and the wider environment, including long -term limitations on the Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  237 
   use of soil s. It may arise from a number of sources being typically associated with 
some types of former industrial sites, but even agricultural land can have issues 
through for example, excessive use or spills of pesticides, or relating to farm waste 
disposal.  Ther e are also natural sources of contamination and radon gas, a 
naturally occurring radioactive gas, is present within the District. Previously 
developed sites in particular may have infestations of Japanese Knotweed, which 
has a detrimental impact on native wildlife as well as having the potential to damage 
buildings and hard surfaces.  
 
9.75 Development provides the opportunity to bring about improvements and 
remediation to contaminated or unstable land.  One of the overarching objectives of 
the Government’s poli cy on contaminated land is to seek to ensure that 
contaminated land is made suitable for its current use (Defra, Environmental 
Protection Act 1990: Part 2A Contaminated Land Statutory Guidance 2012).  The 
aim is not to prevent development of such land but to ensure development is 
suitable and the contamination and physical constraints are taken into account at 
the planning stage.  The risks to human health, buildings and the environment are 
remediated before the new use commences.    
 
9.76 It is recognised that contamination and instability may add substantially to the 
difficulty and cost of developing. Consequently, the viability of development where 
there are high remediation costs will be a factor which the Council will take into 
account in considering plannin g contributions.    
 
9.77 In Ashfield , the principal  issue in relation to ground instability relates to past coal 
mining.  The Coal Mining Referral Areas in Ashfield are largely located towards the 
western part of the District. For non -householder applications in Coal Mining 
Referral Areas the developer wil l be required to prepare and submit a Coal Mining 
Risk Assessment (CMRA) with the planning application. There may be a need for 
appropriate mitigation measures to ensure that there will be no future ground 
instability and public safety issues arising from the development. Within the rest of 
the coalfield area the Coal Authority’s Standing Advice Area will apply.  
 
9.78 When a new development is proposed that could cause land to become 
contaminated, for instance, by the nature of the proposed use, the development 
should be designed in such a way as to minimise the risk of contamination 
occurring.  
 
Groundwater  
9.79 The prevention of pollution and reversal of environmentally significant and sustained 
deteriorating trends in groundwater quality is a requirement of the Water Framework 
Directive and its associative legislations/regulations, as well as good practice. 
Prospective developers should:  
 
• assess the area of influence of their activities and to take account of 
groundwater uses and dependent ecosystems within this area during planning, 
construction and operation;  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  238 
   • provide adequate information to statutory bodies such as the Environment 
Agency when submitting their proposals so that the potential impact on 
groundwater resources and quality can be adequately assessed.  
 
9.80 A substantial part of the District of Ashfield is located on a principal  aquifer where 
groundwater is sensitive to pollution. It is important that standards of design, 
materials specification and of on -site construction practices respect the vulnerabilit y 
of these aquifers as well as all watercourses, and environmentally sensitive areas. 
During and post construction it is possible that this contamination could be 
mobilised and find its way into the aquifer. The Council will need to be satisfied that 
any r isk has been properly assessed and viable remediation is in place. The Council 
will require the applicant to provide such information as is necessary to determine 
whether the proposed development can proceed. Investigations will need to 
consider the possib ility that new pathways may be introduced as a result of 
development activities, such as piling, drain laying and trenches for services and 
that new receptors may be introduced by the development proposed. Development 
proposals should not create a pathway into the water supply.  
 
9.81 The Council will adopt a balanced approach to contamination and unstable ground 
as it is unreasonable for the Council to require every applicant to carry out a 
detailed and expensive site investigation. However, sufficient informat ion should be 
required to determine the existence or otherwise of contamination or unstable 
ground, its nature and the risks it may pose and whether these can be satisfactorily 
reduced to an acceptable level. Where a desk study and site reconnaissance does  
not provide sufficient information to assess the risks and appraise remedial options, 
further investigations will need to be carried out before the application is 
determined. Any remedial measures should be agreed by the Council before the 
development is commenced and completed prior to occupation.   
  
9.82 Planning decisions will take into account the most up to date national, regional or 
local guidance in relation to pollution control/unstable land and planning.  
 
 
 
 
Policy SD9: Environmental Protection  
 
 
Policy SD 9: Environmental Protection  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO5, SO13, SO14.  
 
1. Development should be sited and designed so as to avoid adversely impacting 
upon health, living conditions, the natural environment, and the welfare of 
livestock by reasons of fumes, dust, noise, vibration, smell, light or other forms 
of pollution.  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  239 
   2. Development will not be permitted if mitigation cannot be provided to an 
appropriate standard with an acceptable design, particularly in proximity to 
existing sensitive uses or sites.  
 
3. Proposals for development will be considered in the context of the cumulative 
impact of pollution. The extent of the area over which the cumulative impact will 
be taken into account will be determined on a site by site basis.  
 
4. Development sensitive to the effects of noise or other pollution will not be 
permitted where the presence of that sensitive development could threaten the 
ongoing viability of existing uses that are considered desirable for reasons of 
economic  or wider social need.   
 
5. Where significant pollution may be created the applicant will provide sufficient 
information on the potential impact to enable a determination to be made on 
the effect of pollution and any remediation measures necessary.  
 
Noise  
6. Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that:  
 
a) The proposal does not have a detrimental impact on the indoor and outdoor 
acoustic environment of existing or planned development.  
b) The occupiers of the proposed development will not be subject to detrimental 
noise levels from the existing or potential future operations of adjacent uses; 
and 
c) The proposed development does not cause a significant increase in the 
background noise level to nearby existing noise sensitive land uses.   
 
Lighting  
7. Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that:  
 
a) Light pollution from glare and light spillag e is minimised, including into the 
night sky;  
b) The lighting is necessary;   
c) The proposed lighting scheme is the minimum needed for security, working or 
recreational purposes;  
d) The level of luminance is appropriate to the character of the landscape and the 
surrounding area as a whole, including any cumulative impact of lighting;  
e) There is no significant loss of privacy or amenity to nearby properties and no 
danger to pedestrians and road users; and  
f) There is no detrimental harm to natural ecosystems.  
 
Air Quality  
8. Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that proposals 
minimise harmful emissions to air, will not lead to the declaration of a new Air 
Quality Management Area, and will not impact negatively on any existing Air 
Quality Management Are as. Planning permission will only be granted in areas 
nearing Air Quality Management Area threshold limits if an Impact Assessment Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  240 
   shows that the development in question and its associated activities would not 
increase air pollution to unacceptable levels,  as defined in the National Air 
Quality Strategy.  
 
Soils  
9. Development will take appropriate measures to safeguard and utilise on -site 
soil resources. Regard should be had to the Defra code of practice for the 
sustainable use of soils on construction sites. Where  requested, evidence of 
the adoption of best practice in the movement of, storage, management, reuse 
and reinstatement of soils must be submitted along with any planning 
application.  
 
Evidence base  Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2019, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2019,  Part 15: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Air quality as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Light pollution as of August 2021.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Noise as of August 2021.  
 
9.83 Damage to the environment is usually identified as pollution and it arises from a 
wide variety of sources and has a detrimental impact on human health, wellbeing, 
amenity and the natural  environment.  The natural environment includes the 
landscape, the qu ality of the soil, air, ground/surface water or areas of nature 
conservation (comprise plants and animals).  The nature of pollutants will vary, but 
in terms of Ashfield, issues typically arise in relation to noise, lighting and air quality. 
Nevertheless, pollution can arise from other sources such as emissions of smoke, 
fumes, gases, dust, steam, smells or vibrations all of which will be considered 
during the planning process.  
 
9.84 In assessing a scheme of mitigation, account will be taken of:  
 
a. The location, design and layout of the proposed development;  
b. Measures to bring levels of emissions to an acceptable level;  
c. Measures to control run -off and other diffuse pollution;  
d. Hours of operation; and  
e. Measures that reduce existing levels of pollution.  
 
9.85 Wher e significant pollution may be created, the applicant will be required to provide 
sufficient information on the potential environmental impacts to enable a 
determination to be made whether or not planning permission should be granted.   
Where a desk study and site reconnaissance does not provide sufficient information 
to assess the risks and appraise remedial options, further investigations will need to 
be carried out before the application is determined.  Where appropriate, any report 
will need to set out the cumulative impacts.  
 
9.86 The adverse impact or potential impact of pollution will be a key aspect in any 
planning decision. This includes the relationship with sensitive uses such as 
residential areas, schools, hospitals, or the natural environment. The p osition and Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  241 
   orientation of sensitive uses should be taken into account at the earliest stages of 
any building design or consideration of location.  
 
9.87 Matters for consideration in taking decisions on planning applications in relation to 
pollution are set out in Appendix 11 . However, decisions will also take into account 
the latest national, regional or local guidance in relation to pollution control and 
planning.  
 
Noise  
9.88 Noise has the potential to cause both physical and psychological health issues for 
humans and can have a negative impact on wildlife and livestock.  Within this 
context, noise includes both ambient levels and noise impulses whether irregular or 
tone.   New development which involves noisy uses should also be located away 
from:  
 
• Noise sensitive uses such as dwellings, hospitals, residential institutions, nursing 
homes, hotels, guesthouses, schools and other educational establishments  
• Noise sensitive land inc luding areas valued for their recreational and amenity 
reasons. Certain areas, particularly in rural places, may have very low 
background noise and the Council will take into account that the introduction of 
noisy activities may be especially disruptive.   
 
9.89 The potential impact of noise on wildlife, on conservation sites and, where relevant, 
the welfare of livestock will be taken into account in any planning determination.  
 
9.90 It may be acceptable in meeting other planning objectives that noise generating 
activities should be allowed near to or adjoining noise sensitive uses. In these 
circumstances, the design and layout of the development should reduce noise 
impact and conditions or planning obligations will be used to safeguard local 
amenity  
 
Lighting  
9.91 Lightin g becomes a problem where it is excessive, poorly designed and located, 
badly installed or poorly maintained. This can result in light pollution from a number 
of sources including:  
 
• sky glow: the orange glow seen around urban areas caused by a scattering of 
artificial light by dust particles and water droplets in the sky;  
• glare: the uncomfortable brightness of a light source when viewed against a 
darker background; and  
• light trespass: light spilling beyond the boundary of the property on which a light 
is located.  
 
9.92 Wherever possible, the use of artificial lighting should be  avoided as it has a 
number of negative impacts including increased energy use, detrimental impacts on 
local amenity and nature conservation and it can affect people’s health through 
disrupting sleep. Nevertheless, it is recognised that in specific circums tances Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  242 
   lighting can result in benefits including  safety of movement, security, extension of 
working hours, and for facilitating leisure activities.   
 
9.93 Where lighting is necessary, the Council will expect that, as far as reasonably 
possible, the design and future maintenance of any light system related to the 
proposed development will minimise light pollution.  
 
Air Quality  
9.94 Local Authorities are required to carry out periodic reviews of air quality in their 
areas, and to assess present and likely future quali ty against statutory air quality 
standards.   Air quality assessments may be required as part of an Environmental 
Impact Assessment, for a major development, or as a stand -alone air quality report 
submitted in support of a specific planning application. Whe ther an air quality 
assessment is requirement will depend on a number of issues including:  
 
• traffic generated, including the potential impact on peak flow;  
• whether it will have a significant impact on the traffic composition on local roads;  
• location of the proposed development, particularly where new development is 
proposed close to existing sources of air pollutants, including road traffic, 
industrial operations and agricultural operations;  
• whether the proposal includes significant new car p arking, taking into account 
car park turnover;  
• whether the proposed development may significantly affect Nitrogen deposition 
to sensitive habitats;  
• proposals that include biomass boilers or fuels; and  
• the time and scale of the demolition and/or construction phases of a 
development, particularly near sensitive locations, such as residential areas, or 
commercial operations that may be sensitive to dust.  
 
Soils  
9.95 Soil is essential finite , with a wide-ranging  functions and it is important that soils ar e 
managed sustainably, in order that they can retain the capacity to carry out these 
vital functions.  We rely on soil in relation to food production, water management 
and support for valuable biodiversity and ecosystems. As a large store of carbon,  it 
also plays a vital role in the fight against climate change.   Protecting soils must 
therefore be an important priority and this relates to soils within the urban area, 
where the negative impacts of development on soil resources need to be minimised.  
 
9.96 DEFRA ha s published a Code of Practice on the sustainable use of soils  on 
construction sites. This provides guidance to protect the soil resources. Although 
the Code itself is not legislatively binding, by following it DEFRA identifies that:  
 
• you will help protec t and enhance the soil resources on site and achieve wider 
benefits for the environment;  
• you may achieve cost savings for your business;  
• it may help you to achieve your business sustainability targets; and it  may help 
you to meet legal obligations regarding waste controls.  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  243 
   The Highways Agency and the Construction Industry Research and Information 
Association have produced a best practice guide on habitat translocation external 
site  which also includes useful  information on soil handling.  
 
Policy SD 10: Transport Infrastructure  
 
 
 
Policy SD 10: Transport Infrastructure  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO11, SO12, 
SO14.  
 
1. The Council will support development where:  
 
a. It reduces the need to travel by private motor vehicle and promotes smarter 
choices (to reduce congestion and air pollution);  
 
b. The transport network is well designed, with particular emphasis on high 
quality materials and appropriate landscape features, t aking into consideration 
the needs of all users;  
 
c. Parking provision conforms to local standards and can be shown to satisfy the 
requirements of the development;  
 
d. Parking is effectively designed and integrated into the public realm;  
 
e. It is legible and provides safe, direct and effective access for pedestrians; 
cyclists; and people with a disability;  
 
f. It is safe and convenient, and has excellent connections both wi thin the 
development and to neighbouring areas, and to public transport;  
 
g. It promotes the safe and efficient flow of traffic on the highway network; and  
 
h. Suitable provision is made for cyclists and people with a disability, where 
necessary.  
 
i. The standard s and principles set out in national best practice guidance are 
incorporated into the scheme.  
 
2. Proposed new development should:  
 
a. Protect established rights of way and cycle routes. Where possible, these 
should be incorporated into the scheme.  If this is not practical, established 
rights of way or cycle routes should be re -directed via the most suitable Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  244 
   route to maintain the connect ion to the neighbouring areas and the green 
infrastructure network.  
b. Where appropriate, create new rights of way and cycle routes which 
connect to the neighbouring areas and to the green infrastructure network.  
 
3. New development, singularly or combined with other proposed development, 
should demonstrate that a sufficient package of measures are proposed as 
part of the development to ensure that the wider transport system, in terms of 
effective operation, is not compromised.  Where development places additiona l 
demands on transport infrastructure appropriate mitigation will be required.  
 
4. Transport Assessments should be submitted alongside applications for large 
scale development. Smaller scale developments will require a Transport 
Statement. Comprehensive Trave l Plans should also be devised for residential 
developments and commercial development schemes where necessary, in 
accordance with Highway Authority standards.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Ashfield Transport Study 2016. Systra.  
• Nottinghamshire Local Transport Plan Strategy 2011 – 2026. 
Nottinghamshire County Council.  
• Gear change: a bold vision for cycling and walking (2020) 
Departme nt for Transport . 
• Cycle infrastructure design (LTN 1/20) (2020), Department for 
Transport.  
National Planning Policy 
and Guidance  • NPPF 2019, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2019,  Part 9: Promoting sustainable transport.  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Transport evidence bases in plan 
making and decision taking  
 
 
 
9.97 The Policy set out provision for the required transport infrastructure to support 
development with an emphasis on reducing the need to travel by the private motor 
vehicle.  
 
9.98 The Nottinghamshire Local Transport Plan (LTP3)117 details the transport strategy 
for the whole of Nottinghamshire for a fifteen year period. This Policy is closely 
linked to the objectives of the LTP3 in seeking to promote smarter choices which 
will reduce congestion on the highway network.  
 
9.99 New develop ment should not put a burden on the public highway or lead to an 
unacceptable increase in emissions in relation to air quality.  The Council will seek 
to ensure that new development promotes smarter choices which support 
sustainable patterns of travel. Thi s can be achieved in a number of ways but in land 
use planning terms new development should provide opportunities for good access 
 
117 Nottinghamshire County Council (2011) Nottinghamshire Local Transport Plan Strategy 2011/12 – 
2025/26 . Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  245 
   to public transport; walking and cycling routes, town centres and local services and 
facilities. Travel plans are also a usefu l tool for large scale residential developments 
and for commercial developments. To outline how a development will propose to 
promote sustainable travel.  
 
9.100  Where there are known areas of public transport deficiency, such as the area to the 
west of Hucknall . The Council will seek to address this by working with developers 
and service providers to promote well designed development which promotes 
smarter choices of travel.   
 
Design  
9.101  With regard to transport and movement, development proposals should be well 
designed in terms of the site layout, connectivity, legibility and landscaping; new 
neighbourhoods should create a sense of place with a strong identity which links 
well to the surrounding area. In achieving this, development proposals must create 
high quali ty public realm that enhances ‘place’, whilst providing an effective 
movement network.  
 
9.102  When designing the road network, including vehicular access points, consideration 
must be given to the needs of all users. Safety and convenience are key issues 
which must be addressed. The needs of pedestrians, cyclists118 and people with 
disabilities, including wheelchair users and the visually impaired, must be at the 
forefront of the design process.  
 
9.103  Development to which cyclists and pedestrians would reasonably be expected to 
have access will need to facilitate:  
 
• safe and convenient cycle access, which link to existing or future cycle routes;  
• provide for the safe and convenient access by pedestrians including those with 
limited mobility.  
 
9.104  New residential developments need to provide a safe, attractive and quality highway 
network for all us ers.  The Council will require all new residential developments to 
accord with the principles set out in both local and other relevant national standards, 
in particular Building for a Healthy Life standards.  
 
Highway Improvements  
9.105  Development within the District and in surrounding districts will impact on local 
roads and strategic routes including M1 junctions. Working in partnership with the 
Highway Authority, the Highways England, neighbouring authorities and other 
partners, the Council will seek to improve and ensure that the cumulative impact of 
development in the wider area will not adversely affect the operation of the highway 
and public transport networks.  This will be achieved through the implementation of 
projects and plans identified through the Local Plan, Infrastructure Delivery Plan, 
the Nottinghamshire Local Transport Plan (LTP3) and, where appropriate, other 
 
118 Nottinghamshire County Council (2006) Cycling Design Guide . Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  246 
   development schemes and studies.  Where a ppropriate, developer contributions will 
be required to enable transport improvement works within the affected area.  
 
9.106  Nottinghamshire County Council (the Highway Authority for Ashfield) is responsible 
for the implementation of LTP3. The Council  will requir e Transport Statements (TS) 
and Transport Assessments (TA) and Travel Plans to be submitted with certain 
proposals. Planning applications should accord with current standards and 
guidance set out in national and local highway design guides119.  
 
Policy SD11: Parking  
 
 
Policy SD1 1: Parking  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO11, SO12, SO14.  
 
1. The Council will promote an integrated, design -led approach to vehicle parking. 
Parking provision should be adequate to serve the proposed development, 
appropriately sited and complement the street scene. In order to achieve this, 
developments must meet the following criteria:  
 
a) Parking facilities should appropriately provide for the needs of the 
development;  
b) Off-street parking should be designed to incorporate safety and security 
measures, to minimise inappropriate parking and to minimise the urban heat 
island effect  by providing soft landscaping, permeable surfaces and other 
treatments to offset adverse impacts of surface water run -off; 
c) On-street parking must be well located and should be suitably integrated into 
the development scheme, utilising high quality materials and landscaping.  It 
must not dominate building and road frontage;  
d) Provision must be made for people with impaired mobil ity where necessary;  
e) Provision must be made for emergency service vehicles and delivery vehicles 
where necessary;  
f) Provision should be designed to:  
 
• include electrical car charging provision appropriate to the scale and use of 
the of the proposed development, and  
• incorporate sustainable urban drainage system appropriate to the scale 
and use of the proposed development  
 
Parking provisions will be required, taking into account local and national 
guidance on parking provisions for vehicles including c ycles.  
 
2. The Council will be flexible with parking provision where:  
 
 
119 At the time of publication, the Nottingh amshire Highway Design Guide  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  247 
   • The location of the development will result in a lower parking requirement 
including the close proximity to a major transport node.  
  
• The development includes realistic, alternative arrangements that result in a 
requirement for a lower parking provision and provides for a planning 
contribution to facilitate these alternative arrangements.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd  
• Nottinghamshire Local Transport Plan Strategy 2011 – 2026. 
Nottinghamshire County Council.  
• Cycle infrastructure design (LTN 1/20) (2020), Department for 
Transport.  
National Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2019, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2019,  Part 9: Promoting sustainable transport.  
• Ministerial Guidance -  Parking policy.  March 2015  
• Planning Practice Guidance: Transport evidence bases in plan 
making and decision taking  
 
 
9.107  Effective, well designed and considered parking provision is a key element of any 
development proposal. Insufficient and poorly located parking provision can lead to 
inappropriate parking on streets and verges, which has implications for the health 
and saf ety of all highway users. On street parking is very limited in some areas of 
the District, particularly in and around the main town centres.  
 
9.108  There is no single best solution to resolve the issue of vehicle parking. A 
combination of parking typologies (on -street, off -street, courtyards etc.) may be 
required to create an acceptable solution in terms of design and function. The 
Residential Parking Standards Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)  provides 
further guidance on the design and amount of parking ne eded to support residential 
development. Developments, standards are   set out in the Nottinghamshire 
Highway Design Guide.   All proposals should also be guided by national best 
practice and guidance such as the Manual for Streets and Building for a Health y 
Life 12.  
 
9.109  All development proposals should consider the parking requirements of their 
scheme from the initial stages of the design process, ensuring it is integrated and 
not considered as an afterthought. Development proposals should consider the 
following elements:  
 
• Design & Siting – parking must be siting and designed to reduce its impact on 
the public realm (visual and actual). Proposals should apply high quality, 
permeable materials, appropriate landscaping and a considered siting to help 
achieve this. All parking should be overlooked by surrounding development 
and/or in appropriate circumstances, have sufficient security and CCTV 
coverage to ensure adequate users and vehicle safety.  
 
• Pedestrians & Cyclists - Parking spaces and facilities s hould be designed so that 
they do not inconvenience pedestrians and cyclists.  The street should be Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  248 
   designed so that it can be easily and safely used and navigated by pedestrians 
and cyclists, including people using wheelchairs and pushchairs . Cycling is a n 
important mode of travel offering a more sustainable alternative to the car and 
making a positive contribution to the overall character of a place, public health 
and to tackling climate change through reductions in carbon emissions.  
Providing well -locat ed, safe and secure cycle parking is a major factor in 
encouraging people to cycle as an alternative to the car.  Applications should 
have regard to local  and national guidance on anticipated requirements for 
different types of development.  
 
• Disabled park ing provision must accord with the standards adopted by 
Nottinghamshire County Council. Where necessary, an assessment of need 
should be undertaken to ascertain the level of disabled parking that will be 
required.  Prospective developers will need to demon strate that adequate 
parking space is being provided to enable people with a disability to use the 
building.  
 
• Parking Solutions – Off Street – proposals should apply a mix of parking 
solutions appropriate to the site. Large surface  car parks and long secti ons of 
bays at road or property frontage will not be supported. Off -street parking should 
provide a sufficient amount of space in order to prevent excessive overspill 
parking on adjacent streets. This can be provided in the form of in -curtilage 
parking or small parking courts.  Bays should be well connected to the wider 
development and not satellite from the development they serve, in order to 
discourage inappropriate or unnecessary on -street parking.  
 
• Parking Solution – On-Street - On-street parking must n ot lead to street 
cluttering. They must be integrated into the wider public realm and include 
landscape features to reduce the potential for unmanaged parking beyond the 
designed bays. Parking bays should be clearly delineated and not obstruct 
footpaths or  cycle ways. Large groups of bays will not be supported.  
 
• Garages - Garages should be large enough to accommodate vehicles  for the 
proposed development . 
 
9.110  The Government has taken the decision that by 2040 no new diesel vehicles will be 
produced. The impl ication is that more electric vehicles will be on our road and 
there needs to be the necessary infrastructure to support electric vehicles.   Rapid 
charging points will be particularly important in the public domain. In addition, 
domestic properties and co mmercial premises need to provide for the opportunity to 
charge vehicles close to the parking of vehicles.  
 
9.111  The water run off  from impervious surfaces can result in localised flooding.  
Therefore, it is necessary to reduce flood risk by incorporating sustainable urban 
drainage system.  
 
 
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  249 
   Exceptions  
9.112  Generally, development will only be permitted where it is in accordance with current 
Parking Standards. The Council will work closely with the Highway Authority on 
issues relating to parking.  
 
9.113  In exceptional circumstances a more flexible approach may be r equired and parking 
standards could be negotiable. In particular, developments in areas in close 
proximity to major transport nodes, such as railway and bus stations, may warrant a 
more flexible approach where there are no implications for amenity or healt h and 
safety.    In appropriate locations or developments, this may include alternative 
proposals, which lead to lower parking requirements.  For example, the provision of 
a car club as part of the development.   
 
9.114  The onus is on the developer or applicant to demonstrate that the proposed parking 
facilities or alternative proposals are sufficient to meet the needs of the 
development as a whole.  
 
 
 
Policy SD12: Advertisements  
 
 
Policy SD1 2: Advertisements  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO13, SO14.  
 
Advertisements, including boards and signs, will be supported where they:  
 
a) Do not have a negative impact on the visual amenity of the street scene.  
 
b) Do not affect public safety.  
 
c) Do not have a negative impact on the character of an area or a building.  
 
d) Preserve or enhance the special character of conservation areas and  does not 
have an adverse effect on listed buildings, Scheduled Ancient Monuments and 
other heritage assets or the ir setting.  
 
Evidence base  • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
National 
Planning 
Policy and 
Guidance  • NPPF 2019, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
 
 
 
9.115  The Policy aims to ensure that adverts do not have detrimental impacts and 
contribute to maintaining  the character and appearance of an area.   
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  250 
   9.116  Outdoor advertisements are essential to commercial activity in a diverse economy. 
Outdoor advertisements take m any forms. Among the most common are:  
 
• fascia signs and projecting signs on shops.  
• pole signs at petrol -filling stations.  
• sign boards at factories.  
• advance signs alongside the highway.  
• menu boards at restaurants and cafés.  
• poster hoardings.  
• notices announc ing the visit of a travelling fair.  
 
9.117  Advertising is a part of everyday life, but poorly sited or badly designed 
advertisements and signage can have a detrimental effect on the character and 
appearance of areas and may raise issues of public safety. Adverti sements and 
signage should not dominate the street scene in terms of size, scale, lighting and 
positioning.  
 
9.118  The design of advertisements should complement the architecture of the host 
building  and the area. Consideration should also be given to the cumula tive effect of 
other signage and the potential for precedent setting. In particular regard should be 
had to:  
 
• the impact on architectural features.  
• the size and style of signage boards and lettering.  
• materials, colour and finish.  
• the effects of illumination, where appropriate.  
 
These design details should be considered as an integral part of the development .  
 
9.119  The Council places an emphasis on improvements to town centres and shopping 
parades.   It is important that shops and other uses signage should facilitate the 
character and appearance of the area.  Shop front fascia signage should fit flush 
with the fascia (unless it can be demonstrated that this is not possible), be 
positioned below the first floor and blend with the architectural style of the shop front 
and overall colour scheme.  
 
9.120  Where advertisements affect heritage assets, the test is to ensure that no harm 
occurs to the heritage asset or its setting. In order to prevent this, the Council will 
require a planning statement to be s ubmitted with an application which sets out how 
the character of the heritage asset an, where appropriate, their setting has been 
taken into account in the size and design of the advertisement s. 
 
 
 
 
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  251 
   Policy SD13: Provision and Protection of Health and Community 
Facilities  
 
 
Policy SD1 3: Provision and Protection of Health and Community Facilities  
 
Strategic Objectives  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO5, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO14.  
 
1. The Council will work with developers and strategic partners to provide District 
wide high quality, accessible and inclusive health, and community facilities by:  
  
a) Enhancing health, wellbeing, social, spiritual, sport, leisure and cultural 
provision for the use by schools, clubs, community organisations and the 
public;  
 
b) Encouraging the  co-location of educational, health and community facilities 
where opportunities arise;  
 
2. Where additional facilities are needed as a result of a development proposal, 
the Council will require the provision of:  
 
• a new community facility on site or contributions towards the expansion of 
existing or new community provision off site; and/or  
• a new health facility on site or contributions towards the expansion of existing 
or new health provision off site.  
 
For larger development schemes, the Council may  require the applicant to submit 
a Health Impact Assessment to identify the health implications for the local 
population arising from the development.  
 
3. Development for the alternative use of buildings or sites required for the 
provision of health and commu nity facilities will not be permitted unless:  
 
a. Adequate replacement provision is made;  
 
b. There is no longer a requirement for the facility in that location or a n 
alternative facility in the locality has the capacity to meet those need; and 
 
c. For commercial community facilities, it can be demonstrated the current use 
is no longer economically viable and there is no prospect of it becoming 
viable.  
 
Evidence base • Sustainability Appraisal, August 2021. Wood Group UK Ltd.  
• Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership Strategy Be Healthy, Be 
Happy, 2021 – 2025 Ashfield Health and Wellbeing Partnership . 
National Planning 
Policy and Guidance  • NPPF 2019, Part 2: Achieving sustainable development.  
• NPPF 2019, Part 8: Promoting healthy and safe communities.  Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  252 
   • Planning Practice Guidance: Healthy and safe communities as of 
August 2021.  
 
 
9.121  The provision of a full range of community and health services is of importance to 
the social and economic well -being of Ashfield residents.  These facilities play an 
important role in facilitating social interaction , providing recreational, educational  
and cultural needs and creating healthy, inclusive communities.  
 
9.122  Comm unity facilities include local shops, meeting places, sports venues, open 
space, cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship.  This list is not 
exhaustive and they may include other community facilities or other local services, 
which enhance th e sustainability of communities and residential environments.  
 
9.123  The Council will support the co -location of community facilities and other services, 
where viable. Working in partnership with other service providers and the voluntary 
sector provides an effe ctive and accessible way to meet the needs of communities. 
If services and facilities can be housed within a single building or area there can be 
numerous benefits to users and providers; aiding accessibility, increasing users and 
sharing resources.    
 
9.124  New development has the potential to result in increased pressure on Ashfield’s 
existing health and community facilities, either cumulatively or individually. Where 
appropriate, the Council will expect schemes that create additional demand for 
health and com munity facilities to make an appropriate contribution to meet local 
needs. This may be through on -site provision or a contribution towards improving 
existing facilities close to the development, or within the appropriate catchment for 
the health or communi ty facilities. When assessing the impact of new development,  
the Council will consider:  
 
• the likely number of future occupants of the development and their impact on the 
demand for health and community facilities;  
• the capacity of existing health and community facilities and their accessible to 
the development;  
• the accommodation requirements of community service providers operating in 
the area.  
 
9.125  A Health Impact Assessment may be required on developments of 50 dwelli ngs or 
more. It is anticipated that any Health Impact Assessment will utilise The 
Nottinghamshire Planning and Health Framework (2019 -2022)  document or any 
update.  
 
 
Loss of Health or Community Facilities  
9.126  The Council will resist the loss of health and com munity facilities unless there is no 
longer a requirement for the facility in that location. The application will need to 
demonstrate that:  
 Ashfield Draf t Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Chapter 9 – Design  
 
  
P a g e  253 
   • No shortfall in provision will be created by the loss;  
• Adequate alternative facilities are already available in the area;  
• A replacement facility that meets the needs of the local population will be 
provided;  
• The facility is no longer required in its current use;  
 
9.127  In addition, for commercial community facilities run for business purposes to make a  
profit  (although there may be exceptions), such as local shops or public houses, the 
Council will require evidence that the facility is not viable  in accordance with Policy 
SD6: Assessing Development Viability and Development Demand.  The Council will 
utilise exi sting tools such as The Campaign for Real Ale “Public House Viability 
Test”  or other similar evaluation method to help assess the viability of the business 
and to make an informed judgement on the need for the facility in the locality.   
 
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  254 
   Appendix 1 - Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations  
 
Affordable Housing:  A definition of affordable housing is set out in the Glossary of the 
National Planning Policy Framework.  
 
Agricultural Building:  Is a structure designed and constructed to house farm implements, 
hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural produc ts.  This structure shall not be a 
place of human habitation or a place of employment where agricultural products are 
processed, treated or packaged; nor shall it be a place used by the public.  
 
Aged or Veteran Tree:  A tree which, because of its great age,  size or condition is of 
exceptional value for wildlife, in the landscape or culturally . 
 
Allocation:  Land identified in the Local Plan as appropriate for a specific land use.  
 
Ancient Monument:  A structure regarded by the Secretary of State for the Enviro nment, 
Transport and the Regions as being of national importance by virtue of its historic, 
architectural, traditional or archaeological interest. Scheduled Ancient Monuments are 
listed in a schedule compiled under the requirements of Section 1 of the Anci ent 
Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act, 1979.  
 
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR):  A report which is produced annually to establish what 
is happening now and what may happen in the future and compare trends against existing 
Local Plan policies to determine  if changes need to be made.  
 
Archaeological Interest: There will be archaeological interest in a heritage asset if it 
holds, or potentially may hold, evidence of the past human activity worthy of expert 
investigation at some point.  Heritage assets with a rchaeological interest are the primary 
source of evidence about the substance and evolution of places, and of the people and 
cultures that made them.  
 
Basic Payment Scheme : Was part of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), as the 
principal agricultural subsidy scheme in the European Union.  Under the scheme farmers 
have freedom to farm to the demands of the market as payments are not linked to 
production, and environmentally friendly farming practices, known as cross  compliance , 
are acknowledged.  
 
Best and most versatile agricultural land:  Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural 
Land Classification.  
 
Biodiversity:  The range of life forms which  constitute the living world, from microscopic 
organisms to the largest tree or animal, and the habitat and ecosystem in which they live.  
 
Blue Infrastructure (space) : Encompasses all the water and wetland network (rivers, 
streams, lakes, canals, ponds, re servoirs wetlands, etc.)  These ‘blue’ features  can play an 
important part within a green  infrastructure strategy.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  255 
   BREEAM: An Environmental Assessment Method used to assess the environmental 
performance of both new and existing buildings.  It is regarded by the UK’s construction 
and property sectors as the measure of best practice in environmental design and 
management.  
 
Brownfield Land: A general term used to define land which has been previously 
developed.  It excludes land that was previously developed but where the remains of 
permanent structure or fixed surface structures have blended into the landscape in the 
progress of time (See NPPF Glossary ‘Previously developed land’.)  
 
Census of Population:   A survey of the entire population of the United Kingdom, 
undertaken on a ten -yearly basis.  
 
Character:  A term relating to Conservation Areas or Listed Buildings, but also to the 
appearance of any rural or urban location in terms of its landscape or the layout of streets 
and open spaces, often giving places their own distinct identity.  
 
Civic Space: A subset of open space consisting of urban squares, markets and other 
paved or hard landscaped areas with a civic function.  
 
Community facilities: Community f acilities  are set out in the National Planning Policy 
Framework as including local shops, meeting places, sports venues, cultural buildings, 
public houses and places of worship and other local services to enhance the sustainability 
of communities and resid ential environments.  
 
Comparison Goods: A term used in retailing to indicate goods purchased for longer term 
use and likely to be subject to ‘comparison’ between suppliers before purchase. For 
example, clothing, footwear, household goods, books, stationery , chemist goods, 
photographic goods, jewellery, cycles, pushchairs.  
 
Conversion Method Statement: A Conversion Method Statement sets out the specific 
programme of works to be undertaken in order to convert a building and should be 
submitted as part of a pl anning application for the conversion of a building.  
 
Conservation Area:  An area designated by Local Planning Authority under Section 69 of 
the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act, 1990, regarded as being an 
area of special architectural  or historic interest, the character or appearance of which is 
desirable to preserve or enhance.  
 
Convenience Goods:  A term used in retailing to indicate goods purchased for regular 
consumption.  For example,  food, groceries, drink, confectionary, tobacco,  newspapers.  
 
Countryside:  For the purposes of the Local Plan, it refers the rural parts of the District 
lying outside the defined Main Urban Areas and Named Settlements.   
 
Density:  The intensity of development in a given area. Usually measured, for housi ng, in 
terms of number of dwellings per hectare.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  256 
   Department for Communities and Local Government (CLG): The Government 
Department responsible for planning and local government.  
 
Designated Heritage Asset:  A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed 
Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or 
Conservation Area designated under the relevant legislation.  
 
Development Plan Document (DPD):  A spatial planning document under the provisions 
of Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 which is designed to secure the 
development and use of land in the local planning authority’s area.  It includes the Local 
Plan 
 
Duty to cooperate: The duty to c ooperate, (NPPF paragraph 24) , is a requirement by the 
Government for public bodies to work together on planning issues that cross administrative 
boundaries, particularly those which relate to strategic priorities.  Local Planning 
Authorities must work wit h neighbouring authorities and other bodies, where necessary, to 
ensure that the development requirements of both the district and the surrounding areas 
are met.  
 
Economic development: includes development within the office uses, industry and 
warehousing u ses, public and community uses, leisure and tourism uses and main town 
centre uses. It also includes any other development which provides employment 
opportunities, generates wealth or produces or generates an economic output or product. 
It does not include  housing development.  
 
Edge of centre: For retail purposes, a location that is well connected to and up to 300 
metres from the Primary Shopping Area. For all other main town centre uses, a location 
within 300 metres of a town centre boundary. For office de velopment, this includes 
locations outside the town centre but within 500 metres of a public transport interchange.  
In determining whether a site falls within the definition of edge of centre, account should be 
taken of local circumstances.   
 
Employment Land: For the purposes of this Local Plan, the term employment land will 
normally refer to land intended for us e as offices, light industrial, general industrial or 
storage and distribution.  Under the T own and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 
(as amended) , Sui Generis employment uses outside these categories but of a similar 
character may also be appropriate, subject to normal site planning considerations.  
 
Environmental Assets: Physical features and conditions of notable value occurring within 
the District.  
 
Farm shops:  A farm shop will form an ancillary activity to a commercial farm .  
 
Green Belt:  Describes an area of land surrounding certain cities and large built -up areas 
whose fundamental aim is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open; the 
essential characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their permanence.  (See 
NPPF).  The Green Belt is identified as having five distinct purposes:  
i to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built up areas;  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  257 
   ii to prevent neighbouring towns from merging into one another;  
iii to assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment;  
iv to pres erve the setting and special character of historic towns,  and;  
v to assist in urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other 
urban land.  
 
Greenfield Run -off: This is the surface water run -off from a greenfield site before 
development.  
 
Green Infrastructure: The network of protected sites, green space, blue space and 
linkages which provide for multi -functional uses relating to ecological services, quality of 
life and economic value.  This includes but is not limited to  parks, open spaces, playing 
fields, woodlands, allotments, cemeteries, private gardens and river corridors, green roofs 
and wall as well as agricultural land, country parks, private estates and wa steland.  
Greenfield Land: A term used to define land that has never been built on or  where the 
remains of any structure or activity have been blended into the landscape over time. 
Greenfield land should not be confused with Green Belt land (see definition  above).  
Green Wedge: Green wedges are local policy designations comprising open areas around 
and between parts of settlements, which maintain the distinction between the countryside 
and built up areas, prevent the coalescence (merging) of adjacent places and can also 
provide recreational opportunities.  
 
Groundwater:  An important part of the natural water cycle present underground, within 
strata known as aquifers.   
 
Gypsies and Travelers:  Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin , 
including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’ 
educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but excluding 
members of an organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people trave lling 
together as such.  
 
Ha/ha (Hectare):  An area 10,000 sq. metres or 2.471 acres.  
 
Health and Wellbeing : Health is often considered as being an absence of illness or 
disability.  Health and wellbeing is much wider and is a combination of physical, mental  
and social factors.  (Nottinghamshire Health & Wellbeing Strategy 2014 -2017).  
 
Heritage Asset: A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having 
a degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its 
heritage interest.  Heritage asset includes designated heritage assets and assets identified 
by the local planning authority (including local listing).  
 
Historic Environment:  All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction 
between people and places through time, including all surviving physical remains of past 
human activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and planted or 
managed flora.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  258 
    
Historic Environment Record:  Information services that seek to provide access to 
comprehensive and dynamic resources relating to the historic environment of a defined 
geographic area for public benefit and use.  
 
Infrastructure : The basic structures and facilities necessary for the efficient functioning of 
a given geographical area.  
 
Key Diagram:   Map, picture, figure or plan which is integral to the importance of the 
document.  
 
Knowledge Economy:  Classification of a particular individual industry, if 25% of its 
workforce is qualified to graduate standard.  
 
Listed Buildings:  A buildin g or structure of special architectural or historic interest 
included on a list prepared by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport under 
Section 1 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act, 1990. Consent is 
required for its  demolition in whole or part, and for any works of alteration or extension 
(both internal and external) which would affect its special interest.  
 
Local Development Document (LDD):  A document under the provisions of Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004  that can be either a Development Plan Document or a 
Supplementary Planning Document.  
 
Local Development Framework (LDF):  A term used to describe a portfolio of Local 
Development Documents, which set out the spatial strategy for the development of the 
district. It is now typically identified as the Local Plan.  
 
Local Development Scheme (LDS):  A document setting out the timescales for the 
production of the Local Development Documents. (Usually the Local Plan).  
 
Local Labour Force:  There are a number of d ifferent definitions of local labour markets.  
However, in simple terms the labour market is made up of:  
 
• self-containment, which is measured as the share of the population of an area that is 
employed locally, and the share of the employed who also live i n the local area.  
• the commuting relationships of the area with other areas   
 
The local  labour  force reflects the population of Ashfield that lives within the District and 
which is economically active, being identified by the application of economic activ ity rates 
(by age and sex) to the population.  
 
Local Nature Reserve (LNR):  Established by a Local Authority under the powers of the 
National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949.  
 
Local Plan:  Comprises a Written Statement and a Policies Map.  The W ritten Statement 
includes the Authority’s detailed policies and proposals for the development and use of Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  259 
   land together with reasoned justification for these proposals.   (A development plan 
document).  
 
Local Planning Authority (LPA):  A Local Planning Authority is the local authority or 
council that is empowered by law to exercise planning functions for a particular area of the 
United Kingdom.  
 
Local Strategic Partnership (LSP):  An overall partnership of people that brings together 
organisations from the public, private, community and voluntary sector within a local 
authority area, with the objective of improving people's quality of life.  
 
Local Shopping Centre: Shopping areas de fined on the Local Plan Policies Map which 
are smaller than town centres and serve local communities.  Local shopping centres 
usually contain small scale development which offers a variety of convenience goods and 
services.  
 
Local Transport Plan: Undertake n by Nottinghamshire County Council and by 
Nottingham City Council the local transport plans sets out the transport strategy and 
outlines a programme of measures to be delivered over the short, medium and long term.  
The strategies covers all types of tran sport including public transport, walking, cycling, cars 
and freight.  
 
Local Wildlife Sites: Site of local importance for nature conservation or geology identified 
by the Nottinghamshire Biological and Geological Records Centre.  They were formally 
known a s Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC).   
 
Minerals Local Plan: In Nottinghamshire prepared by the County Council acting as the 
Authority responsible for minerals related issues.  Key issues include the amount of 
minerals we will need to produ ce to meet demand, the location of future sites and the 
social and environmental impacts of mineral working.  
 
National Planning Policy Framework: The N PPF sets out the Government’s planning 
policies for England and how these are expected to be applied.  It  provides a framework of 
polices within which local people and their accountable council can produce their own 
distinctive local and neighbourhood plans, which reflect the needs and priorities of their 
communities.  
 
Nottingham Express Transit (NET):  The l ight rail system for Greater Nottingham with 
stops at Hucknall and Butlers Hill in Ashfield.    
 
Open Space: Any unbuilt land within the boundary of a village, town or city which 
provides, or has the potential to provide, environmental, social and/or econom ic benefits to 
communities, including visual amenity , whether direct or indirect.  It can include areas of 
water such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs.     
 
Out of centre: A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre but not necessarily 
outside the urban area.  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  260 
   Physical Infrastructure: Physical infrastructure refers to the technical services that 
support, sustain or enhance living conditions.  This includes but is not limited to providing 
energy, water, telecommunications, hig hways, bridges, airports, waste management and 
disposal that allow communities and local businesses to thrive.  
 
Pitch: A pitch on a “gypsy and traveller” site. As a general guide an average family pitch 
should be capable of accommodating an amenity building, a large trailer and touring 
caravan, parking space for 2 vehicles and a small garden area. (CLG, Designing Gypsy & 
Traveller Sites: Good Practice Guidance, 2008).  
 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004:  Government legislation which sets out 
the provisions for the local planning system.  
 
Planning Practice Guidance:  Published by the Department for Communities and Local 
Government to provide guidance to the N PPF.  
 
Plot: A pitch on a “travelling showpeople” site (often called a “yard”).  T he area of land for 
which a site license is paid and includes the area set aside  by one family unit as well as 
land set aside for the storage and maintenance of their equipment.  The Showman’s Guild 
recommend a minimum area of 0.2 ha (0.5 acres) per yard.  
 
Previously Developed Land (PDL): Land which has in the past been a developed si te 
(see Brownfield land).  
 
Primary Frontage: Primary frontages are located within primary shopping areas within 
town centres.  They should contain a high proportion of retail uses which may include food, 
drinks, clothing and household goods.  
 
Primary Shopp ing Area: Defined area where retail development is concentrated 
(generally comprising primary and those secondary frontages which are contiguous and 
closely relating to the primary frontage).  
 
Prior Approval - In relation to planning permission this can be granted through:  
  
• A planning application which is submitted to the local planning authority, who can 
balance the impact of the development including on the environment and community 
with the economic benefits, and make a decision; and  
 
• Government can g rant planning permission for specific types of development under the 
General Permitted Development Order.  Most permitted development rights are subject 
to conditions and limitations. One such condition on certain classes of permitted 
development is the ne ed to apply to the Local Planning Authority for its 'Prior Approval'; 
or to determine if its 'Prior Approval' will be required. This allows the Local Planning 
Authority to consider the proposals, their likely impacts in regard to certain factors (e.g. 
transport and highways) and how these may be mitigated.  
 
Recreational Equine Development: Means the keeping and training of horses/ponies 
which are owned by the occupant or owner of the property for leisure purposes.  The Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Appendices  
P a g e  261 horses/ponies are not kept for remuner ation, hire or sale and the development is not open 
for public use.  
Regeneration : The Review of sub national economic development and regeneration, July 
2007 defined regeneration “as the broad process of reversing physical, economic and 
social decline in an area where market forces will not do this without intervention”.  (HM 
Treasury, Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform and Depa rtment for 
Communities and Local Government).  Consequently, regeneration is a comprehensive 
approach, which includes:  
•Economic attributes – relating to employment, skills, and economic opportunities;
•Social attributes – quality of life, health, crime, com munity engagement;
•Physical attributes – housing types and condition, neighbourhood centres, the public
realm; and
•Environmental attributes – the impact on biodiversity, low energy efficiency, localised
pollution and poor visual appearance.
Regional Plan, Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS):  The East Midlands Regional Plan 
(RSS) was issued in March 2009, and provided a framework of planning policies for East 
Midland Region. This document was formally revoked in April 2013.  
Renewable Energy:  The term ‘renewable energy’ covers those resources which occur 
and recur naturally in the environment.  Such resources include heat from the earth or sun, 
power from the wind and from water and energy from plant material and from the recycling 
of domestic, ind ustrial or agricultural waste, and from recovering energy from domestic, 
industrial or agricultural waste.  
Robin Hood Line:  The passenger railway line developed to connect Nottingham to 
Worksop.  Stations in Ashfield are located at Hucknall, Kirkby -in-Ashfield and Sutton 
Parkway . 
Rural Area:  Those parts of the District identified as Green Belt or Countryside.  
The Rurals – Covers the District Council wards of Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood and 
the villages of Selston, Jacksdale, Bagthorpe and Underwood.  
Saved Policies: Policies in the current Local Plan which have been retained and are 
utilised in making planning decisions.  
Secondary Frontage: Secondary frontages provide greater opportunities for a diversity of 
main town centre uses such as restaurants, cinemas and businesses.  
Section 106 agreement (s106): Planning obligations (or “section 106 agreements”) are 
an established and valuable mechanism for securing necessary infrastructure arising from 
a development proposal.  They are commonly u sed to bring development in line with the 
objectives of sustainable development as outlined through the relevant local, regional and 
national planning policies.  The agreements can be used, for example, to provide new or 
improved open spaces, better sustai nable transport links, or more affordable housing.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Appendices  
P a g e  262 Sequential approach/sequential test:  A planning principle that seeks to identify, allocate 
or develop certain types or locations of land before others.  For example, brownfield 
housing sites before greenf ield sites, or town  centre  retail sites before out -of-centre  sites 
or Flood Zone 1 before Flood Zone 2 or 3 . 
Setting of a Heritage Asset:  The surroundings in which a heritage asset is experienced. 
Its extent is not fixed and may change as the asset and it s surroundings evolve.  Elements 
of setting may make a positive or negative contribution to the significance of an asset, may 
affect the ability to appreciate that significance or may be neutral.  
Shopping parades: A small row of shops within a predominant ly residential area which 
provide convenience goods and retail services to the local community.  
Significance (For Heritage Policy):  The value of a heritage asset to this and future 
generations because of its heritage interest.  That interest may be archaeological, 
architectural, artistic or historic.  Significance derives not only from a heritage asset’s 
physical presence, but also fr om its setting.  
Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC):  Site of local importance for nature 
conservation or geology identified by the Nottinghamshire Biological and Geological 
Records Centre.  They have been renamed as Local Wildlife Sites .  
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI):  The designation under Se ction 28 of the 
Wildlife and Countryside Act, 1981, of an area of land of special interest by reason of its 
flora, fauna, geological or physiological features.  
Small Dwelling: A dwelling with a floor area of 80 square metres or less as it existed on 
the 1  July 1982, or as the dwelling was originally built or legally established, if the 
residential use post -dates 1 July 1982.  
Smarter choices: Smarter choices are ‘soft’ transport measures which are aimed at 
helping people to choose to reduce their car use w hile enhancing the attractiveness of 
alternatives.  They include workplace and school travel plans; personalised travel 
planning, public transport information and marketing; car clubs and car sharing schemes; 
teleworking, teleconferencing and home shopping . 
Social Infrastructure: Social infrastructure includes a wide variety of services that are 
essential to the sustainability and wellbeing of a community.  This includes but is not 
limited too  educational facilities including early years education, primary  education, 
secondary education, further education and adult learning; Health services including 
primary and secondary health; sports and leisure facilities; libraries; theatres; community 
centres, meeting rooms and halls; cemeteries; faith facilities; and  public houses.  
Soundness : Under the National Planning Policy Framework 20 21 paragraph 35  
 a local planning authority should submit a plan for examination which it considers is 
“sound” – namely that it is:  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Appendices  
P a g e  263 a.Positively prepared – providing a strategy which, as a minimum, seeks to meet the
area’s objectively assessed needs21; and is informed by agreements with other
authorities, so that unmet need from neighbouring areas is accommodated where it is
practical to do so and is consistent with achi eving sustainable development;
b.Justified – an appropriate strategy, taking into account the reasonable alternatives, and
based on proportionate evidence;
c.Effective – deliverable over the plan period, and based on effective joint working on
cross -boundary s trategic matters that have been dealt with rather than deferred, as
evidenced by the statement of common ground; and
d.Consistent with national policy – enabling the delivery of sustainable development in
accordance with the policies in this Framework and ot her statements of national
planning policy, where relevant.
Starter Homes:  Defined under the Housing and Planning Act 2016 as a new dwelling 
which is available for purchase by qualifying first -time buyers only (being at least 23 years 
old but has not yet reached the age of 40).  They are sold at a discount of at least 20% of 
the market value with a price cap (2016) outside Greater London of £250,000.  Any future 
sale or letting is subject any regulations made by the Secretary of State.  There is a 
statutor y duty on local planning authorities to require starter homes on a planning 
application.    
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI):   This document informs of how  the Council 
intends to engage the community on all major planning applications and in the p reparation 
of the Local Plan.   
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD):  Provide supplementary information in 
respect of the policies in Development Plan Documents (Local Plan).  They do not form 
part of the Development Plan and are not subject to independent examination.  
Sustainability Appraisal (SA):  Examines the social, environmental and economic effects 
of strategies and policies in a Local Plan from the outset of preparation to allow decisions 
to be made that accord with sustainable development.  
Sustainable Communities: Places in which people want  to live, now and in the future.  
They embody the principles of sustainable development at the local level.  This means 
they improve quality of life for all whilst safeguarding the environment for future 
generations. (Source DCLG)  
Sustainable Community St rategy:  A joint plan agreed by the Local Strategic 
Partnerships to enhance the economic, social and environmental wellbeing of each 
District/Borough.  
Sustainable Development:  International and national bodies have set out broad 
principles of sustainable d evelopment.  Resolution 42/187 of the United Nations General 
Assembly defined sustainable development as meeting the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.  The UK 
Sustainable Development Strate gy Securing the Future set out five ‘guiding principles’ of 
sustainable development: living within the planet’s environmental limits; ensuring a strong, Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Appendices  
P a g e  264 healthy and just society; achieving a sustainable economy; promoting good governance; 
and using sound s cience responsibly.  
Town  centre : An area defined on the Local Plan Policies Map which includes primary 
shopping areas.  Town centres are predominantly occupied by main town center uses 
within or adjacent to the primary shopping area.  Main town  centre  uses include:  Retail 
development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment 
facilities the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, 
drive through restaurants, bars and pubs, night -clubs, ca sinos, health and fitness centres, 
indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices, and arts, culture and tourism 
development (including theatres, museum, galleries and concert halls, hotels and 
conference facilities).   
Transport assessment: A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out transport 
issues relating to a proposed development.  It identifies what measures will be required to 
improve accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, particularly for alte rnatives to the 
car such as walking, cycling and public transport and what measures will need to be taken 
to deal with the anticipated transport impacts of the development.  
Transport statement:  A simplified version of a transport assessment where it is ag reed 
the transport issues arising out of development proposals are limited and a full transport 
assessment is not required.  
Travel plan:  A long -term management strategy for an organisation or site that seeks to 
deliver sustainable transport objectives thr ough action and is articulated in a document 
that is regularly reviewed.  
Traveller ( gypsies and travelers ): ‘Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or 
origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or 
depen dents’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but 
excluding members of an  organised  group of travelling showpeople or circus people 
travelling together as such.’  Planning policy for  traveller  sites 2015, Department of 
Communities and Local Government.  
Travelling Showpeople:  Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding fairs, 
circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together as such).  This includes such persons 
who on the gr ounds of their own or their family’s or dependents’  more localised pattern of 
trading, educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but 
excludes Gypsies and Travellers as defined above. Planning policy for  traveller  sites 2015,  
Department for Communities and Local Government.   
Waste Local Plan:  In Nottinghamshire prepared by the County Council acting as the 
Authority responsible for waste related issues including disposal, treatment, transfer and 
recycling within the County.  
Wellbeing: See health and wellbeing.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Appendices  
P a g e  265 Worklessness:  Refers to people who are unemployed or economically inactive, and who 
are in receipt of working age benefits.’ (Social Exclusion Unit, 2004).  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038  Appendices  
P a g e  266 Appendix 2 - Five Year Land Supply and Housing Trajectory  
Five Year Housing Land Supply (post adoption)  
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) places a duty on Local Planning 
Authorities to demonstrate a supply of specific deliverable sites sufficient to provide five 
years’ worth of housing a gainst their requirements  (5YHLS) .  
The following calculation refers to a five year period post adoption to ensure that the Local 
Plan will meet the requirements of the NPPF.  
Five Year Housing Requirement (Dwellings)  
Local Housing Need @ 457 dpa x 5 years  2285  
Add 20% buffer  457 
Total 5 year requirement including buffer  2742  
Annual requirement including buffer  548 
Housing Land Supply (Dwellings)  
Housing allocations deliverable within 5 years (2023 -2028)  3421  
Small site planning permissions deliverable within 5 years  327 
Discount applied to permissions based on historic lapse rate  -132
Permitted Development deliverable within 5 years  5 
Residential Institutions (C2) deliverable within 5 years# 4 
Small site w indfall allowance (2026 to 2028)  120 
Total amount of housing available and deliverable for the 
next 5 year period  3745  
Calculation of 5 year Housing Land Supply  
Deliverable sites for the 5 year period  3745  
Divided by annual requirement for next 5 years  548 
Equates in years to  6.83 
Oversupply (+) or undersupply ( -) of dwellings  1003  
# dwelling equivalent  based on planning practice guidance ratio of 1.8  
It should be noted that the council do not ordinarily include a small site windfall allowance 
in the 5YHLS calculation.  However, as this particular calculation relates to the time period 
2023 to 2028, it is appropriate to include a figure for years 2026 -2028, and is offset by 
excluding  delivery from current planning permissions  for the years 2021 -2023.  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  267 
   Anticipated Annual Housing Delivery by Site  
 
The following schedule gives details of anticipated delivery on individual sites where the yield exceeds 10 dwellings, together with a 
summary of delivery on smaller sites.  
 
Hucknall Area  
 
 
 
Site Allocations without Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
Ref.Planning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year  10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Ha HK009 Seven Stars PH, West 
Street / Ogle Street, 
Hucknall0.66 24 24 24
H1Hb HK013 V/2017/0575
V/2019/0472Linby Boarding Kennels, 
East of Church Lane, 
Hucknall1.60 43 4 35 4 43
H1Hd HK022 Land adjoining Stubbing 
Wood Farm, Watnall Road, 
Hucknall8.82 198 40 40 40 40 38 198
H1He HK023 Phases 5 (part) and 9, land 
at Rolls Royce, Watnall 
Road, Hucknall4.66 105 40 40 25 105
H1Hf HK024 Phases 10,11,12, land at 
Rolls Royce, Watnall Road, 
Hucknall4.45 100 15 40 40 5 100
H1Hc HK051 
(composite 
site HK016, 
HHK034, 
Hk043 & 
HK050)Land north of A611 / South 
of Broomhilll Farm, 
Hucknall31 633 70 70 70 70 70 70 70 70 70 3 633
1103 0 0 4 0 104 185 154 150 148 75 70 70 70 70 3 0 0 1103Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  268 
    
 
 
 
  
Site Allocations with Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
Ref.Planning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year  10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Hg V/2016/0619Hucknall Town football 
Club, Watnall Road 10835 35 35 3 108
H1Hh V/2013/0123Rolls Royce, Watnall Road 
(remaining phases of 
Outline pp) 18650 80 56 186
H1Hi V/2018/0803 Rolls Royce, Watnall Road 48 35 13 48
H1Hj V/2019/0038Land to the East of, 
Hurricane Road RR 1919 19
H1Hk V/2019/0452Parcel 8, Land at Rolls 
Royce, Watnall Road 6126 35 61
H1Hl V/2020/0563Land at, Shepherd Street 
(Rolls Royce site) 10022 35 35 8 100
H1Hm V/2015/0629South of former 
international clothing 5635 21 56
H1Ho HK015 V/2016/0483(Phase 2) Land at, 
Broomhill Farm, 21710 35 35 35 35 35 32 217
795 125 126 120 150 134 70 67 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 795
Strategic Allocation
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
Ref.Planning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year  10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
S6 HK028 Whyburn Farm, Hucknall 205.80 3000 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 1600Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  269 
   Kirkby Area  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Site Allocations without Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
REFPlanning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Ka KA002 Beacon Farm, Derby Road, 
Kirkby-In Ashfield1.50 41 35 6 41
H1Kc KA011 Land at Doles Lane, Kirkby-
In Ashfield2.39 54 35 19 54
H1Kd KA012 Land off Farm View Road/ 
Walesby Drive, Kirkby-In 
Ashfield7.33 187 35 35 35 35 35 12 187
H1Ke KA026 Land off Diamond Avenue, 
Kirkby-In-Ashfield2.11 63 35 28 63
H1Kf KA029 Warwick Close, Kirkby-In-
Ashfield0.75 23 23 23
H1Kg KA038 Land behind 126 Skegby 
Road, Kirkby-In-Ashfield0.55 15 15 15
H1Kh KA046 Hucknall Road, Newstead 1.55 47 35 12 47
430 0 0 0 35 28 38 140 72 35 35 35 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 430
Site Allocations with Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
REFPlanning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Kb KA003 V/2019/0756 Land off Millers Way, Kirkby-
In Ashfield1.63 54 35 19 54
H1Ki V/2018/0393Annesley Miners Welfare 
Institute, Derby Road45 35 10 45
H1Kj V/2020/0061 Former Wild Orchid Public 
House, Southwell Lane, 
Kirkby12 12 12
111 0 35 10 35 19 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 111
Site Allocations without Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
REFPlanning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Ka KA002 Beacon Farm, Derby Road, 
Kirkby-In Ashfield1.50 41 35 6 41
H1Kc KA011 Land at Doles Lane, Kirkby-
In Ashfield2.39 54 35 19 54
H1Kd KA012 Land off Farm View Road/ 
Walesby Drive, Kirkby-In 
Ashfield7.33 187 35 35 35 35 35 12 187
H1Ke KA026 Land off Diamond Avenue, 
Kirkby-In-Ashfield2.11 63 35 28 63
H1Kf KA029 Warwick Close, Kirkby-In-
Ashfield0.75 23 23 23
H1Kg KA038 Land behind 126 Skegby 
Road, Kirkby-In-Ashfield0.55 15 15 15
H1Kh KA046 Hucknall Road, Newstead 1.55 47 35 12 47
430 0 0 0 35 28 38 140 72 35 35 35 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 430
Site Allocations with Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
REFPlanning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Kb KA003 V/2019/0756 Land off Millers Way, Kirkby-
In Ashfield1.63 54 35 19 54
H1Ki V/2018/0393Annesley Miners Welfare 
Institute, Derby Road45 35 10 45
H1Kj V/2020/0061 Former Wild Orchid Public 
House, Southwell Lane, 
Kirkby12 12 12
111 0 35 10 35 19 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 111Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  270 
   Sutton Area  
 
 
  
Site Allocations without Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
REFPlanning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year  10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Sb SA009 Cauldwell Road, Sutton-In-Ashfield 9.24 208 35 35 35 35 35 33 208
H1Sc SA013 West of Fisher Close, Sutton-In-
Ashfield3.65 73 35 35 3 73
H1Sd SA016 (& 
SA044) Adj Oakham Business Park, Sutton-In-
Ashfield9.99 225 35 35 35 35 35 35 15 225
H1Se SA017 Priestic Road, Sutton-In-Ashfield 0.53 19 19 19
H1Sf SA022 Rear 23 Beck Lane, Skegby 0.84 23 23 23
H1Sg SA023 Former Miner's Welfare Sports 
Ground, Stanton Hill, Sutton-In-Ashfield3.78 85 35 35 15 85
H1Sh SA025 Pasture Farm, Alfreton Road, Sutton-In-
Ashfield1.26 34 34 34
H1Si SA033 Rear Kingsmill Hospital, Sutton-In-
Ashfield14.64 264 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 19 264
H1Sj SA041 Clegg Hill Drive, Huthwaite 4.62 104 35 35 34 104
H1Sk SA057 Sunnyside Farm, Blackwell Road, 
Huthwaite18.89 283 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 3 283
H1Sl SA058 North of Fackley Road, Teversal 5.09 115 35 35 35 10 115
H1Sm SA061 Land adjacent 88 High Hazels Drive, 
Sutton-In-Ashfield0.41 11 11 11
H1Sn SA064 Adj Molyneux Farm, Fackley Road, 
Teversal0.50 14 14 14
H1So SA065 Off Fackley Road, Teversal 0.44 12 12 12
H1Sp SA066 Off Tibshelf Road, Fackley 0.48 10 5 5 10
H1Sq SA069 Hardwick Lane Recreation Ground, 
Sutton-In-Ashfield1.10 40 35 5 40
H1Ss SA074 Land to the east off A6075 Beck Lane, 
Skegby 11.80 212 35 35 35 35 35 35 2 212
H1St SA082 Blackwell Road/ Main Street, 
Huthwaite4.42 99 35 35 29 99
H1Su SA084 Rear 113 to 139 Beck Lane, Skegby 4.46 100 35 35 30 100
1929 0 0 0 0 0 156 490 398 277 190 180 145 53 19 0 0 0 23 1931Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  271 
    
 
 
  
Site Allocations with Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
REFPlanning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year  10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Sa SA003 V/2020/0884 Rear of 211 Alfreton Road, Sutton-In-
Ashfield4.15 110 35 35 35 5 110
H1Sr SA071 Land off Clare Road, Sutton-In-Ashfield 3.00 69 35 34 69
H1Sv V/2016/0098 Station House, Outram Street, NG17 
4AX28 2828
H1Sw SA014, 
SA015, 
SA038V/2011/0503  
V/2016/0169Off Gillcroft Street/St Andrews Street & 
Vere Avenue, Skegby177 35 35 35 35 35 2
177
H1Sx V/2016/0487 rear 249, 251 Alfreton Road, Sutton, 
NG17 1JP113 35 35 35 8113
H1Sy V/2018/0120 off Brand Lane, Stanton Hill 137 35 35 35 32 137
H1Sz V/2020/0411 Junction of Outram Street/Park Street, 
Sutton24 2424
H1Saa SA007 V/2016/0569 Land at, Beck Lane, Skegby, NG17 
3AH322 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 7322
H1Sab V/2019/0449 Land Off, Davies Avenue 22 22 22
H1Sac SA068 V/2018/0213 The Quarry, 57, Stoneyford Road, 
NG17 4DA48 35 1348
H1Sad V/2018/0212 The Pattern House, Crossley Avenue, 
Huthwaite23 2323
1073 0 92 70 105 145 139 163 70 70 37 35 35 35 35 35 7 0 0 1073
Strategic Allocation
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
REFPlanning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year  10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
S7 Cauldwell Road New Settlement 1000 105 105 105 315Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  272 
   Selston, Jacksdale, Underwood Area  
 
 
  
Site Allocations without Planning Permission
Draft Local 
Plan 
Allocation 
Ref.2019 
SHELAA 
REFPlanning 
Appn RefAddress Gross 
Developable  
Area (ha):Dwelling 
YieldYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 10 Year 11 Year 12  Year 13  Year 14  Year 15  Year 16  Year 17 Year 18  Total
 20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30   30/31  31/32 32/33  33/34  34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38
H1Va SJU001 Land at Plainspot Farm, 
New 
Brinsley,Underwood1.56 42 35 7 42
H1Vb SJU003 Off Westdale Road, 
Jacksdale2.16 49 35 14 49
H1Vc SJU014 Land adj. Bull & Butcher 
PH, Selston6.60 149 35 35 35 35 9 149
H1Vd SJU016 Adj 149 Stoney Lane, 
Selston0.20 6 5 1 6
H1Ve SJU020 Land off Park Lane/ 
South West M1, Selston9.39 169 35 35 35 35 29 169
H1Vf SJU027 V/2019/0824 Between 106-132 Main 
Road, Underwood0.51 14 14 14
H1Vg SJU031 Land North of Larch 
Close, Underwood1.63 37 35 2 37
H1Vh SJU032 Rear of 64-82 Church 
Lane, Underwood0.62 10 5 5 10
H1Vi SJU035 Westdale Road, 
Jacksdale0.81 22 22 22
498 0 0 0 0 0 124 151 113 72 38 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 498Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  273 
   District Summary  
 
 
 
 
Projected completions from strategic site allocations
Strategic AllocationsYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Whyburn Farm 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 1600
Cauldwell Road 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 105 105 105 315
Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 265 265 265 1915
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 0
Projected completions from site allocations (Policy H1) without planning permission
AreaYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Hucknall Area 0 0 4 0 104 185 154 150 148 75 70 70 70 70 3 0 0 1103
Kirkby Area 0 0 35 28 38 140 72 35 35 35 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 430
Sutton Area 0 0 0 0 156 490 398 277 190 180 145 53 19 0 0 0 23 1931
Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood Area 0 0 0 0 124 151 113 72 38 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 498
Total 0 0 39 28 422 966 737 534 411 290 227 123 89 70 3 0 23 3962
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 2192
Projected completions from site allocations (Policy H1) with planning permission
AreaYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Hucknall Area125 126 120 150 134 70 67 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 795
Kirkby Area35 10 35 19 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 111
Sutton Area92 70 105 145 139 163 70 70 37 35 35 35 35 35 7 0 0 1073
Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood Area0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total 252 206 260 314 285 233 137 73 37 35 35 35 35 35 7 0 0 1979
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 1229
ALL H1 ALLOCATIONS 252 206 299 342 707 1199 874 607 448 325 262 158 124 105 10 0 23 5941
ALL ALLLOCATIONS 252 206 299 342 707 1199 874 767 608 485 422 318 284 265 275 265 288 7856
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 3421
Projected completions from strategic site allocations
Strategic AllocationsYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Whyburn Farm 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 1600
Cauldwell Road 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 105 105 105 315
Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 265 265 265 1915
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 0
Projected completions from site allocations (Policy H1) without planning permission
AreaYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Hucknall Area 0 0 4 0 104 185 154 150 148 75 70 70 70 70 3 0 0 1103
Kirkby Area 0 0 35 28 38 140 72 35 35 35 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 430
Sutton Area 0 0 0 0 156 490 398 277 190 180 145 53 19 0 0 0 23 1931
Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood Area 0 0 0 0 124 151 113 72 38 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 498
Total 0 0 39 28 422 966 737 534 411 290 227 123 89 70 3 0 23 3962
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 2192
Projected completions from site allocations (Policy H1) with planning permission
AreaYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Hucknall Area125 126 120 150 134 70 67 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 795
Kirkby Area35 10 35 19 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 111
Sutton Area92 70 105 145 139 163 70 70 37 35 35 35 35 35 7 0 0 1073
Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood Area0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total 252 206 260 314 285 233 137 73 37 35 35 35 35 35 7 0 0 1979
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 1229
ALL H1 ALLOCATIONS 252 206 299 342 707 1199 874 607 448 325 262 158 124 105 10 0 23 5941
ALL ALLLOCATIONS 252 206 299 342 707 1199 874 767 608 485 422 318 284 265 275 265 288 7856
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 3421Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  274 
    
 
Projected completions from strategic site allocations
Strategic AllocationsYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Whyburn Farm 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 1600
Cauldwell Road 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 105 105 105 315
Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 265 265 265 1915
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 0
Projected completions from site allocations (Policy H1) without planning permission
AreaYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Hucknall Area 0 0 4 0 104 185 154 150 148 75 70 70 70 70 3 0 0 1103
Kirkby Area 0 0 35 28 38 140 72 35 35 35 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 430
Sutton Area 0 0 0 0 156 490 398 277 190 180 145 53 19 0 0 0 23 1931
Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood Area 0 0 0 0 124 151 113 72 38 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 498
Total 0 0 39 28 422 966 737 534 411 290 227 123 89 70 3 0 23 3962
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 2192
Projected completions from site allocations (Policy H1) with planning permission
AreaYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Hucknall Area125 126 120 150 134 70 67 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 795
Kirkby Area35 10 35 19 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 111
Sutton Area92 70 105 145 139 163 70 70 37 35 35 35 35 35 7 0 0 1073
Selston, Jacksdale and Underwood Area0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total 252 206 260 314 285 233 137 73 37 35 35 35 35 35 7 0 0 1979
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 1229
ALL H1 ALLOCATIONS 252 206 299 342 707 1199 874 607 448 325 262 158 124 105 10 0 23 5941
ALL ALLLOCATIONS 252 206 299 342 707 1199 874 767 608 485 422 318 284 265 275 265 288 7856
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 3421Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  275 
     
SourceYear 1  Year 2   Year 3  Year 4 Year 5  Year 6   Year 7    Year 8  Year 9  Year 
10 Year 
11 Year 
12  Year 
13  Year 
14  Year 
15  Year 
16  Year 
17 Year 
18  Total
  20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30     30/31   31/32 32/33  33/34   34/35 35/36  36/37 37/38 2020-2038
Small Sites with Outline Permission 0 0 0 62 17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 79
Small Sites with Full Permission^ 54 3 236 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 305
ALL SMALL SITE PERMISSIONS 54 3 236 74 17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 384
^ includes adjustment of +15 dwellings for commitments on large sites where residual yeild is less than 10 dwellings and therefore too small to allocate 
Known PD/Prior Approvals 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5
Projected Completions from C2 
schemes 4 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6
Small windfall sites beyond 5 years* 0 0 0 0 0 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 720
ALL SITE SUPPLY 315 209 535 416 724 1261 934 827 668 545 482 378 344 325 335 325 348 8971
Estimated delivery in first 5 years post adoption 3870Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  276 
   Ashfield Housing Trajectory 2020 to 2038  
 
Housing Supply and Requirement 
(Dwellings) 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 2037/38 Total
Past Completions (net) 313 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 313
Projected completions from 
strategic site allocations 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 160 160 160 160 160 160 160 265 265 265 1,915
Projected completions from site 
allocations (Policy H1) without 
planning permission 0 0 39 28 422 966 737 534 411 290 227 123 89 70 3 0 23 3,962
Projected completions from site 
allocations (Policy H1) with 
planning permission 252 206 260 314 285 233 137 73 37 35 35 35 35 35 7 0 0 1,979
Projected Completions from Small 
Sites with Full Planning Permission 54 3 236 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 290
Projected Completions from Small 
Sites with Outline Planning 
Permission 0 0 0 62 17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 79
Projected Completions from prior 
approval schemes 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5
Projected Completions from C2 
schemes 4 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6
Small site windfall allowance 0 0 0 0 0 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 720
Cumulative Completions 313 628 837 1,372 1,788 2,512 3,773 4,707 5,534 6,202 6,747 7,229 7,607 7,951 8,276 8,611 8,936 9,284 9,284
PLAN  - Annual requirement 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 457 8,226
PLAN - Cumulative requirement 457 914 1,371 1,828 2,285 2,742 3,199 3,656 4,113 4,570 5,027 5,484 5,941 6,398 6,855 7,312 7,769 8,226 8,226
MONITOR - No. dwellings above or 
below cumulative requirement -144 -286 -534 -456 -497 -230 574 1,051 1,421 1,632 1,720 1,745 1,666 1,553 1,421 1,299 1,167 1,058 1,058
MANAGE  - Requirement taking 
account of past/projected completions 7,913 7,598 7,389 6,854 6,438 5,714 4,453 3,519 2,692 2,024 1,479 997 619 275 -50 -385 -710 -1,058 -1,058
MANAGE  - Annual  requirement taking 
account of past/projected completions 440 447 462 457 460 440 371 320 269 225 185 142 103 55 -13 -128 -355 -1,058 -1,058Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  277 
    
 
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  278 
   Appendix 3 - Development Briefs For Large Housing Sites  
 
 
To follow as part of The Town & Country Planning ( L ocal Plan)(England) 
Regu lations 2012, as amended Regulation 19 con sultation  
 
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  279 
   Appendix 4 - Wind Energy Opportunities Within Ashfield   
 
 
  
Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  280 
   Appendix 5 - Agricultural, Forestry and Other Occupational Dwellings  
 
1. National planning guidance makes clear that isolated new houses in rural areas 
require special justification for planning permission to be granted.  One of the few 
circumstances in which isolated residential development may be justified is when 
accommodation is required to enable agricultural, fores try and certain other full -time 
workers to live at, or in the immediate vicinity of, their place of work.  It will often be 
as convenient and more sustainable for such workers to live in nearby towns or 
villages, or suitable existing dwellings, so avoiding  new and potentially intrusive 
development in the countryside.  Howev er, there will be some cases where the 
nature and demands of the work concerned make it essential for one or more people 
engaged in the enterprise to live at, or very close to, the site o f their work.  Whether 
this is essential in any particular case will depend on the needs of the enterprise 
concerned and not on the personal preferences or circumstances of any of the 
individuals involved.  
 
2. It is essential that all applications for plannin g permission for new occupational 
dwellings in the countryside are scrutinised thoroughly with the aim of detecting 
attempts to abuse (e.g. through speculative proposals) the concession that the 
planning system makes for such dwellings.  In particular, it will be important to 
establish whether the stated intentions to engage in farming, forestry or any other 
rural-based enterprise, are genuine, are reasonably likely to materialise and are 
capable of being sustained for a reasonable period of time.  It will also be important 
to establish that the needs of the intended enterprise require one or more of the 
people engaged in it to live nearby.  
 
3. New permanent dwellings should only be allowed to support existing agricultural 
activities on well -established agricul tural units, providing:  
 
i there is a clearly established existing  functional need (see paragraph 4 below);  
ii the need relates to a full-time worker, or one who is primarily employed in 
agriculture and does not relate to a part -time requirement;  
iii the unit and the agricultural activity concerned have been established for at 
least three years, have been profitable for at least one of them, are currently 
financially sound, and have a clear prospect of remaining so (see paragraph 8 
below);  
iv the functional need c ould not be fulfilled by another existing dwelling on the unit, 
or any other existing accommodation in the area which is suitable and available 
for occupation by the workers concerned; and  
v other planning requirements, e.g. in relation to access, or impact on the 
countryside, are satisfied.  
 
4. A functional test is necessary to establish whether it is essential for the proper 
functioning of the enterprise for one or more workers to be readily available at most 
times.  Such a requirement might arise, for example , if workers are needed to be on 
hand day and night:  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  281 
    
i in case animals or agricultural processes require essential care at short notice;  
ii to deal quickly with emergencies that could otherwise cause serious loss of 
crops or products, for example, by frost da mage or the failure of automatic 
systems.  
5. In cases where there is particularly concerned about possible abuse, the Council will 
investigate the history of the holding to establish the recent pattern of use of land and 
buildings and whether, for example, a ny dwellings, or buildings suitable for 
conversion to dwellings, have recently been sold separately from the farmland 
concerned.  Such a sale could constitute evidence of lack of agricultural need.  
 
6. The protection of livestock from theft or injury by intru ders may contribute on animal 
welfare grounds to the need for a new agricultural dwelling, although it will not by 
itself be sufficient to justify one.  Requirements arising from food processing, as 
opposed to agriculture, cannot be used to justify an agri cultural dwelling.  Nor can 
agricultural needs justify the provision of isolated new dwellings as retirement homes 
for farmers.  
 
7. If a functional requirement is established, it will then be necessary to consider the 
number of workers needed to meet it, for which the scale and nature of the 
enterprise will be relevant.  
 
8. New permanent accommodation cannot be justified on agricultural  grounds unless 
the farming enterprise is economically viable.  A financial test is necessary for this 
purpose, and to provide e vidence of the size of dwelling which the unit can sustain.  
In applying this test (see paragraph 3(iii) above), the Council will take a realistic 
approach to the level of profitability, taking account of the nature of the enterprise 
concerned.  Some enter prises which aim to operate broadly on a subsistence basis, 
but which nonetheless provide wider benefits (e.g.  in managing attractive 
landscapes or wildlife habitats), can be sustained on relatively low financial returns.  
 
9. Agricultural dwellings should be of a size commensurate with the established 
functional requirement.  Dwellings that are unusually large in relation to the 
agricultural needs of the unit, or unusually expensive  to construct in relation to the 
income it ca n sustain in the long -term, should not be permitted.  It is the 
requirements of the enterprise, rather than those of the owner or occupier, that are 
relevant in determining the size of dwelling that is appropriate to a particular holding.  
 
10. The Council will  consider making planning permissions subject to conditions 
removing some of the permitted development rights under part 1 of the Town and 
Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995 for development 
within the curtilage of a dwelling house.   For example, proposed extensions could 
result in a dwelling whose size exceeded what could be justified by the functional 
requirement, and affect the continued viability of maintaining the property for its 
intended use, given the income that the agricult ural unit can sustain.  However, it will 
always be preferable for such conditions to restrict the use of specific permitted Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  282 
   development rights rather than to be drafted in terms which withdraw all those in a 
Class (see paragraphs 86 -90 of the Annex to DOE Circular 11/95).  
 
11. Agricultural dwellings should be sited so as to meet the identified functional need and 
to be well -related to existing farm buildings, or other dwellings.  
 
Temporary agricultural dwellings  
 
12. If a new dwelling is essential to support a new farming activity, whether on a newly -
created agricultural unit or an established one, it should normally, for the first three 
years, be provided by a caravan, a wooden structure which can be easily dismantled, 
or other temporary accommodation.  It shou ld satisfy the following criteria:  
 
i clear evidence of a firm intention and ability to develop the enterprise concerned 
(significant investment in new farm buildings is often a good indication of 
intentions);  
ii functional need (see paragraph 4 of this Appendi x); 
iii clear evidence that the proposed enterprise has been planned on a sound 
financial basis;  
iv the functional need could not be fulfilled by another existing dwelling on the unit, 
or any other existing accommodation in the area which is suitable and availabl e 
for occupation by the workers concerned; and  
v other normal planning requirements, e.g. on siting and access, are satisfied.  
 
13. If permission for temporary accommodation is granted, permission for a permanent 
dwelling should not subsequently be given unless the criteria in paragraph 3 above 
are met.  The Council will make clear the  period for which the temporary permission 
is granted, the fact that the temporary dwelling will have to be removed, and the 
requirements that will have to be met if a permanent pe rmission is to be granted.  
The Council not normally grant successive extensions to a temporary permission 
over a period of more than three years, nor should they normally give temporary 
permissions in locations where they would not permit a permanent dwel ling. 
 
Forestry dwellings  
 
14. The Council will apply the same criteria to applications for forestry dwellings as to 
those for agricultural dwellings.  The other principles in the advice on agricultural 
dwellings are equally relevant to forestry dwellings.  Under conventional methods of 
forestry management, which can involve the use of a peripatetic workforce, new 
forestry dwellings may not always be justified, except perhaps to service intensive 
nursery production of trees.  
 
Other Occupational Dw ellings  
 
15. There may also be instances where special justification exists for new isolated 
dwellings associated with other rural based enterprises.  In these cases, the Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  283 
   enterprise itself, including any development necessary for the operation of the 
enterpris e, must be acceptable in planning terms and permitted in that rural location, 
regardless of the consideration of any proposed associated dwelling.  The Council 
will apply the same stringent levels of assessment to applications for such new 
occupational dwe llings as they apply to applications for agricultural and forestry 
workers’ dwellings.  They should therefore apply the same criteria and principles in 
paragraphs 3 -13 of this Appendix, in a manner and to the extent that they are 
relevant to the nature of the enterprise concerned.  
 
Occupancy Conditions  
 
16. Where the need to provide accommodation to enable farm, forestry or other workers 
to live at or near their place of work has been accepted as providing the special 
justification required for new, isolated re sidential development in the countryside, it 
will be necessary to ensure that the dwellings are kept available for meeting this 
need for as long as it exists.  For this purpose planning permission should be made 
subject to appropriate occupancy conditions.   DOE Circular 11/95 gives further 
advice and provides model occupancy conditions for agricultural dwellings and for 
other staff accommodation.  This will ensure that the dwelling is not subsequently 
sold on the open market and ensures that sporadic develo pment is carefully 
controlled.  
 
17. It will also be necessary to impose an occupancy condition on the existing dwelling 
where there is an established case for two or more full time workers on a unit.  
Where the existing dwelling does not form part of the plan ning application then an 
occupancy condition will be negotiated as part of a legal agreement.  
 
18. Changes in the scale and character of farming and forestry may affect the longer -
term requirement for dwellings for which permission has been granted subject to an 
agricultural or forestry occupancy condition.  Such dwellings, and others in the 
countryside with an occupancy condition attached, should not be kept vacant, nor 
should their present occupants be unnecessarily obliged to remain in occupation 
simply by v irtue of planning conditions restricting occupancy which have outlived 
their usefulness.  However, in  order to justify the removal of an occupancy condition 
the applicant must:  
  
i. outline the changes which have occurred since the granting of  the original 
permission; a minimum time period of 10 years since the granting of the 
original permission must have elapsed before an application to remove an 
occupancy condition will be conside red; 
ii. demonstrate that there is no longer a need for an agricultural/forestry worker’s 
dwelling on the unit/enterprise or in the area;  
iii. provide documentary evidence to show that an attempt has been made to let or 
sell the property at a realistic price (less  than full market value) for at least one 
year with the occupancy condition.  
  
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  284 
    Note:  
 
• The argument that the dwelling is not suitable for an agricultural worker i.e. too 
large and expensive will not be considered as a relevant issue.  
• In addition personal circumstances will not be relevant as it is the needs of the 
holding and not the individual which must be the overriding issue.  
 
 
 
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  285 
   Appendix 6 - Policy EV4: Green Infrastructure, Biodiversity and Geological 
Conservation Sites  
 
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
 
Plan 
Ref. Site Name  Description  Ward  
EV4sa  Annesley Woodhouse 
Quarries  An excellent Magnesian Limestone grassland.  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4s b Bagthorpe Meadows  Lowland acid and neutral grassland.  Underwood  
EV4s c Bogs Farm Quarry  Species -rich pools, flushes and grassland 
developed in a former quarry.  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4s d Bulwell Wood, Hucknall  An ancient deciduous woodland with a 
characteristic ground flora.  Hucknall West  
EV4se  Dovedale Wood  Broadleaved, mixed and yew woodland.  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4s f Friezeland Grassland  An interesting range of habitat types and plant 
communities developed on disturbed clays and 
sands.  Underwood  
EV4s g Kirkby Grives  Very fine examples of calcareous and more neutral 
grassland, with scrub and floristically species -rich 
communities.  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4s h Teversal Pastures  Excellent neutral grasslands with marsh and wet 
woodland - of botanical and zoological interest.  Skegby  
EV4s i Teversal -Pleasley 
Railway  A range of habitats, with especially valuable 
calcareous grassland, along a length of railway.  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
 
 
Local Nature Reserve (LNR ) 
 
Plan 
Ref. Site Name  Description  Ward  
EV4wa  Allen's Green Dumble  Steep unmanaged wooded dumble and coal -
measures grassland  Jacksdale & 
Westwood  
EV4waa  Allen's Green Grassland  A locally species -rich Coal Measures grassland  Selston  
EV4wab  Annesley Cemetery  A notable acid grassland community persisting in 
a cemetery  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wac  Annesley Forest  A mixed forestry plantation with a noteworthy 
and diverse flora  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wad  Annesley Park Duck 
Decoy  A lake with a noteworthy flora, together with a 
mostly naturally regen erated woodland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  286 
   EV4wae  Annesley Park Pond  A relatively large field pond that is rich in aquatic 
and marginal species  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4waf  Annesley Pit  A diverse site of botanical and zoological 
importance  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wag  Annesley Scarp 
Grassland  A species -rich calcareous grassland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wah  Annesley Track Verge  Grassy track verges bounded by species -rich 
hedgerows  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wai  Annesley Woodhouse 
Cemetery  Noteworthy grassland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4waj  Annesley Woodhouse 
Grassland  A fine example of a damp coal measures 
grassland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wak  Annesley Woodhouse 
Pond Grassland  Damp grassland w ith species -rich flushes  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wal  Annesley Woodhouse 
Quarry  An excellent Magnesian Limestone grassland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wam  Annesley Woodhouse 
Woodland  A mixed woodland with a rich ground flora and 
wet flush communities  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wan  Annesley Woodland I  A noteworthy mosaic of dry and wet deciduous 
woodland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wao  Annesley Woodland II  A small valley with notable deciduous woodland, 
flush and aquatic communities  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wap  Ashfield District By -pass 
Meadows  Herb -rich meadows  Larwood  
EV4waq  Bagthorpe Brook  A brook with species -rich semi -natural woodland, 
relict coal measures grassland and scrub 
communitie  Jacksdale & 
Westwood  
EV4war  Bagthorpe Brook 
Grassland  A notable coal -measures grassland  Jacksdale & 
Westwood  
EV4was  Bagthorpe Grassland  A grassland with an impressive herb and grass 
content  Underwood  
EV4wat  Bagthorpe Grasslands  Traditionally managed grasslands with a rich and 
varied botanical interest  Underwood  
EV4wau  Bagthorpe Meadow  A species -rich coal measures type hay meadow  Jacksdale & 
Westwood  
EV4wav  Bagthorpe Pastures  Notable pastures with an especially valuable 
stream  Underwood  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  287 
   EV4waw  Bagthorpe Plantation  A plantation with dry and wet deciduous 
woodland communities and a notable species 
diversity  Underwood  
EV4wax  Bentinck Colliery  A site supporting a butterfly species of high 
conservation priority in Nottinghamshire  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4way  Bentinck Void  A mosaic of habitats of botanical and zoological 
note on the site of a former mine  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4waz  Blackwell Road 
Grassland  A notable dry grassland community  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wb  Bleinheim Lane Ponds  Species -rich pools surrounded by a noteworthy 
grassland and newly planted saplings'  Hucknall West  
EV4wba  Blenheim Farm  An area of notable calcareous grassland and pond  Hucknall West  
EV4wbb  Blenheim Lane 
Grassland  A species -rich calcareous grassland with a clear 
stream  Hucknall West  
EV4wbc  Blenheim Lane 
Hedgerows  Hedgerows along a lane supporting notable shrub 
and tree species  Hucknall West  
EV4wbd  Blenheim Lane Quarry  Former quarry with calcareous grassland and 
scrub communities  Hucknall West  
EV4wbe  Blidworth Road Verge  Species -rich grassland along a stretch of road 
verge  Abbey Hill  
EV4wbf  Boar Hill  A bank of calcareo us grassland  Larwood  
EV4wbg  Bogs Farm Quarry  Species -rich pools, flushes and grassland 
developed in a former quarry  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wbh  Border Marsh, 
Huthwaite  A notable marshy community on the county 
boundary  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wbi  Brierley Forest Marsh  Wet neutral grassland  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wbj  Brierley Park Marshy 
Grassland  An interesting and valuable remnant of rough 
marshy grassland  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wbk  Brookside Farm 
Grassland, Bagthorpe  Neutral grassland  Underwood  
EV4wbl  Bulwell Hall Park  An excellent assemblage of species -rich habitats 
in a large city park  Hucknall West  
EV4wbm  Bulwell Wood and Pond  An ancient deciduous woodland with a 
characteristic ground flora  Hucknall West  
EV4wbn  Cauldwell Brook  A length of stream of zoological importance  Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  
EV4wbo  Cauldwell Brook Marsh  Marshy grassland in willow plantation by 
tributary of Cauldwell Brook  Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  
EV4wbp  Cauldwell Dam and 
Drain  A po nd, marsh and drain with a noteworthy 
community  Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  288 
   EV4wbq  Chesterfield Road 
Grassland, 
Whiteborough  A neutral grassland of note  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wbr  Chesterfield Road 
Pastures, Huthwaite  A network of four grazed pastures with an 
impressive diversity of community types  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wbs  Coppy Wood  A remnant area of ancient woodland with a 
surviving ground flora  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wbt  County Dumble  A wooded stream supporting a noteworthy flora  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wbu  Coxmoor Golf Course  An excellent habitat mosaic with a most 
impressive flora  Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  
EV4wbw  Crossley Avenue 
Grassland  A noteworthy calcareous grassland with a field 
pond  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wbw  Crossley Plantation  A mature neglected plantation site with a very 
rich ground flora  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wbx  Davis's Bottom  A valuable woodland with a notable ground flora  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wby  Davis's Bottom 
Grassland  A grassland with a notable species assemblage  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wbz  Davis's Bottom Pasture  Two through -grazed grasslands with an excellent 
herb -rich sward showing calcareous and Coal 
Measure  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wc  Dawgate's  Lane 
Grassland  Steep, unimproved grassland with a noteworthy 
sward  Skegby  
EV4wca  Dobpark Grassland  Remnant area of pastures incorporating some 
notable marshy areas  Hucknall West  
EV4wcb  Dovedale Farm Field 
Bank  A species -rich grassland bank  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wcc  Dovedale Wood  An ancient deciduous woodland with an excellent 
ground flora and invertebrate interest  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wcd  Dovedale Wood 
Grassland  A floristically rich grassland with Coal Measures 
indicator species  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wce  Dumbles Bungalow 
Grassland  A species -rich coal -measures grassland  Larwood  
EV4wcf  Eelhole Wood  A valuable, deciduous woodland with areas of 
open acidic and grassland in an urban setting  Hucknall West  
EV4wcg  Erewash Grassland  Neutral grassland  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wch  Erewash Meadow 1 
Kirkby Grives  A notable hay meadow  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  289 
   EV4wci  Erewash Meadow, 
Portland Park  A hay meadow with a coal measures grassland 
flora  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wcj  Farley's Disused Railway  A valuable wooded and scrubby habitat with a 
most interesting flora  Hucknall West  
EV4wck  Farley's Grassland  A species -rich coal measures grassland  Hucknall South  
EV4wcl  Felley Brook  A stream of zoological note  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wcm  Felley Brook Wood  A semi -natural riparian woodland with a notable 
ground flora  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wcn  Felley Dumble  A good habitat mosaic of woodland, scrub, banks, 
stream and pond with a noteworthy flora  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wco  Felley Mill Pond  A drying pool with woodland and damp grassland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wcp  Felley Priory Pond  A pond with a notable aquatic and bankside flora  Underwood  
EV4wcq  Forest Road Grassland  A species rich coal measures grassland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wcr  Fountain Dale  A damp, open valley woodland with drying out 
fish pools, and clearings of an acidic character  Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  
EV4wcs  Franderground Farm 
Disuse d Railway  A wooded disused railway with a notable flora  Larwood  
EV4wct  Freizeland Grassland  An interesting range of habitat types and plant 
communities developed on disturbed clays and 
sands  Underwood  
EV4wcu  Fulwood Grassland  Damp coal-measures grassland  Ashfields  
EV4wcv  Fulwood Grassland II  A noteworthy hay meadow  Larwood  
EV4wcw  Fulwood Grassland III  A traditionally managed coal measures grassland  Larwood  
EV4wcx  Fulwood Meadow  A base -rich unimproved neutral grassland with a 
noteworthy flora  Larwood  
EV4wcy  Glasswork Grassland, 
Kirkby -in-Ashfield 
District  A notable magnesian limestone grassland 
community  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wcz  Halfmoon Plantation  A valuable habitat mosaic of woodland, scrub, 
and acidic grassland  Kings way 
EV4wd  Hall Green Grassland  A classic Coal Measures grassland  Selston  
EV4wda  Hall Green Meadow  A large, unimproved coal measures type hay 
meadow  Selston  
EV4wdb  Hamilton Hill  A remnant acid grassland on a isolated hill  Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  290 
   EV4wdc  Handstubbing's 
Meadows  A series of hay -cut species rich neutral 
grasslandss  Selston  
EV4wdd  Hardwick Farm 
Grasslands  Large area of neutral grassland  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wde  Harlow Wood  An extensive coniferous plantation with a 
noteworthy flora  Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  
EV4wdf  Heald's Wood  An ancient semi -natural woodland with a species -
rich ground flora on a steep North facing slope  Skegby  
EV4wdg  Heald's Wood 
Grassland  A notable calcicole grassland community  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wdh  Heatherdale Pond  A pond with a noteworthy aquatic flora and a 
complementary wooded fringe  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wdi  Herod's Hill Grassland  Well -established, species -rich pastures  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wdj  High Park Wood  A predominantly coniferous plantation with 
deciduous portions and numerous species -rich 
pockets  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wdk  Hollinwell Golf Course  An extensive area incorporating a number of 
acidic habitat types with their characteri stic 
species  Kingsway  
EV4wdl  Holly Hill, Selston  An interesting area of scrub with coal measure 
grassland  Selston  
EV4wdm  Hucknall Airfield  A significant area of species -rich calcareous and 
base -rich neutral grassland  Hucknall West  
EV4wdn  Hucknall Colliery Site  Landscaped colliery spoil, colonised by plants of 
nutrient poor habitats with areas of tree planting  Hucknall North  
EV4wdo  Hucknall Disused 
Railways  A valuable length of disused railways with a 
notable, characteristic community  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wdp  Huthwaite Commonside 
Industrial Estate 
Grassland (III)  Remnant coal -measures grassland  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wdq  Huthwaite Grassland  A noteworthy meadow with both dry, acidic and 
neutral grassland communities  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wdr  Huthwaite Meadow  A mosaic of coal -measures grassland, base -rich 
flushes and mature scrub along a stream  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wds  Jacksdale Meadow East  A notable hay meadow  Jacksdale & 
Westwood  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  291 
   EV4wdt  King's Mill Reservoir  A valuable water body for fauna and flora  Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  
EV4wdu  Kirby Bentinck Colliery 
Yard  Colliery yard of botanical interest  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wdv  Kirkby Bentinck 
Dismantled Railway  A mosaic of scrub and grassland with diverse 
calcicole species  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wdw  Kirkby Bentinck 
Dismantled Railway 
Spoil  A naturally vegetated spoil heap and valuable 
dismantled railway habitat  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wdx  Kirkby Bentinck 
Erewash Meadow  Neutral grassland with permanent wet areas 
supporting notable species  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wdy  Kirkby Bentinck 
Grassland  A once -typical grassland of grazed hay meadows  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wdz  Kirkby Dismantled 
Railway  A scrubby dismantled ra ilway with a notable 
calcicolous grassland community  Larwood  
EV4we  Kirkby Grives Grassland  A rough, damp, notable grassland  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wea  Kirkby Grives I  Very fine examples of calcareous and more 
neutral grassland, with scrub and floristically 
species -r Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4web  Kirkby Grives 
Grasslands  Two horse grazed grasslands with wet and dry 
areas  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wec  Kirkby Grives II  A very fine calcareous grassland  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wed  Kirkby Wasteland  Interesting neglected grasslands with a number 
of notable plant species  Greenwood & 
Summit  
EV4wee  Kirkby Woodhouse 
Bank  A steep bank clothed in ruderal vegetation with a 
notable calcareous community  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wef  Kirkby Woodhouse 
Grassland  A species -rich scarp grassland, incorporating 
unimproved dry calcareous and damp neutral 
grassland,  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4weg  Kirkby Woodhouse 
Limestone Grassland  A species -rich calcareous bank  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4weh  Lady Spencer's Wood  Deciduous woodland with a noteworthy ground 
flora  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wei  Langton Marshy 
Grassland  Interesting marsh, swamp, and damp grasslands - 
of both botanical and zoological interest  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wej  Langton Meadow  A notable Coal Measures grassland  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  292 
   EV4wek  Linby Colliery Railway  An interesting community developed on cinder 
and ballast  Hucknall North  
EV4wel  Little Dawsgate's Wood  A deciduous plantation woodland with a remnant 
ground flora  Skegby  
EV4wem  Little Oak Plantation  Plantation woodland supporting a noteworthy 
ground flora  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wen  Long Hill Disused Pit  Once typical dry grassland communies  on disused 
workings  Hucknall West  
EV4weo  Long Hill Meadow  A damp species -rich meadow  Hucknall West  
EV4wep  Longside Farm 
Grassland  Two hay meadows and a pasture with diverse 
floras  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4weq  Maghole  Brook and 
Ashfield District Dumble  A stream and dumble with their associated 
woodland and sections of interesting ground 
flora  Larwood  
EV4wer  Mawkin Lane Grassland  Notable coal -measures grassland  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wes  Mawkin's Lane  A green path  with a notable community  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wet  Middle Brook and 
Millington Springs  Large area of replanted woodland with an ancient 
woodland flora along a stream  Underwood  
EV4weu  Middlebrook Grassland  A good species -rich example of a Coal Measures 
type grassland  Underwood  
EV4wev  Middlebrook Meadow  A classic Coal Measures type community  Underwood  
EV4wew  Mill Lake Pasture, 
Bestwood  A valuable damp riverside pasture  Hucknall South  
EV4wex  Mill Lake Swamp  A valuable tall swamp habitat  Hucknall South  
EV4wey  Mill Lakes, Bestwood  A landscaped lake with a good range of species  Hucknall South  
EV4wez  Millington Springs 
Grassland  A good species -rich example of a damp Coal 
Measures type grassland  Underwood  
EV4wf  Moor Road Disused 
Railway, Bestwood  An interesting length of disused railway 
vegetated by dense scrub and a notable herb 
community  Hucknall South  
EV4wfa  Morning Springs  A coniferous plantation with deciduous areas and 
species -rich pockets  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wfb  Moseley Spring  A damp acid woodland  Kingsway  
EV4wfc  New Hucknall Sidings 
Grasslands  A valuable series of grasslands with a number of 
notable species  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wfd  Newboundmill and 
Blackholme Woods  Wet species -rich deciduous woodland  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  293 
   EV4wfe  Newstead Park 
(including River Leen 
System)  An impressive variety of habitats of faunal and 
floral importance  Kingsway  
EV4wff  Newstead Robin Hood 
Line A site supporting a butterfly species of  principle 
importance  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wfg  Norwood Plantation  A sizeable deciduous woodland, grassland, 
streamside flush communities and some 
noteworthy species  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wfh  Oak Plantation, 
Annesley  An interesting woodland with a noteworthy 
ground flora  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wfi  Papplewick Ponds  Interesting subsidence ponds with some valuable 
peripheral habitats  Hucknall North  
EV4wfj  Park Forest, Annesley  A mixed forestry plantation on a ancient 
woodland site  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wfk  Pinxton Lane  A roadside verge supporting an interesting flora  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wfl  Pinxton Road 
Grasslands, Bentinck 
Town  A group of species -rich grasslan ds Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wfm  Pleasley Road Grassland  A damp neutral grassland with notable species  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wfn  Pye Hill Marshy 
Grassland  An interesting marshy field with locally 
characteristic grassland species  Jacksdale  & 
Westwood  
EV4wfo  River Leen  A stretch of river of zoological importance  Hucknall North  
EV4wfp  River Leen (Part)  City section of a river with important plant and 
animal communities  Hucknall South  
EV4wfq  River Leen Pastures, 
Bestwood  Fine pastures with an unusual and valuable 
species composition  Hucknall South  
EV4wfr  River Meden - 
Newboundmill Bridge  A section of the River Meden of interest for 
Water beetles  Skegby  
EV4wfs  River Meden Grassland, 
Skegby  Sloping grassland with species -rich calcareous 
banks  Skegby  
EV4wft  Robin Hood Hills  A large area of acidic woodland, extensive 
bracken and notable heath communities on 
South facing slo  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wfu  Rookery Lane 
Grassland, Fulwood  A neglected grassland with a notable species 
content  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wfv  Rosemary Hill Pasture  Notable pastures with a basic influence  Selston  
EV4wfw  School Road Pasture, 
Bagthorpe  An interesting pasture and stream,showing  an 
excellent species -diversity  Underwood  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  294 
   EV4wfx  Selston Common 
Grasslands  A valuable pocket of grasslands with especially 
notable flush communities  Selston  
EV4wfy  Selston Golf Course  Grassland, scrub and wetland communities of 
conservation interest  Selston 
EV4wfz  Selston Grassland (I)  A little -managed, species -rich grassland  Underwood  
EV4wg  Selston Grassland (II)  A notable grassland community  Underwood  
EV4wga  Selston Meadow  A traditionally managed species -rich coal 
measures type grassland  Selston  
EV4wgb  Silverhill Colliery  Former colliery site of botanical and zoological 
interest  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wgc  Silverhill Lane  An attractive cutting with tall, botanically 
interesting, hedgebanks  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wgd  Skegby Disuse d Quarry I  Species -rich calcareous community on the lower 
exposures of a disused quarry  The Dales  
EV4wge  Skegby Disused Quarry 
III A mosaic of neutral and species -rich calcareous 
grassland in a abandoned quarry  The Dales  
EV4wgf  Skegby  Grassland II  A damp grassland with a valuable collection of 
herbs  Skegby  
EV4wgg  Skegby Grassland III  A valuable wet meadow  Skegby  
EV4wgh  Skegby Junction 
Grassland  A linear hay meadow with characteristic species  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wgi  Skegby  Railway Cutting  A good exposure of Lower Magnesian Limestone 
with botanical interest  The Dales  
EV4wgj  Skegby Railway 
Grassland  A grassland with an impressive herb content  Skegby  
EV4wgk  Skegby Railway 
Grassland III  A noteworthy calcareous grassland.  Skegby  
EV4wgl  Skegby Riparian 
Woodland  A grassland, short length of stream and a pond 
with a well developed submerged and marginal 
aquatic  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wgm  Skegby to Pleasley 
Railway  A range of habitats developed on a disused 
railway, including some excellent species -rich 
grassland  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wgn  Spring Farm Meadows, 
Huthwaite  A sequence of species -rich hay meadows  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wgo  Spring Farm Pasture, 
Huthwaite  A long -established and notably species -rich 
grassland community  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4wgp  Spring Wood, Stanton 
Hill Deciduous woodland and scrub in a shallow 
valley with noteworthy wet areas and ponds  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wgq  Springfield Cottage 
Grasslands  A fine series of little -improved, species -rich 
grasslands  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  295 
   EV4wgr  Springfield Grassland 
Ext Neutral grassland of note  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wgs  St Helen's Grassland  A noteworthy horse grazed semi -improved 
neutral grassland  Kirkby Cross & 
Portland  
EV4wgt  Stanley Farm 
Grasslands  Species -rich Coal Measures grasslands along a 
tree-lined stream  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wgu  Stanley Grange 
Grassland  Species -rich coal -measures grassland  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wgv  Stanley Grasslands  An unimproved coal measures type grassland  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wgw  Stanton Hill Colliery 
Dismantled Railway 
Line A notable mosaic of scrub, relict grassland and 
track -bed flora along a dismantled railway line  Stanton Hill  & 
Teversal  
EV4wgx  Stanton Hill Colliery 
Spoil  Colliery spoil with a collection of rare and notable 
species  Carsic  
EV4wgy  Stanton Hill 
EV4whGrasslands  Grasslands with a number of notable species  The Dales  
EV4wgz  Stanton Hill Grassland I  Damp and wet neutral grassland with notable 
herbs characteristic of inundation communities  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wh  Stanton Hill Relict 
Grassland  An unimproved calcareous grassland with a 
noteworthy flora  Carsic  
EV4wha  Starth Wood  Species -rich deciduous coppice with standards  Hucknall West  
EV4whb  Strawberry Bank 
Meadow  A species -rich hay meadow  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4whc  Stubbinghill Farm 
Meadow  A notable meadow with a particularly valuable 
sloping portion  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4whd  Sunnyside Farm 
Meadows  A fine sequence of variously wet and dry 
grasslands  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4whe  Sutton -in-Ashfield 
District Grassland  A species -rich grassland with damp and dry parts  Huthwaite & 
Brierley  
EV4whf  Teversal Cemetery  A species -rich calcareous grassland within a 
cemetery  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4whg  Teversal Disused 
Railway  An interesting stretch of disused railway with a 
particularly notable calcicolous community  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4whh  Teversal Flush  A notable base -rich wet flush community  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4whi  Teversal Pastures  Excellent neutral grasslands with marsh and wet 
woodland - of botanical and zoological interest  Skegby  
EV4whj  Teversal to Pleasley 
Railway  A range of habitats, with es pecially valuable 
calcareous grassland, along a length of railway  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  296 
   EV4whk  Thieves Wood  An extensive coniferous plantation with ancient 
deciduous portions and an interesting flora and 
fau Sutton Junction 
& Harlow Wood  
EV4whl  Underwood Football 
Ground  A football pitch flanked by notable damp areas  Underwood  
EV4wi  Underwood Grassland  Grasslands with a noteworthy sward  Underwood  
EV4wj  Underwood Meadow  A small unimproved hay meadow with a rich 
diversity of characteristic species  Underwood  
EV4wk  Underwood Meadows  Herb -rich meadows with an especially important 
stream  Underwood  
EV4wl  Underwood Plantation  Coniferous plantation with notable acidic flushes, 
tall wetland herb communities and acidic fen  Underwood  
EV4wm  Washdyke Lane Hedges  Shrub -rich hedges  Hucknall West  
EV4wn  Watnall Coppice East  A deciduous woodland with an impressive flora  Hucknall West  
EV4wo  Weaver's Lane 
Grassland  A notable neutral grassland  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wp  Weaver's Lane Verge  Notable calcareous communities adjacent to a 
track  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wq  Westwood Bents 
Corner  A noteworthy coal -measures grassland  Jacksdale & 
Westwood  
EV4wr  Wharf Yard Bank, Kirkby 
Woodhouse  A herb -rich, calcareous bank  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4ws  Whiteborough Farm 
Pasture  A well -established pasture with a notable plant 
community  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wt  Whiteborough Railway  An interesting stretch of active railway with a 
grassland community of particular note  Stanton Hill & 
Teversal  
EV4wu  Wighay Road Grassland  A base -rich grassland with a notable flora  Hucknall North  
EV4wv  Wighay Wood  A mixed woodland that retains some interest  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4ww  Wighay Wood Stream  A rich woodland lining a clear stream  Hucknall West  
EV4wx  William Wood  A mature deciduous woodland with a noteworthy 
ground flora  Annesley & 
Kirkby 
Woodhouse  
EV4wy  Winter Close Grassland, 
New Brinsley  Neutral grassland  Underwood  
EV4wz  Woodhouse Lane 
Quarry  A calcareous grassland and scrub on an old 
quarry site  Skegby  
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  297 
   Appendix 7 - Policy EV5: Protection of Green Spaces and Recreational Facilities 
Sites  
 
Green Spaces and Recreational Facilities  
 
Local Plan 
Reference  Site Name  Sheet  
EV5/1  Hucknall Bypass Embankment - South  South Sheet  
EV5/2  Hucknall Lane Nature Area  South Sheet  
EV5/3  Shelton Avenue  South Sheet  
EV5/4  Rolls Royce Sports Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/6  Astral Grove  South Sheet  
EV5/7  Lancaster Road  South Sheet  
EV5/8  Fields off Farleys Lane  South Sheet  
EV5/9  Kingsway Gardens  South Sheet  
EV5/10  Mill Lakes  South Sheet  
EV5/11  Farm Avenue Fields  South Sheet  
EV5/12  Edgewood School and Leisure Centre Playing Fields  South Sheet  
EV5/13  Lime Tree Road Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/14  Ruffs Drive/Robin Hood Drive  South Sheet  
EV5/15  Nabbs Lane Park  South Sheet  
EV5/16  Farleys Lane  South Sheet  
EV5/17  Broomhill School Playing Fields  South Sheet  
EV5/18  Jenny Burton Way  South Sheet  
EV5/19  Salterford Road Open Space  South Sheet  
EV5/20  Aerial Way  South Sheet  
EV5/21  Hucknall Cemetery  South Sheet  
EV5/22  Butlers Hill Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/23  Titchfield Park  South Sheet  
EV5/24  Land off Totnes Close  South Sheet  
EV5/25  The Holgate Comprehensive School Playing Fields  South Sheet  
EV5/26  Rollestone to Tiverton Close  South Sheet  
EV5/27  Field End of High Leys Road  South Sheet  
EV5/28  Polperro Lagoon  South Sheet  
EV5/29  The Holgate Comprehensive School Open Area  South Sheet  
EV5/29  Garden Road  South Sheet  
EV5/30  Annie Holgate School Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/31  Common Farm  South Sheet  
EV5/32  Wigwam Lane Open Area  South Sheet  
EV5/33  Leen Valley Golf Course  South Sheet  
EV5/34  Garden Road  South Sheet  
EV5/35  Wood Lane  South Sheet  
EV5/36  St Mary Magdalen's Church Cemetery  South Sheet  
EV5/37  Whyburn Primary School Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/38  Greenwood Vale  South Sheet  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  298 
   EV5/39  Wigwam Lane Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/40  Albert Street Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/41  Papplewick Lane Football Pitches  South Sheet  
EV5/42  Papplewick Leen Corridor  South Sheet  
EV5/43  Hucknall National Junior School Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/44  Washdyke Lane Recreation Ground/Wighay Park  South Sheet  
EV5/45  Field at Leen Mills School  South Sheet  
EV5/46  Leen Mills School Playing Fields  South Sheet  
EV5/47  Bishops Way Walk  South Sheet  
EV5/48  Boatswain Drive  South Sheet  
EV5/49  Dob Park  South Sheet  
EV5/50  Holy Cross Primary School Playing Fields  South Sheet  
EV5/51  Barbara Square/ Coronation Road Footpath  South Sheet  
EV5/52  The National School Playing Fields  South Sheet  
EV5/53  The Ranges  South Sheet  
EV5/54  Church Lane Cycle Way  South Sheet  
EV5/55  Grange Cottage Woods  South Sheet  
EV5/56  Church Lane  South Sheet  
EV5/57  Church Lane Open Space  South Sheet  
EV5/58  Fields off Winter Close/ Cordy Lane  South Sheet  
EV5/59  Felley Wood  South Sheet  
EV5/60  Underwood Church of England School Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/61  Alfreton Road Cricket Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/62  Fields off Felley Mill Lane  South Sheet  
EV5/63  South of Main Road, Underwood Hill Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/64  St Michael and All Angels Church Cemetery  South Sheet  
EV5/65  Church Lane Recreation Ground, Friezeland  South Sheet  
EV5/66  Underwood Football Club  South Sheet  
EV5/67  Bagthorpe Primary School Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/68  Fields at Millington Springs  South Sheet  
EV5/69  Jacksdale Nature Reserve  South Sheet  
EV5/70  Land at Miners Welfare Club Jacksdale  South Sheet  
EV5/71  Main Road Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/72  Wharf Green  South Sheet  
EV5/73  Pye Hill Road  South Sheet  
EV5/74  Westwood Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/75  Fields at Pye Hill  South Sheet  
EV5/76  Pye Hill  South Sheet  
EV5/77  Nottingham Road Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/78  Selston Par 3 Golf Course  South Sheet  
EV5/79  Green Well Park  South Sheet  
EV5/80  Selston High School Playing Field (south)  South Sheet  
EV5/81  The Hills  South Sheet  
EV5/82  Green Farm Road Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/83  Alexander Avenue  South Sheet  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  299 
   EV5/84  Selston Parish Hall  South Sheet  
EV5/85  Selston High School Playing Field (north)  South Sheet  
EV5/86  Valentine Avenue Play Area  South Sheet  
EV5/87  Holly Hill School Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/88  St Helen's Church  South Sheet  
EV5/89  Portland Road  South Sheet  
EV5/90  Jubilee Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/91  New Selston Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/92  Annesley Wood  South Sheet  
EV5/93  Annesley Church  South Sheet  
EV5/94  Hucknall Road  South Sheet  
EV5/95  Sherwood Business Park Lakes  South Sheet  
EV5/96  Playground opposite Newstead School  South Sheet  
EV5/97  Oak Field Woods  South Sheet  
EV5/98  Annesley Woods  South Sheet  
EV5/100  Acacia Avenue Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/101  Annesley Primary School Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/102  Nuncargate Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/103  Nuncargate Road Cricket Field  South Sheet  
EV5/104  Annesley Cutting  South Sheet  
EV5/105  New Annesley Green, Byron Road  South Sheet  
EV5/106  New Annesley Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/107  Annesley Parish Millennium Garden  South Sheet  
EV5/108  Kirkby Woodhouse Cemetery  South Sheet  
EV5/109  Skegby Road Recreation Ground  South Sheet  
EV5/110  Kirkby Woodhouse Playing Field  South Sheet  
EV5/111  Broadoak Park  South Sheet  
EV5/112  Park Forest  South Sheet  
EV5/113  Notts Golf Club  North Sheet  
EV5/114  Kirkby Forest  North Sheet  
EV5/115  Portland Park  North Sheet  
EV5/116  Kingsway Cemetery (Newest)  North Sheet  
EV5/117  Kingsway School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/118  Footpath adjacent Kingsway Park  North Sheet  
EV5/119  Portland Park Extension  North Sheet  
EV5/120  Land at Studfold farm  North Sheet  
EV5/121  Old Kingsway Cemetery  North Sheet  
EV5/122  Kingsway Park  North Sheet  
EV5/123  Mayfield Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/124  Church Hill Cemetery  North Sheet  
EV5/125  Lindleys Lane Footpath  North Sheet  
EV5/126  Land at Lane End  North Sheet  
EV5/127  Kirkby College Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/128  Lindleys Lane to Studfold Farm Footpath  North Sheet  
EV5/129  St Wilfreds Church Cemetery  North Sheet  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  300 
   EV5/130  Lime Street  North Sheet  
EV5/131  Titchfield Park  North Sheet  
EV5/132  Orchard Primary and Nursery School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/133  Morven Park  North Sheet  
EV5/134  Bracken Hill and Coxmoor Primary School Field  North Sheet  
EV5/135  Jeffries School Field  North Sheet  
EV5/136  BRSA Football Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/137  Ashfield Drive  North Sheet  
EV5/138  Sutton Road Miners Welfare  North Sheet  
EV5/139  Warwick Close  North Sheet  
EV5/140  Southwell Lane to Rowan Drive Footpath  North Sheet  
EV5/141  Land at rear of Ashfield Community Hospital  North Sheet  
EV5/142  West Park  North Sheet  
EV5/143  Summit Centre Open Space  North Sheet  
EV5/144  Coxmoor Plantation  North Sheet  
EV5/145  Forster Street  North Sheet  
EV5/146  Coniston Road  North Sheet  
EV5/147  Southwell Close  North Sheet  
EV5/148  Acorn View  North Sheet  
EV5/149  Chapel Street/Lindrick Road (Footpath)  North Sheet  
EV5/150  Beacon Drive  North Sheet  
EV5/151  Greenwood Primary and Nursery School Field  North Sheet  
EV5/152  Rowan Drive  North Sheet  
EV5/153  David Street  North Sheet  
EV5/154  Sutton Middle Lane  North Sheet  
EV5/155  Summerfields Road  North Sheet  
EV5/156  Ashfield Comprehensive School Field  North Sheet  
EV5/157  Orchid Close  North Sheet  
EV5/158  Penny Emma Way (South)  North Sheet  
EV5/159  Kirkby Summit West  North Sheet  
EV5/160  Swans Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/161  Maun Valley  North Sheet  
EV5/162  Orchid Drive  North Sheet  
EV5/163  Thieves Wood  North Sheet  
EV5/164  Harlow Wood  North Sheet  
EV5/165  Fields opposite Orchard Way and A38  North Sheet  
EV5/166  Coxmoor Golf Course  North Sheet  
EV5/168  Leamington County Primary School Field  North Sheet  
EV5/169  Lynton Drive footpath  North Sheet  
EV5/170  Ashfield Park  North Sheet  
EV5/171  Hill Top View Open Space  North Sheet  
EV5/172  Lynton Drive  North Sheet  
EV5/173  Twinyards Close Footpath  North Sheet  
EV5/174  Calladine Open Space  North Sheet  
EV5/175  Taylor Crescent Recreation Ground  North Sheet  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  301 
   EV5/176  Roundhills Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/177  Cow Pasture Lane Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/178  Calladine Pond and Open Space  North Sheet  
EV5/179  Mapplewells School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/180  Land to rear of Crowtrees Drive  North Sheet  
EV5/181  Oakleaf Crescent  North Sheet  
EV5/182  Kirkby Folly Road  North Sheet  
EV5/183  Cauldwell Wood  North Sheet  
EV5/185  Charnwood Street Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/186  Peveril Drive  North Sheet  
EV5/187  The Lawns  North Sheet  
EV5/188  Maun Way - Kingsmill Road East  North Sheet  
EV5/189  St Mary Magdalen's Church Cemetery  North Sheet  
EV5/190  Hosiery Mills Football Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/191  Sutton Cemetery  North Sheet  
EV5/192  Hosiery Mills Cricket Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/193  Maun Way - Kingsmill Link  North Sheet  
EV5/194  Jubilee Road  North Sheet  
EV5/195  St Mary's Primary School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/196  Hillocks School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/197  Springwood View Close  North Sheet  
EV5/198  Priestsic Road Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/199  Priestic  Primary School Field  North Sheet  
EV5/200  Pretty Polly Sports Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/201  Carsic School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/202  Westbourne Road  North Sheet  
EV5/203  Westbourne Road  North Sheet  
EV5/204  John Davies School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/205  Sowter Avenue  North Sheet  
EV5/206  Rear of Shortwood Avenue  South Sheet  
EV5/207  Kingsmill Reservoir  North Sheet  
EV5/208  The Oval  North Sheet  
EV5/209  Stoneyford Road Trail - South  North Sheet  
EV5/210  Lawrence Crescent  North Sheet  
EV5/211  Stoneyford Road Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/212  Brierley Forest Park  North Sheet  
EV5/213  Hill Crescent  North Sheet  
EV5/214  Dalestorth School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/215  Cosgrove Avenue footpath  North Sheet  
EV5/216  Cosgrove Avenue Open Space  North Sheet  
EV5/217  Quarrydale Road Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/218  Quarrydale Comprehensive School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/219  Stamper Crescent Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/220  St Andrew's Church of England School Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/221  Saville Road  North Sheet  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  302 
   EV5/222  Nunn Brook  North Sheet  
EV5/223  Rookery Park  North Sheet  
EV5/224  Field off Sudbury Drive  North Sheet  
EV5/225  Huthwaite Cemetery  North Sheet  
EV5/226  Huthwaite Welfare Park  North Sheet  
EV5/227  Strawberry Bank (2)  North Sheet  
EV5/229  Woodland Avenue  North Sheet  
EV5/230  Fackley Way Open Space  North Sheet  
EV5/231  Brand Lane  North Sheet  
EV5/232  Wharf Road Hill  North Sheet  
EV5/233  Healdswood  Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/234  Meden Bank  North Sheet  
EV5/235  Skegby Hall  North Sheet  
EV5/236  Stoneyford Trail  North Sheet  
EV5/237  St Andrews Church  North Sheet  
EV5/238  Skegby Quarries  North Sheet  
EV5/239  Skegby  Junior Academy Playing Field  North Sheet  
EV5/240  Teversal Grange Sports Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/241  Teversal Football Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/242  Teversal Trail - Skegby to Teversal  North Sheet  
EV5/243  Pleasley to Teversal Footpath  North Sheet  
EV5/244  Teversal Recreation Ground  North Sheet  
EV5/245  Silverhill Country Park  North Sheet  
EV5/246  Teversal Trail - Skegby to Pleasley  North Sheet  
EV5/247  Teversal to Blackholme  North Sheet  
EV5/248  Hardwick Fields  North Sheet  
EV5/249  Lady Spencer's Wood  North Sheet  
 
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  303 
   Appendix 8 - Policy EV6: Trees, Woodlands and Hedgerows  
 
Ancient Woodland Sites  
 
Plan Ref.  Site Name  Sheet  
EV6a  Healds Wood  North Sheet  
EV6b  Bloomer Wood  North Sheet  
EV6c  Bulwell Wood  South Sheet  
EV6d  Dawgates  Wood 1  North Sheet  
EV6e  Dovedale Wood  North Sheet  
EV6f  High Park Wood  South Sheet  
EV6g  Little Oak Plantation  South Sheet  
EV6h  Millington Springs  South Sheet  
EV6i  Normanshill/ Thieves Wood  North Sheet  
EV6j  Norwood  North Sheet  
EV6k  The Dumbles  North Sheet  
 
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  304 
   Appendix 9 - Policy EV7: Provision and Protection of Allotments  
 
Allotments  
 
Local Plan 
Reference  Allotment Name  Location  
EV7 Ha  Lime Tree Road  Hucknall  
EV7 Hb  Butlers Hill  Hucknall  
EV7 Hc  High Leys  Hucknall  
EV7 Hd  Wood Lane/A611  Hucknall  
EV7 He  Wigwam Lane  Hucknall  
EV7 Hf  Linby Road East  Hucknall  
EV7 Hg  St Mary’s Way  Hucknall  
EV7 Hh  Wighay  Hucknall  
EV7 Hi  Washdyke Lane  Hucknall  
   
EV7 Va  Plainspot Road  Brinsley  
EV7 Vb  Cordy Lane  Underwood  
EV7 Vc  School Road  Bagthorpe  
EV7 Vd  Westwood Gardens  Westwood  
EV7 Ve  Nottingham Road  Selston  
EV7 Vf  Mansfield Road  Selston  
   
EV7 Ka  Wesley Street  Annesley Woodhouse  
EV7 Kb  Sherwood Rise  Annesley Woodhouse  
EV7 Kc  Recreation Road  Annesley  
EV7 Kd  Kingsway  Kirkby  
EV7 Ke  Church Gardens  Kirkby  
EV7 Kf  Diamond Avenue  Kirkby  
EV7 Kg  Harcourt Street  Kirkby  
EV7 Kh  California, Cowpasture Lane  Kirkby  
EV7 Ki  Sutton Road  Kirkby  
   
EV7 Sa  Willowbridge  Sutton  
EV7 Sb  Jubilee Gardens  Sutton  
EV7 Sc  Mill Lane  Huthwaite  
EV7 Sd  Garden Gap  Huthwaite  
EV7 Se  Carsic  Sutton  
EV7 Sf  Lane End  Sutton  
EV7 Sg  Wharf Road  Stanton Hill  
EV7 Sh  New Lane  Stanton Hill  
 
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  305 
   Appendix 10 - Policy EV9 – The Historic Environment  
 
Scheduled Monuments  
 
Plan Ref.  Site Name  
EV10 Aa   
Remains of Old Manor House, Skegby, Sutton -in-Ashfield.  
 
EV10 Ab  Market Cross, Kirkby Cross, Kirkby -in-Ashfield.  
EV10 Ac  Fish Ponds 220m East of St. Wilfred’s Church, Kirkby Cross, Kirkby -
in- Ashfield.  
EV10 Ad  Castle Hill, Annesley.  
EV10 A e All Saints Church, Annesley.  
EV10 Af  Fish Ponds, South of Damstead Farm, Annesley.  
EV10 Ag  Castle Hill Fortified Manor, South of St Wilfred’s Church, Kirkby -in-
Ashfield.  
EV10 Ah  Mound on Hamilton Hill, Sutton -in-Ashfield.  
EV10 Ai  Wansley Hall Manorial Site, Bagthorpe.  
 
  Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  306 
   Appendix 11 - Environmental Protection – Matters For Consideration In 
Taking  Decisions On Planning Applications  
 
The following matters (not in any order of importance) should be considered in the  
determination of planning applications where pollution considerations arise:  
 
• The possible impact of potentially polluting development (both direct and indirect) on 
land use, including effects on health, the natural environment or general amenity . 
 
• The potential sensitivity of the area to adverse effects from pollution, in particular 
reflected in landscape, the quality of soil, air, and ground and surface waters, nature 
conservation including Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), Protection Areas 
(SPAs),We tland of International Importance (RAMSAR sites), and Local Wildlife Sites 
agricultural land quality, water supply (Source Protection Zones), Special Areas of 
Conservation (SAC), archaeological designations and the need to protect natural 
resources . 
 
• The e nvironmental benefits that the development might bring, such as: resulting 
reductions in the need to travel; – accompanying improvements to transport 
infrastructure; restoration of former habitats; enhancement or creation of habitats; and 
the remediation o f past contamination.  
 
• The economic and wider social need for development (including potentially polluting 
development) such as the provision of a product or service, the generation of 
secondary trade with local businesses, the creation of new jobs and meeting regional 
or national environmental objectives including: the need to identify land, or establish 
criteria, for the acceptable location of potentially polluting developments and the 
availability of alternative sites; and the need to separate necessa ry but potentially 
polluting and other land uses (recognising the potential conflict with sustainable 
development over mixed -use developments) so as to reduce conflicts, for example by 
identifying where necessary areas around existing sources of pollution (including 
roads) in which proposed new developments and uses should be carefully considered 
in terms of their potential as pollution receptors.  
 
• The existing, and likely future, air quality in an area, including any Air Quality 
Management Areas (AQMAs) or  other areas where air quality is likely to be poor 
(including the consideration of cumulative impacts of a number of smaller 
developments on air quality, and the impact of development proposals in rural areas 
with low existing levels of background air pol lution).  
 
• The need for compliance with any statutory environmental quality standards or 
objectives (including the air quality objectives prescribed by the Air Quality Regulations 
2000 and Amending Regulations 2002, the water quality objectives  prescribed i n EU 
legislation including the 1991 Urban Waste Water Treatment  Directive and Nitrate 
Vulnerable Zones identified under the 1991 Nitrates  Directiv e. 
 
 Ashfield Draft Local Plan 2020 - 2038   Appendices  
 
  
P a g e  307 
   • The need to ensure that land, after development, is not capable of being  determined as 
contaminated land under Part IIA of the EPA 1990 and that all  unacceptable risks have 
been addressed . 
 
• The need to limit and where possible reduce greenhouse gas emissions and take  
account of potential effects of climate change . 
 
• The possible adverse impacts on water qualit y and the impact of any possible  
discharge of effluent or leachates which may pose a threat to surface or  underground 
water resources directly or indirectly through surrounding soil . 
 
• The need to make suitable provision for the drainage of surface water . 
 
• The provision of sewerage and sewage treatment and the availability of existing  
sewage infrastructure . 
 
• Existing action and management plans with a bearing on environmental quality  
including: Air Quality Management Area Action Plans, inspection str ategies and  
programmes for contaminated land, River Basin Management Plans, Catchment  
Abstraction Management Strategies, Catchment Flood Management Plans,  Biodiversity 
Action Plans Noise Management Plans and Noise Action Plans,  Sustainable 
Community Strate gies. 
 
• The possibility that (whether or not some aspects of the development are subject  to 
pollution control), emissions of smoke, fumes, gases, dust, steam, smell,  vibration or 
noise from the development might nevertheless be seriously  detrimental to amen ity in 
addition to constituting a statutory nuisance under the  Environmental Protection Act 
1990 . 
 
• The possibility that the development might present a Major Accident Hazard  under the 
Control of Major Accident Hazard Regulations 1999 or an unacceptable  risk to the 
health or safety of the public arising from the development . 
 
• The need to limit and, where possible, reduce the adverse impact of light  pollution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 