5
10
15
20
253 
5 6 Adopted Local Plan 
Contents 
1 Foreword 
2 Vision and Objectives 
3 Introduction 
4 Relationship to Other Plans and Strategies 12 
Spatial Strategy 16 
6 Policies and Proposals 27 
7 Location of Growth 31 
8 Economy 33 
9 Housing 57 
Mixed Use Sites 120 
Education  127 11 
12 Transport 128 
13 Local Character 151 
Historic Environment 155 
Town Centres
 and Retail 162 14 
16 Barnsley Town Centre 173 
17 Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 226 
18 Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 246 
19 Climate Change 256 
Renewables 263 
21 Waste and Recycling 266 
22 Minerals 267 
Contaminated Land and Pollution 282 
Utilities
 285 23 
24 
Community Infrastructure 286 
26 Monitoring & Indicators 289 
Appendices 
1 Glossary 315 
2 Housing Trajectory 322 
3 Supplementary Planning Documents 323 
4 Evidence Base 324 
5 Viability Assessments 328 Adopted Local Plan 
Contents 
6 Superseded Policies 330 Adopted Local Plan 
1 . Foreword 
1.1 Barnsley has changed,  and  will continue to change ……for the better. This document provides 
local planning policy for the future development of Barnsley up to the year 2033. 
1.2 The Local Plan sets out the  key elements of the planning framework for Barnsley, and the 
approach to its long term physical development to achieve the Council’s vision of what sort 
of place Barnsley wants to become. 
1.3 The document reflects the council’s  hopes and aims for the people who live, work, run 
businesses and enjoy leisure in Barnsley. 
1.4 Barnsley has a big role to  play in the wider City Regions and the Northern Powerhouse 
initiative being within both the Leeds and Sheffield City Regions, and the council intends to 
take full advantage of any opportunities that this fortunate position may present. 
1.5 A Transport Strategy for Barnsley  is  in preparation. Barnsley’s new Local Plan sets out the 
council’s strategic vision and priorities for housing, employment and commercial development, 
including transport infrastructure and protection of our local environment. To make 
improvements effectively in relation to our economic priorities we must also ensure progress 
on other issues such as: 
Health; 
Education and skills; 
Cohesion and community safety; 
Child poverty; and 
Quality of life and the  well-being of Barnsley’s people. 
1.6 Only if this is done will  the full potential of Barnsley’s economic growth be realised, making 
the borough a better place to live 
1.7 The Local Plan objectives seek to  improve the economic prosperity and quality of life for all 
its residents and those who work here. The Local Plan will have 3 key roles in accordance 
with the Government's Framework (NPPF) namely economic, social and environmental, and 
will deliver sustainable development. In order to support Barnsley's ambitions and vision the 
Local Plan objectives are: 
Provide opportunities for the creation  of new jobs and protection of existing jobs; 
Improve the conditions in which  people live, work, travel and take leisure; 
Widen the choice of high  quality homes; 
Improve the design of development;  and 
Protect and enhance Barnsley's environmental  assets and achieve net gains in 
biodiversity. 
1.8 In particular it will:-
Allocate sites for employment land  to support our economic needs and aspirations; 
Allocate housing sites to support  the economy and to provide an appropriate land supply 
to meet our needs; 
Set the planning context for  Barnsley Town Centre; 
3 Adopted Local Plan 
1 . Foreword 
Protect and enhance green spaces  and green infrastructure that contribute towards 
improving quality of life; and 
Contain policies to secure appropriate  high quality development and to protect and 
enhance what is special about Barnsley and its environment. 
1.9 A glossary is contained in appendix  1. 
4 Adopted Local Plan 
2 . Vision and Objectives 
There is clear intention to enhance Barnsley as a location to do business and a place that will 
improve the quality of life for residents. 
“Working together for a brighter future, a better Barnsley.” 
To achieve this Barnsley’s Local Plan will provide the spatial framework within which we can 
deliver substantial and sustainable economic growth for the borough, as well as Leeds and 
Sheffield City Regions and the Northern Powerhouse, that also respects the needs of local 
communities. The Local Plan objectives seek to improve the economic prosperity and quality of 
life for all its residents and those who work here. In order to support Barnsley's ambitions and 
vision the Local Plan objectives are: 
Provide opportunities for the creation of new jobs and protection of existing jobs 
Improve the conditions in which people live, work, travel and take leisure 
Widen the choice of high quality homes 
Improve the design of development 
Protect and enhance Barnsley's natural assets and achieve net gains in biodiversity 
To be achieved by: 
Providing the opportunity to grow the economy by 28,840 jobs 
Encouraging significant inward investment to generate this additional employment 
Providing the space to allow existing businesses to grow 
Creating a vibrant and attractive Town Centre 
Enabling the delivery of at least 21,546 homes that provide housing for all, including affordable 
housing, and maintaining at least a rolling 5 year deliverable supply of new housing 
Enabling the provision of critical infrastructure to support sustainable communities 
Protecting and enhancing the natural, built and historic environment 
Respecting the cultural identity and local character of Barnsley 
The focus for growth will be within Urban Barnsley and the principal towns, whilst recognising 
the need to ensure other settlements within the Borough are able to provide appropriate levels 
of growth and regeneration critical to maintaining sustainable local communities. Maintaining 
this settlement hierarchy helps to make the best use of existing infrastructure and to achieve 
sustainable development. The Local Plan will have 3 key roles in accordance with the 
Government's Framework (NPPF) namely economic, social and environmental, and will deliver 
sustainable development. The UK Sustainable Development Strategy Securing the Future set 
out five ‘guiding principles’ of sustainable development: living within the planet’s environmental 
limits; ensuring a strong, healthy and just society; achieving a sustainable economy; promoting 
good governance; and using sound science responsibly. This Local Plan aims to provide a 
stronger and more responsive economy and to ensure a brighter future where people can achieve 
their potential. A 'better Barnsley' can be achieved by working together with local communities. 
5 Adopted Local Plan 
3 . Introduction 
Introduction 
What the Plan is 
3.1 The Planning and Compulsory Purchase  Act  2004 introduced a new planning system as a 
result of which Development Plans were replaced by Local Development Frameworks. In 
March 2012 the government issued the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) which 
sets out the government's planning policies for England and how these are expected to be 
applied. It provides a framework within which local people and their accountable councils 
can produce their own distinctive local and neighbourhood plans, which reflect the needs 
and priorities of their communities. 
3.2 The NPPF describes the development  plan  as including Local Plans, neighbourhood plans, 
and regional strategies, until regional strategies were revoked (The Regional Spatial Strategy 
for Yorkshire and Humber was revoked on 22nd February 2013). The Local Plan is the plan 
for the future development of the local area. 
3.3 The Council adopted the Core Strategy  in September 2011 which set out the key elements 
of the planning framework for Barnsley and the approach to its development to 2026. Since 
its adoption the NPPF has been published and the Regional Spatial Strategy was abolished. 
Therefore this document has been prepared and takes a more holistic approach in line with 
NPPF. Once adopted this Local Plan will replace the Core Strategy. It is a requirement that 
plans are reviewed and updated on a regular basis. 
3.4 This document,  together with the Joint  Waste Plan adopted in March 2012 prepared with 
Doncaster and Rotherham, will be our Local Plan, and once adopted will become the statutory 
development plan for Barnsley. It deals with Barnsley Town Centre and includes text 
previously set out in a stand alone document called the Town Centre Area Action Plan, and 
consulted upon in 2012. It establishes policies and proposals for the development and use 
of land up to the year 2033. It will be used when considering planning applications and to 
coordinate investment decisions that affect the towns, villages and countryside of Barnsley. 
Once the Local Plan is adopted it will supersede the Core Strategy policies and UDP saved 
policies. 
3.5 Neighbourhood plans are plans prepared  by  a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for 
a particular neighbourhood area. They are intended to give direct power to communities to 
develop a shared vision for their neighbourhood and deliver the sustainable development 
they need. The ambition of the neighbourhood should be aligned with the strategic needs 
and priorities of the wider local area. Neighbourhood plans must be in general conformity 
with the strategic policies of the Local Plan and must not promote less development than set 
out in the Local Plan. Neighbourhood Plans are currently being prepared in Barnsley for 
Oxspring,Penistone, Silkstone and Cawthorne. 
3.6 This Local Plan does not identify  sites for waste management as these are set out in the 
adopted Barnsley, Doncaster & Rotherham Joint Waste Plan. 
3.7 The policies in this Local Plan  supersede the saved UDP policies, Education Sites DPD and 
Core Strategy. Appendix 6 sets out the list of superseded policies. 
6 Adopted Local Plan 
3 . Introduction 
3.8 The Local Plan must comply  with the requirements of the EU Directive on Strategic 
Environmental Assessment (SEA). These requirements are built into the Sustainability 
Appraisal (SA) process. The SA can be found on our website. No further work is considered 
necessary under SEA. 
3.9 There is also a requirement  under the Habitats Regulations to complete an Appropriate 
Assessment (AA) to demonstrate that the policies in the Local Plan do not harm European 
designated sites. We have undertaken a screening in conjunction with Natural England. This 
can also be found on our website. 
Our approach 
Plan Period 
3.10 In this document we have  worked from a base date of 1st April 2014 to 2033, which gives 
an overall time horizon of 19 years and will be known as the plan period. (1) We have chosen 
these dates as our plan period particularly because of our economic position and the lead 
in time for employment land to be developed and 2033 aligns with the council's economic 
strategy. 
Proposed allocations 
3.11 W
e have shown proposed  allocations  to cover this period. We are also proposing safeguarded 
land (land which can be considered for development after 2033). This will give permanence 
to the proposed Green Belt boundary until at least 2038. 
Green Belt Review 
3.12 Our
 housing and employment  needs  and aspirations cannot be accommodated without the 
need to release land from the Green Belt. We have undertaken a Green Belt review as part 
of our evidence base for this Local Plan. 
3.13 In addition, further minor changes  have been made to the Green Belt boundary to address 
such things as mapping anomalies, accuracy issues and changes in physical features and 
to provide more defensible boundaries. 
3.14 Changes are shown on the  Policies Map and we have produced plans to show these changes 
which are available in the Green Belt background paper. In relation to major changes to 
accommodate housing and employment requirements the Green Belt background paper also 
sets out the exceptional circumstances to justify alterations to the Green Belt boundary. 
3.15 The Local Plan seeks to  implement sustainable development by allocating previously 
developed land in the first instance and also by making the best use of existing infrastructure, 
where possible. There is not a large amount of previously developed land in the borough 
that is considered suitable for allocation. 
1 Sometimes this period is referred to in other documentation as "over the next 20 years" for convenient shorthand. The period is in fact a nineteen 
year period in planning terms, spanning, but including, 20 different years 2014-2033. 
7 Adopted Local Plan 
3 . Introduction 
3.16 The proposed allocations and policies  in this document seek to provide a balance between 
creating the best possible opportunities to improve the economic prosperity of Barnsley as 
well as protecting and enhancing the boroughs assets to make Barnsley an attractive place 
to live, work and invest in. Where we use the word ‘we’ in policies this refers to the Council 
as the local planning authority. 
What area does this Local  Plan cover? 
3.17 This Local Plan covers all  land within Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council's administrative 
boundary, with the exception of the area identified as the Peak District National Park. The 
Peak District National Park has its own local planning authority which sets planning policies 
and determines planning applications. The land within the Peak District National Park is not 
Green Belt and therefore does not have any bearing on any Green Belt figures quoted in the 
Local Plan or supporting documents. 
Context 
3.18 Barnsley lies at the mid  point between the region’s two main cities of Leeds to the north and 
Sheffield to the south, and covers an area of 329 square kilometres. It is home to around 
236,600 people (taken from ONS 2012 based population projections). 
3.19 Historically Barnsley was centred around  coal mining resulting in the borough’s dispersed 
pattern of small towns and villages. Because people lived where they worked and coal was 
moved by rail, road links between towns and villages were poor and communities were self 
contained. 
3.20 The borough has a varied  geography. The west of the borough is predominantly rural in 
character with open moorland, arable farmland and natural woodland. It is characterised by 
attractive hilly countryside part of which lies in the Peak District National Park, and is centred 
on the rural market town of Penistone. In the centre of the borough is Barnsley itself and the 
surrounding urban area which is the main shopping, administrative, business and 
entertainment centre. To the east of the borough stretching from the M1 motorway to the 
Dearne Valley are the towns of the former Barnsley coalfield which form a dense settlement 
pattern and have a relatively high level of deprivation. 
3.21 Barnsley’s local distinctiveness stems from  its historical character and culture, including its 
settlements and architecture. Barnsley Town Centre with its market and role as a knowledge 
hub and administrative centre for the borough, the friendly traditional market towns and the 
former mining settlements with their strong communities who have a traditional belief in self 
improvement and learning, along with the attractive rural villages all define Barnsley's 
distinctiveness. It also includes Barnsley's rural heritage, the Pennine topography, the varied 
landscapes, and the National Park. 
3.22 Much of Barnsley's past economy , heritage, settlement pattern and character is a legacy of 
the mining industry. The closure of the mines saw the loss of more than 20,000 jobs over a 
period of 4/5 years. We need to evolve from our industrial past, adapt to change and meet 
future needs. 
8 Adopted Local Plan 
3 . Introduction 
Duty to Co-operate and the City Regions 
3.23 The Duty to Co-operate  is  a legal test that ensures Local Plans demonstrate that strategic 
cross boundary issues have been adequately dealt with. This involves ongoing engagement 
and co-operation with neighbouring authorities, and with various other agencies as set out 
in the regulations, known as 'prescribed bodies'. The mechanisms that already operate within 
both the Leeds and Sheffield City Regions mean that we are able to engage effectively with 
other authorities within both City Regions. 
Leeds City Region (LCR) 
3.24
 Leeds City Region is the  largest city region outside the London economy and has an Economic 
output of £55 Billion (5% of England’s total). 
3.25 LCR Strategic Economic Plan sets  out the ambition to deliver an additional £3.7 Billion in 
economic output and an extra 35,700 jobs by 2036. 
3.26 The City Regions growth aspirations  will be achieved by focusing on the following sectors: 
Financial & Professional Services; 
Health & Life Sciences; 
Innovative Manufacturing; 
Creative & Digital; 
Food & Drink; and 
Low Carbon & Environmental. 
Sheffield City Region (SCR) 
3.27
 Sheffield City Region's economy  needs  radical structural change. To achieve this the number 
and productivity of businesses in the area must grow significantly and the economy must be 
internationalised. 
3.28 SCR Strategic Economic Plan sets  out the ambition to create 70,000 more jobs, 6,000 more 
businesses and increase productivity by £3 billion between 2015 and 2025. 
3.29 The SCR LEP Strategic  Economic  Plan (SEP) outlines Sheffield City Region’s plans for 
bridging the gap between the economy of our region and that of the rest of the country. 
Central to that plan is the creation of 70,000 new jobs over a 10 year period. 
3.30 The 70,000 net additional  jobs  to be created in SCR will impact on spatial development 
patterns. The City Region has initially identified seven long term spatial areas of growth and 
change where a significant proportion of growth is expected to occur. These seven areas 
contain our Enterprise Zone, in addition to both urban and rural parts of SCR and the Core 
City centre. In order to achieve the scale of growth required in the SCR in the long term it 
9 Adopted Local Plan 
3 . Introduction 
will be of vital importance to ensure that they are market ready. This will mean providing 
appropriate incentives, such as the Enterprise Zone, and infrastructure investment, including 
in the provision of commercial property, needed to unlock development opportunity. 
3.31 In both City Regions  emerging work will establish and agree what the implications are for 
Barnsley and the other local planning authorities. 
Northern Powerhouse 
3.32 The
 Northern Powerhouse  is  a proposal to boost economic growth in the North of England 
in the "Core Cities" of Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds, Sheffield and Newcastle. The proposal 
is based on urban agglomeration and aims to reposition the UK economy away from London 
and the South East. 
Sustainability and Climate Change  
3.33 Promoting sustainable development  and  reducing the borough's impact on climate change 
are overarching principles of this Local Plan, in accordance with NPPF. Sustainable 
development is commonly defined as follows: 'The goal of sustainable development is to 
enable all people throughout the world to satisfy their basic needs and enjoy a better quality 
of life, without compromising the quality of life for future generations'. The use and 
development of land will be assessed against the objective of securing sustainable 
development within Barnsley to meet its environmental, economic and social needs. Proposals 
will be supported where they deliver: 
Efficient use of land and  infrastructure, particularly by utilising previously developed 
‘brownfield’ land, achieving housing density targets to minimise the use of 'greenfield' 
sites and promoting appropriate mixed land uses integrated with the existing built form; 
Economic and social well-being including  health and safety of the population; 
Reductions in social inequalities and  disadvantages within the community particularly 
in relation to the location of employment, housing, shopping and other community facilities; 
Protection or enhancement of the  quality of natural assets including water, air, soil, 
minerals and biodiversity; 
Vibrant and viable town centres;  
High quality well designed development  taking into account local distinctiveness; 
Improved quality of local landscapes  and protection of the character of the wider 
countryside; 
Preservation or enhancement of the  historic and cultural features of acknowledged 
importance; 
Convenient and integrated accessibility by public transport, cycle and foot and 
development located to reduce the need to travel; 
10 Adopted Local Plan 
3 . Introduction 
Efficient use of natural  resources such as water; and 
Renewable energy generation to  reduce the causes of climate change. 
11 Adopted Local Plan 
4 . Relationship to Other Plans and Strategies 
National Planning Policy Framework 
4.1 The Local Plan  has to  be consistent with the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 
and the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites that both came into force in 2012. The NPPF, 
and subsequent guidance that supports it, are reflected in this Local Plan. 
4.2 In addition to national planning  policy it is important that the plan is also prepared in the 
context of work within the City Regions and our local strategies. More detail can be found 
on these in the introduction section. 
Neighbourhood Plans 
4.3 Following  implementation
 of the Localism  Act 2011, Neighbourhood Planning guidance and 
regulations have been introduced. Neighbourhood planning gives local communities the 
opportunity to plan and shape their local areas. Once adopted a neighbourhood plan will 
form part of the statutory development plan for Barnsley and will inform decisions on planning 
applications within that neighbourhood area. 
Local Strategies 
Corporate Plan 
4.4 The council’s Corporate  Plan  for 2017 to 2020 sets out what we aim to achieve over the 
next three years to improve outcomes for our customers and the community. It explains what 
we want to do, how we plan to do it, and how we'll measure whether we're on track to achieve 
it. 
4.5 The Council’s three main  priorities are: 
Thriving and vibrant economy; 
People achieving their potential; and 
Strong and resilient communities. 
Economic
 Strategy - Jobs and  Business Growth Plan 
4.6 The Jobs and Business  Plan  2014-17 was agreed by Barnsley MBC in May 2014 and was 
refreshed in 2017. This is a three year business plan which sets the direction for a strong 
and stable economic future for Barnsley. Barnsley’s economy is too small for the size of the 
borough. The town is unable to maintain enough jobs and businesses to support its working 
population. Therefore significant intervention in the local economy is needed. The Jobs and 
Business Plan sets out the business goals for Barnsley to close the economic performance 
gap as: 
More new businesses; 
More job opportunities; 
12 Adopted Local Plan 
4 . Relationship to Other Plans and Strategies 
Diversification of the business base towards higher productivity sectors; and 
Better skills and  training for Barnsley people. 
4.7 The five key steps as part of our action plan are:-
Invest in infrastructure; 
Attract inward investment;  
Improve the town  centre; 
Grow existing businesses;  and 
Encourage higher productivity  start-ups. 
Employment and  Skills Strategy: More and Better Jobs 
4.8 The Employment  and Skills Strategy “More and Better Jobs” (2016 - 2021) is designed to: 
Identify the key challenges facing Barnsley on employment and skills; 
Identify what is in place, any gaps in provision, and what is needed to tackle the education 
and skills deficit that is holding people back from getting into and progressing in work 
and in doing so, drive productivity improvements; and 
Set out the strategic priorities and actions on skills for business and more and better 
jobs. 
4.9 The headline  measures of success are that by 2021: 
There is stronger  ambition across businesses, organisations and people of all ages; 
All schools and  colleges have excellent business engagement and employability activity; 
The proportion of  people claiming out of work benefits is cut by a third; and 
Workforce skills, progression  and earnings are increased, with the gaps to national 
average on NVQ Level 3+ and NVQ Level 4+ qualifications reduced by a third. 
4.10 The strategy  aims to “To embed a shared ambition, not just for any jobs, but for better jobs 
that grow Barnsley’s businesses in the long term.” It identified significant gaps and challenges 
in its review of current and planned skills delivery and recommends 4 priorities: 
1. To raise the ambition of Barnsley business, institutions, people and communities; 
2. To improve  education, employability and work-readiness; 
13 Adopted Local Plan 
4 . Relationship to Other Plans and Strategies 
3. To improve  routes into work; and 
4. To enhance  business skills and progression within the workplace. 
Barnsley’s Housing  Strategy 
4.11 In May 2014 Barnsley MBC agreed a Housing Strategy for 2014-2033. This builds on housing 
and regeneration initiatives that have been delivered across the borough. It also builds on 
the progress that Barnsley has made over a number of years towards achieving the long-term 
goal for the borough as ‘a successful, uniquely distinctive town that offers prosperity and a 
high quality of life for all’. 
4.12 It sets out the council’s ambitions for housing provision, investment and management in the 
borough, and how a series of four-year delivery plans will be developed. The delivery plans 
will also show how the Council will use resources and influence partners particularly the 
private sector, to achieve its goals. 
4.13 The Housing  Strategy sets out five main strategic objectives, what the delivery plans will do 
to achieve these objectives and key ambitions. The objectives are set out below: 
Objective 1 Support  new housing development; 
Objective 2 Build high quality, desirable and sustainable homes; 
Objective 3 Make best use of and improve existing housing stock; 
Objective 4 Develop  strong and resilient communities; and 
Objective 5 Support  younger, older and vulnerable people to live independently. 
Health 
4.14 The government  has introduced a series of wider ranging health reforms through the Health 
and Social Care Act (April 2013). At a local level this saw Public Health relocate in Local 
Authorities and the introduction of Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCG). 
4.15 The CCG  is responsible for commissioning services with the approval of the Health and 
Wellbeing Boards (HWB). The HWB is responsible for the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment 
(JSNA). The delivery of the JSNA is the joint responsibility of the local authority and the 
CCG. 
Joint Strategic  Needs Assessment 
4.16 A Joint Strategic Needs Assessment has been carried out by Barnsley MBC and the Primary 
Care Trust to draw together various strategies and statistics on the determinants of health. 
14 Adopted Local Plan 
4 . Relationship to Other Plans and Strategies 
4.17 Barnsley’s JSNA (web  link 
https://www.barnsley.gov.uk/services/public-health/joint-strategic-needs-assessment-jsna ) 
contains
 information  around  the a number of planning related matter in the borough these 
include: 
Air Pollution; 
Noise; 
Fuel Poverty; and 
Excess weight in Children.  
Transport Strategy  
4.18
 A transport  strategy  has been developed for Barnsley, which identifies and prioritises 
interventions associated with sustainable development transport corridors within and beyond 
the borough. The interventions identified within the Barnsley Transport Strategy will be 
programmed to promote sustainable travel and parking options for residents, visitors and 
business to employment locations, attractions, interchanges and also reduce the adverse 
impact of travel on people and the environment. 
Digital Infrastructure  Superfast  Broadband Project 
4.19 The four local  authorities of the South Yorkshire Region (Sheffield, Rotherham, Barnsley and 
Doncaster) are embarking on a Superfast Broadband project to deliver improved broadband 
infrastructure to areas where it is acknowledged that the market is unlikely to deliver. 
Broadband connectivity is considered essential for building a strong and competitive economy 
resulting in economic growth and creating more and better jobs. 
4.20 The Superfast  South  Yorkshire programme is separate from any commercial activity and 
exists to plug the gap where the commercial market either has not or does not intend to invest 
in fibre broadband, ensuring no-one gets left behind digitally. The Superfast broadband 
programme aims to extend the roll out of fibre broadband to 97.9% of South Yorkshire. Fibre 
broadband is capable of achieving speeds of 24mbps and above. The contract to deliver 
Superfast Broadband was signed in late 2014. Since this time further investment has been 
made to extend coverage to 99% and bring ultrafast technology to Enterprise Zones. A 
phased roll out will take place, with 12 phases that will be completed by the end of 2019. 
15 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
Barnsley's role in the City Regions 
5.1 Barnsley's location means it  is ideally placed to support sustainable economic growth in both 
Leeds and Sheffield city regions. Whilst we recognise that Barnsley is not a lead player in 
all respects, it can offer more affordable homes, and premises to businesses that do not 
need a city centre location. We have developed a regional reputation as a significant market 
town and sub regional service centre between Sheffield and Leeds. Barnsley can support 
the city regions to achieve their potential in a complementary way, supporting the sectors 
which will drive forward the regional economy. Situated in a gateway to the Peak District 
National Park means that recreation and leisure opportunities are much more accessible in 
Barnsley than they are to many residents within the two cities. 
5.2 In order for Barnsley  to fulfill its potential in a sustainable way its connectivity needs to improve. 
There is potential in the city regions to see Barnsley as being central to a Leeds - Sheffield 
growth corridor. 
5.3 Barnsley taking a greater  role in the economy could make a case for improvements in the 
A1-M corridor in order to deal with deprivation issues, particularly in the east of the borough. 
The majority of development proposed in the borough is to the east of the M1 and the 
Accessibility Improvement Zone supports this. 
Spatial strategy and the  location of growth 
5.4 This Local Plan retains  the Core Strategy spatial strategy and settlement hierarchy for Barnsley 
which is to focus development in the following areas: 
Urban Barnsley; 
The Principal Towns (Wombwell;  Hoyland; Penistone; Goldthorpe (Dearne Towns); 
Cudworth and Royston; and 
Development in villages will be  encouraged where it meets local needs and supports 
vitality, the local village economy and viability of the local community. 
5.5 The nature of Barnsley's  historic development has led to a dispersed pattern of settlements. 
Given the number of Principal Towns within the borough it is considered that this spatial 
strategy, based on spreading growth between these important settlements, is necessary to 
ensure the continued viability of our places and communities. Locating growth in all the 
Principal Towns is considered necessary not only to maintain the viability of those settlements 
but also to accommodate the growth anticipated for the borough. This spatial strategy is the 
most appropriate for Barnsley because it meets the needs of the borough, is able to 
accommodate growth, and provides flexibility. The spatial strategy is shown on the Key 
Diagram. 
16 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
17 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
5.6 This section defines Barnsley's  settlement hierarchy, and provides more information on the 
current and anticipated roles of the Borough's settlements. 
5.7 It is important to recognise  that both Urban Barnsley and the Principal Towns include within 
their boundaries other distinct localities. These places have their own identity and 
characteristics which need to be taken into account, maintained and strengthened where 
appropriate. 
5.8 It is intended that no  matter how much development a settlement can accommodate, the 
local distinctiveness of that place will be retained. Some areas cannot accommodate large 
numbers of new houses or employment development but that does not mean that those 
places will not change. We will make sure that what is good and special about a place is 
preserved and enhanced, and what is not so good can be improved through development 
as appropriate. 
The Settlement  Hierarchy  
5.9 In
 order to create sustainable  communities the Local Plan identifies where development 
should be focused and where it should be limited. Places differ across the borough and the 
role and function of the borough's settlements is reflected in the following settlement hierarchy. 
Settlements Classification 
Urban Barnsley (including Darton, Dodworth, Monk Bretton, Carlton, Athersley 
South, Athersley North, New Lodge, Mapplewell, Staincross, Kexborough, 
Gilroyd, Barugh Green, Higham, Pogmoor, Gawber, Worsbrough Common, 
Worsbrough Dale, Worsbrough, Ardsley, Wilthorpe, Hoyle Mill, Kendray, Stairfoot, 
Ward Green, Lundwood) Sub Regional 
Town 
Cudworth (including Grimethorpe and Shafton), Wombwell (including Darfield), 
Hoyland (including Birdwell, Blacker Hill, Elsecar, Hemingfield and Jump), 
Goldthorpe (Dearne Towns, including Thurnscoe and Bolton on Dearne), 
Penistone (including Cubley and Springvale), Royston Principal Towns 
Billingley, Brierley, Broomhill, Carlecotes, Cawthorne, Crane Moor, Crow 
Edge, Great Houghton, Green Moor, High Hoyland, Hood Green, Howbrook, 
Hoylandswaine, Huthwaite, Ingbirchworth, Langsett, Little Houghton, Middlecliff, Villages 
Millhouse Green, Pilley, Oxspring, Silkstone, Silkstone Common, Swaithe, 
Tankersley (including lower Pilley), Townhead, Thurlstone, Thurgoland, 
Weetshaw Lane (near Cudworth), Woolley Colliery Village, Worsbrough Village, 
and Wortley 
5.10 The Policies Map shows  settlement boundaries for Urban Barnsley and the Principal Towns, 
which illustrate their geographical areas as 'places'. These are not intended to be interpreted 
as defining development limits as in some cases there are areas of Green Belt between 
localities. For villages the extent of the settlement will be a matter of interpretation on a case 
by case basis. 
18 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
Urban Barnsley 
5.11 Urban Barnsley  incorporates the main built up area of Barnsley extending from Athersley to 
Worsbrough (North to South) and Higham to Ardsley (East to West) and also includes Darton 
and Dodworth. It is within Urban Barnsley as a whole where most development should take 
place in order to enhance Barnsley's role as a sub-regional town within the Sheffield and 
Leeds City Regions. 
5.12 Urban Barnsley  includes Barnsley town itself, the largest settlement in the borough which is 
the main retail (including a sub-regionally important Market) employment, educational and 
cultural centre of the borough. It is the most accessible place in the borough in terms of public 
transport and benefits from the Barnsley Interchange as a hub for bus, rail and taxi services. 
Barnsley town centre will be the main focus for new retail, leisure, cultural and office 
development. 
5.13 The River  Dearne Valley Corridor and the Historic Landscape Corridor are strategic parts of 
Barnsley’s Green Infrastructure network. 
5.14 We want  to encourage growth in what are our most accessible and sustainable locations in 
the borough. Urban Barnsley will be the main focus for development, and will support the 
important role of Barnsley Town Centre. 
5.15 Outside Barnsley  Town Centre, there are a number of smaller centres providing local retail 
and facilities to meet the needs of the local communities. Any proposed development in 
these areas will be appropriate to the scale, role, function and character of the centres. 
Alongside industrial and rural land uses the settlements are set within an undulating valley, 
within which perhaps the most striking feature is the green infrastructure surrounding, 
penetrating and defining the built up areas within it. This varied topography provides the 
opportunity for occasional far reaching views of the surrounding area and as recognised in 
the Landscape Character Assessment, there is the potential for well managed development 
to restore and improve the surrounding landscape, particularly on the edges of the built up 
areas. 
Principal T owns 
5.16 The Regional  Spatial Strategy (RSS) designated five Principal Towns in Barnsley and provided 
the opportunity to designate other Principal Towns if there was a need for regeneration 
purposes. A case for Royston to be an additional Principal Town was made through the Core 
Strategy. Barnsley has six Principal Towns, Wombwell, Hoyland, Penistone, Goldthorpe 
(Dearne Towns), Cudworth and Royston, which along with Urban Barnsley should be the 
main local focus for housing, employment, shopping, leisure, education, health and cultural 
activities and facilities, and their roles as accessible and vibrant places to live should be 
enhanced. 
5.17 The importance  of our principal towns and local centres and their contribution to our overall 
growth agenda is recognised through the Principal Towns programme established in 2016. 
Principal Towns is a three year £5 million programme which seeks to build economic and 
community capacity leading to the sustainability and long term vitality of our local centres. 
Growth proposals with clearly defined outcomes are being actively developed through robust 
engagement and consultation with local community stakeholders covering a range of initiatives: 
19 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
Quality Public Realm;  
Local area master  planning; 
Shopfront Schemes; 
Business Incentives; 
Sustainable transport improvements;  and 
Acquisition of buildings/land  delivering economic benefits. 
5.18 The Dearne  Towns of Goldthorpe along with Thurnscoe and Bolton on Dearne represent 
an urban grouping in the east of the borough which relates closely to the A1 and Doncaster 
to the east. There are train stations at Goldthorpe (with limited park and ride facilities), Bolton 
on Dearne and Thurnscoe on the Wakefield Sheffield Line. The Dearne Valley Parkway runs 
north of Goldthorpe linking junction 36 of the M1 on to Doncaster and the Dearne towns was 
the subject of a pilot community accessibility study. Thurnscoe is a good example of where 
community facilities such as park and ride and a Sure Start Centre have been located at the 
railway station to make the most of an accessible location. 
5.19 The decline  of the coal mining industry had a significant impact on the area resulting in high 
levels of unemployment and large amounts of despoiled and derelict land. Reclamation 
schemes have been carried out although environmental problems persist and the quality of 
much of the housing stock is poor. The Dearne Towns are a priority in terms of housing and 
employment development with a particular emphasis on renewing areas where the market 
has failed. 
5.20 Goldthorpe town  centre is the main shopping and service centre for the Dearne Towns.The 
other smaller local centres in the Dearne Towns of Bolton on Dearne and Thurnscoe will also 
be supported. 
5.21 The Shef field City Region Dearne Valley Eco-Vision sought to re-imagine the Dearne Valley 
as the green heart of Sheffield City Region Eco Valley. The principles of the Eco-Vision were: 
The delivery of more energy efficient homes, cutting fuel bills for residents; 
Better public transport links, improving access and reducing reliance on the car; 
More training opportunities will be available in skills to address climate change; 
Improving people’s job  prospects and equipping them for the new jobs created; 
More businesses, specialising  in environmental technologies, are attracted to the area; 
An enhanced natural environment, creating a place where people want to live and work 
and bring up their families; and 
The creation of an area attracting visitors from across the City Region. 
5.22 Work has  been done previously to establish whether joint planning documents and seeking 
Eco-standards for developments is feasible. Latterly it has been decided that the Eco-Vision 
is best delivered through implementation of the Nature Improvement Area and Local Nature 
Partnership. 
20 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
5.23 The Landscape  Character Assessment describes it as having a topographically varied 
landscape characterised by three dominant land use patterns, agriculture, industry and 
landscape renewal which mitigates impacts of previous industrial activity. The potential for 
development to improve the condition and character of the landscape is identified. Landscape 
design will form an important part of any development, with particular attention being given 
to boundary treatment, restoration of lost and degraded landscape features, protecting the 
arable areas and ensuring appropriate planting at the urban edge. 
5.24 Hoyland, W ombwell , Cudworth (including Grimethorpe) and Royston whilst different in 
character, can be seen to have more commonality in role. Rather than standing alone they 
relate more closely to each other and have interlinked functions. They are located in an arc 
close to Urban Barnsley, hugging the eastern side of the built up area. They cumulatively 
provide significant housing and employment opportunities. They are also grouped around 
the route of the former Cudworth Railway which will be safeguarded for potential reinstatement. 
5.25 Cudworth suf fered severe decline in traditional sources of employment during the 1980's, 
a process which accelerated in the 90's with the almost complete cessation of coal mining 
and associated activity. The inadequacy of the existing infrastructure and the generally poor 
image of the area was identified in the UDP as having presented difficulties in attracting new 
employment opportunities . The Core Strategy identified Cudworth as an area of growth and 
aims to enable Cudworth to fulfill its important role as a Principal Town. Grimethorpe and 
Shafton are included within the Cudworth Principal Town boundary as set out in the settlement 
hierarchy section above. This enables some development to be focused on Grimethorpe to 
take forward and continue the regeneration that has already been carried out. 
5.26 The Cudworth  and West Green Link Road is now completed and the treatment of the town 
centre needs to be carefully considered. The A1-M1 link road which links Junction 36 of the 
M1 to the A1 through Wakefield District passes between Cudworth and Grimethorpe and 
has improved accessibility in this area. 
5.27 'There’s a  good range of shops and services in Cudworth, even a couple of furniture stores 
(Roberts) and it soon became clear that a lot of hard work has been done in recent years by 
community volunteers, councillors and professionals in key social and economic areas, part 
of the regeneration of the Borough as a whole, bringing Cudworth out of the doldrums following 
the 1984/85 miners’ strike'. (Brian Elliot www.aroundtownpublications.co.uk) 
5.28 Grimethorpe has  its own smaller local centre which will also be supported . It has been the 
focus of major regeneration and renewal in recent years, particularly benefiting from the 
Green Corridor Programme of housing investment. 
5.29 At Grimethorpe  the focus of recent activity has been to improve owner-occupied terraced 
housing in the centre of the village, replace 47 old prefabs in the Mount Pleasant area and 
continue the new build programme on what is known as ‘the old village site’. This was an 
area of older terraced housing cleared between 2000 and 2005. 
5.30 'Grimethorpe  is a place where, despite tremendous social and economic problems in the 
wake of the miners’ strike and pit closures, residents and supporters are rightly proud of what 
is now being achieved. And, as we shall see, it is not just structural regeneration and 
redevelopment that has put a smile on a place of well over 5,000 residents, about the same 
population size as existed in the days of when Coal was King and Carlton Main Colliery 
21 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
Company the main landowner. Over three or four generations coal was Grimethorpe, and 
vice versa. It provided work, wages, houses, amenities and culture, the very life and soul of 
the community. It is no surprise that when coal suddenly went a great vacuum could not be 
collier-like filled.'  (Brian Elliot www.aroundtownpublications.co.uk) 
5.31 We will plan for Cudworth, Shafton and Grimethorpe together but will ensure that we protect 
their individual distinctiveness. We will progress and consolidate the success of regeneration 
schemes completed, and the opportunity to improve the public realm as a result of a reduction 
in through traffic. 
5.32 The Cudworth  Principal Town boundary includes both the urban areas of Cudworth and 
Grimethorpe which are separated by open Green Belt land. The Principal Town has varied 
land uses and topography where the settlements are situated mainly on higher ground with 
large areas of residential and industrial development. The topography allows for distant 
views towards Urban Barnsley. Shafton Advanced Learning Centre is located centrally 
between Cudworth, Grimethorpe and Shafton. Retail and service provision is concentrated 
within Cudworth District Centre and further enhanced with more local provsion within 
Grimethorpe. The central area of Cudworth also benefits from a high quality district park, 
Cudworth Park and the Dorothy Hyman Sports Centre which serves the Principal Town and 
the whole borough. 
5.33 As recognised  in the Landscape Character Assessment, there is the potential for well managed 
development to restore and improve the surrounding landscape. Potential housing 
development within Cudworth is focused on four key sites at Carrs Lane, Pontefract Road, 
land off Cudworth Bypass and Weetshaw Lane. Proposals for Grimethorpe are at the former 
Willowgarth school and Brierley Road which has the potential to consolidate progress with 
ongoing regeneration projects. 
5.34 Wombwell is  recognised as a small but busy market town which continues to be a well 
defined centre. The area suffered from the decline of the coal industry and levels of new 
housebuilding have been historically low. Wombwell has a train station on the Wakefield to 
Sheffield line with a park and ride facility. The Dearne Valley Parkway runs to the south of 
Wombwell linking from Junction 36 of the M1 to the Dearne Towns and on to Doncaster. 
Wombwell has a bypass in the form of Mitchell's Way and Valley Way to the east of the town. 
This forms a link from Urban Barnsley to the Dearne Valley Parkway. 
5.35 'The advent of Valley Way and Mitchells Way, the new by-pass, in recent years has taken 
its toll on the centre of Wombwell. But this small town has risen to the challenge. Its paved 
plaza area on High Street is a credit to regeneration. It is good to see such an ancient town 
still growing and thriving. Wombwell dates back to pre-Norman times and is named in the 
Domesday Book as a small agricultural village, Wambella -the place of the well.' (Brian Elliot 
www.aroundtownpublications.co.uk) 
5.36 Wombwell Principal  Town also includes Darfield. Coal mining was a traditional source of 
employment in Darfield but ceased in the 1990's, as a result unemployment has increased. 
East of Darfield is the A1- M1 link road which links Junction 36 of the M1 to the A1 through 
Wakefield District (part is the Dearne Valley Parkway and part the Coalfields Link Road). 
22 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
5.37 We want W ombwell to continue to flourish as one of the borough’s largest district centres 
offering a range of services and facilities. We will support the centre in Darfield possibly by 
way of added retail provision on the redundant Foulstone school site. The Advanced Learning 
Centre, which is located between Wombwell and Darfield adjacent to Netherwood Country 
Park, will improve, integrate and coordinate the social and leisure facilities of the town as 
well as adding sustainable transport links. We will support improved connections between 
the two settlements whilst continuing to promote the distinctiveness of both communities. 
5.38 Wombwell Principal T own, including Darfield is within an undulating topography with Wombwell 
as a dominant built form stretching from lower to higher ground, and Darfield located on a 
ridge top making it visible from other vantage points elsewhere in the borough. As recognised 
in the Landscape Character Assessment, this topography allows for distant views interrupted 
by built form and vegetation from the Principal Town with the potential for development in 
Wombwell to restore and enhance the landscape, with an emphasis on screening industrial 
development, restoring protecting and enhancing urban edges and landscape features and 
considering woodland planting. 
5.39 There are a  variety of land uses including residential, industrial, shops, services and green 
infrastructure, with areas of ancient woodland on the edges of the settlement. Retail and 
service provision is focused in Wombwell District Centre, one of the larger centres outside 
Barnsley Town Centre and the new Advanced Learning Centre in Low Valley is centrally 
located between Wombwell and Darfield. There is also local centre provision in Darfield. 
5.40 The main focus  for employment in this area is within the existing employment area at Mitchell's 
Way and new development at the existing Everill Gate Lane Industrial Estate. Housing 
development is focused on four key sites, land east of Lundhill Road, the former Wombwell 
High School, land south of Doncaster Road and the former playing fields in Darfield. The 
development of the former school sites are likely to involve the loss of existing green space. 
As such developments will be required to incorporate appropriate green space provision in 
line with relevant site specific and green space policies set out in the housing section of this 
document. The main areas of safeguarded land are to the west of Darfield and to the south 
of Wombwell, with the potential to be considered for development at the next review of the 
plan. 
5.41 Hoyland was also  hit by pit closures which removed traditional sources of employment in 
the area. Interest in the area recovered in the late 80's and 90's with industrial estates being 
established on the sites of two former collieries and housing development taking place. It is 
a district centre with a market which the Local Plan will support by focusing retail, service 
and community facilities here. Hoyland is accessible to the M1 and the Dearne Valley Parkway 
which forms part of the A1-M1 link road. Hoyland also includes Birdwell, Blacker Hill, Elsecar, 
Hemingfield and Jump. There is a train station at Elsecar on the Wakefield to Sheffield line 
which has the tourism assets of the Elsecar Heritage Centre and the Trans Pennine Trail. 
5.42 'In recent years,  particularly in the wake of pit closures, much work has been done and is 
ongoing to revive and improve the quality of life, the built environment, community services 
and the general appearance of Hoyland. New proposals which appear to be the harbinger 
of Hoyland’s renaissance could be very exciting indeed.' (Brian Elliot 
www.aroundtownpublications.co.uk) 
23 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
5.43 The Elsecar  Heritage Centre is an important tourism and cultural asset in this area that the 
Local Plan will safeguard and promote. The Plan will also protect those areas around the 
Heritage Centre that contribute to the wider understanding of the early coal and ironworking 
industries of this part of Barnsley. 
5.44 Elsecar has  been awarded 'Heritage Action Zone' status by Historic England, based on the 
significance of its heritage and the potential future economic impact of that heritage. The 
Heritage Action Zone will enable Elsecar to realise its immense potential by deepening 
understanding of its heritage, extending the visitor experience to key archaeological sites, 
for which conservation principles will be established, identifying appropriate potential future 
development and maximising commercial use of historic assets. The Heritage Action Zone 
is anticipated to be a major driver for future investment, grant funding and economic growth 
for Elsecar. 
5.45 We want Hoyland to grow in housing and employment terms taking advantage of its accessible 
location and utilising strategic transport links. We will plan for Birdwell, Hemingfield, Jump, 
Blacker Hill and Elsecar along with Hoyland whilst seeking to protect their unique identities. 
The defined centres will be supported and additional development, particularly in Hoyland 
town centre will be welcomed to improve the vitality and viability of this district centre. 
5.46 Royston is  situated on the northern edge of the borough adjacent to Wakefield District. To 
the north and west are extensive areas of countryside and to the south open land separates 
the settlement from Athersley to Carlton (although this is where the new secondary school 
is located). Originally a farming village, during the industrial revolution Royston saw the 
construction of the canal in the 1790's and the railway which opened in 1840 (both of which 
are now disused). 
5.47 As in other places, pit closures meant the loss of a major source of local employment. A shirt 
factory provided employment in Royston from the 1940s to 1980s, but Royston has traditionally 
looked to Wakefield district, urban Barnsley and the north east towns for employment 
opportunities. Most housing growth in recent decades has taken place in the western half of 
Royston. Reflecting this pattern of housing growth the eastern part of Royston is characterised 
by older housing stock, much of which is relatively high density and local authority owned. 
The Trans Pennine Trail runs through Royston along the canal bank. 
5.48 Renewing areas  where the local housing market has failed is a priority and like Cudworth, 
Royston was part of Barnsley's Green Corridor area. At Royston the Green Corridor work 
centred around improvements on the Midland Road gateway, providing grants for owners 
and landlords via a facelift scheme. 
5.49 Royston is  a low lying self contained settlement within a valley between Wakefield and Urban 
Barnsley, with significant arable farming and residential settlements. The town's landscape 
character has a strong urban influence due to earlier industrial and housing development. 
It is now principally residential in character with the last central employment site now disused. 
5.50 The former  Barnsley canal also runs through the east of the town providing a green link with 
biodiversity value and the potential for use of sustainable transport modes. There is a detailed 
network of footpaths and cycleways running through the town linking the different residential 
areas, open spaces and community facilities. However, the links between them are not 
always clear and would benefit from improvement. As part of the development of the Advanced 
24 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
Learning Centre (Outwood Academy) located at Carlton and serving Royston, part of this 
network is being used as a safer route to school. Royston Park in particular is a high quality 
and valued open space located in the very centre of the town, but its entrance is to an extent 
concealed. 
5.51 The key area of opportunity for the future development of Royston is the substantial area of 
land proposed for mixed use comprising of housing and primary school at the western edge 
of the town at Lee Lane. Given the size and location of this site, development must consider 
the need for appropriate local facilities, provided they do not negatively impact on Royston 
Town Centre. Further detail is contained in the site specific policy in the Mixed Use section 
of this document. The ongoing development of the 'Rabbit Ings' area as a high quality multi 
functioning open space to the west of the settlement adjacent to the Cokeworks which also 
contributes to the improvement of Royston's green space provision. 
5.52 Penistone stands  alone as a long established Pennine rural market town which is an important 
shopping and service centre serving a large rural hinterland in the west of the borough. The 
Principal Town boundary includes Cubley and Springvale. 
5.53 Penistone is  in an area of attractive countryside, close to the Peak Park and surrounded by 
Green Belt. Its close proximity to Sheffield, Huddersfield and Barnsley has made it attractive 
to people who wish to combine the benefits of living in a pleasant environment without having 
excessively long journeys to work. The unemployment rate in the town is lower than other 
parts of the borough due to the large number of commuters, but many residents still depend 
upon the limited number of employment opportunities in the town. The relative remoteness 
of the town from the remainder of the borough, particularly for people who rely on public 
transport make these employment opportunities even more important. 
5.54 'There is  much about the history of Penistone that explains the character of the old town and 
perhaps the local people. The physical character can of course be traced to those early days 
of church, school and market followed by the impact of the local steel and engineering industry 
and the associated importance of the railway links. As for the people, this is less easy to 
argue especially in these days of greatly increased mobility. The town is a great mix of 
long-established families and family businesses and so called “newcomers” and in fairness 
to the latter it is probably fair to say that nowadays they far outweigh the former. It all depends 
of course on what your definition of a “newcomer” might be. It is not unknown for a whole 
generation to pass by before a newcomer comes to be regarded as a genuine “local”. Whilst 
this no doubt applies to some extent to Penistone with its well-marked and much valued old 
traditions, there are clear signs of change. Change that is important to maintaining and 
developing the vitality of the town based on local initiatives. New people moving into the 
Penistone area – even those who appear at first or even second glance to have mainly 
“dormitory linkages” nevertheless bring new interests, abilities, skills and of course, 
expectations to the town.' (Frank A Wilson www.aroundtownpublications.co.uk ). 
5.55 We want  Penistone to be the main local focus for development in the borough’s rural west, 
facilitating its renaissance as a market town and maximising its tourism role. Penistone is 
the main centre for the surrounding villages and we want to consolidate this role through the 
plan period. The town centre has undergone regeneration with a supermarket and market 
hall that have been operational since 2010. 
25 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Spatial Strategy 
5.56 Penistone Principal T own is focused on the settlement of Penistone, a long established 
Pennine rural market town which serves the surrounding rural villages. As described in the 
Landscape Character Assessment the agricultural landscape around Penistone is 
characterised by regular field patterns with stone wall boundaries. It is close to and has 
views across open moorland with the wind farm at Spicer Hill a highly visible and dominant 
feature. 
5.57 The remaining  rural  area has both distinctive open moorland forming part of the Peak District 
National Park and gently rolling hills and valleys containing woodland, agricultural land, stone 
farmsteads, villages and hamlets and large stone country houses set in designed parkland 
landscapes. A network of main roads and country lanes link settlements and the disused 
Woodhead railway crosses the area. The railway now has a role as part of the Transpennine 
Trail and has the potential for future reinstatement. 
Villages 
5.58 Villages vary in  size from larger villages to small hamlets but are generally characterised by 
a more limited range of services and public transport compared with Urban Barnsley and the 
Principal Towns. Some are close to nearby towns, others are washed over by Green Belt or 
inset from the Green Belt. Some limited development is identified in these villages. An updated 
settlement assessment of villages was carried out in 2017. 
26 Adopted Local Plan 
6 . Policies and Proposals 
6.1 These general policies  are intended to guide the location, type and quality of development 
in the borough. They will be used to make decisions on planning applications together with 
other policies in this Local Plan, the Joint Waste Plan and the National Planning Policy 
Framework. 
6.2 Arrangements for the  monitoring of the policies and the key indicators to ensure the policies 
are working will be set out in the next version of the Local Plan. We will carry out regular 
monitoring to ensure that the plan is successfully managing change, that its implementation 
is producing sustainable development and to determine when a review of the Local Plan may 
be required. 
6.3 When considering  development  proposals we will take a positive approach that reflects the 
presumption in favour of sustainable development(2) contained in the National Planning Policy 
Framework. We will work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions which mean that 
proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves 
the economic, social and environmental conditions in the area. 
6.4 Planning applications  that  accord with other relevant policies will be approved without delay, 
unless material considerations indicate otherwise taking into account whether: 
Any adverse impacts  of granting permission would significantly and demonstrably 
outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy 
Framework taken as a whole; or 
Specific policies in  that framework indicate that development should be restricted. 
Policy SD1 Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development 
When considering development proposals we will take a positive approach that reflects the 
presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning Policy 
Framework. We will work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions which mean that 
proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the 
economic, social and environmental conditions in the area. 
6.5 The National Planning  Policy Framework (NPPF) sets out a presumption in favour of 
sustainable development(3), which is to be seen as a 'golden thread' that runs through 
plan-making and decision taking. In respect of making planning decisions, development 
proposals that accord with the development plan should be approved without delay unless 
there are adverse impacts of granting permission that would significantly and demonstrably 
outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy 
Framework, taken as a whole or specific policies in that framework, indicate that development 
should be restricted. 
2 Paragraph 7 of the NPPF sets out the three dimensions to sustainable development: economic, social and environmental.The paragraph goes 
on to set out the roles that the planning system needs to perform in respect of each dimension. 
3 Paragraph 7 of  the NPPF sets out the three dimensions to sustainable development: economic, social and environmental. The paragraph goes 
on to set out the roles that the planning system needs to perform in respect of each dimension. 
27 
Adopted Local Plan 
6 . Policies and Proposals 
6.6 Development proposals will  be assessed against all relevant policies in the Local Plan and 
Joint Waste Plan. Policy GD1 below will be applied to all development. This policy will be 
the starting point for making decisions on all proposals including those shown on the Policies 
Map as Urban Fabric (shown as light grey areas with the notation of no specific allocation). 
Policy GD1 General Development 
Proposals for development will be approved if: 
There will be no significant adverse effect on the living conditions and residential amenity 
of existing and future residents; 
They are compatible with neighbouring land and will not significantly prejudice the current 
or future use of the neighbouring land; 
They will not adversely affect the potential development of a wider area of land which could 
otherwise be available for development and safeguards access to adjacent land; 
They include landscaping to provide a high quality setting for buildings, incorporating existing 
landscape features and ensuring that plant species and the way they are planted, hard 
surfaces, boundary treatments and other features appropriately reflect, protect and improve 
the character of the local landscape; 
Any adverse impact on the environment, natural resources, waste and pollution is minimised 
and mitigated; 
Adequate access and internal road layouts are provided to allow the complete development 
of the entire site for residential purposes, and to provide appropriate vehicular and pedestrian 
links throughout the site and into adjacent areas; 
Any drains, culverts and other surface water bodies that may cross the site are considered; 
Appropriate landscaped boundaries are provided where sites are adjacent to open 
countryside; 
Any pylons are considered in the layout; and 
Existing trees that are to remain on site are considered in the layout in order to avoid 
overshadowing. 
6.7 Further detail on  some of these issues is set out in Policy D1 Design which sets the 
overarching design principles for the borough, and associated Supplementary Planning 
Documents on Residential Amenity and the Siting of Buildings, Designing New Housing 
Development and Advertisements. 
28 Adopted Local Plan 
6 . Policies and Proposals 
Living Conditions 
6.8 We want  to make sure that the living conditions and residential amenity of people are 
protected, that development is set within high quality landscaping and that land is used 
efficiently by making sure that new development does not reduce development opportunities 
on neighbouring land. 
6.9 We will assess impact on living conditions and residential amenity in relation to: 
Noise, smell, dust,vibration,  light, air, surface water, groundwater or other pollution and 
disturbance from any proposed activity, including traffic related noise and the comings 
and goings of visitors to premises particularly when late evening activity is involved. 
Planning conditions will be used to control the construction process; 
Overlooking and privacy;  
Outlook from dwellings  including consideration of whether structures in close proximity 
to windows are considered visually over dominant. However, consideration does not 
extend to the protection of a person's particular view from a property as this is not a 
material planning consideration; 
Daylight/sunlight and overshadowing;  and 
Landscaping and boundary  treatments. 
Landscaping and  Boundary Treatments 
6.10 Landscaping should  be encouraged in all schemes as it has other benefits including 
biodiversity provision, climate change resilience and carbon absorption. Any new planting 
should use a variety of native species which are of local provenance where possible as plants 
from local sources are better adapted to local conditions and using local sources reduces 
the risk of introducing diseases and pests. Nectar-rich plants and berry producing shrubs 
incorporated into planting schemes will be encouraged as they will provide valuable food 
sources for wildlife, and development of other habitats such as wildflower grassland and 
wetlands should also be considered. 
6.11 Planting should,  where possible, be designed to link habitats to form corridors for wildlife 
with existing hedgerows included within developments. Where they have become patchy or 
overgrown, existing hedgerows should be restored as part of new developments wherever 
possible. Green walls within developments will be encouraged. 
Masterplan Frameworks  
6.12 Where Masterplan  Frameworks are being sought, they shall contain the following: 
Planning policy summary , site location and description, land ownership, a summary of 
the existing evidence, site evaluation (opportunities and constraints), land use framework, 
sustainable movement framework, protection of existing public rights of way routes and 
their incorporation within new development layouts, vehicular movement framework, 
green and blue infrastructure framework, place-making framework (including design 
29 Adopted Local Plan 
6 . Policies and Proposals 
guides for character and neighbourhood areas where applicable), sustainability and 
energy use, health and wellbeing, design evolution, conceptual masterplan, infrastructure 
and delivery phasing. 
Masterplan Frameworks shall be subject to public consultation and be approved by the 
Council prior to the determination of any planning applications on the affected sites. 
Each Masterplan will be bespoke and therefore will be considered on a case by case 
basis. 
Policy GD2 Temporary Buildings and Uses 
Temporary buildings will normally be allowed where it can be demonstrated that a permanent 
building is either not suitable or that urgent accommodation is needed pending the completion 
of a permanent building. 
On sites visible from highways and public areas, temporary buildings will normally be given a 
temporary permission not exceeding 5 years. 
Where vacant sites and premises are not to be immediately developed, appropriate temporary 
uses may be permitted subject to other policies in the Plan. 
6.13 Temporary buildings include  portable and demountable buildings and structures and those 
built using short life materials. 
6.14 Such buildings  are  often utilitarian in design and can detract from the appearance of the area. 
They may be acceptable when hidden from public view, for example on some parts of industrial 
estates. However temporary buildings and uses can also play an important role in the phased 
redevelopment of key locations such as Barnsley Town Centre. Policy BTC8 together with 
its supporting text covers this scenario. In other instances they will be allowed only 
exceptionally and for a limited period. 
6.15 Renewal of temporary  permission will only be permitted where it can be shown that exceptional 
circumstances exist and that measures to resolve the situation are outside the applicant’s 
control. In such instances further temporary permission would be for a period not exceeding 
5 years. Applicants must demonstrate that the situation is capable of being resolved within 
this period. 
6.16 Temporary uses will  be assessed having regard to the provisions of other policies in the plan 
and in particular Policy GD1 General Development Policy. Where proposals are acceptable 
temporary permission would be given for a period not exceeding 5 years. 
6.17 There is an  expectation that any temporary building on playing field land will need to meet 
policy GS1 and the playing field land be reinstated to the same or better quality once the 
building is removed. 
6.18 Also for any  temporary building located on a playing field there will be measures taken to 
protect any glazing from projectiles including balls, emanating from the playing field. 
30 Adopted Local Plan 
7 . Location of Growth 
The Challenge 
Ensuring that all development reduces the need to travel and improves the general level 
of accessibility helping to reduce disadvantages and inequalities in access to services and 
minimising the impact on the countryside 
Providing enough new homes in the borough over the plan period 
Demonstrating at least a 15 year supply of land for housing development is available 
Ensuring new homes are provided in the right places 
Developing the Barnsley economy to meet local needs and to provide local job opportunities 
Capitalising on our position within two City Regions and adjoining a third 
Providing people who live in Barnsley with opportunities to get good quality jobs in and out 
of Barnsley 
Developing a residential offer that makes Barnsley an attractive location for investment 
Building on economic progress over the last 10 years and addressing entrenched problems 
of worklessness by creating a more diverse range of employment development and 
employment opportunities 
The Current Position 
Barnsley is a significant market town and sub regional service centre 
Barnsley sits within both the Leeds and the Sheffield City Regions 
Local waiting lists for housing are growing 
Increasing house prices which have led in recent years to an increase in demand for 
affordable housing. 
Policy Solutions 
Continuing to support the growth agenda of the City Regions 
Employing a sequential approach to the location of development 
Allocating land for employment 
Allocating land for housing 
Policy LG1 City Regions 
We will support the economic growth agenda of the Sheffield, Leeds and Manchester City 
Regions. We will seek to maximise the opportunities and benefits of Barnsley's favourable 
location in the region and the favourable economic position of sitting within two City Regions. 
7.1 Barnsley sits within  the functional economic areas of the Leeds City Region and the Sheffield 
City Region. There may also be opportunities for Barnsley in economic terms arising from 
proximity to the Manchester City Region, to the west and from the Northern Powerhouse 
initiative. 
31 Adopted Local Plan 
7 . Location of Growth 
Policy LG2 The Location of Growth 
Priority will be given to development in the following locations: 
Urban Barnsley; 
Principal Towns of Cudworth, Wombwell, Hoyland, Goldthorpe (which includes Thurnscoe 
and Bolton on Dearne), Penistone and Royston; and 
Villages. 
Urban Barnsley will be expected to accommodate significantly more growth than any individual 
Principal Town, and the Principal Towns will be expected to accommodate significantly more 
growth than the villages, to accord with their place in the settlement hierarchy. 
7.2 This approach  to the location of development is advocated to encourage development in 
specific locations to ensure the spatial strategy for the borough is achieved. Urban Barnsley, 
in support of Barnsley Town Centre, will be the main focus for housing, employment, shopping, 
health, leisure, business and public services in the region. Individual Principal Towns will 
be the main local focus for housing, employment, shopping, leisure, education, health and 
cultural activities and facilities. There will be a slower pace and scale of growth in villages 
and rural areas. 
7.3 Villages will  be expected to deliver approximately 5% of the overall housing requirement 
figure through housing allocations or windfall sites. 
7.4 Barnsley’s settlement  hierarchy and settlement roles are set out in the Spatial Strategy Section 
6. Policies E2  and H2 in the Economy and Housing chapters set out the distribution of 
employment land and dwellings. 
32 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
The Challenge 
Developing the Barnsley economy to meet local needs and to provide local job opportunities 
Reducing serious levels of worklessness and encouraging the transition from a low skill/low 
wage economy to a higher skills/higher wage economy 
Protecting existing employment sites and buildings and ensuring provision of sufficient land 
and premises for future economic growth 
Promoting tourism and cultural facilities 
Enabling appropriate rural diversification 
Maintaining sustainable rural communities and viable villages 
Supporting and developing existing and new sectors in Barnsley which have growth potential 
Ensuring that the office sector and other new sectors are provided with opportunities for 
growth and development, primarily in Barnsley Town Centre 
The Current Position 
Barnsley is under performing economically in comparison with South Yorkshire and the 
wider region, and its current economic structure makes it more vulnerable to the effects of 
global economic recession 
Existing tourist attractions include Cannon Hall, Elsecar Heritage Centre, Worsbrough Mill, 
the Trans Pennine Trail, Wentworth Castle, RSPB Old Moor Wetlands Centre and the Peak 
District National Park and Southern Pennine Fringe 
Existing cultural facilities include Experience Barnsley, the Civic, the Lamproom Theatre, 
The Cooper Gallery and a seasonal town centre events programme 
Policy Solutions 
Ensuring the provision of a wide range of employment locations, land and premises 
Resisting the loss of existing employment land that meets the needs of existing businesses 
or is likely to meet the needs of businesses in the future 
Promoting opportunities for tourism and culture 
Accommodating a range of employment generating use, including work from/at home, within 
settlements, particularly in or adjacent to their centres 
Resisting the loss of shops and local services in villages 
33 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
8.1 The National  Planning Policy Framework is clear that the Government is committed to securing 
economic growth, and that the planning system must do everything it can to support 
sustainable economic growth. 
8.2 Barnsley's economy  is too small and needs to grow significantly if it is to fulfil its potential, 
benefit local people and maximise its contribution to the Leeds and Sheffield City Region 
economies. 
8.3 In order to create a larger and more diverse economy, more businesses and jobs are needed 
in the Borough. The Local Plan will support economic growth by providing a range of new 
employment sites and premises in order to attract new investment and support the growth 
of indigenous business. It will also seek to protect existing employment sites and premises 
from alternative uses. 
8.4 A number  of Barnsley's recent economic strategies and plans, including the Jobs and Business 
Plan, contain an aspiration to close the gap with regional job densities by the end of the plan 
period. 
8.5 The employment  land allocations seek to encourage indigenous business growth and attract 
inward investment, predominantly in the manufacturing and logistics sectors. 
8.6 Barnsley's objectively  assessed employment land requirement is around 291ha. This includes 
an allowance of 30% for flexibility to provide the market with choice. The amount of new 
employment land we propose to allocate is 297 hectares. 
Policy E1 Providing Strategic Employment Locations 
297 ha of land in sustainable locations is allocated to meet the development needs of existing 
and future industry and business up to 2033. This will provide a choice of sites in accessible 
locations to meet the needs of businesses and their workforce and provide local communities 
with access to job opportunities. 
Barnsley Town Centre will be the focus for office development and employment in new 
technologies such as creative digital media and telecommunications. 
8.7 In terms of providing new job opportunities in the borough, the main focus will be on: 
Urban Barnsley  including Barnsley Town Centre (through the commercial and retail 
sectors); 
Principal Towns; and 
Existing key employment sites (existing industrial estates and business parks). 
34 
Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Policy E2 The Distribution of New Employment Sites 
The approximate distribution of employment land during the Local Plan period will be as follows: 
Employment land (ha) Location 
64.6* Urban Barnsley 
18.2 Cudworth including Grimethorpe 
80.9 Goldthorpe (which includes Thurnscoe and Bolton on 
Dearne) 
110.9 Hoyland 
3.3 Penistone 
0 Royston 
3.6 Wombwell 
16 Other 
297 Total 
* includes 43ha proposed as part of mixed use site MU1 Land south of Barugh Green Road. 
Please see site policy MU1 for further details 
8.8 Barnsley town  centre has a key role in providing opportunities for office development and 
modern employment sectors such as Creative Digital Industries (CDI). 
8.9 The proposed  employment land allocations above are considered to provide Barnsley with 
an appropriate mix of large and small sites. The employment supply includes a 43ha 
contribution from mixed use site MU1 which is listed in Chapter 10 Mixed Use Sites. This 
will put Barnsley in the best position possible to provide a strong economic offer both to 
inward investors and to indigenous companies seeking to expand. 
8.10 We consider  that the mix of sites proposed accords with the NPPF in terms of delivering 
sustainable economic growth. Barnsley has a strong role to play within Sheffield and Leeds 
City Regions, and its location means that it can provide sites that can accommodate a 
proportion of the ambitious job numbers sought through the Strategic Economic Plans of 
both City Regions. 
8.11 Amongst the  proposed allocations are some sites which we consider to be expansion land. 
As these are regarded as under the control of an existing/neighbouring end user they may 
not be immediately available to the market. They are however new sites that are proposed, 
35 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
and therefore they are included as part of our employment land supply. These sites are 
unlikely to be brought forward in the short to medium term, or sites whose owners intend to 
develop for their own purposes. 
8.12 On those  sites currently functioning as green space, compensation would be required for 
loss of this green space should the proposed allocations come forward. As set out in policy 
GS1, compensation could include on site retention and enhancement, off site replacement 
or financial contribution. 
8.13 Employment land  must be developed in line with the relevant site specific policies below. 
8.14 Below is a list of proposed employment land allocations. The employment land supply includes 
a 43ha contribution from mixed use site MU1 which is listed in Chapter 10 Mixed Use Sites. 
Where there are specific issues site specific policies are provided. Where there are no site 
specific details any subsequent planning application will be determined in accordance with 
the Local Plan. 
Urban Barnsley  
Site ES1 Birthwaite Business Park 3.5 ha 
The development will be expected to safeguard the setting of the Listed buildings at Birthwaite 
Hall. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
36 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Site ES2 Claycliffe Business Park 1.5 ha 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site ES3 Zenith Business Park 0.4 ha 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
37 
Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Site ES4 Capitol Park Extension 5.4 ha 
The development will be expected to: 
Consider the impact  on residential amenity and include appropriate mitigation where 
necessary; 
Provide on and off site highways infrastructure works and improvements at Junction 37 as 
necessary; 
Provide off site highway safety enhancements; 
Consider the potential  impact on the nearby Hugset Wood Local Wildlife Site and include 
appropriate mitigation where necessary; 
Retain, buffer and  manage the existing hedgerows; 
Ensure that development  respects the landscape and wider countryside, and where 
appropriate mitigation measures are incorporated to address impacts on the adjacent Green 
Belt and countryside; and 
Provide air quality  assessments in accordance with policy Poll 1. 
Archaeological remains  are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
38 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Site ES5 Capitol Park 9 ha 
The development will  be expected to: 
Provide on and off site highways infrastructure works and improvements at Junction 37 as 
necessary; 
Provide off site highway safety enhancements; and 
Retain the woodland  planting on the site’s northern embankment and the section of hedgerow, 
and associated mature trees running adjacent to Higham Lane. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site ES6 Bromcliffe Business Park 0.7ha 
Site ES7 Oaks Business Park 0.9ha 
39 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Cudworth 
Site ES8 Land off Ferrymoor Way 17 ha 
The development will be expected to: 
Avoid locating any built development in Flood Zone 2 and 3; 
Plant a strip of native shrubs and trees along the western boundary to allow for the corridor 
formed by the adjacent dismantled railway line to continue; 
As Skylark are breeding on site, the timing of development is critical, and should begin 
outside of the breeding season to prevent disturbance to breeding birds; and 
Retain, enhance and manage a buffer strip of existing vegetation along the north and eastern 
boundaries of the site including the stream corridor. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site ES9 Land west of Springvale Road 1.2 ha 
The development will be expected to retain the young woodland planting on the site’s eastern 
boundary. 
40 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Dearne 
Site ES10 Land South of Dearne Valley Parkway 72.9 ha 
The development will be subject to the production of a phased Masterplan Framework and will 
be expected to: 
Protect and enhance biodiversity value including possible impacts on the Golden Plover 
population and on the nearby Old Moor RSPB reserve and ensure that the development 
avoids impacts or incorporates effective mitigation measures. Any impact on the golden 
plover habitat will be expected to be mitigated by either; 
a. On-site creation of optimal agricultural conditions for fields to be retained; or 
b. Creating suitable compensation habitat for the species off-site but nearby. 
Provide a contribution towards improvements to biodiversity within the Dearne Valley Green 
Heart Nature Improvement Area; 
Include the creation of a habitat corridor (at least 8m in width) along Carr Dike and a 
sustainable drainage scheme to ensure that rainwater falling on the site is still able to drain 
into the Dike aiming to improve water quality; 
Improve the highway network to mitigate the impact of additional traffic generated by the 
development on surrounding roads and in particular effects on the A635 and other strategic 
road links to the A1/M and M1 motorways; 
Provide appropriate access to housing site reference HS51 from Billingley View through the 
south east corner of the site; 
Retain the existing woodland and hedgerows on the site periphery; 
Retain the section of hedgerow remaining in the north-west corner of the site; 
Avoid locating any built development in Flood zones 2 and 3; 
Safeguard the setting of the Billingley Conservation Area; 
Give consideration to Carr Dike and the connecting unnamed ordinary watercourse which 
run through the site; and 
Provide an air quality assessment to assess the impacts of traffic emissions within air quality 
management areas along the A635 and other strategic road links to the A1/M and M1. Any 
adverse impacts on air quality should be mitigated in accordance with policy AQ1. 
Archaeological remains are known to be present on this site. The site area has been reduced to 
allow flexibility in the development to ensure the remains can be preserved in situ if necessary. 
41 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
8.15 Currently strategic  highway links to the motorways experience high traffic levels; phasing of 
development may be needed to avoid unacceptable impacts. Longer term proposals along 
the A635 corridor in Doncaster may provide increased capacity and Barnsley will work jointly 
with Doncaster to bring such a scheme forward. 
8.16 A detailed  air quality assessment is necessary to quantify the impact of any development 
together with robust mitigation proposals to off-set impacts. Any decision will be subject to 
consultation with Doncaster Metropolitan Borough Council given potential effects within its 
boundary. 
Site ES11 Fields End Business Park 2 ha 
The development will be expected to: 
Consider the impact on the amenity of Phoenix Park and include appropriate mitigation 
where necessary. 
Site ES12 Thurnscoe Business Park 6 ha 
The development will be expected to : 
Consider the impact on the amenity of Phoenix Park and include appropriate mitigation 
where necessary; 
Where possible retain the grassland which is relatively species rich in places. Where this is 
not possible other areas of native wildflower grassland will be expected to be created 
elsewhere on the site; 
Consider wetland creation as part of the development; and 
Give consideration to the Thurnscoe Dike culvert which runs through the site. 
42 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Hoyland 
Site ES13 Land West of Sheffield Road 49.3 ha 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework including housing 
site reference HS57. The development will be expected to: 
Provide a link road between the new Birdwell roundabout linking to Tankersley Lane and 
from there to Sheffield Road; 
Relocate the area of Rockingham Sports Ground that falls within the site boundary to an 
appropriate location within Hoyland Principal Town. The replacement pitch and associated 
facilities must be constructed and available for use before development on the existing sports 
ground site commences; 
Consider impact on residential amenity and include appropriate mitigation where necessary; 
Retain the mature trees and hedgerows; 
Provide a buffer strip at least 10 metres wide along the common boundary with the M1; 
Ensure that development respects the landscape and wider countryside, and incorporates 
appropriate mitigation measures to address impacts on the adjacent Green Belt and 
countryside, including the planting of a substantial tree belt at the southern boundary in 
order to define the new Green Belt boundary; 
Undertake necessary drainage works; and 
Provide air quality assessments in accordance with policy Poll 1. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
43 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Site ES14 Rockingham 8.9 ha 
The development will  be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS64; HS66; HS56 and employment site references: 
ES14 and ES17. 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide appropriate access to employment site ES17 and housing site HS64; 
Consider the impact  on residential amenity and include appropriate mitigation where 
necessary; and 
Consider the potential  impact on the nearby Shortwood and Hay Green Local Wildlife Sites 
and include appropriate mitigation where necessary; and 
Retain the hedgerow  along the north edge. 
44 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Site ES15 Shortwood Extension 11.8 ha 
The development will be expected to: 
Undertake necessary drainage  works; 
Ensure that development  does not impair the visual amenity of the landscape (wider 
countryside). Potential mitigation measures include restrictions on building heights, 
landscaping and structural planting; 
Consider the potential  impact on the nearby Shortwood and Hay Green Local Wildlife Sites 
and include appropriate mitigation where necessary; 
Retain the valuable habitats in the south-western corner of the site and exclude them from 
the scope of any development proposals. The site has potential as a habitat for newts, so 
it is recommended that this possibility is investigated prior to any development; and 
Protect the routes  of the Green way and Public Rights of Way that cross the site, and make 
provision for these as part of any proposal. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
45 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Site ES16 Shortwood Business Park 3.8 ha 
The site is part of the Sheffield City Region Enterprise Zone. 
The development will be expected to: 
Consider the potential impact on the adjacent Shortwood and Hay Green Local Wildlife Sites 
and include appropriate mitigation where necessary; and 
Retain the mature trees present on site. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site ES17 Land South of Dearne Valley Parkway 28.2 ha 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS64; HS66; HS56; and employment site references: 
ES14 and ES17. 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide appropriate access to housing site references HS64, HS66 and HS56; 
Protect and retain the areas of woodland, species-rich neutral grassland, pond and stretches 
of older hedgerow. The site has potential as a habitat for newts, so it is recommended that 
this possibility is investigated prior to any development; 
Consider and minimise the impact on the setting of listed buildings through appropriate 
design and landscaping; 
Ensure that development respects the landscape and wider countryside, and where 
appropriate mitigation measures are incorporated to address impacts on the adjacent Green 
Belt and countryside; and 
Protect and retain the Green way, Public Footpaths and Bridleways, cutting through and 
along the periphery of the site, and make provision for them in the design of the layout. 
46 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Site ES18 Ashroyd 8.9 ha 
Part of the site  is in Sheffield City Region Enterprise Zone. 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the young plantation woodland present on the periphery of the site. 
Archaeological remains may be  present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the  significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the  remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
47 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Penistone 
Site ES19 Land North of Sheffield Road 3.3 ha 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the mature trees present on the site’s north-eastern boundary; 
Provide a buffer strip along the entire edge of the north-eastern boundary to prevent the site 
from being developed right up to the woodland edge; 
Observe the statutory safety clearances in relation to the pylons which cross the site; and 
Respect the setting of the listed Kirkwood Farmhouse 100m to the West by the use of 
appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, scaling, massing, details 
and materials. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
48 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Wombwell 
Site ES20 Everill Gate Lane 3.6 ha 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide off site pedestrian and vehicular infrastructure improvements; 
Consider the potential impact on the nearby Broom Hill Flash Nature Reserve Local Wildlife 
Site and include appropriate mitigation where necessary; and 
Retain the mature oak on the site’s northern boundary and hawthorn hedgerow on the 
south-eastern boundary. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
49 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Outside Urban Barnsley and Principal Towns 
Site ES21 Wentworth Industrial Park, Tankersley 4.3 ha 
The development will be expected to: 
Consider the potential impact on the adjacent West Wood and Sowell Pond Local Wildlife 
Sites and include appropriate mitigation where necessary; 
Protect and retain the site’s woodlands; 
Consider exclusion of the natural area from the site boundary or provide compensation for 
its loss; and 
Ensure a wildlife corridor is either retained or created along the northern boundary of the 
parcel of land north of Maple Court. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site ES22 Park Springs, Houghton 3.4 ha 
The development will be expected to:-
Consider the potential impact on the nearby Edderthorpe Ings Local Wildlife Site and include 
appropriate mitigation where necessary; 
Retain the marshy grassland areas. Where these cannot be retained, suitable wetland 
features should be incorporated into the development as replacement habitat; 
Provide off site road safety enhancements; and 
Avoid locating built development in parts of the site within flood zone 2 and 3. 
50 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Site ES23 Land South of Park Springs 8.3 ha 
Habitats at the north of the site comprising swamp, watercourse/banks and semi-improved neutral 
grassland to the north of the watercourse should be retained by any development, as should the 
deciduous woodland belt running down the east of the site, including the row of mature black 
poplars/lime trees and the large horse chestnut tree at the east of the disused bus turning circle. 
8.17 Amongst the  proposed allocations are some sites which we consider to be expansion land. 
As these are regarded as under the control of an existing/ neighbouring end user they may 
not be immediately available to the market. They are however new sites that are proposed, 
and therefore they are included as part of our employment land supply. These sites are 
unlikely to be brought forward in the short to medium term, or are sites whose owners intend 
to develop for their own purposes. 
8.18 On those  sites currently functioning as green space, compensation would be required for 
loss of this green space should the proposed allocations come forward. 
8.19 Allocated employment  sites are shown on the Policies Map. In terms of controlling development 
on them the following policy applies to all allocated employment sites. It will also be applied 
to areas currently in employment use, or where a previous employment use has now ceased. 
Policy E3 Uses on employment land 
On allocated Employment Sites, or land currently or last used for employment purposes, we will 
allow the following uses:(4) 
1. Research and development, and light industry; 
2. General industrial; or 
3. Storage or distribution. 
Ancillary uses will be allowed where appropriate in scale. 
Proposals for other employment generating uses may be considered on their merits, particularly 
in terms of providing jobs, skills and their contribution to the borough's GVA. 
8.20 The provision  of well located employment land is key to the borough's future economic growth. 
It is therefore essential that both new employment land, and land currently in use or last used 
for employment purposes, is protected and safeguarded from non employment uses. 
4 The uses in policy E3 are those set out in the Use Classes Order 1987 as amended (including any subsequent amendments), categories 
B1, B2 and B8 and therefore the exclusions set out in those categories apply. Offices are considered to be a Town Centre use. 
51 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
8.21 Non employment  uses will only be considered where it can be demonstrated that they provide 
a significant contribution to the economic offer of the borough. Given the job growth targets 
that Barnsley aspires to close the job density gap it is imperative that the best use is made 
of employment land to contribute towards increasing the number of jobs in the borough. 
8.22 Employment Sites  are undeveloped land allocated for employment use. These allocations 
will provide a choice in places that meet the needs of businesses and their workforce in terms 
of accessibility and are accessible to communities that would benefit from greater access to 
job opportunities. Land currently or last used for employment purposes are areas of established 
employment use and represent the borough's employment land stock. These areas are 
sometimes interspersed with other 'employment generating' uses which may not strictly 
conform to the conventional B class employment uses, and may include some vacant land 
and premises. Due to their long established nature they comprise some of the borough's 
most sustainable and most valued employment areas and will be protected from non 
employment development as set out in policy E4 Protecting Existing Employment Land. It 
should be noted that 'Land currently or last used for employment purposes' does not contribute 
towards the available supply as it is already in existing use. 
8.23 In order to encourage economic restructuring in accordance with the Jobs and Business 
Plan, provision is made on the majority of sites for a range of employment creating uses. 
These will mainly be uses falling within Parts B1, B2 or B8 of the Use Classes Order 1987. 
However, so that the process of widening the economic base and diversifying the local 
economy is not hindered, other job creating uses may be allowed. Proposals for waste 
management facilities may be acceptable subject to meeting the requirements set out in the 
Barnsley, Doncaster and Rotherham Joint Waste Plan 2012 and any updates to this document. 
Policy E4 Protecting Existing Employment Land 
Land or premises currently or last used for employment purposes will be retained in order to 
safeguard existing or potential jobs. The development of employment land and premises for 
non-employment uses will only take place if: 
Development would not result in a significant loss of existing jobs or employment potential; 
There will still be an adequate supply of employment land or premises in the locality; and 
The land or premises cannot satisfactorily support continued employment use. 
If the above criteria can be satisfied then redevelopment will be allowed. 
8.24 Due to their long established nature, land or premises currently or last used for employment 
purposes, comprise some of the borough's most sustainable and most valued employment 
areas. These areas will be protected from non-employment use to maintain the range of land 
and premises. 
52 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
8.25 It is important to retain existing employment sites in order to maintain a range of types of 
available premises. Losses have been as high as 8 ha per annum, but have significantly 
reduced in recent years. These losses have been to a variety of uses, but predominantly to 
housing. This Local Plan sets out the numbers of housing required and broadly where it will 
be located. We will seek to stop further losses of employment land to housing unless credible 
supporting evidence is provided to demonstrate that a proposal conforms with the above 
policy. 
Policy E5 Promoting Tourism and encouraging Cultural Provision 
We will promote tourism and encourage the growth and development of cultural provision by: 
Encouraging the provision of a wide range of venues and opportunities for cultural activity; 
Safeguarding and sustaining existing cultural provision; 
Promoting the existing cultural provision and tourism offer (for example museums, theatres, 
accommodation and hospitality); and 
Encouraging the growth of the tourism business sector. 
Major new tourist and cultural facilities will be focused within existing centres where possible. 
Tourist related development in rural areas will be protected and encouraged to support and 
diversify the local economy, subject to the requirements of Policy E6 Rural Economy. 
8.26 The Good  Practice Guide on Planning for Tourism uses the World Tourism Organisation's 
(WTO) definition of tourism: 'the activities of persons travelling to and staying in places 
outside their usual environment for not more than one consecutive year for leisure, business 
and other purposes'. Tourism refers to all activities of visitors including both 'tourists' (overnight 
visitors) and 'same-day visitors' and can cover a very diverse range of activities. 
8.27 Tourism can  bring many broader benefits that will contribute to the economic and social well 
being of local communities as well as to individuals. It can: 
Be the focus of regeneration of urban and rural areas; 
Provide a  catalyst for growth in an area, raising its profile and stabilising out-migration; 
Provide opportunities  for retraining for the resident workforce and help to diversify 
over-specialised economies; and 
Help maintain  and expand under used sports and recreation facilities in urban areas. 
8.28 The future  development of tourism is an important issue in both urban and rural areas. Tourism 
has an important role to play in Barnsley's economy. We want to build on the existing tourism 
potential of current attractions and others close to our borders and to support and explore 
53 
Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
all opportunities to improve existing destinations and create new tourism and cultural 
attractions. We need to build on the legacy of the Tour de France and maximise use of key 
assets in the borough such as the Trans Pennine Trail. 
8.29 The council  has an emerging Destination Management Plan which aims to improve the 
economic prosperity and vitality of Barnsley and to improve the health and social well being 
of the residents and communities of Barnsley. 
8.30 The benefits  of providing for a wide range of cultural activities and facilities include: 
Contributing to the local economy; 
Creating a rich vibrant and diverse mix of uses; 
Well being and  enjoyment of town centres and countryside; 
Social benefits; 
Supporting citizenship and  community identity; and 
Maintaining healthy lifestyles.  
8.31 In order to maximise the benefits of tourism to rural economies, it is important to locate new 
tourism development in locations where visitors to such attractions can help to support local 
shops and services. It must also be sensitive to and integrate well with its countryside and 
landscape setting in accordance with Policy E6 which relates to the rural economy. 
54 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Policy E6 Rural Economy 
We will encourage a viable rural economy by allowing development in rural areas if it: 
Supports the sustainable diversification and development of the rural economy; 
Results in the growth of existing businesses; 
Is related to tourism or recreation; or 
Improves the range and quality of local services in existing settlements. 
Development in rural areas will be expected to: 
Be of a scale proportionate to the size and role of the settlement; 
Be directly related, where appropriate, to the needs of the settlement; 
Not have a harmful impact on the countryside, biodiversity, Green Belt, landscape or local 
character of the area; 
Consider the re-use of existing rural buildings in the first instance; and 
Protect the best quality agricultural land, areas of lower quality agricultural land should be 
used for development in preference to the best and most versatile land. 
8.32 It is important that the Local Plan plays a role in maintaining and enhancing sustainable rural 
communities. To do this we need to balance the potentially conflicting demands on rural 
areas. This policy seeks to support the diversification and strengthening of the rural economy 
and revitalisation of rural villages and to improve the range and quality of local services 
available to rural communities. This however must not be at the expense of maintaining the 
character and quality of Barnsley's environment. Development in rural areas must have due 
respect to the character of the landscape, biodiversity, and the Green Belt. 
8.33 Rural diversification  should relate primarily to business and employment development, rather 
than residential development, with priority given to the re-use of existing buildings rather than 
the construction of new ones. Small businesses, self employment and home based work are 
particularly important in rural areas and will be supported, as will opportunities to increase 
the availability of high speed broadband internet services in rural areas. 
55 Adopted Local Plan 
8 . Economy 
Policy E7 Loss of Local Services and Community Facilities in Villages 
Planning permission for changing the use of local services and community facilities in villages, 
such as local shops, meeting places, sports venues, cultural buildings, public houses, places of 
worship, post offices and petrol stations; to new uses will only be allowed if it can be shown that: 
The business or facility cannot be economically successful; or 
The change of use would not have a significant effect on the ability of local people to access 
local services. 
8.34 It is important that people living in villages have reasonable access to facilities to provide for 
day-to-day needs such as local shops and post offices. Where possible, these facilities will 
be kept. If there is going to be a change of use, supporting evidence should be provided to 
justify the proposal. This may include information about the business (such as any attempts 
to sell it), or alternative facilities available in the area that provide the same services. Villages 
are set out in the settlement hierarchy in section 5. 
56 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
The Challenge 
Providing the right mix, type and density of housing 
Meeting the need for affordable homes 
Meeting the shortfall of sites for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
Meeting the accommodation needs of children and vulnerable adults 
The Current Position 
Changing population profiles with a growth in small households 
Insufficient supply of pitches for Gypsies and Travellers and increased instances of 
unauthorised encampments 
Shortfall in supply of affordable housing 
Policy Solutions 
Ensuring the mix, type and density of housing is appropriate 
Seeking affordable housing where appropriate 
Providing for the needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
Policy H1 The Number of New Homes to be Built 
We will seek to achieve the completion of at least 21,546 net additional homes during the period 
2014 to 2033. 
A minimum five year supply of deliverable sites will be maintained. 
9.1 This figure gives  an indicative annualised figure of 1,134 per annum (21,546 over the plan 
period). It is considered that the 1,134 figure represents an ambitious and aspirational figure 
which addresses housing needs and supports economic growth ambitions, and would still 
require a step up in delivery. 
9.2 The supply of  housing sites is made up of Local Plan allocations and sites that already have 
planning permission. Empty homes and buildings brought back into residential use will also 
be part of our supply in accordance with NPPF paragraph 51. The Council has an Empty 
Homes Strategy. 
57 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
9.3 For the purposes of this policy, institutional accommodation units and student accommodation, 
not classed as a C3 dwelling house, are excluded from this target. 
Policy H2 The Distribution of New Homes 
The approximate distribution of new homes for the period 2014 to 2033 will be as follows: 
Distribution of new homes for the period 2014 to 2033 
% of Overall 
Supply1 Total Planning 
Permissions Number of 
homes Settlement 
43 9070 3258 5812 Urban 
Barnsley 
6 1303 215 1088 Cudworth 
14 2891 922 1969 Dearne 
12 2567 304 2263 Hoyland 
5 1003 366 637 Penistone 
6 1302 416 886 Royston 
10 2069 699 1370 Wombwell 
4 801 590 211 Other 
100 21006 6770 14236 Total 
1Includes 4295 dwellings proposed as part of mixed use sites. Please see site policies in Chapter 
10 for further details. 
A further 200 dwellings in the villages and 566 dwellings across the Borough will be added to 
the overall total supply as a windfall allowance. The methodology for calculating this allowance 
is set out in the 5 year supply note. 
9.4 The location  of housing development accords with the settlement hierarchy and Policy LG2 
regarding the location of growth. 
9.5 Sites are  allocated for housing in accordance with policy H1 of this Local Plan. The sites are 
shown on the Policies Map and set out in the site policies below and the site policies in section 
10 Mixed Use. Sites within Urban Barnsley and the Principal Towns have been assessed at 
an indicative density of 40 dwellings per hectare and sites in the villages at 30 dwellings per 
hectare. A gross to net ratio has been applied to take account of on site infrastructure 
requirements. 
58 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
9.6 Some site  areas have also been reduced further to take into account areas of archaeological 
or ecological importance, and areas where development would significantly impact on the 
setting of a heritage asset. 
9.7 On those sites  currently functioning as green space, compensation would be required for 
loss of this green space should the proposed allocations come forward. As set out in policy 
GS1, compensation could include on site retention and enhancement, off site replacement 
or financial contribution. 
9.8 Below is a  list of proposed housing allocations. Where there are specific issues site specific 
policies are provided. Where there are no site specific details any subsequent planning 
application will be determined in accordance with the Local Plan. 
Urban Barnsley  
Site HS1 Former Woolley Colliery Indicative number of dwellings 90 
Development of the site will not take place until the road layouts are in place for sites HS25 and 
HS11. 
The development will be expected to retain and manage the species-rich grassland and the 
woodland which forms the north and eastern half of the northern parcel of land. 
Site HS2 Land south of Darton Lane, Staincross Indicative number of dwellings 
86 
The development will be expected retain species-rich grassland meadows at the west of the site. 
A buffer strip of vegetation should also be retained adjacent to the disused railway line at the 
south. Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
59 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS3 Former William Freeman Site, Wakefield Road Indicative number of 
dwellings 102 
The development will be expected to retain the diverse grassland to the east, abutting the disused 
railway line. 
Site HS4 Longcar PDC, Longcar Lane 
The site has planning permission for 32 dwellings. 
Site HS5 Land South of West Street, Worsbrough 
The site has planning permission for 70 dwellings. 
Site HS6 Land south of Coniston Avenue, Darton Indicative number of 
dwellings 40 
Site HS7 Land east of Burton Road, Monk Bretton Indicative number of 
dwellings 218 
The development will be expected to: 
Ensure that no vehicular access shall be taken from Littleworth Lane; and 
Provide a wildlife  buffer strip between the site and Littleworth Park green space to the east. 
Archaeological remains  are known to be present on this site.The developable site area has been 
reduced to allow flexibility in the development to ensure the remains can be preserved in situ if 
necessary. 
60 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS8 Site West of Wakefield Road, Mapplewell Indicative number of 
dwellings 135 
Part of the site has planning permission for 250 dwellings. The indicative number of dwellings 
above relates to the remainder of the site. 
The development  will be expected to retain, buffer and manage all the hedgerows; significant 
areas of the existing grassland and scrub should be retained and managed as the greenspace 
provision. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
61 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS9 Land East of Smithy Wood Lane, Gilroyd Indicative number of 
dwellings 144 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide adequate access  to allow the complete development of the entire site for residential 
purposes including bringing the necessary section of Smithy Wood Lane up to adoptable 
standards and the investigation and evaluation of other potential improvements; 
Provide off site highway safety enhancements; and 
Retain and buf fer boundary vegetation which has ecological value, the hedgerow at the 
south-west, the tree strip at the south-east adjacent to the wildlife corridor, and the mature 
trees at the north. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
62 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS10 Land North of Keresforth Road, Dodworth Indicative number of 
dwellings 175 
The development will  be expected to: 
Retain woodland, stream habitat and hedgerows; 
Avoid development in  the Air Quality Management Area affected by the M1 and satisfy the 
requirements of Local Plan Policy AQ1 Development in Air Quality Management Areas; 
Provide pedestrian links  through the development to the footbridge across the M1 Motorway; 
Provide appropriate vehicular  access; 
Provide appropriate acoustic  treatment to mitigate against traffic noise; and 
Provide compensation for  the loss of any trees. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
63 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS11 Land South of Bloomhouse Lane, Darton Indicative number of 
dwellings 214 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide a new roundabout and access from the B6131 Station Road adequate to 
accommodate the development of the entire site; 
Ensure that the internal road layout will allow access to housing allocation HS25 and provide 
a spine road through the site linking Station Road with Woolley Colliery Road that is capable 
of taking through traffic; and 
Retain, buffer and manage all the hedges plus retain and manage a significant proportion 
of the existing scrub as part of the greenspace provision. 
Archaeological remains are known to be present on this site. The developable site area has been 
reduced to allow flexibility in the development to ensure the remains can be preserved in situ if 
necessary. 
Site HS12 Site north of Carlton Road Indicative number of dwellings 86 
Part of the site currently functions as a car park. This has been included in the development site 
because part may be needed to provide adequate access. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
64 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS13 Former Priory School/ Land off Rotherham Road, Cundy Cross 
Indicative number of dwellings 51 
Part of the site has planning permission for 197 dwellings. The indicative number of dwellings 
above relates to the remainder of the site. 
The development will be expected to: 
Secure access from the site with planning permission to the remainder of the site; 
Undertake an ecology  report and retain any areas of significant value; and 
Either retain and  manage the small area of species-rich grassland in the south-east and the 
plantation woodland or provide mitigation for these biodiversity losses within any development. 
Site HS14 Garden House Farm, Garden House Close, Monk Bretton Indicative 
number of dwellings 70 
The development will be expected to: 
Respect the historic setting of the listed buildings associated with Manor Farm immediately 
to the South West by the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the 
setting, appropriate scaling, massing, details and materials; and 
Retain and manage the scrub/grassland in the south-eastern section of the site apart from 
the buildings part. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS15 Land to the West of Smithy Wood Lane, Gilroyd Indicative number 
of dwellings 36 
The development will be expected to provide off site highway safety enhancements. 
65 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS16 Site to the east of St Helens Avenue Indicative number of dwellings 
96 
The development will be expected to retain the woodland at the north-east corner plus the 
hedgerows in the northern half of the site. These should be buffered and managed. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS17 Land west of Wakefield Road Indicative number of dwellings 250 
The development will be expected to: 
Be accompanied  by plans for the improvement, protection and maintenance of the adjacent 
Scheduled Ancient Monument known as East Gawber Hall Colliery Fanhouse and its setting. 
Planning conditions will be used to ensure that details for the improvement, protection and 
maintenance of the adjacent monument and its setting have been submitted to and approved 
by the Council before development commences; and 
Retain, buf fer and manage all hedgerows plus the scrubland/swamp in the depression. 
Archaeological remains  are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
66 
Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS18 Site of former Kingstone High School 
The site has planning permission for 163 dwellings. 
Site HS19 Land North of Wilthorpe Road, Wilthorpe 
The site has planning permission for 326 dwellings. 
Site HS20 Land off High Street, Dodworth 
The site has planning permission for 6 dwellings. 
Site HS21 Monk Bretton Reservoir and land to the east of Cross Street 
Indicative number of dwellings 79 
Part of the site has planning permission for 95 dwellings. The indicative number of dwellings 
above relates to the remainder of the site. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Respect the historic  setting of the adjacent listed building associated with Manor Farm 
immediately to the east by use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects 
the setting, appropriate scaling, massing, details and materials; and 
Ensure that no development takes place around the access road to the cricket ground in 
order to protect the setting of Monk Bretton Cross Scheduled Ancient Monument. 
Archaeological remains  are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
67 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS22 Land at St Michaels Avenue Indicative number of dwellings 38 
The development will be expected to provide appropriate acoustic treatment to mitigate against 
noise from the industrial estate. 
Archaeological remains  are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS23 Land off Highstone Lane, Worsbrough Common Indicative number 
of dwellings 18 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
68 
Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS24 Land between Mount Vernon Road and Upper Sheffield Road 
Indicative number of dwellings 42 
The development will be expected to: 
Protect the historic  setting of the listed Darley Cliffe Hall, its ancillary listed buildings and 
Elmhirst Farm and cottage. Development shall be limited to the area shown on the Policies 
Map. Development shall respect the historic setting of these listed buildings by the use of 
appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, appropriate scaling, 
massing, details and materials; and 
Retain and enhance  the boundary wall fronting Mount Vernon Road or rebuild at the back 
of wider footway. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
69 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS25 Land to the east of Woolley Colliery Road Indicative number of 
dwellings 118 
The development will be expected to: 
Ensure that the internal road layout will allow access to housing allocation HS11 and provide 
a spine road through the site linking Station Road with Woolley Colliery Road that is capable 
of taking through traffic; and 
Ensure appropriate access is provided to enable the development of site HS1. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS26 Land adjacent Zenith Business Park Indicative number of dwellings 
143 
The development will be expected to retain the woodland belt at the west and retain scattered 
trees in the east of the site. 
70 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS27 Bleachcroft Way Industrial Estate indicative number of dwellings 
230 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide off site highways capacity works at Stairfoot; 
Retain the wet woodland on the site’s southern boundary which forms part of a habitat 
corridor; 
Retain the areas of more species-rich grassland within the railway cutting and in the site’s 
north-eastern corner; 
Provide landscape screening to the site's open southern aspect to the Green Belt which is 
formed by Dob Syke; 
Retain the grasslands at the south-west and north-east of the site plus the woodland/stream 
corridor to the east; and 
Safeguard the setting of the Listed Buildings at Swaithe Hall and Ardsley Cemetery. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS28 Land south west of Priory Road Indicative number of dwellings 18 
The development will be expected to incorporate methane barrier protection measures into the 
design of the scheme as the site is within 250m of a category 1 landfill site. 
71 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS29 Land off Mount Vernon Road, Worsbrough, Barnsley Indicative 
number of dwellings 74 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain and maintain the strip of semi-natural broadleaf woodland in the south of the site; 
and 
Respect the historic setting of the listed building at Elmhirst Farmhouse and Cottage opposite 
this site by the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects their setting, 
scaling, massing, details and materials. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation of necessary) that 
must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS30 Land off Leighton Close Indicative number of dwellings 18 
The development will be expected to retain and manage boundary vegetation, plus create new 
biodiverse hedgerows. 
72 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Cudworth 
Site HS31 Land off High Street, Shafton 
This site has planning permission for 38 dwellings. 
Site HS32 Land off Pontefract Road Indicative number of dwellings 147 
The development will  be expected to retain and buffer the hedgerows. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS33 Land west of Brierley Road, Grimethorpe Indicative number of 
dwellings 61 
The development will be expected to: 
Respect the setting of the adjacent listed building 40m immediately to the east (Bridge 
Farmhouse) by the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, 
appropriate scaling, massing, details and materials; and 
Retain a buffer strip of vegetation alongside the dyke at the southern boundary plus the 
mature trees and hedgerows. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remain; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
73 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS34 Land north of Blacker Lane, Shafton Indicative number of dwellings 
169 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide a masterplan demonstrating how the site can be developed for residential 
purposes.This should consider access issues and, if necessary, the redevelopment of the 
area occupied by the farm and industrial buildings; 
Provide off site highway safety enhancements; and 
Retain and manage the hedgerows, mature trees and pond, plus a buffer strip against the 
disused railway line. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS35 Land adjacent to Carrs Lane / Summerdale Road, Cudworth 
This site has planning permission for 278 dwellings. 
74 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS36 Land at Weetshaw Lane, Cudworth Indicative number of dwellings 
144 
The development will  be expected to: 
Retain, buffer and manage the existing hedgerows and woodland blocks; 
Be accessed through  the adjacent housing allocation HS39; 
Provide appropriate acoustic  treatment to mitigate against road noise; and 
Avoid locating any  built development in Flood Zone 2 and 3. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
75 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS37 Land north of Sidcop Road, Cudworth Indicative number of 
dwellings 18 
The development will  be subject to a masterplan covering the entire site and including sites HS38 
and HS40 demonstrating that proposals will positively support and complement the comprehensive 
wider development of the area. 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide appropriate junction improvements at Pontefract Road; 
Retain, buffer and  manage the trees at the southern boundary; and 
Provide appropriate acoustic  treatment to mitigate against road noise. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
76 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS38 Land off Cudworth Bypass Indicative number of dwellings 192 
The development will be subject to a masterplan covering the entire site and including sites HS37 
and HS40 demonstrating that proposals will positively support and complement the comprehensive 
wider development of the area. 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide appropriate junction improvements at Pontefract Road; 
Retain, buffer and manage hedgerows and trees at the north-east side of the site; and 
Provide appropriate acoustic treatment to mitigate against road noise. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS39 Land west of Three Nooks Lane, Cudworth Indicative number of 
dwellings 41 
The development will  be expected to: 
Be accessed from the adjacent roundabout on the Cudworth Parkway; 
Provide access to  enable development of site HS36; and 
Provide appropriate acoustic  treatment to mitigate against road noise. 
77 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS40 Land north of Oak Tree Avenue Indicative number of dwellings 38 
The development will be subject to a masterplan covering the entire site and including sites HS37 
and HS38 demonstrating that proposals will positively support and complement the comprehensive 
wider development of the area. 
The development  will be expected to provide appropriate junction improvements at Pontefract 
Road 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS41 Former Willowgarth School, Grimethorpe 
The site has planning permission for 97 dwellings. 
78 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Goldthorpe (Dearne Towns) 
Site HS42 Land south of Lowfield Road, Bolton on Dearne Indicative number 
of dwellings 86 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide traffic signals at the railway bridge on Lowfield Road; 
Provide an odour report and incorporate any appropriate mitigation measures including a 
landscaped buffer; 
Be designed, managed and mitigated to ensure that there are no adverse impacts on the 
neighbouring Adwick Washlands nature reserve (to the east of the site) which is of significant 
ecological interest; and 
Be accompanied by details for the improvement, protection and maintenance of the adjacent 
Scheduled Ancient Monument known as Heavy Anti-aircraft gunsite 330m south east of 
Lowfield Farm (Entry 1019872) and its setting. Planning conditions will be used to ensure 
that details for the improvement, protection and maintenance of the monument have been 
submitted to and approved by the Council before development commences. 
Site HS43 Former Reema Estate and adjoining land, off School Street, 
Thurnscoe Indicative number of dwellings 480 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide a bridge for people and vehicles to use across the railway line connecting the site 
with Thurnscoe East Estate; and 
Retain, enhance and manage a wildlife corridor on the eastern boundary alongside the rail 
line. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
79 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS44 Bolton House Farm, Goldthorpe Indicative number of dwellings 
194 
Archaeological remains are known to be present on this site. The developable site area has been 
reduced to allow flexibility in the development to ensure the remains can be preserved in situ if 
necessary. 
Site HS45 Land south of Barnburgh Lane Indicative number of dwellings 69 
Part of the site has planning permission for 61 dwellings. The indicative dwelling number above 
relates to the remainder of the site. 
The development  will be expected to retain, enhance and manage hedgerows, woodland and 
swamp at the south-west side of site. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
80 
Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS46 Land North of East Street, Goldthorpe Indicative number of 
dwellings 125 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain and manage habitat at the north-east part of site (grassland, herbs and trees) plus 
hedgerows on the site; 
Respect the historic setting of the listed Church of St. John and St. Mary Magdalene by the 
use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, scaling, massing, 
details and materials; 
Comply with the Goldthorpe Masterplan; and 
Provide appropriate acoustic treatment to mitigate against road noise. 
Archaeological remains are known to be present on this site. The developable site area has been 
reduced to allow flexibility in the development to ensure the remains can be preserved in situ if 
necessary. 
Site HS47 Land to the north of the Dearne Advanced Learning Centre, 
Goldthorpe Indicative number of dwellings 86 
The development will be expected to retain, enhance and manage the higher value ecological 
areas detailed in the ecological assessments produced on behalf of BMBC. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
81 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS48 Land north of Barnburgh Lane, Goldthorpe Indicative number of 
dwellings 109 
The development will be expected to retain hedgerows around the periphery of the site. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS49 Land to the South of Beever Street Goldthorpe Indicative number 
of dwellings 54 
Part of the site has planning permission for 180 dwellings. The indicative dwelling number above 
relates to the remainder of the site. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Comply with  the Goldthorpe Masterplan; and 
Retain, enhance  and manage a buffer strip of existing vegetation to the disused railway at 
the south plus mature trees and hedgerows. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
82 
Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS50 Site at Brunswick Street Indicative number of dwellings 45 
Site HS51 Site to the west of Broadwater Estate Indicative number of dwellings 
279 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the  southern quarter of the site which has high ecological value. The developable 
site area has been reduced to account for retention of this area; and 
Provide appropriate  access to housing site reference HS51 from Billingley View through the 
south east corner of site ES10. 
Archaeological remains  are known to be present on this site. The developable site area has 
been reduced to allow flexibility in the development to ensure the remains can be preserved in 
situ if necessary. 
Site HS52 Land west of Thurnscoe Bridge Lane and south of Derry Grove, 
Thurnscoe Indicative number of dwellings 308 
The development will be subject to the production of a masterplan covering the entire site to 
ensure that development is brought forward in a comprehensive manner. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Ensure that  the trees and hedgerows around the periphery of the site, in particular on the 
southern boundary  are retained; and 
Provide of f site highway enhancements. 
Archaeological remains  are known to be present on this site. The site area has been reduced to 
allow flexibility in the development to ensure the remains can be preserved in situ if necessary. 
Site HS53 Site south of King Street, Thurnscoe Indicative number of dwellings 
25 
83 
Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS54 Land off Gooseacre Avenue, Thurnscoe Indicative number of 
dwellings 80 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide appropriate  access; and 
Retain the  dense scrub at the north and west of the site. 
Site HS55 Former Highgate Social Centre Indicative number of dwellings 29 
Planning permission for 6 dwellings has been granted on part of the site. The indicative dwelling 
number above relates to the remainder of the site. 
84 
Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Hoyland 
Site HS56 Land off Shortwood Roundabout, Hoyland Indicative number of 
dwellings 80 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS64; HS66; HS56 and employment site references: 
ES14 and ES17.The Masterplan Framework should demonstrate that proposals will positively 
support and complement the comprehensive wider development of the area and ensure that 
development is brought forward in a comprehensive manner. 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain, enhance and manage the hedgerow on the east side; 
Provide appropriate acoustic measures to mitigate against noise from the road; and 
Provide appropriate access. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
85 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS57 Land at Tankersley Lane Indicative number of dwellings 101 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering the entire 
site and employment site reference ES13. The Masterplan Framework should demonstrate that 
proposals will positively support and complement the comprehensive wider development of the 
area and ensure that development is brought forward in a comprehensive manner. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Ensure any layout  takes account of the relationship between the new development and 
existing buildings that are not available for redevelopment; 
Provide a buf fer between the site and Skiers Wood Local Wildlife Site; 
Provide a landscape  buffer between this site and the employment site ES13; and 
Produce a detailed  ecology report in support of any development proposal. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
86 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS58 Land at Broad Carr Road, Hoyland Indicative number of dwellings 
131 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS61; HS62; HS65; HS58 and HS68. The Masterplan 
Framework should demonstrate that proposals will positively support and complement the 
comprehensive wider development of the area and ensure that development is brought forward 
in a comprehensive manner. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Retain the double,  species-rich hedgerow on the north-eastern boundary and the areas of 
broadleaf woodland; 
Provide a buf fer between the site and Skiers Wood Local Wildlife Site; 
Provide appropriate access  to site HS62; and 
Provide small scale  convenience retail and community facilities in compliance with Local 
Plan policy TC5 Small Local Shops. 
Archaeological remains  are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
87 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS59 Land south of Hay Green Lane Indicative number of dwellings 118 
The development will be expected to: 
Produced a detailed ecology report in support of any development proposal; 
Respect the historic setting of the listed barn opposite Herons Way by retaining the existing 
mature field boundary with its existing hedge and trees to the east, and by the use of 
appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, scaling, massing, details 
and materials; and 
Provide appropriate access and off site highway works. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS60 Land at Greenside Lane, Hoyland Indicative number of dwellings 
22 
The development will  be expected to retain the mature trees on the boundaries. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
88 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS61 Land off Clough Fields Road, Hoyland Common Indicative number 
of dwellings 74 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS61; HS62; HS65; HS58 and HS68. The Masterplan 
Framework should demonstrate that proposals will positively support and complement the 
comprehensive wider development of the area and ensure that development is brought forward 
in a comprehensive manner. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Retain and manage  the woodland at the south and east of the site; 
Provide appropriate access  to site HS65; and 
Provide small scale  convenience retail and community facilities in compliance with Local 
Plan policy TC5 Small Local Shops. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
89 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS62 Land off Meadowfield Drive Indicative dwelling number 74 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS61; HS62; HS65; HS58 and HS68. The Masterplan 
Framework should demonstrate that proposals will positively support and complement the 
comprehensive wider development of the area and ensure that development is brought forward 
in a comprehensive manner. 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain and manage the woodland belt at the west of the site; and 
Provide small scale convenience retail and community facilities in compliance with Local 
Plan policy TC5 Small Local Shops. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS63 Land off Welland Crescent, Hoyland Indicative number of dwellings 
29 
The development will be expected to retain and manage existing vegetation at the north-east 
and north-west boundaries alongside the rail line and footpath. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
90 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS64 Land North of Hoyland Road, Hoyland Common Indiacive number 
of dwellings 615 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS64; HS66; HS56 and employment site references: 
ES14 and ES17. The Masterplan Framework should demonstrate that proposals will positively 
support and complement the comprehensive wider development of the area and ensure that 
development is brought forward in a comprehensive manner. 
The development  will be expected to ensure that: 
All hedgerows and  woodland blocks are retained, enhanced and managed and appropriate 
access provided; 
A wildlife corridor  is created across the site; 
Appropriate acoustic measures  are provided to mitigate against noise from the road; and 
Development shall respect  the historic setting of Hoyland Lowe Stand and the churchyard 
of St. Peters Church to the east by the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design 
that reflects the setting, appropriate scaling, massing, details and materials. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
91 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS65 Land North of Stead Lane, Hoyland Indicative number of dwellings 
600 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS61; HS62; HS65; HS58 and HS68.The Masterplan 
Framework should demonstrate that proposals will positively support and complement the 
comprehensive wider development of the area and ensure that development is brought forward 
in a comprehensive manner. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Retain buffer and  manage the woodland at the north and east, all hedgerows on site and 
the pond at the south-west; 
Provide appropriate access  to sites HS61, HS62 and HS58; and 
Provide small scale  convenience retail and community facilities in compliance with Local 
Plan policy TC5 Small Local Shops. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
92 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS66 Land west of Upper Hoyland Road Indicative number of dwellings 
70 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS64; HS66; HS56 and employment site references: 
ES14 and ES17. 
The Masterplan  Framework should demonstrate that proposals will positively support and 
complement the comprehensive wider development of the area and ensure that development is 
brought forward in a comprehensive manner. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Ensure access to  the site is taken through the adjacent housing allocation HS64. Access 
infrastructure must be capable of allowing development of the whole site; 
Retain, enhance and  manage the species-rich hedgerows and plantation woodland at the 
north, plus create a wildlife corridor along the site; and 
Protect the historic  setting of Hoyland Lowe Stand immediately to the east by: 
Limiting development on  the site to the area shown on the Policies Map; 
Restricting the height  of dwellings to a single storey at the eastern margin of the 
developable area; and 
Providing appropriate site  layout and sympathetic design that reflects the setting, scaling, 
massing, details and materials. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
93 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS67 Land at Sheffield Road, Birdwell Indicative number of dwellings 
17 
The development will be expected to: 
Respect the  historic and listed status of the Mine Rescue Station immediately adjacent by 
the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, appropriate 
scaling, massing, details and materials; and 
Avoid development  in the Air Quality Management Area affected by the M1 and satisfy the 
requirements of Local Plan Policy AQ1 Development in Air Quality Management Areas. 
Site HS68 Land between Stead Lane and Sheffield Road, Hoyland Common 
Indicative number of dwellings 237 
The development will be expected to: 
The development  will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering a number 
of sites including housing site references: HS61; HS62; HS65; HS58 and HS68.The Masterplan 
Framework should demonstrate that proposals will positively support and complement the 
comprehensive wider development of the area and ensure that development is brought forward 
in a comprehensive manner 
The development  will be expected to: 
Retain and  maintain the species-rich hedgerow along the north-eastern boundary. The other 
hedgerows should be retained. If they are proposed for removal their importance should 
first be assessed against the Hedgerow Regulations 1997; 
Retain the  two mature oak trees on the north-east boundary; and 
Include measures  for the protection and retention of the listed milepost on Sheffield Road 
which is approximately 100m to the north of the driveway to Bell Ground House and its 
immediate setting. 
94 
Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS69 Land north of Wood Walk, Hoyland Indicative number of dwellings 
112 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the broadleaf  plantation in the east of the site and the strip of dense scrub with 
scattered trees towards the west of the site; 
Retain and maintain  the large ash tree near the centre of the site; and 
Fully evaluate any  hedgerows which are proposed for removal against all criteria of the 
Hedgerows Regulations 1997. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation of necessary) that 
must include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
95 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Penistone 
Site HS70 Land to north of Barnsley Road, Penistone Indicative number of 
dwellings 32 
Part of the site has planning permission for 11 dwellings. The indicative number of dwellings 
above relates to the remainder of the site. 
The development will be expected to: 
Respect the setting of the listed complex of buildings at Nether Mill 60m to the West by the 
use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, scaling, massing, 
details and materials; and 
Avoid locating built development in parts of the site within flood zone 2 and 3. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
96 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS71 Land at Talbot Road, Penistone Indicative number of dwellings 30 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide appropriate access;  and 
Respect the historic  setting of the listed buildings at 8-10 Thurlstone Road and the group 
character of Penistone Conservation Area immediately adjacent and to the east. Development 
of site HS71 will require the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects 
the setting, scaling, massing, details and materials. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
97 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS72 Land east of Saunderson Road, Penistone Indicative number of 
dwellings 29 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the heathland in the southern half plus provide a buffer strip of vegetation to the 
cemetery at the south; and 
Respect the historic setting of the listed buildings at 8-10 Thurlstone Road and the group 
character of Penistone Conservation Area 200m to the east. Development will require the 
use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, scaling, massing, 
details and materials. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS73 Land South East of Schole Hill Lane, Penistone 
The site has planning permission for 139 dwellings 
98 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS74 Land south of Well House Lane, Penistone Indicative number of 
dwellings 132 
The development will  be expected to: 
Ensure the wider characteristic landscape setting and the setting of the Penistone 
Conservation Area are protected and enhanced including the use of appropriate site layout, 
and sympathetic design that reflects their setting, scaling, massing, details and materials; 
Provide appropriate of f site road safety enhancements; 
Be designed to  provide an appropriate buffer around Westhorpe Works in accordance with 
HSE standards; 
Evaluate the site’ s importance as overwintering feeding habitat for golden plovers and provide 
mitigation or compensation habitat as appropriate; and 
Avoid locating built  development in parts of the site within flood zones 2 and 3. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
99 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS75 Land south of Halifax Road, Penistone Indicative number of 
dwellings 414 
The development will  be expected to: 
Be designed to provide an appropriate buffer around Westhorpe Works in accordance with 
HSE standards; 
Provide appropriate of f site road safety enhancements; 
Ensure the wider  characteristic landscape setting and the setting of the Penistone 
Conservation Area are protected and enhanced by the use of appropriate site layout and 
sympathetic design that reflects their setting, scaling, massing, details and materials; 
Provide appropriate acoustic  treatment to mitigate against road and railway noise; and 
Evaluate the site’ s importance as overwintering feeding habitat for golden plovers and provide 
mitigation or compensation habitat as appropriate. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
100 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Royston 
Site HS76 Land at end of Melton Way, Royston Indicative number of dwellings 
58 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
101 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Wombwell 
Site HS77 Land at Pitt Street, Wombwell Indicative number of dwellings 109 
The development will be expected to provide appropriate access. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS78 Land to the south of Doncaster Road, Darfield Indicative number 
of dwellings 441 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain and improve hedgerows running along the east and west boundaries; 
Retain and protect the small areas of woodland along the eastern boundary. The area of 
woodland/scrub and unimproved neutral grassland to the west of the site should be excluded 
from development; 
Provide appropriate access; and 
Provide off site road safety enhancements. 
102 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS79 Former Foulstone School Playing Fields Indicative number of 
dwellings 189 
The development will be expected to: 
provide a minimum of 3 hectares of the playing fields and provide improvements to 
compensate for loss of green space to include provision of changing facilities. 
include measures for the protection and retention of the listed milepost and its immediate 
setting on the short link road 150m east of the junction with Barnsley Road. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains 
An assessment of the significance of the remains 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS80 The Former Foulstone School Indicative number of dwellings 49 
Part of the site has planning permission for 40 dwellings. The indicative number of dwellings 
above relates to the remainder of the site. 
The development will be expected to: 
Respect the historic setting and the group character of the adjacent Darfield Conservation 
Area by the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design that reflects the setting, 
scaling, massing, details and materials; and 
Investigate options on the southern boundary of the site on the edge of Darfield Local Centre 
for providing either: 
A small scale convenience shop that is in compliance with Local Plan Policy TC5 Local 
Shops; or 
An extension to Darfield Local Centre that is in compliance with local and national policy 
to protect town centres. 
103 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS81 Land rear of Kings Oak Primary School, Wombwell Indicative 
number of dwellings 49 
The site has planning permission for 49 dwellings. 
Site HS82 Land off Newsome Avenue, Wombwell 
The site has planning permission for 43 dwellings. 
Site HS83 Former Kings Road School Site, Wombwell Indicative number of 
dwellings 34 
The site has planning permission for 34 dwellings. 
Site HS84 Land east of Lundhill Road, Wombwell Indicative number of 
dwellings 150 
The development will  be expected to: 
Provide off site highway works; 
Retain, enhance and manage the species  rich grassland at the west, the marshy grassland 
in the north, and the species-rich hedgerow in the north-east of the site; and 
Avoid locating built  development in parts of the site within flood zones 2 and 3. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
104 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS85 Land at Hill Street/ Snape Hill Road, Darfield Indicative number of 
dwellings 32 
Site HS86 Land at New Street, Wombwell Indicative number of dwellings 35 
Site HS87 Land east of Wortley Avenue, Wombwell Indicative number of 
dwellings 32 
105 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Land outside Urban Barnsley and the Principal Towns 
Site HS88 Former Paper Mill, Oughtibridge, Sheffield 
This site has planning permission for 320 dwellings. Whilst within our boundary, the impact of 
development will lie within Sheffield. Therefore this site is not included within our housing figures, 
but will contribute towards Sheffield's housing need figure. 
Site HS89 Land off Roughbirchworth Lane, Oxspring Indicative number of 
dwellings 22 
The development will be expected to: 
Fully evaluate existing woodland trees for their biodiversity value and retain mature trees; 
Retain or create a buffer of trees/woody vegetation adjacent to the Trans Pennine Trail (to 
the north-east) to reinforce the wildlife corridor; 
Evaluate existing farm buildings for their bat roost and nesting bird value; 
Evaluate the site’s importance as overwintering feeding habitat for golden plovers and provide 
mitigation or compensation habitat as appropriate; and 
Ensure the impacts/effects on the landscape are appropriately minimised and mitigated. 
There is a further protected species issue which affects the northern portion of this site. Any 
applicant/developer should contact Barnsley Council’s Planning Policy team for details which 
would need to be addressed within any proposals for a planning application. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
106 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS90 Land off High Street, Great Houghton Indicative number of dwellings 
67 
The development will be expected to: 
Fully evaluate any  hedgerows which are proposed for removal against all the criteria of the 
Hedgerow Regulations 1997. Valuable hedgerows must be retained within any development. 
The hedgerow at the north of the site should be retained and maintained; 
Assess mature trees  for their ecological value with any valuable or veteran trees being 
retained; and 
Ensure the impacts/ef fects on the landscape are appropriately minimised and mitigated. 
Archaeological remains  are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation of 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
107 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS91 Land off Cote Lane, Thurgoland Indicative number of dwellings 22 
The development will be expected to: 
Survey the vegetation in the south and east half of the site, and retain high ecological value 
habitats; 
Survey the scattered mature trees in the other half of the site for ecological value then retain 
valuable or veteran trees within any development; and 
Ensure the impacts/effects on the landscape are appropriately minimised and mitigated. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation of 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS92 Everill Gate Farm, Broomhill Indicative number of dwellings 26 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the pond and associated wetland-related habitat around it; maintain and improve its 
biodiversity value; and 
Ensure the impacts/effects on the landscape are appropriately minimised and mitigated. 
Archaeological remains are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation of 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
108 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS93 Land north of Halifax Road, Thurgoland Indicative number of 
dwellings 19 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the hedgerows on the southern and eastern boundaries. If it is proposed to remove 
any of these sections of hedgerow they should first be fully evaluated against all the criteria 
of the Hedgerow Regulations 1997; and 
Ensure the impacts/effects on the landscape are appropriately minimised and mitigated. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation of necessary) that 
must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Site HS94 Land off New Road, Tankersley Indicative number of dwellings 26 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the mature boundary trees and the hedgerow at the south of the site. If proposed for 
removal the trees should be assessed for their ecological value and the hedgerow fully 
evaluated against all the criteria of the Hedgerow Regulations 1997; and 
Create a buffer strip of native tree planting at the boundary where the site abuts a Local 
Nature Reserve woodland to the south west, which is an England Priority Woodland Habitat. 
Archaeological remainsmay be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation of necessary) that 
must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
109 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Site HS95 Land at Hall Farm, Church Street, Brierley Indicative number of 
dwellings 29 
This site was proposed as green space in the Submitted Local Plan. It is now proposed as a 
potential housing allocation to account for the changed approach to development in villages. 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain the mature on-site trees and protect them from any development; 
Retain and manage the intact hedgerow forming the north-western and north-eastern 
boundary; and 
Respect the historic setting of the Brierley Conservation Area which it lies within as well as 
the setting of Brierley Hall to the south west by the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic 
design that reflects the setting and the historic vernacular, appropriate scaling, massing, 
details and materials. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation of necessary) that 
must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
9.9 The following  policies will be applied to proposals for housing: 
Policy H3 Uses on Allocated Housing Sites 
The sites shown as housing sites on the Policies Map will be developed for residential purposes. 
Other uses on these sites will only be allowed where: 
They are small scale and ancillary to the housing elements; and 
They provide a service or other facility for local residents. 
110 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
9.10 The sites  identified for housing are needed to provide new homes for people who want to 
live in the borough. However small scale facilities such as local shops or a community building 
can make housing developments more sustainable by offering a service within walking 
distance of homes. Any non residential proposals on allocated housing sites must be in 
conformity with other relevant policies in this Local Plan. 
Policy H4 Residential Development on Small Non-allocated Sites 
Proposals for residential development on sites below 0.4 hectares (including conversions of 
existing buildings and creating dwellings above shops) will be allowed where the proposal complies 
with other relevant policies in the Plan. 
9.11 Whilst many  new homes in the borough will be built on sites allocated for housing, other sites 
will also be suitable for residential development. These sites make a valuable contribution 
to the housing supply. Sites in towns and villages can offer good opportunities for providing 
houses where other people already live, near to shops and services. Developing these sites 
also reduces the need to provide new sites outside settlement boundaries. We will allow 
small scale residential development within towns and villages in line with other plan policies, 
including those protecting people’s living conditions, road safety and design. 
9.12 This policy  does not apply to areas of land under 0.4 hectares where they form part of a 
larger site that is over 0.4 hectares and has potential for housing development. These sites 
are covered by policy H5 below. This is to ensure that small developments which take place 
on part of a larger site do not compromise its wider development. 
Policy H5 Residential Development on Large Non-allocated Sites 
Proposals for residential development on sites above 0.4 hectares which are not shown as 
housing sites on the Policies Map will be supported where they: 
Are located on previously or part previously developed land; 
Are located within Urban Barnsley, Principal Towns and Villages; 
Are accessible by public transport; and 
Have good access to a range of shops and services. 
9.13 An important  indicator of a site's sustainability is its access to public transport as this can 
reduce the amount of travel undertaken using the car. We will use information provided by 
South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive (SYPTE) to determine if a site is accessible 
by public transport. SYPTE can provide an assessment of a sites location in relation to the 
Core Public Transport Network (CPTN). For a site to be considered to be accessible by public 
111 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
transport the centre of the site will need to be located within the CPTN or within the CPTN 
buffer and acceptable mitigation provided to compensate for the degree of restriction to public 
transport use. 
9.14 The CPTN  is defined as core bus corridors with six or more buses per hour and the railway 
network. A catchment area buffer is applied to the CPTN access points (bus stops and railway 
stations) which is based on a 400 metre walk to access bus services and an 800 metre walk 
to access a railway station. 
9.15 It is important that housing developments have good access to a range of shops and services. 
This reduces car use and helps to create sustainable communities. We will assess if a site 
has 'good access' by reviewing information supplied by applicants in support of their 
application. This will be expected to identify the number of facilities within an 800 metre radius 
of the centre of the site listed in the tables below. Good access to shops and services will be 
where all the essential facilities, and a range of the other services and facilities listed below, 
are within 800 metres of the centre of site. 
Essential Facilities 
Doctors Practise – one or more doctors* Primary School 
Public Open Green Space – generally urban green 
space identified in the Green Space Register 
(excluding allotments) Local Convenience Store – any shop selling 
at least a small range of everyday essential 
items 
Other Services/Facilities 
Post Office Job Centre Secondary School 
Petrol Station Place of Worship Benefit Agency 
Village / Community Hall TertiaryCollege Retail (Shopping Parade) 
Library Banking Facility Public House 
Chemist Sports Centre Hospital 
Health Centre / Clinic – providing a range of health related community services such as district 
nursing, chiropody, occupational therapy etc. 
Supermarket – Self – service store selling mainly food, or food and non-food goods, often with car 
parking. 
9.16 *Where a  LIFT centre has opened in a settlement that has lead to a reduction in the number 
of local doctors practises due to relocation there we will take this into account when assessing 
a site's access to services. 
112 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Policy H6 Housing Mix and Efficient Use of Land 
Housing proposals will be expected to include a broad mix of house size, type and tenure to help 
create mixed and balanced communities. Homes must be suitable for different types of households 
and be capable of being adapted to meet the changing needs of the population. 
Proposals to change the size and type of existing housing stock must maintain an appropriate 
mix of homes to meet local needs. 
A density of 40 dwellings per hectare net will be expected in Urban Barnsley and Principal Towns 
and 30 dwellings per hectare net in the villages. 
Lower densities will be supported where it can be demonstrated that they are necessary for 
character and appearance, need, viability or sustainable design reasons. 
9.17 Proposals for  new housing will be expected to deliver a mix of house dwelling sizes, type 
and tenure informed by the most relevant evidence taking into account an up to date Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment for the entire housing market area and the needs of the market, 
in order to meet the present and future needs of all members of the community. Various 
housing types capable of accommodating a range of needs are required across the borough 
such as family housing and older persons accommodation. Supported housing is required 
for vulnerable households for example those with physical or mental disabilities and young 
people with support needs. Proposals will be supported where they are consistent with this 
policy and other policies in the development plan, or where robust supporting evidence can 
be provided that would be a material consideration of sufficient weight to take precedence. 
The principle of creating homes that are capable of meeting long term needs of residents or 
can be adapted to meet these needs (often referred to as 'Lifetime Homes') will be supported. 
9.18 A density  of 40 dwellings per hectare net is expected in Urban Barnsley and the Principal 
Towns and 30 dwellings per hectare net in villages. We recognise that it is important that the 
density of development is appropriate to the site. Lower densities will be supported if there 
is robust supporting evidence to outweigh the objective of making the most efficient use of 
land. The mix of housing on a site should also be appropriate to the scale and context of the 
development and the character of the area. 
113 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Policy H7 Affordable Housing 
Housing developments of 15 or more dwellings will be expected to provide affordable housing. 
30% affordable housing will be expected in Penistone and Dodworth and Rural West, 20% in 
Darton and Barugh; 10% in Bolton, Goldthorpe, Thurnscoe, Hoyland, Wombwell, Darfield, North 
Barnsley and Royston, South Barnsley and Worsbrough and Rural East. 
These percentages will be sought unless it can be demonstrated through a viability assessment 
that the required figure would render the scheme unviable. 
The developer must show that arrangements have been put in place to keep the new homes 
affordable. 
Limited affordable housing to meet community needs may be allowed in or on the edge of villages. 
9.19 Some people  cannot afford to buy or rent houses that are generally available on the open 
market. We aim to provide homes for everyone in the borough, no matter what their income 
and the cost of buying or renting a house. Affordable homes are low cost housing made 
available specifically to people who cannot afford the open market prices. 
9.20 The NPPF  describes affordable housing as: Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate 
housing, provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility 
is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. Affordable housing should 
include provisions to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households or for the 
subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision. 
9.21 Affordable homes  are needed in all parts of the borough to a varying extent, where local 
incomes cannot meet the costs of housing on the open market. Residential development in 
these areas must include affordable homes in line with this policy. Both the areas of need 
and the type of affordable homes needed will change over time, as a result of general 
socio-economic changes and the ever changing dynamics of the housing markets within the 
borough. 
9.22 Where there  are opportunities to meet affordable housing needs through schemes such as 
'Living Over the Shop' and bringing empty properties back into use these will be supported. 
9.23 The figures  in the policy have been derived from an Affordable Housing Viability Study. The 
viability study will be updated as part of the plan review process, and this may inform future 
amendments to the percentages and threshold set out in this policy. Further detail on the 
affordable housing viability study and the application of this policy will be set out in a 
Supplementary Planning Document on adoption of the Local Plan. This will identify options 
for delivery such as on site provision (which would be the priority), a mix of on site and off 
site contributions such as commuted sums, and the transfer of free serviced plots to an 
appropriate provider. 
114 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
9.24 The Council  will seek provision of affordable housing on all housing development according 
to the targets set out in policy H7, subject to this being consistent with the economic viability 
of the development. Generally, it will be necessary to provide the affordable homes needed 
on site. However, in some cases, we may allow affordable homes to be built off site, but 
within the local area, where this is beneficial to the affordable housing scheme. The areas 
referred to in the policy are housing sub market areas. 
9.25 To maintain  a stock of affordable homes, it is important that they are not sold or rented at 
market values in the future. We will require a planning obligation to make sure the homes 
remain affordable. 
9.26 The type  and tenure of affordable housing will vary from site to site according to local 
circumstances and will be negotiated between the applicant and the Council. 
9.27 Custom build  and self build will be supported where appropriate. 
9.28 The Council  will look to accommodate starter homes in developments, in accordance with 
relevant Government policy. 
9.29 We recognise  the importance of providing affordable homes in rural settlements that are 
constrained by or washed over by Green Belt. Policy H7 makes provision for rural exception 
sites to be considered. These may in some instances be on the edge of the settlement. Sites 
on the edge of settlements will need to provide acceptable mitigation of their impact on the 
countryside or they will not be considered to be acceptable locations for residential 
development. We will require a planning obligation to make sure the homes remain affordable. 
If provision of some market housing is necessary to make the affordable housing viable, this 
would be considered and would be subject to an open book viability appraisal. 
9.30 The Council  will seek every opportunity to work positively with developers and other partners 
to deliver affordable housing and a mix of houses housing types to meet local needs through 
use of its own land , all available funding opportunities, innovative development models and 
other initiatives. 
115 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Policy H8 Housing Regeneration Areas 
In lower value housing sub markets a range of housing market regeneration programmes will 
be supported aimed at the renewal of poor housing and the revitalisation of the neighbourhoods 
and communities. Lower value housing sub markets which contain some lower value areas/estates 
are: 
North Barnsley and Royston; 
South Barnsley and Worsbrough; 
Hoyland, Wombwell and Darfield; 
Bolton, Goldthorpe and Thurnscoe; and 
Rural East (including Cudworth Principal Town) 
Such support may include: 
Encouraging sustainable housing growth to support creation of an overall balanced housing 
market; 
Addressing the density and mix of housing types and tenure; 
Giving full weight to agreed masterplans produced under housing regeneration area 
programmes; and 
Providing new infrastructure to support the sustainability of communities. 
9.31 Parts of the borough exhibit weak and at times failing housing markets. This is caused by a 
mixture of circumstances including dwelling type, design, tenure and management, the profile 
of demand, and the attractiveness of the community and neighbourhood, as well as the age 
and condition of the dwellings themselves. Falling demand reflects economic decline, but in 
some areas decline has accelerated into a downward spiral. Low demand can be very 
localised to one or two streets in what would generally be perceived as sustainable areas. 
9.32 Parts of South Yorkshire have in the past been established as a Housing Market Renewal 
Pathfinder which provided a framework for planning and implementing extensive housing 
market change in large areas of recognised housing market failure. 
9.33 There are  other areas in the borough which are also recognised as exhibiting similar 
characteristics and which are, or will be, the subject of planned intervention to remedy their 
problems. 
116 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Policy H9 Protection of Existing Larger Dwellings 
Development within the curtilage of existing larger dwellings will be resisted where it will have 
an adverse impact on the setting of the original dwelling, and the size of the remaining garden 
area. 
The loss of existing larger dwellings will be resisted. Support will be given to the re-establishment 
of Houses in Multiple Occupation into single family sized houses. 
9.34 As well as provision as part of our housing mix of some new low density, large dwellings and 
family housing, it is also important to ensure the endurance of existing housing stock of this 
type. In recent years dwelling conversions have been taking place at an increasing rate in 
the borough. These conversions have resulted in a loss of larger homes and an increase in 
the number of smaller homes contributing to the imbalance in the housing stock towards 
smaller homes. This has been a problem particularly in Urban Barnsley around the Town 
Centre. The Government has changed the designation of garden areas from 'brownfield land' 
to 'greenfield land', in an attempt to resist development of additional houses within the curtilage 
of larger homes, known as 'garden grabbing', as this has also had an adverse impact on 
larger housing stock. Often additional dwellings have been built within their curtilage, resulting 
in an adverse impact on the original dwelling. In order to further protect larger homes, we 
will resist the conversion of larger homes into flats and other non self contained housing such 
as Houses in Multiple Occupation and support their re-introduction into family-sized homes. 
Where this conflicts with policy GD1, this policy will take precedence if it maintains the 
existence of a large dwelling. This policy will also take precedence over any infill development 
that would normally be allowed under the Designing New Housing Development SPD, where 
that development would have an adverse impact on an existing large house. We will also 
resist development in gardens of larger dwellings where this will have an adverse impact on 
the original dwelling and its continued function. The definition of 'larger dwelling' will be 
contained in the Designing New Housing Development Supplementary Planning Document. 
117 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
Sites for Gypsies and Travellers 
Policy GT1 Sites for Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
Sites will be allocated to meet the shortfall in provision of permanent sites. The following criteria 
will be used in allocating sites and in determining planning applications: 
In terms of their broad location sites will: 
Have good access to facilities; and 
Be primarily located within urban areas. 
In terms of their specific location the sites will: 
Be in an area of low flood risk; 
Be unaffected by contamination, unless the site can be adequately remediated; 
Have good vehicular and pedestrian access from the highway; 
Provide a good safe living environment with appropriate standards of residential amenity; 
and 
Have no other restrictive development constraints. 
Self-sought provision will be positively considered where it accords with this policy and other 
relevant policies in the Local Plan. 
Transit Sites should provide safe and convenient access to road networks and be located so as 
to cause minimum disruption to surrounding communities. Land contamination, flood risk issues 
and any health and safety risks that may arise for occupants from adjoining land uses, must also 
be considered (especially in regard to children). 
9.35 Barnsley's Gypsy  and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs 
Assessment (GTNA) 2015 identifies a five year requirement of 15 pitches between 2014/15 
and 2018/19. A further annualised requirement of 1.83 pitches can be applied to this figure 
to account for household formation. 
9.36 An emergency  stopping place has been created in the borough to help better management 
of, and reduce the frequency of illegal and unauthorised encampments, which are symptomatic 
of the current shortfall in pitch provision. This meets the identified need for transit pitches 
identified in the GTNA. There is currently no identified need for Travelling Showpeople 
accommodation in Barnsley. 
118 Adopted Local Plan 
9 . Housing 
9.37 Other restrictive  development constraints not covered in the policy may be: 
Ownership issues. 
The scope to provide esential services such as mains water, electricity, drainage and 
sanitation. 
Ground
 stability. 
Other issues that relate to the practicability of development. 
9.38 Appropriate standards  of residential amenity refers to the need to take account of a greater 
emphasis on outdoor living associated with Gypsy and Traveller homes, and the implications 
of this for visual and acoustic privacy. 
9.39 Sites will  be allocated and developed to accommodate unmet need in accordance with the 
above criteria. 
Site Policy GT2 Sites for Travellers 
The following sites are shown on the Policies Map: 
TS1 Land North of Industry Road, Carlton up to 11 pitches; and 
TS2 Burntwood Cottages extension, Brierley 8 pitches. 
These sites are to provide accommodation for Travellers. No other development will be allowed 
on these sites. 
119 
Adopted Local Plan 
10 . Mixed Use Sites 
10.1 The following sites  are proposed for mixed use. The proposed mix of uses are set out in the 
site specific policies below. 
10.2 Where there are  specific issues site specific policies are provided. Where there are no site 
specific details any subsequent planning application will be determined in accordance with 
the Local Plan. 
10.3 All developments  will  be expected to provide adequate access and internal road layouts to 
allow the complete development of the entire site, and to provide appropriate vehicular and 
pedestrian links throughout the site and into adjacent areas. 
10.4 Consideration should be  given to any drains and culverts on the sites. 
120 Adopted Local Plan 
10 . Mixed Use Sites 
Urban Barnsley 
Site MU1 Land south of Barugh Green Road 
The site is proposed for mixed use predominantly for housing and employment. The indicative 
number of dwellings proposed on this site is 1700. These are included in the housing numbers 
for Urban Barnsley in the housing chapter. 
43 ha of employment land is proposed on the site and is included in the employment land figures 
in the Urban Barnsley section of the Economy chapter. 
The development  will be subject to the production and approval of a Masterplan Framework 
covering the entire site which seeks to ensure that the employment land is developed within the 
plan period, that community facilities come forward before completion of the housing and that 
development is brought forward in a comprehensive manner. 
The development  will be expected to: 
Provide a  primary school on the site; 
Ensure that  ground stability and contamination investigations are undertaken prior to 
development commencing and necessary remedial works completed in accordance with 
the phasing plan; 
Provide on  and off site highway infrastructure works, including a link road (Claycliffe Link) 
and improvements at Junction 37 as necessary; 
Provide small  scale convenience retail and community facilities in compliance with Local 
Plan policy TC5 Small Local Shops; 
Retain, buf fer and manage the watercourse, grassland and woodland north-east of Hermit 
Lane; 
Retain, buf fer and manage the species-rich hedgerows and boundary features. Where this 
is not possible transplant hedgerows including root balls and associated soils. A method 
statement for this should be provided and agreed prior to works commencing; 
Create/retain wildlife corridors through/across the site; 
Provide accessible  public open space; 
Ensure that  any sustainable drainage system incorporating above-ground habitats is designed 
from the outset to serve the whole site; 
Give consideration  to the drain/culvert that runs through the site; and 
Include measures  for the protection and retention of the listed milepost on Barugh Green 
Road 500m west of the junction with Claycliffe Road and its immediate setting; and 
121 
Adopted Local Plan 
10 . Mixed Use Sites 
Protect the routes of the Public Rights of Way that cross the site, and make provision for 
these as part of any proposal. 
Archaeological remains  may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying  the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment  of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of  how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
10.5 Where reference  is made to community facilities, these are defined as uses falling outside 
the A use classes and are facilities that will serve the residents and employees of the 
development. They could include a medical centre/doctor’s surgery, childcare facilities, such 
as a crèche/nursery and a community centre/meeting place. 
122 
Adopted Local Plan 
10 . Mixed Use Sites 
Site MU2 Land between Fish Dam Lane and Carlton Road 
This site is proposed for mixed use for housing and a primary school. 
The indicative number of dwellings proposed for this site is 294. These have been included in 
the housing figures for Urban Barnsley in the housing chapter. 
The development will be subject to the production of a phased Masterplan Framework. 
The development will be expected to: 
Respect the setting of the listed Manor Farmhouse and the Carlton Conservation Area 
immediately adjacent to the East by the use of appropriate site layout, sympathetic design 
that reflects the setting, scaling, massing, details and materials; 
Retain the woodland  and grassland to the north west of Manor Street; and 
Retain existing vegetation  on the wildlife corridor adjacent the stream at the south and west 
of the site. 
Archaeological remains  are known/expected to be present on this site therefore proposals must 
be accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the  likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of  the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
123 Adopted Local Plan 
10 . Mixed Use Sites 
Site MU3 Land off Shaw Lane Carlton 
This site is proposed for mixed use for housing and green space. The indicative number of 
dwellings proposed for this site is 1683. These are included in the Housing figures for Urban 
Barnsley in the Housing chapter. 
The development will be subject to the production of a phased Masterplan Framework covering 
the entire site to ensure that development is brought forward in a comprehensive manner. 
The development will be expected to: 
Retain areas of woodland, not affected by the road. Should any part of the existing Wharncliffe 
Woodmoor green space be developed, an area of compensatory biodiversity-value green 
space of equivalent size should be created on the land within site MU3 to the east of the 
existing Wharncliffe Woodmoor green space. Compensatory areas will need to be linked to 
Wharncliffe Woodmoor by wildlife corridors; 
Provide access from Far Field Lane roundabout; 
Provide off site highway works; 
Retain the higher ecological value habitats in the southern part of Wharncliffe Woodmoor 
green space, together with the water courses in the centre of the site with a buffer; 
Provide robust measures to mitigate ecological impact where the construction of the access 
road impacts upon the southern part of the site which has high ecological value and in 
particular woodland blocks; 
Provide robust mitigation measures to mitigate against noise, odour and other potential 
impacts arising from the existing industrial operations at Manor Bakeries and Boulder Bridge; 
Provide small scale convenience retail and community facilities in compliance with Local 
Plan policy TC5 Small Local Shops; and 
Avoid locating built development in parts of the site within flood zone 2 and 3. 
10.6 The following  areas of higher ecological value habitats are of particular importance and should 
be retained: 
The grassland  just South of Shaw Lane, near the centre of the site; 
Boundary vegetation in the northern portion of the site; 
Grassland in the very north east; 
Retain a Wildlife corridor running down the eastern side of the site; and 
Buffer and preserve the habitats of higher ecological value in the part of the site to the 
east of the existing Wharncliffe Woodmoor POS. These areas include: 
124 
Adopted Local Plan 
10 . Mixed Use Sites 
The western and eastern boundaries of this part of the site including the stream 
and woodland; and 
The stream corridor that crosses the north western section of this part of the site. 
Site MU4 Land off Broadway 
This site is proposed for mixed use for housing and green space. The indicative number of 
dwellings proposed for this site is 150. These are included in the housing figures for Urban 
Barnsley in the Housing chapter. 
The development will be expected to provide 3.25 ha of playing pitches; and 
Any layout should take account of the relationship between the new development and existing 
buildings that are not available for redevelopment. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
125 
Adopted Local Plan 
10 . Mixed Use Sites 
Royston 
Site MU5 Land off Lee Lane, Royston Indicative number of dwellings 828 
Planning permission has been granted on this site for 166 dwellings. The indicative number of 
dwellings above relates to the remainder of the site. 
The development will be subject to the production of a Masterplan Framework covering the entire 
site which ensures that development is brought forward in a comprehensive manner. 
The development will be expected to: 
Provide a primary school on site; 
Ensure that access is via the construction of a roundabout on Lee Lane which along with 
the road layouts will allow the development of the entire site; 
Provide a small scale convenience retail facility as part of the development that is in 
compliance with Local Plan policy TC5 Small Local Shops; 
Investigate options for improving public transport access to the development and interventions 
to encourage public transport use by residents; and 
Ensure that hedgerows, the trees at the west side of the site and the strip adjacent to the 
disused railway line at the north of the site are retained, buffered and managed. 
Archaeological remains may be present on this site therefore proposals must be accompanied 
by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including field evaluation if necessary) that must 
include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development 
Wombwell 
Site MU6 Former Wombwell High School, Wombwell 
This site is proposed for mixed use for housing and a primary school. The indicative number of 
dwellings proposed for the site is 250. Two hectares of the site is proposed for a primary school. 
The development will be expected to provide a new access and any necessary highway 
interventions at Lund Hill Road and Park Street. 
126 Adopted Local Plan 
11 . Education 
11.1 We have worked  closely with colleagues in Education to look at the impact that development 
proposed in the Local Plan will have on the capacity of schools across the borough. 
11.2 This work has  indicated pressures in the capacity of Primary Schools, particularly in Barnsley 
Town Centre, Wombwell and North East areas of the borough. The Local Plan proposes to 
allocate the following sites for the future development of primary schools as part of mixed 
use allocations. 
11.3 Please see the  site specific policies in section 10 ‘Mixed Use Sites’: 
MU1 Land South  of Barugh Green Road 
MU2 Land between Fish Dam Lane and Carlton Road 
MU5 Land off Lee Lane Royston 
MU6 Former Wombwell High School, Wombwell 
Further information  is  provided in the infrastructure delivery plan. 
127 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
The Challenge 
Reducing transport related green  house gas emissions 
Supporting sustainable development and  the locations for growth set out in the Local Plan 
Addressing cross boundary transportation  issues 
Reducing the need to  travel, particularly by car. 
Where travel is necessary  
making it easier for  people to travel between home and health, education, leisure, 
countryside and work opportunities within the borough by walking, cycling and public 
transport 
improving direct public transport  and freight links with significant places of business 
and employment outside the borough 
Influencing travel behaviour,  in particular 
encouraging greater take up  of walking, cycling and public transport whilst recognising 
the constraints of existing transport infrastructure, such as narrow roads which can 
make the provision of dedicated cycle routes difficult 
encouraging a healthier lifestyle  to help reduce the high levels of obesity and heart 
disease 
managing car parking 
Increasing the feeling of  safety and security whilst using public transport, walking and cycling 
Ensuring that sustainable and  inclusive travel is embedded within new development 
Reducing the number of  people, particularly children, that are killed or seriously injured on 
our roads 
Reducing the impact of  necessary road travel on the environment, the health and safety of 
the community and the local economy 
The Current Position  
In 2009 Barnsley launched  and continues to develop the 'Care4Air ECO Stars' fleet 
recognition scheme. The scheme encourages operators of buses, coaches, heavy goods 
vehicles and light vans to maximise efficiency and minimise exhaust emissions 
128 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
Barnsley’s bus operators  continue to promote an effective bus network using Barnsley 
Interchange as a hub, to provide links to other bus, rail and taxi services 
The Cudworth and  West Green bypass has now become established as a significant 
component of Barnsley’s highway network including use for ‘express X’ bus services 
A Barnsley Rail  Vision has been prepared which sets out by way of five ‘route packages’ a 
programme of conditional outputs to improve rail services and patronage together with 
referencing the potential of non-rail mass transit for the Dearne Valley to better connect 
Barnsley and Doncaster 
Key bus service  routes between Barnsley and Doncaster via the Dearne Valley are subject 
of a current feasibility study. This will look at targeted infrastructure improvements to improve 
performance of bus services and reduce journey times 
Policy Solutions  
Designating a broad based Accessibility Improvement Zone as the focus of future transport 
investment 
Improving accessibility within  the Principal Towns 
Improving public transport,  walking and cycling links between the Principal Towns 
Improving service links  between Urban Barnsley and the Principal Towns to places on the 
Leeds to Sheffield corridor 
Improving direct links  between London, Manchester, other Core Cities and the Humber Ports 
and keeping abreast of and contributing to major transport infrastructure studies 
Supporting neighbouring authorities  and joint working and establishing an integrated approach 
linking our neighbouring authorities through sub-regional and city regional working 
Protecting disused rail  lines for future reinstatement 
Ensuring that new development is designed and located to be accessible to public transport, 
walking and cycling 
Applying minimum parking  standards for cycles, motorbikes, scooters, mopeds and disabled 
people and maximum car parking standards 
Requiring transport assessments  and travel plans for new development 
Ensuring that new development is designed and built to provide safe, secure and convenient 
access for all road users 
129 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
Setting the scope for Barnsley's parking strategy 
Developing and implementing Air Quality Action Plans 
Working with partners to improve the efficiency of vehicles and goods delivery and reduce 
exhaust emissions  
Providing for effective use of existing transport networks 
Capitalising on Barnsley’s location at the heart of the Trans Pennine Trail 
Transport 
12.1 Barnsley, working  with city region partners and other stakeholders has prepared a Transport 
Strategy for Barnsley which aligns with city region transport strategy and is working to promote 
delivery of interventions associated with its priorities of: 
Economic growth  and strategic connections. 
Inclusion, accessibility and a better quality of life. 
High quality natural environment, local air quality and climate change. 
Safety, security and health. 
12.2 The purpose  of the transport strategy is ‘to identify and prioritise interventions associated 
with sustainable development - transport corridors within and beyond the borough to: 
Deliver the  Barnsley Economic Strategy; 
Implement the  Barnsley Local Plan Accessibility Priorities; 
Fully engage  the Barnsley economy in the city regional, national and international 
economies; and 
Deliver the  Barnsley related transport economic growth, social inclusion, health and 
safety policies and associated investments of the National Planning Policy Framework 
(paragraphs 29-41) and Sheffield / Leeds City Region sustainable transport strategies. 
12.3 Consistent with  the Local Plan the Barnsley Transport Strategy interventions will 
promote sustainable travel and parking options for residents, visitors and business to 
employment locations, attractions, interchanges and also reduce the adverse impact of travel 
on people and the environment. 
130 
Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
The importance of Transport to the Local Plan 
12.4 Reducing the  impact of climate change is a key objective of the Barnsley Local Plan. In 
response to this challenge, the accessibility policies included in the Local Plan and the 
interventions promoted in the Transport Strategy aim to contribute to the reduction in 
transportation related green house gas emissions. 
12.5 The overall  aim for sustainable travel is firstly to reduce the need to travel, but where travel 
is necessary to make it easy for people to move between home, work, health, community 
and leisure facilities by walking, cycling, or where necessary using public transport. We want 
to reduce the need for individuals with a car to use it for these journeys. We also need to 
ensure that everybody has a real alternative option, other than the car. 
12.6 However we  recognise that some journeys will need to be made by road, including the 
movement of freight. Where these journeys are necessary we want to make sure the existing 
road network is used more efficiently, supporting a good bus network, allowing public transport, 
cars and freight to move quickly between their destinations, both within and outside the 
borough. This will have the added benefit of improving local air quality. 
12.7 Achieving these  aims will need us to change our travel behaviour, but by encouraging these 
'smarter choices' and efficient movement, this strategy will also play a part in improving local 
prosperity, health, quality of life and reduce the impact of climate change. It aims to minimise 
the impact of travel on the environment and will help to reduce Barnsley's carbon emissions. 
12.8 These aims  are also reflected in the corporate ambitions which recognise the role 
transportation can play in helping Barnsley to become a strong, healthy and just society. 
Transport has a role in reducing high levels of obesity in all ages including children, by 
facilitating a major increase in walking and cycling through combinations of transport modal 
programmes such as the South Yorkshire Cycling Action Plan increasing the modal share 
of cycling and ‘Lifestyle programmes’, created to improve health and reduce health inequalities 
in Barnsley. 
12.9 The Local  Plan policy framework for transport and the interventions of the Transport Strategy 
by emphasising accessible, inclusive and sustainable travel are consistent with the national 
goals for transport set out in the NPPF and Government investment programmes. 
The existing  and future pattern of transport infrastructure and services 
12.10 Barnsley's existing  transport infrastructure is a consequence of both the historical coal 
economy with more recent adjustments as part of the economic restructuring following the 
ending of coal mining in the 1990’s. 
12.11 Because the  coal mining communities were self contained and coal was transported by rail, 
there was very little demand for travel or transport infrastructure linking the coalfield townships 
(the Principal Towns). The bus network serving the townships was a traditional hub and 
spoke pattern with services solely to Barnsley town centre. Alongside the closure of many 
of our railways in the 1960's, which reflected little rail commuter use at that time, this pattern 
has resulted in a legacy of poor public transport, walking and cycling routes particularly 
between the Principal Towns. 
131 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
12.12 In 2017 a Voluntary Bus Partnership (VBP) was established between the Council, SYPTE 
and bus operators. The VBP by setting out performance standards will seek to promote 
improved bus services and network infrastructure, together with improving the quality of 
vehicles and the passenger experience. 
12.13 During the  immediate post coal economy and to date there have been improvements to the 
highway pattern, public transport and active travel routes. The main elements have been: 
A series of  new roads which have provided direct road access from the M1 and A635 / 
A628 to the employment sites within the Dearne and other coalfield communities such 
as Grimethorpe. 
By pass schemes  for communities originally penetrated by heavy traffic such as Dodworth 
and Cudworth. 
Other roads providing  links between these new roads and established employment areas 
eg Carlton Industrial estate. 
Various localised junction  improvements such as associated with the A61 Quality Bus 
Corridor. 
Bus route rationalisation  and modern buses operating limited stop ‘express’ services 
and concentration of previously less focused / infrequent services on’ corridor’ routes 
together with targeted ‘town’ (every 10 minutes) services. 
Train patronage has  increased and there is now an established inter-regional service 
connecting Barnsley interchange station to Leeds, Wakefield, Sheffield, Chesterfield 
and Nottingham and subject to funding confirmation firm proposals are being promoted 
for improving linespeed on the Barnsley line between Sheffield-Barnsley-Wakefield – 
Leeds. 
Active travel routes  have been increased through the establishment of the Trans Pennine 
long distance trail through Barnsley including using disused railway routes together with 
a vigorous promotion of a ‘Safe Routes to School’ associated with the Building Schools 
for the Future programme. 
12.14 Future investment  in transport infrastructure is being given higher priority nationally and within 
the Sheffield and Leeds City Regions. 
12.15 The Government is  promoting the construction of a completely new high speed railway from 
London to Birmingham and then onward via an eastern leg to Leeds and a western leg to 
Manchester. The route of the eastern leg was confirmed in July 2017 and the route has a 
slight incursion into Barnsley (east of Brierley). Additionally further work is about to get 
underway into the feasibility of HS2 making provision for a HS2 parkway station being located 
to serve the South Yorkshire economy. 
132 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
12.16 Construction is  currently intended to begin within the Local Plan period, with the route 
potentially opening around 2032-33. Whilst services would not become operational until the 
end or beyond the plan period if the decision is taken to proceed then potentially there would 
be a major improvement in advance of that to rail, bus, active travel and highway connections 
to any South Yorkshire station provision. 
12.17 The Government  has now confirmed it currently does not have any plans to fund the routes 
from the original feasibility study of possible active travel routes within the broad HS2 corridor 
nor is HS2 Ltd funded to implement any of the proposals in the study. 
12.18 The long  term planning of major national/North of England highway routes is being progressed 
by a series of Highways England route studies including trans-pennine. The Council and 
other stakeholders will engage with these studies so full account is taken of Barnsley’s needs 
and opportunities. For example a Pan Northern Route (PNR) as included within these studies 
would provide a new strategic highway connecting Manchester (possibly via a proposed 
Trans- Pennine tunnel) with the A1 and Humber Ports, enabling capacity to be released on 
the M62. Several routes are being investigated by the Highways England Trans- Pennine 
Tunnel Study. The new transpennine highway connecting westwards from the M1 would 
provide strategic road network resilience and capacity as well as supporting city region and 
local investment opportunities and growth. In a Highways England July 2016 progress report 
it was confirmed there would be consideration of proposed link connecting the M1 and the 
M18 through Barnsley and Doncaster. 
Development - Transport Priority Corridors 
12.19 Over the  plan period in order to meet the local economic challenges the Barnsley Economic 
Strategy is promoting a change to the pattern, size and character of employment sites. The 
new pattern is characterised by selection of a limited number of locations attractive to the 
private sector able to provide large sites able to accommodate a variety of employment users. 
Those employment sites will either be set within existing development – transport priority 
corridors or will form part of coordinated proposals promoting new development – transport 
priority corridors. 
12.20 Additionally as  part of growing the visitor economy Barnsley will be seeking to both promote 
more vigorously its existing visitor offer but also enhance the attractions as well as increasing 
the range of leisure destinations and hospitality facilities both within the town centre and 
other areas of heritage and cultural interest. 
12.21 In supporting  the Economic Strategy the emerging Transport Strategy will identify and promote 
priority corridors in order to progress sustainable transport provision and patronage as well 
as enthusing and guiding stakeholder investment. The Transport Strategy interventions will 
progressively target priority corridors. These priority corridors as presently envisaged whilst 
they are shown in schematic form by diagrams in the Local Plan are not shown on the Barnsley 
Local Plan Policy Map as they will change over time. The corridors and associated 
interventions will be defined and described in the Transport Strategy documentation. 
133 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
The interaction of the Local Plan and the Transport Strategy 
12.22 The emerging  Transport Strategy will set out priorities for improvements to the existing 
transport infrastructure as well as ensuring that sustainable travel is an integral part of new 
development. It considers sustainable and accessible travel within the Barnsley borough and 
also to places outside of the borough, links which are necessary for Barnsley to fully develop 
its role in the national and city regional economy. 
12.23 The Local  Plan sets out the spatial strategy for the sustainable development and use of land 
within the Borough. Transport infrastructure is both needed to serve the Local Plan policies 
and proposals as well as providing an important consideration for spatial planning as making 
the best use of existing infrastructure is a key component of sustainable development. 
Consequently it is felt appropriate for both the Local Plan and Transport Strategy to have 
common policy priorities. The Barnsley Local Plan transport policy framework is framed 
around the following accessibility priorities. These priorities are also the major policy 
considerations for the interventions set out in the Transport Strategy. 
Policy T1 Accessibility Priorities 
Working with city region partners and other stakeholders transport investment will be set out in 
Transport Strategy programmes focused on development-transport corridors as shown in the 
Accessibility Priorities diagram below to: 
A. Improve sustainable transport and circulation in the Accessibility Improvement Zone (AIZ) 
area particularly between Principal Towns. 
B. Implement transport network improvements as supported by evidence from modelling, 
feasibility studies, consultation, surveys, community engagement etc. 
C. Facilitate sustainable transport links to and from existing and proposed employment, 
interchange, community and leisure and tourism facilities in the borough, including provision 
for car parking and enhancing the non car role of the transport corridor shown on the 
Accessibility Priorities diagram as ‘potential enhanced road based public transport corridor'. 
D. Promote high quality public transport linking the AIZ to significant places of business, 
employment and national / international interchange in the Leeds - Sheffield City Region 
corridor including neighbouring Wakefield, Kirklees, Doncaster, Sheffield and Rotherham. 
E. Improve direct public transport and freight links to London, Manchester, other Core Cities, 
national / international interchanges and the Humber ports. 
134 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
135 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
A. Improve sustainable  transport and circulation in the Accessibility Improvement Zone (AIZ) 
area particularly between Principal Towns 
12.24 The Accessibility  Improvement Zone (AIZ) is directly associated with the main focus of 
development and renewal set out in the Local Plan. Geographically the AIZ is a broad area 
embracing that part of the borough extending eastward from the M1. It reflects the focus of 
growth within the Barnsley Economic Strategy and our location as a key part of the transport 
corridor connecting the Sheffield and Leeds City Regions, as set out in the earlier vision and 
spatial strategy sections. The zone is recognised in city region transport, regeneration and 
housing strategies. By focusing transport investment in this area the Transport Strategy and 
Local Plan supports the delivery of continued sustainable growth set out in the Barnsley 
Economic Strategy. 
12.25 The zone  will enable significant improvement to be made to Barnsley’s sustainable integrated 
transport system focusing on the need to improve passenger and freight connectivity whilst 
encouraging development in the most sustainable locations. The active travel component of 
the emerging Transport Strategy aims to encourage walking and cycling in recognition that 
walking is a healthy, non polluting, versatile and reliable mode of transport available to the 
majority of the population. In addition proposals for active travel (cycleways and footpaths) 
are included in the Green space section of this plan which relates to Local Plan policy GS1 
Green Space. In particular Green Ways are shown on the the Policies Map and are subject 
to policy GS2. Cycleways in Barnsley town centre are considered specifically in the Town 
Centre Area Action Plan. These proposals further develop the award winning 'Safe Routes 
to schools' projects completed and underway as part of the sustainable travel plans for the 
Advanced Learning Centres (ALC's). 
12.26 Sheffield City  Region Transport Strategy and the emerging Transport Strategy will include 
investment in walking, cycling and public transport services. This investment could cover 
physical infrastructure or initiatives to encourage people to make 'smarter choices' about 
how they travel. Development of smarter choices will involve ensuring people have a genuine 
choice of travel mode and are aware of the travel opportunities available to them. Interventions 
will build on existing programmes and might include quality bus corridors, improved capacity 
on existing rail lines, interchanges, smart ticketing, personalised journey planning, promotional 
campaigns, car sharing, flexible working, support for voluntary travel plans and working with 
transport operators to encourage the use of better and cleaner vehicles and routes. We will 
also support the council's commitment to becoming the most accessible market town in Britain 
for disabled people. 
12.27 To encourage  people to make smarter choices, they need to feel safe when walking, cycling 
and using public transport. Improvements might include closed circuit television (CCTV), 
improved lighting, on site customer service staff, replacement of level crossings with 
footbridges and any other measures introduced as part of providing a secure environment. 
Barnsley Interchange, in the town centre shows how clean, safe and secure facilities for 
different forms of transport can be brought together to facilitate non-car journeys. Establishing 
mini or local interchanges would provide an opportunity to improve the travelling experience 
outside of the town centre. However, such facilities require significant investment. Therefore 
as part of the focus on the AIZ we will explore the potential for developing local public transport 
interchanges in the Principal Towns, in partnership with the South Yorkshire Passenger 
Transport Executive (SYPTE). 
136 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
12.28 Alongside public  transport, cycling and walking are key to reducing reliance on the car. We 
are working with SYPTE and existing businesses, education establishments and major 
employers in the borough to encourage the development of voluntary travel plans (see 
paragraph 13.65 for an explanation of what a travel plan is). As part of this process the council 
and local employers have carried out travel surveys showing that considerable numbers of 
staff live within the governments recommended cycle or walking distance from their place of 
work. However, levels of walking and cycling within the borough are low with under 500 trips 
per day into the central area, and very few people cycling in to work. This demonstrates the 
impact that implementing travel plan recommendations can have in delivering smarter choices. 
We will continue to work with the SYPTE Travel Advice teams who provide valuable support 
to employers developing travel plans. 
B. Implement transport  network improvements as supported by evidence from modelling, 
feasibility studies, consultation, surveys, community engagement etc. 
12.29 The T ransport Strategy and Barnsley Local Plan is informed by a multi modal district transport 
model to identify impacts of development and to identify and test interventions across all 
modes of transport. These could include public transport options such as quality bus corridors, 
rail or road improvements. Barnsley’s model is compatible with the models of other authorities 
in South Yorkshire and the approach advocated by the Department for Transport. There is 
also a micro-simulation model for the Town Centre. 
12.30 The district  transport model is essentially a bespoke computer simulation which contains the 
accumulated transport 'knowledge' of the borough, including traffic flows, origin and destination 
data, public transport and development. The Transport Strategy includes provision for its 
continuing validity for informing policy development, option testing and design. 
C. Facilitate sustainable  transport links to and from existing and proposed employment, 
interchange, community and leisure and tourism facilities in the borough, including enhancing 
the non car role of the transport corridor shown on the Accessibility Priorities diagram as the 
‘potential enhanced road based public transport corridor' 
12.31 The emerging  Transport Strategy and its delivery initiatives will increase the number of places, 
neighbourhoods and development sites in immediate proximity to the 'core bus network'.
(5)Also as part of the emerging Transport Strategy a parking strategy will be developed that 
will help influence people's sustainable travel choices. 
12.32 In partnership  with transport operators, employers and other partners the Council and SYPTE 
have promoted a stronger corridor approach to bus service provision including identifying 
and facilitating sustainable links between the Principal Towns and employment, community 
and leisure and tourism facilities as a priority, including the Peak District National Park. 
5 The 'Core  bus network' has been identified by SYPTE as the bus route network made up of stops having at least six services per hour. 
137 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
D. Promote high  quality public transport linking the AIZ to significant places of business, 
employment and national / international interchange in the Leeds - Sheffield City Region 
corridor including neighbouring Wakefield, Kirklees, Doncaster, Sheffield and Rotherham 
12.33 For Barnsley's  economy  to realise its full growth potential we need to improve our strategic 
links (connectivity), as well as our internal accessibility. The diagram below summarises our 
key strategic links ‘desires’. 
12.34 Whilst we can  address these issues to some degree, the delivery of improvements will depend 
upon working effectively with our city region partners and external service providers. For 
instance, railway services are provided by a franchising process. Therefore the ability to 
provide direct services to locations outside the borough will be influenced by aspirations of 
stakeholders including the council, city region partners and other stakeholders. 
138 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
139 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
12.35 The now  abolished RSS identified a number of significant centres within the Yorkshire and 
Humber region including the regional cities of Leeds, Bradford, Sheffield and Hull, and a 
number of subregional towns and cities including Barnsley and its neighbours Wakefield, 
Huddersfield,Rotherham and Doncaster. Good connectivity to these centres is still relevant. 
12.36 It is important that Barnsley's Transport Strategy is set in the context of the Leeds and Sheffield 
City Regions, considering areas of proposed growth and sustainable options for movement 
between them, because of the strong economic connections between them. We know that 
Barnsley's population does not carry out all of its journeys within Barnsley borough, particularly 
when travelling to work. 
12.37 Therefore we  will promote strengthening of public transport services and infrastructure within 
the Leeds and Sheffield city region corridors and to work with our city region partners to 
deliver improvements. In particular, direct transport links between the AIZ and our neighbouring 
sub-regional and principal towns need to be improved. Accessibility and connectivity 
improvements in these corridors will support the significant housing and employment growth 
planned. 
E. Improve direct  public transport and freight links to London, Manchester, other Core Cities, 
national / international interchanges and the Humber ports. 
12.38 It is important that Barnsley has both efficient freight transport and direct public transport 
links to London and the core cities to ensure that it can develop its role and potential in the 
national and city regional economy. 
12.39 There is potential for these links to be made using a combination of travel modes, including 
rail and bus based services. It is important that freight operators are able to transport their 
goods as efficiently as possible, using rail where appropriate, but otherwise the strategic 
highway networks. Barnsley and its Principal Towns are well located in relation to the regional 
and national motorway network via the M1 and A1 and should a Pan Northern Route as 
described above be added this will further enhance its strategic road connectivity. Similarly 
Barnsley will seek to secure local benefits from HS2 and TfN’s rail initiatives. The Council will 
seek to grasp all opportunities to improve freight links and to place Barnsley more directly 
on the national and regional rail, coach and bus based networks serving London, Manchester, 
other Core Cities and the Humber Ports. Through the Transport Strategy/ Barnsley Rail Vision 
and any updates we will work with delivery partners to consider and promote opportunities 
for improved public transport connections including a role for Barnsley Interchange and other 
interchanges to increase the number of national and regional bus and rail services serving 
Barnsley. 
12.40 As referred  to above there are a number of national and regional initiatives outside the scope 
of the Local Plan which have significant potential to add value to Barnsley Local Plan policies 
and transport interventions. In the longer term it is possible that a number of future changes 
to rail services may arise from the: 
Construction of a new national high speed rail route and stations between London and 
the north of England. 
Network Rail Long  Term Planning process and associated route studies. 
140 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
Sheffield City Region infrastructure investments. 
Future Highways  England national route studies. 
12.41 The Government is  promoting the construction of a completely new high speed railway from 
London to Birmingham and then onward via an eastern leg to Leeds and a western leg to 
Manchester. The Government’s preferred route, depots and stations consultation proposals 
show a route serving Leeds and York via a new line entering South Yorkshire alongside the 
M1/M18 motorways before skirting immediately to the east of Barnsley Borough (includes a 
slight incursion into Barnsley east of Brierley) through Doncaster and Wakefield and serving 
stations at Leeds and York together with services to Sheffield Midland station via a spur from 
HS2 and depots at Staveley and Leeds. Additionally HS2 in liaison with other stakeholders 
including Barnsley MBC are assessing the case for a HS2 South Yorkshire Parkway station. 
The Government has confirmed a first tranche of UK Growth Strategy funding for Sheffield 
LEP to support maximising the benefits of HS2. Barnsley has 10 stations all with services to 
Sheffield Midland and 7 with services to Leeds station. Barnsley MBC will assess the ways 
HS2 and its related investments can support the economic and accessibility priorities of the 
Local Plan. 
12.42 We recognise  that our own aspirations for improving connectivity rely heavily on sub regional 
improvements being made at key transport hubs such as Leeds, Sheffield, Wakefield and 
Doncaster stations. For example to improve our strategic accessibility as stated above in 
relation to HS2 and also through other initiatives such as those promoted by Transport for 
the North, Sheffield and Leeds City Region stakeholders etc we need to work with partners 
to maximise benefits from initiatives outside Barnsley. We will continue to support neighbouring 
authorities and contribute to an integrated, joint working approach linking through sub regional 
and city regional working. 
12.43 The reinstatement  of former railway lines may also play a longer term role in improving our 
transport connections, providing further opportunity for both freight and passenger lines and 
supporting continued sustainable development beyond the Local Plan period. The importance 
of safeguarding these lines within the Local Plan is recognised in Policy T2 below 
Policy T2 Safeguarding of Former Railway Lines 
We will safeguard land within and adjacent to existing and historical rail alignments to 
accommodate the potential reinstatement of former strategic railway lines. Their historical routes 
will be shown on the Policies Map. 
Where it is not possible to use the original alignment we will work with our delivery partners to 
identify any appropriate alternative routes. 
141 
Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
12.44 It is important for us to safeguard the routes of former strategic rail lines for potential 
reinstatement because: 
Reinstatement would provide  for continuing the growth associated with a robust 
sustainable transport framework beyond the plan period. The reinstatement of these 
lines is not required to serve the Local Plan proposals and timescales. 
The Local Plan  is strengthening economic and housing focus of the Principal Towns to 
the east of Barnsley within the Leeds to Sheffield transport corridors. Improved rail links 
will support sustainable transport links between these towns, and the Leeds, Sheffield 
and Manchester City Regions. 
In earlier plans  Network Rail have advised that the substantial passenger growth 
envisaged over the next 10 years in the Yorkshire and Humber RUS, and the increasing 
passenger and freight congestion on lines from Leeds to the south east will strengthen 
support for reopening of lines(including as part of maintenance diversionary work) such 
as the former Cudworth railways. 
The Network Rail  Yorkshire and Humber RUS included specific reference to the 
reinstatement of the Barnsley to Doncaster and former Cudworth railways in the post 
2019 period. 
The South Y orkshire Rail Strategy includes specific reference to the reinstatement of 
the Barnsley to Doncaster and the former Cudworth (referred to as Barnsley Growth 
Corridor) Railways. 
The existing national  and regional rail network is reaching capacity and additional north 
south and transpennine lines will be required. 
Transpennine corridors are  important to the the growth of North of England productivity, 
both in terms of passenger and freight transport. 
Currently the railhead  at Monk Bretton, used by the glass industry, is the only dedicated 
freight link in Barnsley. 
Reinstatement of the former Cudworth line may have particular benefits as providing 
options for relieving capacity on freight and passenger routes. 
Reinstating rail infrastructure  to modern standards can provide for modern deep sea 
freight containers, which are significantly larger than the traditional, predominantly bulk 
freight wagons used for carrying steel and coal. 
12.45 The former  Barnsley Doncaster and Cudworth line railways are indicated on the Rail 
Connectivity and Safeguarded Routes diagram below. Other safeguarding provisions are 
shown on the Policies Map. 
142 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
143 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
Policy T3 New Development and Sustainable Travel 
New development will be expected to: 
Be located and designed to reduce the need to travel, be accessible to public transport and 
meet the needs of pedestrians and cyclists; 
Provide at least the minimum levels of parking for cycles, motorbikes, scooters, mopeds 
and disabled people set out in the relevant Supplementary Planning Document; 
Provide a transport statement or assessment in line with guidance set out in the National 
Planning Policy Framework and guidance including where appropriate regard for cross 
boundary local authority impacts; and 
Provide a travel plan statement or a travel plan in accordance with guidance set out in the 
National Planning Policy Framework including where appropriate regard for cross boundary 
local authority impacts. Travel plans will be secured through a planning obligation or a 
planning condition. 
Where levels of accessibility through public transport, cycling and walking are unacceptable, we 
will expect developers to take action or make financial contributions in accordance with policy 
I1. 
If it is not possible or appropriate for the minimum amount of parking for cycles, motorbikes, 
scooters and mopeds to be met on site, the developer must provide, or contribute towards, off-site 
parking, or improve or provide other forms of travel. 
12.46 A fundamental goal of  Barnsley's Local Plan is to provide for sustainable development and 
it includes a spatial strategy that reduces the need to travel by promoting growth in sustainable, 
accessible locations. This policy is about ensuring that sustainable and inclusive travel is 
embedded within any new development and providing the opportunities for people to change 
their travel behaviour where travel is necessary. It recognises that the availability of car 
parking is a key factor affecting whether people choose to travel by car or use a smarter 
alternative and aims to limit car parking associated with new development whilst providing 
appropriate facilities for cycles, motorbikes, scooters, mopeds and disabled people. This is 
balanced with the considerations of highway safety, living conditions and the economy, and 
the need to provide enough parking so people can use other forms of transport than the car. 
12.47 We will produce a  Supplementary Planning Document which will set out maximum standards 
of parking for broad classes of development within Urban Barnsley and the Principal Towns 
and will explain how we will decide the level of parking for particular developments. 
Transport assessments and travel  plans for new development 
12.48 The need for transport  assessments and travel plans, for all forms of development will be 
determined in accordance with government guidance. 
144 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
12.49 A transport  assessment 'is a comprehensive and systematic process that sets out transport 
issues relating to a proposed development. It identifies what measures (such as travel plans) 
will be taken to address the anticipated transport impacts of the scheme and to improve 
accessibility, and to encourage sustainable modes of travel.(6) 
12.50 When considering whether  a transport assessment will be needed, we must take account of 
local circumstances. For example, if there are significant local transport difficulties, we may 
need to carry out an assessment for developments below the thresholds in the guidance. 
However, where a proposed development is expected to generate relatively low numbers of 
trips or traffic flows, with minor transport impacts, a less detailed transport statement may 
be sufficient. 
12.51 The contents  of a transport assessment will depend on the size, nature and location of a 
development, but in all cases the transport mitigation plans or package of measures should 
focus on maximising sustainable accessibility to the development and should show: 
Consideration of reducing  the need to travel. 
How accessible the  development is by all forms of transport. 
Whether the site access can deal with the predicted level of traffic. 
Measures to reduce  the negative impacts of transport. 
What measures can  be taken to encourage travel by walking, cycling and public transport. 
Mitigation measures avoiding  unnecessary physical highway improvements and promoting 
innovative and sustainable transport solutions. 
12.52 Where appropriate,  developers will be expected to use our multi modal transportation models 
to estimate the effects of new developments on the transport network and to confirm that 
submitted transport assessments are accurate. 
12.53 A travel plan will normally be required alongside planning applications that are likely to have 
significant transport implications, alongside a full transport assessment. A travel plan statement 
may be required on smaller scale developments which are expected to have minor travel 
impacts, particularly where specific concerns are raised in a transport statement or 
assessment. 
12.54 A travel plan is a long-term management strategy for an occupier or site that seeks to deliver 
sustainable transport objectives through positive action and is articulated in a document that 
is regularly reviewed. It involves developing a set of procedures, schemes and targets that 
encourage people to use sustainable forms of transport, and should: 
Be site specific.  
Contain both measures addressing site design, infrastructure and new services, as well 
as marketing, promotion and awareness raising. 
6 PPG T ransport Assessments Travel Plans 
145 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
Provide a package of measures integrated into the design and use of the development. 
Encourage walking,  cycling and public transport use and facilitate disabled access. 
Restrict on-site  car-parking spaces. 
Include arrangements  for managing the process. 
12.55 The travel  plan is an important tool in implementing measures to influence travel behaviour. 
It should demonstrate a firm commitment by developers and occupiers to reduce the number 
of trips generated by, or attracted to their site. By encouraging walking and cycling in particular, 
travel plans can contribute to a healthier lifestyle, reducing obesity and improving quality of 
life. Highways England will work with us to advise developers how to prepare, implement, 
monitor, review and update travel plans to support their development and will consider 
tri-partite agreements with the council and developers where appropriate. Highways England 
has developed toolkits of Active Traffic Management and Integrated Demand Management 
which can be used to regulate traffic on the National Strategic Road Network. These 
interventions are preferred to capacity improvements. 
12.56 The Council  will also work with partners such as SYPTE and Highways England to ensure 
a consistent approach for the preparation, implementation and monitoring of travel plans. 
Policy T4 New development and Transport Safety 
New development will be expected to be designed and built to provide all transport users within 
and surrounding the development with safe, secure and convenient access and movement. 
If a development is not suitably served by the existing highway, or would create or add to problems 
of safety or the efficiency of the highway or any adjoining rail infrastructure for users, we will 
expect developers to take mitigating action or to make a financial contribution to make sure the 
necessary improvements go ahead. Any contributions will be secured through a planning obligation 
or planning condition. 
12.57 With over  3,000 killed or seriously injured on the UK's roads every year road safety is a major 
concern for communities across the UK. There were 5952 casualties in collisions on roads 
in South Yorkshire in 2007, a 4.7% decrease on the 2006 level. The emotional cost to families 
of serious and sometimes fatal injuries, and the pressure on local health resources are of 
particular concern. 
12.58 Whilst all  applications will be expected to meet the sustainable travel criteria in policy T3 
there will be occasions where improvements to the existing highway network are also required. 
We are responsible for making sure the borough’s streets are safe for everyone using them. 
When new developments are built, we make sure any new roads are up to standard and that 
people using the new development can do so safely and without negatively affecting existing 
roads. They must be designed and built to provide safe, secure and convenient access for 
all road users, which will include pedestrians, cyclists, people with special needs and people 
with mobility problems. In doing so we will support the long term aspirations of the South 
146 
Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
Yorkshire Road Safety and Casualty Reduction Strategy (delivered through the LTP) which 
focuses on the need to achieve further reductions in casualties, focusing on vulnerable road 
users including children and motorcyclists, and on local areas where road safety is a known 
problem. 
12.59 If a development is not suitably served by the existing highway, or would create or add to 
highway safety problems (including at railway level crossings) or would adversely affect the 
efficiency of the highway we will refuse planning permission, unless the developer agrees to 
take full responsibility for any necessary improvements or measures to upgrade the highway 
network to a suitable standard. Under the Highways Act, the developer may need to create 
and maintain new roads or improve existing ones. 
Policy T5 Reducing the Impact of Road Travel 
We will reduce the impact of road travel by: 
Developing and implementing robust, evidence based air quality action plans to improve air 
quality; 
Working with our sub regional partners, fleet and freight operators to improve the efficiency 
of vehicles and goods delivery, and reduce exhaust emissions; and 
Implementing measures to ensure the current road system is used efficiently. 
12.60 Where it is necessary to travel, it is important that our strategy includes measures to reduce 
the impact of those journeys on the environment, the health and safety of the community 
and on the local economy. 
12.61 Traffic volumes  in both South and West Yorkshire are rising, and journey times in Barnsley 
are increasing, despite Local Transport Plan measures aimed at stemming that growth. 
Rising traffic levels are also having a detrimental impact on the efficiency of our road network 
and are increasingly likely to effect the borough’s economic performance. Congestion costs 
money and affects economic performance, costing UK businesses an estimated £17billlon 
per annum (CBI). 
12.62 Goods such  as food, clothes, furniture and construction materials are a vital part of modern 
life which we depend upon the freight industry to deliver every day. The stability and growth 
of local businesses relies on just-in-time delivery, if they are to be competitive. Manufacturing, 
power stations, construction sites and retail establishments need materials to be delivered 
promptly ready to meet customer demand. With the development of the Internet, goods can 
increasingly be delivered directly to our homes at a time when we are available to receive 
them. As a result of this increasing consumer demand, freight vehicles are contributing to 
the rising levels of traffic on our roads, adding to the levels of noise, congestion, air pollution 
and accidents, as well as greenhouse gas emissions. 
147 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
12.63 This rise in  road traffic is affecting our environment and health and is contributing to a 
deterioration in air quality reflected by the declaration of 6 traffic related Air Quality 
Management Areas in the borough. 
12.64 We have already  outlined how the Transport Strategy and Local Transport Plan will promote 
sustainable development and encourage people to make smarter choices by providing 
opportunities to change travel behaviour, with genuine travel choices which have less 
environmental impact and which do not add to traffic levels. The health benefits of active 
travel, such as cycling and walking are also well known. Walking and cycling can make a 
major contribution to our Healthy Weight Strategy, helping to reduce the high levels of obesity 
incidences of respiratory illness. Our aspirations to improve connectivity will also give freight 
operators an opportunity to transport their goods as efficiently as possible using rail where 
appropriate. This policy sets out how we intend to work with partners to ensure that we use 
our local strategic highway network efficiently, manage congestion and thereby reduce traffic 
pollution. 
12.65 We will also  continue to work to minimise the impact of air pollution on human health both 
within the AQMA's and in the borough generally. To this end we are currently updating our 
Air Quality Action Plan (initially published in 2004) to accommodate measures to improve air 
quality in the additional AQMA's that have been declared since 2004. 
12.66 For those journeys  where road travel, including freight, is necessary we will work alongside 
other initiatives including the Local Transport Plan to reduce transport related carbon 
emissions. To help reduce the number of freight vehicles on the roads and to promote 
efficient use of the road network to deliver goods we are intending to investigate the possibility 
of locating a freight consolidation centre within the borough, with careful consideration given 
to minimising related noise and amenity issues. Such a centre would provide the facility to 
enable smaller loads to be combined and moved on as one unit in a single delivery. 
12.67 Recognising the importance  of minimising exhaust emissions from major vehicle fleets serving 
the borough, we have worked with the other South Yorkshire local authorities to successfully 
launch the 'Care4Air ECO Stars' scheme. We will continue to work in partnership to develop 
the scheme which rewards organisations who are minimising pollution by developing measures 
to reduce the level of fuel used, improve driver training and develop vehicle replacement 
programmes to ensure vehicles are running cleanly and efficiently. 
12.68 In line with  national, Transport for the North (TfN) and regional frameworks we are working 
with our sub regional partners to support freight initiatives to balance the needs of local 
businesses, minimise congestion and improve air quality. Partnership working will involve 
freight industry stakeholders facilitated by City Region and Transport for the North (TfN) 
programmes and mechanisms. It will consider issues including journey times, routes, highway 
improvements to ease congestion, road safety, and the design of new development (especially 
retail proposals) to adequately accommodate delivery vehicles. 
The National  Strategic  Highway Network 
12.69 Highways England is  responsible for the management of the national strategic highway 
network on behalf of the Secretary of State for Transport. In Barnsley this includes part of 
the M1 between junction 35A and junction 38 and the A61 (T) and the A616. The M1 has 
148 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
dual three lane capacity through the district and all M1 junctions are grade separated. The 
A61(T) is an all-purpose trunk road with a dual two lane carriageway and at grade junctions 
that connect the M1 junction 36 with the A616(T), within Sheffield. 
12.70 The M1 and A61 (T) within the Barnsley borough generally have sufficient capacity for traffic 
demands although there are speed stress issues on the A616. Highways England introduced 
ramp metering at M1 junctions 35 and 35A southbound on-slip roads as a means of regulating 
the flow of traffic onto the motorway at times of peak demand. Operational conditions on the 
strategic road and local highway networks and the potential implications of new developments 
will be kept under review and the most up to date information will inform decisions about 
proposals for development. 
12.71 A ‘managed  motorway’ initiative for the M1 in South Yorkshire (Junctions 32 to 35A) and 
West Yorkshire (Junctions 39 to 42) is nearing completion. Highways England has identified 
a similar scheme for M1 Junctions 35A to 39 for inclusion in the post 2021 investment 
programme. The current Road Investment Strategy includes investment for dualling the 
A61(T) in Barnsley by 2021. 
12.72 These enhancements  will increase capacity for strategic traffic and relieve existing traffic 
delays. Paragraph 18 of Circular 02/02013 states ' capacity enhancements and infrastructure 
required to deliver strategic growth should be identified at the Local Plan stage, which provides 
the best opportunity to consider development aspirations alongside the associated 
infrastructure needs’. 
The role  of computer based traffic management 
12.73 We will continue to develop computer based traffic management systems including our 
partnership within the South Yorkshire Intelligent Transport Systems (SYITS) to help manage 
traffic on the road network more efficiently. SYITS is an £11m European Regional 
Development Fund initiative aimed at enhancing Intelligent Transport System (ITS) capabilities 
across the county. It will provide central facilities for collecting, processing and accessing 
real-time traveller information throughout South Yorkshire and in Barnsley has already funded 
the following: 
A strategic transport  modelling upgrade. 
A network of  cameras to monitor journey times on key routes. 
Upgrades to our urban traffic control system which will enable the future use of variable 
message and car park guidance signs. 
Installation of bus priority equipment at traffic signals. 
Improvements to a number of traffic signal junctions. 
Optimisation of urban traffic control. 
149 Adopted Local Plan 
12 . Transport 
Real Time Passenger  Information on the bus network across South and West Yorkshire, 
giving major benefits for bus passengers within and across boundaries. 
A consultancy report  on the future development of intelligent transport systems in 
Barnsley. 
150 Adopted Local Plan 
13 . Local Character 
The Challenge 
Encouraging the community to expect, demand and appreciate high quality urban 
environments 
Achieving sustainable development 
Insisting on excellent design 
Protecting local distinctiveness 
The Current Position 
Design Review Panel of major pre-application and application proposals 
Design and Access Statements are submitted with planning applications to demonstrate 
how the application conforms with the Development Plan, is sustainable, well designed and 
inclusive 
Landscape Character Assessment 
Protecting what is distinctive about Barnsley's landscape 
Policy Solutions 
Requiring developers to embrace good design and protect and enhance the historic 
environment 
Encouraging developers to work in partnership with organisations such as the Barnsley Civic 
Trust, community and schools partnerships and other local relevant organisations in 
forwarding proposals 
Undertaking pre-application discussions 
Using the advice of the Design Advisory Panels on major projects to secure improvements 
to schemes coming forward and to achieve the best design solutions 
Building the capacity of the community to appreciate and expect higher standards of design 
by involving them in decisions and consulting them on proposals and strategies 
Producing local design guidance such as SPDs, village design statements, planning and 
design briefs and master plans 
Protecting important landscapes both directly and indirectly by ensuring their settings and 
key views are respected and not subject to inappropriate development 
Respecting the character of the landscape using the Landscape Character Assessment 
151 Adopted Local Plan 
13 . Local Character 
Policy D1 High Quality Design and Place Making 
Design Principles: 
Development
 is expected to be of high quality design and will be expected to respect, take 
advantage of and reinforce the distinctive, local character and features of Barnsley, including: 
Landscape character, topography, green infrastructure assets, important habitats, woodlands 
and other natural features; 
Views and vistas  to key buildings, landmarks, skylines and gateways; and 
Heritage and townscape  character including the scale, layout, building styles and materials 
of the built form in the locality. 
Through its  layout and design development should: 
Contribute to place making and be of high quality, that contributes to a healthy, safe and 
sustainable environment; 
Complement and enhance  the character and setting of distinctive places, including Barnsley 
Town Centre, Penistone, rural villages and Conservation Areas; 
Help to transform  the character of physical environments that have become run down and 
are lacking in distinctiveness; 
Provide an accessible  and inclusive environment for the users of individual buildings and 
surrounding spaces; 
Provide clear and  obvious connections to the surrounding street and pedestrian network; 
Ensure ease of movement and legibility for all users, ensure overlooking of streets, spaces 
and pedestrian routes through the arrangement and orientation of buildings and the location 
of entrances; 
Promote safe, secure  environments and access routes with priority for pedestrians and 
cyclists; 
Create clear distinctions  between public and private spaces; 
Display architectural quality  and express proposed uses through its composition, scale, 
form, proportions and arrangement of materials, colours and details; 
Make the best use of high quality materials; 
Include a comprehensive  and high quality scheme for hard and soft landscaping; and 
Provide high quality  public realm. 
152 Adopted Local Plan 
13 . Local Character 
In terms of place making development should make a positive contribution to achieving qualities 
of a successful place such as character, legibility, permeability and vitality. 
13.1 As set out in the National Planning Policy Framework, the Government attaches great 
importance to the design and quality of the built environment, stating that ‘it is important to 
plan positively for the achievement of high quality and inclusive design for all development, 
including individual buildings, public and private spaces and wider area development schemes.’ 
13.2 In terms of place making the quality of places has a major influence on the quality of life for 
people living and working in the borough. Through high quality and sustainable design 
developers should be able to create strong, locally-distinctive places that are safe, inclusive 
and accessible to all, that promote social interaction and a healthy and active lifestyle. 
13.3 Inclusiveness and  accessibility need to be considered from an early stage of design, preferably 
including consultation with a wide range of potential users. 
13.4 The components  of a development, including its integration with its surroundings and its mix, 
layout and form, will be assessed to ensure that development makes a positive contribution 
to achieving the qualities of a successful place. 
13.5 Development should  take account of the following design standards and guidance (and any 
future updates of these) which will be used (but not exclusively) to help assess the quality 
of design: 
Building for  Life 12 (for residential developments of 10 or more dwellings). 
Secured By Design/ Safer Places- the Planning System and Crime Prevention. 
Manual for Streets (for residential developments). 
Manual for Streets 2- Wider Application of the Principles (which takes this guidance 
beyond just residential developments). 
The South Yorkshire Residential Design Guide. 
13.6 The Public  Spaces Strategy and the Building Heights Study provide additional evidence for 
design decisions in Barnsley Town Centre. Inset map 8 illustrates the strategy for tall buildings 
in Barnsley Town Centre. 
13.7 Supplementary Planning  Documents also provide guidance on specific design issues. 
Policy LC1 Landscape Character 
Development will be expected to retain and enhance the character and distinctiveness of the 
individual Landscape Character area in which it is located (as set out in the Landscape Character 
Assessment of Barnsley Borough 2002 and any subsequent amendments). 
Development which would be harmful to the special qualities of the Peak District National Park 
will not be allowed. 
153 
Adopted Local Plan 
13 . Local Character 
13.8 The 1996  Countryside Agency/English Nature publication 'The Character of England -
landscapes, wildlife  and natural features' provides a framework identifying unique landscape 
character areas nationally, and was refined in 1999 by 'Countryside Character Volume 3: 
Yorkshire and the Humber'. 
13.9 These documents  provide a framework into which the 'Landscape Character Assessment of 
Barnsley Borough' fits. This was carried out in 2002 and updated in 2016 to provide a complete 
statement of landscape character and quality across the borough and to give a better 
understanding of the landscape types, their quality and character and how they combine with 
each other. 
13.10 The assessment  divides Barnsley into 6 character types (unenclosed moorland, upland river 
valleys, lowland river floors, settled arable slopes, settled wooded farmland and upland 
farmland) and 17 geographical landscape character areas which are shown on the Landscape 
Character Area Map. 
13.11 All new development should be in keeping with the surrounding landscape and reflect the 
character, materials and details of the local area. We will pay particular attention to 
development in prominent positions, for example, by waterside locations, within Conservation 
Areas and on the edge of towns and villages where it is important to maintain a clear distinction 
between urban areas and the countryside and to ensure that development is not obtrusive 
in the skyline. 
13.12 We will also seek opportunities for the conservation, management and enhancement of 
landscape character through development and land management. 
13.13 Given the  close relationship between the west of the borough and the Peak District National 
Park,it is important to recognise the special qualities of the National Park need to be protected 
from development in Barnsley which could cause harm. Planning permission will not be 
granted for development that is considered to be harmful to the valued characteristics of the 
national park. The Peak District National Park Landscape Strategy will aid this consideration 
as it recognises the flow of landscape beyond the boundary of the National Park. The Council 
will refer to Section 62(2) of the Environment Act in determining when it is appropriate to 
consult the Peak Park on development proposals which may cause harm or where there is 
doubt as to whether or not the proposal would cause harm. 
13.14 We will produce a Supplementary Planning Document on Landscape Character to provide 
more detailed guidance on how to assess the impact of development on the landscape. The 
Landscape Character Assessment was carried out in 2002 . This was reviewed in 2016 to 
inform the Local Plan. The former Countryside Agency 2002 guidelines are still current. 
154 Adopted Local Plan 
14 . Historic Environment 
The Challenge 
Managing and conserving the  historic environment and its assets 
Protecting local character and  a sense of place by recognising the social, cultural, and 
economic contribution made by the historic environment 
The Current Position  
18 designated Conservation Areas  
23 Scheduled Ancient Monuments,  and 671 Listed Buildings including 13 Grade I , 30 Grade 
II* , and 628 Grade II 
5 entries on the  register of parks and gardens: the only grade I historic park and garden in 
South Yorkshire at Wentworth Castle together with Stainborough Park and 4 grade II historic 
parks and gardens at: Wortley Hall, Cannon Hall, Bretton Hall (part only) and Locke Park 
Barnsley 
6 Scheduled Ancient Monuments,  3 Listed Buildings, 3 Listed Places of Worship and 1 
Conservation Area are identified 'at risk' (13) 
A regionally and nationally  important legacy of buildings and structures associated with the 
industrial past including coal mining, metalworking, textiles and glass making 
The valued landscapes in  the west of the borough and neighbouring Peak District National 
Park and Southern Pennine Fringe 
Policy Solutions  
Requiring all developers to  embrace good design which protects and enhances the 
significance of the historic environment and its heritage assets 
Encouraging developers to work  in partnership with organisations such as the Barnsley Civic 
Trust, community and schools partnerships and other local relevant organisations in 
forwarding proposals. Also engaging the public to identify what is important about their local 
area that should be protected 
Undertaking pre-application discussions 
Producing local design guidance  such as character appraisals, design guides, heritage 
schemes, conservation area statements and management plans that identify what is special 
and what should be maintained or enhanced 
Ensuring historic 'at risk' buildings, sites, or places receive particular attention to ensure 
they have an identified path to safeguard their long term future 
155 Adopted Local Plan 
14 . Historic Environment 
Securing a sustainable future for the important legacy of buildings and structures including 
those associated with Barnsley's industrial past by ensuring our historic assets are 
appreciated and appropriately managed 
Protecting important landscapes both directly and indirectly by ensuring their settings and 
their key views are respected and not subject to inappropriate development 
Policy HE1 The Historic Environment 
We will positively encourage developments which will help in the management, conservation, 
understanding and enjoyment of Barnsley’s historic environment, especially for those assets 
which are at risk 
This will be achieved by:-
a. Supporting proposals which conserve and enhance the significance and setting of the 
borough’s heritage assets, paying particular attention to those elements which contribute 
most to the borough’s distinctive character and sense of place. 
These elements and assets include:-
The nationally significant industrial landscapes of the Don Valley which includes Wortley 
Top Forge and its associated water management system. 
Elsecar Conservation Village, its former ironworks and its workshops which were once part 
of the Fitzwilliam Estate. 
A number of important 18th and 19th century designed landscapes and parks including 
Wentworth Castle parkland (the only grade I Registered Park and Garden in South Yorkshire), 
and Cannon Hall Park. 
The well preserved upstanding remains of the Cluniac and Benedictine monastery at Monk 
Bretton. 
18 designated conservation areas of special and architectural interest including three town 
centre conservation areas, as well as large areas incorporating Stainborough Park, 
Cawthorne, Penistone and Thurlstone. 
The 17th century Rockley Blast Furnace and its later engine house. 
Gunthwaite Hall Barn, a large 16th century timber framed barn. 
Barnsley Main Colliery Engine House and Pithead structures. 
The 17th century Worsbrough Mill (the only historic working water mill in South Yorkshire). 
156 
Adopted Local Plan 
14 . Historic Environment 
Relatively widespread evidence of pre-historic settlements, and occupation which are often 
archaeological and below ground but sometimes expressed as physical or topographic 
features. 
The boroughs  more rural western and Pennine fringe characterised by upland and (often) 
isolated settlements or farmsteads surrounded by agricultural land and dominated by historic 
and vernacular buildings built from local gritstone. 
b. By ensuring  that proposals affecting a designated heritage asset (or an archaeological site 
of national importance such as a Scheduled Ancient Monument) conserve those elements 
which contribute to its significance. Harm to such elements will be permitted only where this 
is outweighed by the public benefits of the proposal. Substantial harm or total loss to the 
significance of a designated heritage asset (or an archaeological site of national importance) 
will be permitted only in exceptional circumstances where there is a clearly defined public 
benefit. 
c. By supporting  proposals that would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of a 
conservation area. There are 18 conservation areas in the borough and each is designated 
for its particular built and historic significance. This significance is derived from the group 
value of its constituent buildings, locally prevalent styles of architecture, historic street layouts 
and its individual setting which frequently includes views and vistas both into and out of the 
area. Particular attention will be given to those elements which have been identified in a 
Conservation Area Appraisal as making a positive contribution to its significance. 
d. By ensuring  that proposals affecting an archaeological site of less than national importance 
or sites with no statutory protection conserve those elements which contribute to its 
significance in line with the importance of the remains. In those cases where development 
affecting such sites is acceptable in principle, mitigation of damage will be ensured through 
preservation of the remains in situ as a preferred solution. When in situ preservation is not 
justified, an understanding of the evidence to be lost must be gained in line with the provisions 
of Policy HE6. 
e. By supporting  proposals which conserve Barnsley’s non-designated heritage assets. We 
will ensure that developments which would harm or undermine the significance of such 
assets, or their contribution to the character of a place will only be permitted where the 
benefits of the development would outweigh the harm. 
f. By supporting  proposals which will help to secure a sustainable future for Barnsley’s heritage 
assets, especially those identified as being at greatest risk of loss or decay. 
14.1 Barnsley has  many important heritage assets that reflect its long and complex history including 
a legacy of buildings, structures, places and archaeology. These assets are particularly 
associated with (but not limited to) its medieval past, its Georgian designed landscapes and 
its industrial past that relate to coal mining, metalworking, textile production, brick making, 
and glass manufacture. 
14.2 For development  proposals likely to impact upon a heritage asset or its setting, the following 
procedures will apply:-
157 
Adopted Local Plan 
14 . Historic Environment 
Policy HE2 Heritage Statements and general application procedures 
Proposals that are likely to affect known heritage assets or sites where it comes to light there is 
potential for the discovery of unrecorded heritage assets will be expected to include a description 
of the heritage significance of the site and its setting. 
This description will need to include an appropriate but proportionate level of detail that 
allows an understanding of the significance of the asset but no more than is necessary to 
understand the impact of the proposal. 
For sites with significant archaeological potential, a desk based assessment may be required 
in line with the provisions of Policy HE6. 
Applications made in outline form will not be accepted for proposals which will which affect a 
conservation area, a listed building or any other designated heritage asset. In such cases, 
sufficiently detailed plans and drawings to enable an assessment to be made of the likely impact 
of the development upon the significance of any heritage assets affected will be required. 
14.3 Planning applications  made in outline form only do not provide enough information for us to 
assess the effect the proposals will have on a designated asset. In such a scenario we will 
refuse planning permission because not enough information has been provided to assess 
the proposal. 
Policy HE3 Developments affecting Historic Buildings 
Proposals involving additions or alterations to listed buildings or buildings of evident historic 
significance such as locally listed buildings (or their setting) should seek to conserve and where 
appropriate enhance that building’s significance. In such circumstances proposals will be expected 
to: 
Respect historic precedents of scale, form, massing, architectural detail and the use of 
appropriate materials that contribute to the special interest of a building. 
Capitalise on opportunities to better reveal the significance of a building where elements 
exist that detract from its special interest. 
14.4 Listed building  consent is needed to alter, extend or demolish a listed building. These controls 
apply to all internal and external work where it cannot be reasonably considered a repair, 
maintenance or genuine like for like replacement. Planning permission may also be needed 
for work carried out to alter and extend a listed building. It is an offence to carry out 
unauthorised work involving the alteration, extension or demolition of a listed building. 
14.5 Planning applications  made in outline form do not provide enough information for us to assess 
the effect of the proposals on a Listed Building and its setting and will be refused. Information 
provided with an application must include full survey drawings of the building, identifying any 
interior features of historic or architectural interest affected by the proposals. 
158 Adopted Local Plan 
14 . Historic Environment 
14.6 Listed buildings  are designated by the Secretary of State because of their special architectural 
or historic interest. It should be noted that buildings considered to be of sufficient architectural 
or historic interest, but not included in the statutory list of protected buildings, will be put 
forward to the Department of Culture Media and Sport (care of English Heritage) with a 
request for listing, particularly if threatened by demolition or harmful alteration. 
Policy HE4 Developments affecting Historic Areas or Landscapes 
Proposals that are within or likely to affect the setting and the heritage significance of a Registered 
Park and Garden will be expected to: 
Respect historic precedents of layout, density, scale, forms, massing, architectural detail 
and materials that contribute to the special interest of an area. 
Respect important views either within the area or views that contribute to the setting of the 
area. 
Take account of and respect important landscape elements including topographic features 
or trees that contribute to the significance of the area where harm might prejudice future 
restoration. 
14.7 As well as normal planning application requirements, there are extra controls in conservation 
areas to help keep their character. This includes the requirement for permission where a 
proposal involves totally demolishing any building that is 115 cubic metres or more in size, 
or demolishing any gate, wall, fence or other enclosure that is more than one metre high 
where it is next to a highway, or more than two metres high in any other case. 
159 Adopted Local Plan 
14 . Historic Environment 
Policy HE5 the Demolition of Historic Buildings 
The demolition of listed buildings, buildings that make a positive contribution to a conservation 
area, buildings in registered parks and gardens, or other buildings (including locally listed buildings) 
with evident historic significance will not be approved unless: 
The building is structurally unsound and dangerous and cannot be viably repaired, where it 
is shown that every effort has been made to secure, repair, or re-use the building, and where 
no opportunities for grant funding, charitable ownership, sale or lease are available. 
It can be demonstrated that the retention of the building is not justifiable in terms of the 
overarching public benefit that would outweigh the historic value of the asset. 
Demolition involves partial demolition where that element can be shown not to contribute 
positively to the area or the heritage significance of the asset. 
Where permission is granted for the demolition of a building within a conservation area or a 
registered park and garden, a condition will be attached to ensure that the demolition only goes 
ahead when full planning permission has been granted for redeveloping the site and the developer 
can demonstrate that the redevelopment will go-ahead within a specific timescale. 
14.8 We will always try to save listed or important historic buildings and demolition is to be seen 
as a last resort. Developers should discuss with us the suitability of any alternative use 
consistent with the conservation of an historic building at an early stage. Only in circumstances 
where an overarching public benefit can be shown that clearly outweighs the value of the 
heritage will demolition be permitted. If demolition is deemed to be acceptable in principle, 
we will only allow it to go ahead when we are certain that the site will be redeveloped. In 
cases where an application for demolition follows a period of willful neglect of a listed building, 
consent is unlikely to be given. 
14.9 Where permission  is granted for demolishing a building, we will attach a condition to make 
sure that the demolition goes ahead only when full planning permission has been granted 
for redeveloping the site and the developer can show beyond reasonable doubt that the 
redevelopment will go ahead within a specific timescale. 
160 Adopted Local Plan 
14 . Historic Environment 
Policy HE6 Archaeology 
Applications for development on sites where archaeological remains may be present must be 
accompanied by an appropriate archaeological assessment (including a field evaluation if 
necessary) that must include the following: 
Information identifying the likely location and extent of the remains, and the nature of the 
remains; 
An assessment of the significance of the remains; and 
Consideration of how the remains would be affected by the proposed development. 
Where preservations of the remains are not justified, permission will be conditional upon:-
Archaeological recording of the evidence (including evidence that might be destroyed), 
whether buried remains or part of a standing structure or building; 
Analysis of the information gathered; 
Interpretation of the results gained; 
Public dissemination of the results; and 
Deposition of the resulting archive with an appropriate museum or archive service. 
14.10 We will need enough information from developers to assess the probable effects of their 
proposals on archaeological sites or buildings of archaeological interest. The assessment 
aims to find out whether there are any remains on site and to show the character and extent 
of those remains. It will also provide information useful for identifying potential options for 
reducing or avoiding damage to the remains. 
14.11 Where the  information in the assessment is not sufficient to determine the archaeological 
impact of the proposal, we may also ask the developer to arrange for an archaeological field 
evaluation. Pre application discussions with us should be used to clarify whether applications 
will require supporting archaeological information. 
14.12 We will consider any archaeological aspects of development proposals in consultation with 
the South Yorkshire Archaeology Service. As well as providing archaeological advice the 
South Yorkshire Archaeology Service maintains the South Yorkshire Sites and Monuments 
Record, which holds information on many of the archaeological sites and finds, and buildings 
of archaeological interest in Barnsley. 
14.13 We will use the information submitted with a planning application and required by Policy HE6 
and the advice of the South Yorkshire Archaeological Service to determine applications with 
archaeological implications. 
14.14 Development which  would result in harm to the significance of a Scheduled Monument or 
other nationally important archaeological site will not be permitted. The preservation of other 
archaeological sites will be an important consideration. When development affecting such 
sites is acceptable in principle, the council will seek to ensure mitigation of damage through 
preservation of the remains in situ as a preferred solution. 
161 Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
The Challenge 
Enhancing the vitality and  viability of existing centres 
Locating new retail and  leisure development in existing centres 
Strengthening Barnsley Town Centre's  role in the sub-region and wider region and creating 
a 21st Century Market Town 
Improving the role of  the Principal Towns 
Reducing the need to  travel to out of centre locations 
Providing local shops to  meet local needs outside of existing retail centres 
Encourage Walking and Cycling  
The Current Position  
Barnsley is a significant  sub regional centre with a large catchment area 
Other District and Local Centres serve more local needs 
2010 Smaller Centres Study  
2014 Barnsley Town Centre  Retail Study 
Policy Solutions  
Setting out a town  centre hierarchy 
Identifying retail needs 
Providing flexibility to allow  small local shops in appropriate locations 
162 Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
Policy TC1 Town Centres 
Support will be given to maintaining and enhancing the vitality and viability of the following 
hierarchy of centres: 
Centre Type of Centre 
Barnsley Town Centre Town 
Cudworth, Hoyland, Wombwell, Goldthorpe, Penistone, Royston District 
Athersley ,Bolton on Dearne (St Andrew's Square), Darfield, Darton, 
Dodworth, Grimethorpe, Hoyland Common, Lundwood, Mapplewell, 
Stairfoot, Thurnscoe (Houghton Road), Thurnscoe (Shepherd Lane) Local 
Barnsley Town Centre is the dominant town centre in the borough. To ensure it continues to 
fulfill its sub regional role the majority of new retail and town centre development will be directed 
to Barnsley Town Centre. 
The District Centres have an important role serving localised catchments and meeting more local 
needs. To ensure they fulfil this role and continue to complement and support the role of Barnsley 
Town Centre new retail and town centre development will also be directed to the District Centres. 
The Local Centres serve smaller catchments and development here will be expected to meet 
the needs of the local area and not adversely impact on the vitality or viability of other nearby 
centres. 
All retail and town centre developments will be expected to be appropriate to the scale, role, 
function and character of the centres in which they are proposed. 
A sequential approach will be used to assess proposals for new retail and town centre 
development. This will help to achieve the spatial strategy for the borough and will focus 
development on identified centres in the first instance. Edge of centre and out of centre 
development will only be allowed where it meets the requirements of NPPF. 
Impact assessments will also be required as laid out in policy TC3. These should comply with 
the requirements of the NPPF. 
15.1 The main  town centre uses to which this policy apply are defined by NPPF as being retail, 
leisure, entertainment facilities, more intensive sport and recreation uses, offices, arts, culture 
and tourism development . 
15.2 We have  assessed the centres above in terms of the roles they play, the community they 
serve, and the range of shops and services they offer in determining the town centre hierarchy. 
The extent of the centres are shown on the Policies Map that accompanies the Local Plan. 
163 Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
15.3 The overall  approach is that new retail and town centre development should be located within 
existing centres. This will help to strengthen and protect their important roles and to reduce 
the need to travel to out of centre locations. 
15.4 Barnsley T own Centre will be the prime focus for growth of retail and town centre uses. It 
has an important role to play in serving the needs of local residents, and also in the context 
of the region. A Town Centre policy framework is set out in section 16. 
15.5 The Glassworks  town centre redevelopment project has a key role in the regeneration of 
Barnsley town centre and its immediate redevelopment programme and proposals include: 
Demolition of the former County Council offices and adjacent shops. 
Redesign and redevelopment  of the Metropolitan Centre and indoor market. 
Purchase by BMBC  and demolition of the former Training and Enterprise (TEC) building 
and adjacent property to the north of Kendray Street. 
Promotion and provision  of new retail and leisure facilities. 
Construction of a new, purpose built central library/community hub. 
Creation of a new public square to accommodate a new open market and town centre 
events. 
New surface car  parking. 
Public realm improvements.  
Cinema and facilities  for families and the evening economy. 
15.6 The Barnsley  Town Centre Retail Study, England and Lyle 2014 identifies the future need 
for retail floorspace in Barnsley both for convenience and comparison goods. This concludes 
that after the Barnsley Markets Project redevelopment there will be some limited capacity 
for new convenience floorspace but little for new comparison floorspace. 
15.7 Barnsley’s District  Centres have a vital role to play in providing shops and services to the 
people who live near them. The aim is to support and improve the role of all these centres 
and in particular to support and enhance them to enable them to have the capacity to fulfill 
their important roles as Principal Towns. Principal Towns should be the main local focus for 
housing, employment, shopping, leisure, education, health and cultural activities and facilities. 
15.8 It should  be noted that in the hierarchy above Cudworth is identified as the district centre for 
the Cudworth and Grimethorpe Principal Town, and Goldthorpe as the district centre for the 
Dearne Towns Principal Town. Royston district centre includes the areas of The Wells and 
Midland Road. 
164 Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
15.9 The Smaller  Centres Study (2010) considers the existing role and potential future role of the 
District and Local Centres. The study uses a vitality and viability index based on the indicators 
listed in PPS4 to score the centres as part of a health check. The study also includes 
conclusions on centres regarding their potential for growth or change and uses the categories 
of expand, intensify, rationalise or consolidate. 
The following notations are shown on the Policies Map and the Barnsley Town Centre Inset 
Maps: 
Barnsley T own Centre 
Boundary of  Barnsley Town Centre 
Primary Shopping Area 
Primary Shopping Frontages 
Secondary Shopping Frontages 
(the extent  of the Primary Shopping Area and Primary and Secondary Shopping Frontages in 
Barnsley Town Centre are shown on the Town Centre Area Action Plan Inset Maps) 
District Centres  
Cudworth (serving  Cudworth and Grimethorpe Principal Town) 
Hoyland 
Wombwell Goldthorpe (serving the Dearne Towns Principal Town) 
Penistone Royston (including the Wells and Midland Road) 
Primary Shopping
  Areas 
Primary Shopping Frontages 
Secondary Shopping Frontages 
165 
Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
Local Centres 
Athersley 
Bolton
 on Dearne (St Andrew's Square) 
Darfield Darton Dodworth Grimethorpe Hoyland Common 
Lundwood Mapplewell Stairfoot Thurnscoe (Houghton Road) 
Thurnscoe (Shepherd Lane) 
Cudworth 
15.10 Cudworth is
  one of the smaller district centres with the main retail and service provision 
located along the main Barnsley Road. It is average in terms of vitality and viability. Its 
strengths include the amount of shopping floorspace, the absence of floorspace outside the 
centre, the lack of charity shops and good pedestrian flows and availability of public transport. 
Aims for the future of Cudworth are to improve the provision of leisure, cultural and 
entertainment activities, attract non food multiple retailers, and to improve movement for 
pedestrians and cyclists. The strategic direction for Cudworth is to intensify, (that is to realise 
its potential within its existing boundaries by redeveloping and reconfiguring to intensify the 
level of current town centre uses). 
Goldthorpe 15.11 Goldthorpe is
  one of the larger district centres with its main retail and service provision located 
along the main Barnsley and Doncaster Roads. It is average in terms of vitality and viability. 
Its main strengths are the number and type of shops, the good supply of offices, the absence 
of floorspace outside the centre, the variety of specialist and independent shops, the market, 
the availability of food shopping, good pedestrian flow and the availability of public transport. 
In order to improve the economic fortunes of Goldthorpe the aims are: 
166 
Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
To improve the  provision of leisure, cultural and entertainment activities. 
Enhance movement for  pedestrians, cyclists and the disabled. 
Improve access to  the main attractions and to enhance security. 
Address environmental problems  and increase the quality of open spaces and 
landscaping. 
15.12 In 2008 a masterplan was produced for Goldthorpe to improve the village centre and develop 
the vision provided within the Renaissance Market Town strategy for Goldthorpe. The 
masterplan was finalised in 2011. The objectives of the masterplan include improving public 
realm, new retail development and a public square, car park reorganisation and shop front 
refurbishment. As part of this work an economic study identified that Goldthorpe town centre 
has the potential to support a total of 40-50,000 sq ft of retail floorspace. This is less than 
the total retail floorspace in the town centre at present and it implies the need to consolidate 
and improve the retail offer and ensure its future viability and sustainability. 
Hoyland 
15.13 Hoyland is  one of the smaller district centres. Its main retail and service offer is concentrated 
on High Street, King Street and Market Street radiating from the main square which includes 
the Town Hall and the Co-op supermarket. In terms of vitality and viability Hoyland is slightly 
above average. Its main strengths are the number and type of shops, the absence of 
floorspace outside the centre, the market, the low vacancy rates, high pedestrian flows and 
good bus services and linked trips. The aims for the future of Hoyland are to improve 
movement for pedestrians, cyclists and the disabled. The strategic direction for Hoyland is 
to intensify. 
Penistone 15.14 Penistone is
  one of the smaller district centres. Penistone is a historic market town which 
has its main retail and service offer concentrated on Market Street which is further enhanced 
by the new Market Hall and Tesco supermarket. The overall vitality and viability is much 
better than average. Penistone has many strengths including the availability of pubs, cafes 
and restaurants, the market, the availability of food shopping, the evidence of recent 
investment by retailers, the very low vacancy rates, good pedestrian flow and public transport 
access, a feeling of security and high quality of the open spaces and landscaping. Aims for 
the future of Penistone are to improve the availability of leisure, cultural and entertainment 
activities, and to improve car parking and movement for pedestrians, cyclists and the disabled. 
Since the potential for expansion in Penistone has already taken place with the recent Tesco 
supermarket, the strategic direction for Penistone is to intensify within its existing boundaries. 
Royston 15.15 Royston is
  one of the smaller district centres and comprises two separate centres. The Wells 
and Midland Road which are separated by housing. The Wells is a centre located on a main 
road junction and Midland Road is a linear centre surrounded by residential areas. Royston 
is average in terms of vitality and viability. Its main strengths are the absence of floorspace 
167 Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
outside the centre, the availability of food shopping, good car parking and the high frequency 
and range of places served by bus services. Aims for the future of Royston are to increase 
the range of pubs, cafes and restaurants, introduce non food multiple retailers, address high 
vacancy rates, and to encourage linked trips to the centre. The strategic direction for Royston 
is to expand (it is recognised that Royston has the potential to physically expand outside of 
its existing boundaries). The development of the vacant school site provides potential for this 
to be realised. 
Wombwell 
15.16 Wombwell is  one of the larger district centres. The main retail and service offer is located 
along High Street. Wombwell is better than average in terms of vitality and viability. Its main 
strengths are the number and type of shops, the large amount of shopping floorspace within 
the centre, the number of multiple retailers, the variety of specialist and independent retailers, 
the market, the low vacancy rates, good pedestrian flows and car parking provision, good 
bus services, and high quality environment. Aims for the future of Wombwell are to reduce 
the amount of retail, leisure and office floorspace which exists outside the town centre. The 
strategic direction for Wombwell is to intensify. 
15.17 Outside Barnsley  Town Centre and the District Centres, Barnsley's network of Local Centres 
meet more day to day needs and will be the focus for small scale local shops and services. 
Barnsley also has two retail warehouse parks at the Peel Centre on Harborough Hill Road 
and Wombwell Lane Retail Park, Stairfoot which will remain the focus for retail warehouses 
within the borough. 
15.18 Retail proposals  will be encouraged and supported in the Primary Shopping Areas of Barnsley 
Town Centre the District Centres provided they are appropriate to the scale, role, function 
and character of the centre. Such proposals located outside of the Primary Shopping Areas 
will need to undertake a sequential approach (as required by national policy and Local Plan 
policy TC1) and may also need to undertake an impact assessment (as required by national 
policy and Policy TC3 of this DPD). These provisions will apply even if the proposal is located 
within the Barnsley Town Centre or District Centre boundaries. 
15.19 The extent  of the Primary and Secondary frontages in Barnsley Town Centre and the District 
Centres, is shown on the Policies Map and the Barnsley Town Centre Inset Maps and the 
following policy applies: 
168 Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
Policy TC2 Primary and Secondary Shopping Frontages 
Proposals for retail (A1-A5) uses will be allowed on Primary and Secondary Shopping frontages 
in Barnsley Town Centre and the District Centres provided that: 
Within each primary shopping frontage in Barnsley Town Centre and the District Centres, 
ground floor uses would remain predominantly retail (Class A1) in nature. 
Other uses may be acceptable, especially where they diversify and improve provision in a 
centre, provided that it can be demonstrated that the vitality and viability of the primary 
shopping area concerned would not be negatively affected and that ground floor uses on 
the Primary Shopping Frontages remain predominantly retail (Class A1) in nature. 
15.20 For the purposes of policy TC2 we take the view that predominantly means ‘most’ and will 
apply a 51% threshold. The other uses referred to in policy TC2 are primarily envisaged to 
be the other main town centre uses defined by the NPPF. The onus will be on the applicant 
to demonstrate that other uses, amongst the town centre uses, will be acceptable. 
15.21 Proposals for  main town centre uses that are not in a centre should be assessed against 
their impact on centres. The NPPF requires such an assessment particularly for developments 
over 2,500 square metres gross but it also allows us to set a local threshold for the scale of 
development which should be subject to an impact assessment. As such the following policy 
applies: 
169 Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
Policy TC3 Thresholds for Impact Assessments 
Proposals for retail and leisure uses will be required to provide an impact assessment if they 
are of a scale, role or function where they could have a negative impact on the vitality and viability 
of the centre and are: 
Located outside the Primary Shopping Area of Barnsley Town Centre and are: 
Within the catchment of Barnsley Town Centre, and 
Have a floorspace in excess of 2,500 square metres gross 
Located outside the Primary Shopping Area of a District Centre and are: 
Within the catchment of a District Centre, and 
Have a floorspace in excess of 1,000 square metres gross 
Located outside a Local Centre and are: 
Within the catchment of a Local Centre, and 
Have a floorspace in excess of 500 square metres gross 
If we have concerns that a proposal below these floorspace thresholds may have a significantly 
adverse impact on centres, we may require an impact assessment as part of a planning 
application. 
15.22 Outside the centres identified above, proposals for small local shops will be considered in 
the context of Local Plan policy TC5. 
15.23 The boundaries of the Primary Shopping Area of Barnsley Town Centre, the Primary Shopping 
Area of the District Centres and the Local Centres referred to in the policy above are those 
shown on the Policies Map and Town Centre Inset Maps. 
15.24 A map is provided in the Smaller Centres Study (November 2010) which shows the catchments 
of the defined centres in the borough including the catchments of Local Centres which are 
defined as being an 800 metre radius around each Local Centre. An impact assessment 
should include assessment of the impact of the proposal on the existing, committed and 
planned public and private investment in the centre(s) which the proposal is in the catchment 
area of. The assessment should also include an assessment of the impact of the proposal 
on the vitality and viability of the centre, including local consumer choice and trade in the 
town centre and wider area, up to five years from the time the application is made, unless 
170 
Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
the proposal is for a major scheme where the full impact will not be realised in five years, in 
which case the impact should be assessed for up to ten years from the time the application 
is made. 
15.25 Proposals will  only be allowed if they are not likely to have significant adverse impact on 
investment or on town centre vitality and viability. 
15.26 The District  and Local Centres have localised catchments within which the specified threshold 
for impact assessment set out in Policy TC3 will apply. The Barnsley Town Centre catchment 
threshold of 2,500 sq m for impact assessment will apply across the remainder of the authority 
area. 
15.27 Policy TC3  refers to Thresholds for Impact Assessments whereas policy TC5 sets out 
circumstances where small local shops will not require a sequential test. 
15.28 The borough  has two main retail parks, The Peel Centre, off Harborough Hill Road in Barnsley, 
and the Wombwell Lane Retail Park at Stairfoot. Policy TC4 below will apply to any planning 
applications received on these parks as shown on the Policies Map. 
Policy TC4 Retail Parks 
In the retail parks identified on the Policies Map, retail warehouses will be allowed. Uses other 
than retail warehouses will be allowed where the role, character and function of the retail park 
will not be adversely affected. 
Except where justified, planning permissions on these retail parks will be subject to conditions 
to limit: 
The minimum size of units to at least 920 square metres gross; and 
The type of goods which can be sold from the units to bulky comparison goods. 
15.29 Retail warehouses  are defined as large stores specialising in the sale of household goods 
(such as carpets, furniture and electrical goods), DIY items and other ranges of goods, 
catering mainly for car using customers. 
15.30 Planning permission  for retail warehousing will be subject to conditions to control the character 
of the development, the size of individual units and the range and type of goods sold. 
Otherwise there is the potential for a wider range of comparison goods to be sold which may 
negatively affect the vitality and viability of defined centres. 
171 Adopted Local Plan 
15 . Town Centres and Retail 
Policy TC5 Small Local Shops 
Outside existing centres small shops that meet the daily shopping needs of a local community 
will be permitted where: 
The shops are of a type and in a place that would meet daily shopping needs and this need 
is not already met by existing shops; and 
The shops are located and designed to encourage trips by pedestrians and cyclists and 
would not encourage car trips. 
15.31 Local shops  perform an important role in meeting the day-to-day needs of communities. They 
are a vital part of creating sustainable communities, reducing the need for people to travel. 
We will encourage small shops where it can be shown that they meet a local need. Proposals 
for small shops will not normally require a sequential test provided that they accord with the 
criteria set out in Policy TC5. 
15.32 Small shops  are defined as units having a gross floor area of 500 sqm or less. Because they 
are intended to serve local needs, developments allowed under this policy must not include 
large, dedicated car parks. Conditions may be attached to planning permissions to restrict 
the range of goods to be sold, making sure that the shops continue to serve local day-to-day 
needs, rather than attracting customers from some distance away. 
172 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Vision 
16.1 The vision for  the future of the town centre is the creation of a town centre that is uniquely 
distinctive and establishes Barnsley as the premier 21st Century market town – not a copy 
of many other town centres around the country. 
16.2 The Economic  Strategy  2012 – 2033 sets out how we will ‘develop a vibrant town centre with 
a strong and growing retail and leisure offer, a thriving and balanced business community 
with a series of attractions and facilities to create a major visitor draw’. Specifically, this will 
include: 
Delivering the Glassworks Project  as a major catalyst for improving Barnsley’s retail 
ranking and stimulating investment to transform the town’s leisure and retail offer. 
Prioritising key development sites  and under-utilised buildings to provide the greatest 
economic activity, enhanced vibrancy and footfall within the town centre. 
Promoting exemplar public realm  to create greater inter-connectivity, quality spaces and 
enhanced opportunities for private investment. 
Putting in place innovative  financial and partnership vehicles, where the pace of delivery 
maintains the momentum gained over the past 10 years albeit in a more challenging era 
of public and private sector funding. 
Building on our existing  cultural provision to make Barnsley a desirable visitor destination. 
Recognising that a sympathetic  innovative approach to temporary uses will play a vital 
role in maintaining the vibrancy and vitality of the town centre while redevelopment 
schemes are devised and implemented. 
16.3 A key challenge  is to develop the town as a place of diverse quality employment which 
provides a location for quality business interaction, education and culture. The town centre 
will be a fitting setting for these activities to flourish. In this way it is a ‘shop window’ and a 
gateway to the Borough for new investment in the economy. The forward strategy will need 
to focus very seriously on providing appropriate space for business and cultural development 
and promoting the benefits of a Barnsley location to potential users. 
16.4 Delivering the vision  will require using its strengths and responding to its challenges by: 
Creating a town centre  powerfully shaped by its distinctive and unique features and 
avoiding insensitive anonymous developments diluting its ‘sense of identity and place’. 
Building upon Barnsley’s  successful role as a market town and bring it up to date to 
meet the needs of the 21st Century by creating a new market and attracting a more 
varied range of shops, bars and cafes. 
Making the most of  Barnsley’s traditional strengths, including its retail market, and expand 
its role as a centre for business and leisure making it a place where people want to come 
for shopping, services, leisure and work. 
173 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Providing a vibrant  family friendly mix of activities that are available throughout the day 
and evening to create a more family-based environment with a wide range of education, 
leisure and cultural opportunities including youth facilities. 
Increasing job opportunities  especially in office, creative and digital industries, information 
technology and professional sectors and strengthen the town centre as the economic 
focus for the Borough and attract inward investment. 
Encouraging town centre  living and attract new residents to the town by introducing a 
mix of housing which makes the best use of the available land and is affordable to local 
people. 
Ensuring that all new development is of a high quality design, which is sustainable and 
maintains and enhances the character and appearance of the town centre. 
Creating a more exciting, healthy urban environment by securing important landmark 
and ground breaking buildings, attractive public spaces, public art and green spaces as 
part of new developments. 
Promoting a more efficient transport network, encourage alternative modes of transport 
other than unsustainable use of the car, improve public transport facilities and manage 
cars more effectively through our approach to car parking. 
Enabling people to  walk into and around the town more easily, develop and improve 
pedestrian and cycle routes, reduce the dominance of the car, and improve the pedestrian 
environment creating a town centre that favours pedestrians and cyclists and enhances 
peoples' health and wellbeing. 
Strengths 
16.5 Barnsley is  a sub regional centre and the town centre provides a focus for shopping, transport, 
commerce, leisure, education, cultural and tourism facilities and activities within the borough 
so attracting new investment to the borough. 
16.6 The Remaking  Barnsley: Strategic Development Framework 2003-2033 has inspired progress 
over the last 8 years towards the creation of a successful, uniquely distinctive ‘21st Century 
market town’ including major developments within the town centre to strengthen its base 
from which further developments can emerge. These include the Transport Interchange, 
Digital Media Centre, The Core, The Civic, Mandela Gardens, Queens Court, Gateway Plaza, 
Westgate Plaza One, replacement Sixth Form College, Experience Barnsley and the Pals 
Centenary Gardens. 
174 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Westgate Plaza One The Civic and Transport Digital Media Gateway Plaza 
Mandela Gardens Interchange Centre 
16.7 The Glassworks  is underway and is a major mixed use town centre redevelopment initiative 
with a strong leisure component. It has a key role in the regeneration of Barnsley town centre. 
The Council has set aside resources for the Glassworks and the project will also attract 
significant additional private sector investment. It will safeguard jobs and also promote creation 
of additional jobs. 
16.8 The Council  has also prepared a town centre marketing, promotion and management 
prospectus. This sets out in a report by Arup consultants (Barnsley Town Centre Regeneration 
Plan) three components: 
a. Illustrative potential  of three development opportunity sites – Courthouse Campus, 
Eastern Gateway and Southern Fringe. 
b. Scope for  three town centre projects – Mandela Gardens, Peel Square and Barnsley 
Interchange (focus on west exit). 
c. Town centre  wide action on lighting, public art, digital technology and gateways. 
16.9 Additionally the  Council is currently undertaking a review of town centre car parking supply 
and management.” 
16.10 The town  centre’s traditional strengths, which are still valid as the foundation for a coordinated 
strategy to retain its viability and vitality, include: 
Traditional markets and  shops that have a reputation for value to residents and that 
attract visitors from outside the borough, as cited by Mary Portas as being a role model 
for the drive to energise the nations high streets.(7) 
Barnsley has a low retail vacancy level compared to regional and national figures. 
Barnsley has the highest level of Independent retailers in the region by a significant 
margin. 
A diverse range of shops, services and institutions all within close proximity of each 
other including the College and University Campus Barnsley. 
7 British Retail  Consortium, Association of Town Centre Management, Springboard Retail Footfall Monitor. 
175 
Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Good connectivity by  way of an improving range and quality of public transport links to 
the borough’s communities and surrounding settlements by way of a new Transport 
Interchange, convenient car parking and convenient access to the M1 motorway. 
Dramatic topography which  creates an extra dimension to consider in terms of townscape 
and views, and a rich urban form with a variety of architectural styles and block sizes. 
An interesting configuration  of streets, arcades and thoroughfares including Conservation 
Areas, attractive buildings and open spaces providing a compact and walkable town 
centre which is close to residential parts of the town, with some pedestrianisation and 
covered shopping areas, CCTV coverage and falling crime levels. 
A variety of  further opportunities to complement the achievements to date. 
Challenges 
16.11 Whilst protecting  and further enhancing these strengths the strategy needs to mobilise a 
coordinated management and development response to challenges from pressures and 
trends which weaken the viability and vitality of the town centre such as: 
A recent decline  in shopping at markets. 
Competition from the nearby centres of Leeds, Sheffield including Meadowhall, Wakefield 
and Doncaster and the growing popularity of online shopping. 
The barrier caused  by heavily trafficked dual carriageway roads ringing the town centre 
which by separating it from residential areas and edge of centre facilities discourage 
walking and cycling to and within the town centre. 
Concerns as to the over supply of long stay car parking within the town centre occupying 
premium development land. 
A poor visual  experience due to tired and badly maintained public spaces, some poor 
quality 60’s and 70’s development, unsympathetically designed shopfronts and signage 
and an uncoordinated approach to street furniture and a lack of seating. 
A lack of family friendly facilities and activities for younger people and concerns arising 
from anti social activities. 
A decline in  the number of homes and amount of green space in the town centre. 
Limited early evening  ‘offer’. 
16.12 The planning  policy framework for delivering the vision for a distinctive town centre, building 
on its strengths and responding to the challenges, is detailed in the following two sections 
which set out: 
176 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
General policies targeted  at retaining and strengthening the viability and vitality of the 
existing town centre uses and enhancing the enjoyment of its spaces and landmark 
buildings together with improving the convenience of moving around the town centre. 
District and site specific policies for sites of opportunity setting out how the development 
needs to sensitively relate to the distinctive character of the location. 
Pals Centenary Square, Barnsley Town Centre. Image courtesy of photographer A. Kent 
General Policies 
Introduction 
16.13 These policies  relate to Barnsley town centre as a whole The Inset Maps 1-5 of this document 
form part of the Policies Map referred to in the Local Plan and are as follows: 
Inset Map 1 - Districts 
Inset Map 2 - Movement 
Inset Map 3 - Public Spaces 
177 
Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Inset Map 4 - Development Sites 
Inset Map 5  - Primary Shopping Area and Shopping Frontages 
16.14 We have looked  at what we need to do to meet the needs of Barnsley’s residents, extend 
the town’s economic base and attract new people to the town. The tables in this section 
summarise the existing situation and the intended future position with regard to different town 
centre uses. Where relevant the corresponding general policies are included in each sub 
section. These are as follows: 
General Policy Reference 
The daytime and evening economies BTC1 
Late night uses BTC2 
Public spaces BTC3 
Improving public spaces BTC4 
Landmark buildings BTC5 
Building heights BTC6 
Gateways BTC7 
Temporary Uses and Phased Development BTC8 
Cycling BTC9 
The Green Sprint BTC10 
Car Parks BTC11 
16.15 In the context  of the policies in this document (unless otherwise stated in the supporting text) 
the following definitions apply: 
Offices are those  which fall into Class B1 of the Use Classes Order. 
Financial and professional  services are those which fall into Class A2 of the Use Classes 
Order. 
Food and drink  uses are those which fall within Class A3, A4 and A5 of the Use Classes 
Order. 
Assembly and leisure  uses are those which fall within Class D2 of the Use Classes 
Order. 
178 
Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Market and Shops 
16.16 Our approach  to  Town Centres is set out in Policy TC1 Town Centres. 
16.17 Our approach  to  the Primary Shopping Area and Primary and Secondary Shopping Frontages 
(Shown on Inset  Map 5) is set out in Policy TC2. 
The future Now 
The Glassworks is a major town centre 
redevelopment currently underway and 
which has a key role in the regeneration 
of Barnsley town centre. 450 retail units 
Approximately 110,000 square metres of retail floorspace 
The current range and quality of shops falls short of what 
is needed 
300 market stalls covering 9,300 square metres. The 
current market stalls are outdated and unattractive, and 
customer facilities are poor 
Offices 
16.18 Barnsley town centre  will be the focus for major new office development. 
The future Now 
New, high quality office development in 
various town centre districts. Approximately 80,000 square metres of office floor 
space, much of it old and not ideal for modern 
business needs 
Culture and Leisure Uses 
16.19 Leisure uses play  an important role in the creation of vibrant centres, and it is recognised 
that Barnsley town centre currently lacks high quality leisure and cultural facilities, especially 
after normal shopping hours. Leisure uses will be provided as part of the Glassworks project 
and also in adjacent areas such as the Metrodome. 
The Future Now 
Provide additional cinema screens. Lamproom theatre 
The Lamproom theatre has ambitions to 
include additional performance and seating 
space. Replacement Sixth Form College recently completed 
and opened 
179 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Future Now 
Cooper Art Gallery – recently extended Experience Barnsley museum is open in 
Cinema, Eldon Street the refurbished Town Hall. 
Experience Barnsley  museum  is open in the refurbished A high quality events programme will be 
Town Hall. established for the town centre. 
The Civic has  been refurbished to provide a range of Provide a new Central library. 
cultural and leisure uses including flexible performance 
and exhibition space and design and craft workshops 
The Core V oluntary Action Barnsley’s building for 
community and voluntary organisations at Courthouse 
A hotel in  Gateway Plaza 
16.20 The provision of  more restaurants and family friendly places to eat is a priority in Barnsley 
town centre. 
The future Now 
The Glassworks project will provide new cafes and 
restaurants. We will encourage throughout the town 
centre a greater variety of high quality places to eat 
and drink, including better facilities for families. 75-80 units (over 9,000 square metres). 
Mostly pubs, with few restaurants. There 
is little variety, and few family friendly pubs 
180 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Policy BTC1 The daytime and evening economies 
We will work with developers and operators to diversify the daytime and evening economies 
(particularly early evening) Preference will be given to pubs, clubs, restaurants, cafés and night 
time entertainment uses which: 
Cater for a range of customers and are family friendly; 
Are open throughout the day and evening; 
Maintain an active street frontage throughout the day and evening; 
Serve food; and 
Complement other leisure activities. 
Planning permission will be granted for pubs, clubs, restaurants, cafés and night time 
entertainment uses in the town centre provided that they: 
Add to the range and diversity of uses on offer and increase customer choice; 
Do not harm amenity or give rise to increased noise, disturbance, or antisocial behaviour; 
Can be adequately accessed, serviced and ventilated; and 
Are designed with public safety, crime prevention and the reduction of anti social behaviour 
in mind. 
All such uses should have regard to the principles and practises of ‘Secured by Design’ and 
planning applications must be supported by a design statement. 
16.21 It is important  that there is a range of activity in the town centre both during the daytime and 
into the early and late evening. The aim of this policy is to encourage complementary evening 
and night time economy uses which appeal to a wide range of social groups and different 
age groups to ensure that provision is made for a range of leisure, cultural and tourism 
activities such as cinemas, galleries, exhibitions, theatres, restaurants, pubs, bars, nightclubs 
and cafés. 
16.22 We want to  encourage the controlled, well managed growth, diversification and promotion 
of the leisure, early evening and night time economy so as to promote and safeguard uses 
contributing to the vibrancy of Barnsley town centre and making the town centre welcoming 
to all groups. 
16.23 Proposals for family  friendly venues in particular are welcomed as they are currently under 
represented in the town centre. These should be open throughout the day and evening, serve 
food (preferably for customers to consume whilst sitting down), and maintain an active frontage 
to the street. Such uses create valuable additions to the town centre enhancing its vitality 
181 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
and viability and increasing the leisure options that the town centre can offer. The Council 
will work with developers and operators to encourage them to secure restaurants and cafés 
in preference to further pubs and bars in any redevelopment schemes. 
16.24 Issues of amenity, noise and disturbance, accessibility, traffic, car parking, ventilation, 
servicing, community safety, security and anti social behaviour also need to be addressed 
as part of applications for such uses. Proposals for outside seating areas will need to consider 
traffic volumes and air quality in particular . Where measures can be used to mitigate such 
issues, details must be provided to support planning applications. Where appropriate planning 
conditions and obligations will be used to control matters such as hours of opening, noise 
control, odour control and the means employed for the extraction of fumes. 
16.25 In particular the problem of antisocial behaviour in and around pubs and bars can be made 
worse by badly designed buildings and the spaces surrounding them. We will work with the 
police to make sure that these buildings are designed to be safe and to minimise the incidence 
of crime. The police promote a ‘Secure by Design’ Scheme which provides good practice 
guidance. 
Policy BTC2 late night uses 
Late night uses will only be encouraged in the following locations within the town centre: 
Wellington Street; 
Peel Street; 
Market Street; 
Market Hill; and 
Graham’s Orchard. 
Proposals for late night uses in the above locations will be supported provided they: 
Add to the range and diversity of uses on offer and increase customer choice; 
Do not have a significant adverse effect on amenity including from increased noise, 
disturbance, or antisocial behaviour; 
Can be adequately accessed, serviced and ventilated; and 
Are designed with public safety, crime prevention and the reduction of anti-social behaviour 
in mind. 
All such uses should have regard to the principles and practices of ‘Secured by Design’ and 
planning applications must be supported by a design statement. 
182 
Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.26 Bars and  nightclubs which are open during the evening and night time help to sustain activity 
in the town centre, however they can sometimes disturb local residents. Late night uses are 
defined as those which open beyond 00.00 hours (midnight). 
16.27 Wellington Street,  Peel Street, Market Street, Market Hill and Graham’s Orchard are an 
existing focus for late night uses in the town centre. A further concentration of late night uses 
in this area would create a late night zone within the heart of the town centre which is easily 
accessible and relatively compatible with existing adjoining uses. There can also be servicing 
and management benefits of grouping such uses. 
16.28 By having  late night uses in this defined area it is intended that the issues relating to noise, 
disturbance, litter and antisocial behaviour which can be associated with late night uses can 
be managed more effectively and avoided in other more sensitive areas of the town centre. 
16.29 All proposals  for late night uses will also be subject to policy BTC1 The Daytime and Evening 
Economy. This policy seeks to ensure a range of complementary daytime and evening 
economy uses which appeal to a wide range of social groups and different age groups. It 
also requires issues of amenity, noise and disturbance, accessibility, car parking, ventilation, 
servicing, community safety, security and antisocial behaviour to be addressed as part of 
planning applications. 
Homes 
16.30 The main  existing residential areas of the town centre are in the Churchfields part of the 
Westgate / Churchfield district to the north of the business centre and the Doncaster Road 
and Southern Fringe districts. The aim is to build a variety homes of different sizes within 
vibrant, mixed developments that maximise the town centre’s public transport accessibility. 
16.31 All new housing in the Borough must embrace the principles of sustainable development. 
Policies contained in the Local Plan require developers to comply with national advice on 
good design such as the Building for Life standard. 
16.32 The Council  is also committed to providing affordable homes which are made available 
specifically to people who cannot afford the open market prices. 
The future Now 
A recent study by Arup consultants (including 
discussions with developers and estate agents) has 
identified housing opportunities at three priority areas 
Court House, Southern Fringe and Eastern Gateway. The long established housing of around 
700 homes concentrated in the 
Churchfields district has recently been 
added to by the completion of the Gateway 
Plaza and City Reach developments and 
their 188 and 110 apartments respectively. 
183 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Public Spaces 
16.33 The  aim is  to provide a wide range of open spaces and related facilities so that local people 
have access to  a good choice of outdoor spaces. Open spaces are important to the 
environmental quality of  Barnsley town centre and should be enhanced and protected from 
development. 
16.34 The Council’s  Green Space Strategy sets out an overall strategy for greenspace and the 
standards we want  to achieve. Green spaces are shown on Inset Map 3 Public Spaces and 
Local Plan policy  GS1 Green Space applies. The Barnsley Public Spaces Strategy sets out 
a vision for  the future of Barnsley’s public spaces and aims to ensure the town is less 
dominated by vehicles.  
The future Now 
It is anticipated new public spaces meeting a wide 
range of needs, for both residents and visitors will 
be created within the Courthouse Campus, Barnsley Existing open spaces at Peel Square, 
Mandela Gardens and Churchfields and 
other areas some shown as green space on 
Markets, Town Hall Square and land between the Inset Map 3. Pals Centenary Square an 
Transport Interchange and Harborough Hill Road enlarged public space and setting to the 
development sites. The Barnsley Public Spaces Town Hall-Experience Barnsley has been 
completed as the forerunner of a range of 
new public spaces. Strategy identifies a number of priority and gateway 
sites in the town and lays out design briefs for their 
redevelopment. 
Policy BTC3 Public Spaces 
New development must make a positive contribution to public spaces through its design, siting 
and use of materials. 
The creation of new public spaces and improvements to existing public spaces must be made 
in accordance with the Barnsley Town Centre Public Spaces Strategy. 
16.35 Good quality  public spaces and public realm will make Barnsley town centre more attractive 
and set the standard for the quality of development that is required. They can benefit 
businesses and make homes in town centres more desirable. The quality of the public spaces 
and streetscape affects peoples’ enjoyment of the town centre. 
16.36 The Public Spaces  Strategy (PSS) outlines a vision for the future of the town centre’s public 
spaces and describes how they could look and function in the future. It aims to create cohesion 
and ‘glue’ the town centre together, to create user friendly, comfortable, clutter free streets, 
spaces and gateways and to celebrate Barnsley. 
184 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Policy BTC4 Improving Public Spaces 
New developments above the following sizes must include proposals to improve public spaces: 
Residential developments of 10 homes or more; 
Business developments over 1000 square metres; 
Community uses over 1000 square metres; and 
New strategic roads and public transport projects 
Developments must provide a financial contribution to allow off site improvements to public 
spaces to be made and maintained. The type of improvements which are considered appropriate 
will be determined using the Barnsley Town Centre Public Spaces Strategy. 
Where necessary we will ask for a planning obligation to secure these requirements. 
16.37 Significant new developments  in the town centre must improve the quality of the town centre’s 
streetscape and public spaces for everyone’s benefit. Public space improvements include 
such things as surfacing, street furniture, boundary treatments, paving, lighting, benches, 
litter bins, signage, and public art. 
16.38 Priority Sites for  public space improvement are shown on Inset Map 3 as follows: 
Wellington Street. 
Peel Square and Market Hill. 
Courthouse. 
Experience Barnsley (now completed). 
Kendray Street (Eldon Place) - part of The Glassworks. 
Kendray Street (Interchange Square) - part of The Glassworks. 
Cheapside/Queen Street/May Day Green - part of The Glassworks. 
16.39 Gateway Sites for  public space improvement are also shown on Inset Map 3 as follows: 
Town End. 
St Marys. 
Eldon Street railway bridge. 
185 
Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Transport Interchange. 
Jumble Lane Crossing.(8) 
Alhambra roundabout. 
New Street. 
16.40
 Inset Map 3  also identifies other parts of the town centre where public space improvements 
would be particularly beneficial. 
16.41 The aim is  for the town to enjoy a wide range of public art, from traditional sculptures and 
statues to installations that explore new media, using digital images and light. Public art can 
include specially ordered street furniture. Temporary works of art can allow risks to be taken, 
particularly during periods of change. The guiding principle is that public art should be varied, 
creative, of high quality and use appropriate materials. Public art will be particularly encouraged 
in the Priority Sites and Gateway Sites identified in the Public Spaces Strategy. 
16.42 Improvements to public  spaces will also be encouraged and welcomed as part of smaller 
developments (below the thresholds set out in this policy). Any such improvements should 
be identified and undertaken in accordance with the Public Spaces Strategy. 
Policy BTC5 Landmark Buildings 
New development must be designed to enhance the settings of and safeguard views of the 
landmark buildings identified on Inset Map 3. Development which adversely affects the setting 
of a landmark building will not be allowed. 
16.43 Landmark buildings are  important because they have significant local interest and make a 
positive contribution to the character and appearance of Barnsley’s townscape. They are 
located at key points in the town centre such as road junctions and at gateways and help 
add variety and interest to the town. They are shown on Inset Map 3 as follows: 
1. Barnsley Town Hall.  
2. St Mary’s Church.  
3. The Civic. 
4.
 John Rideal House,  Shambles Street. 
5. The former Co-op  building, Wellington House, New Street. 
6. Holy Rood church,  George Street. 
including Harborough hill underpass gateway to Metrodome and Oakwell neighbourhood 
186 
8 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
7. The National  Union of Mineworkers building. 
8. The T ransport Interchange. 
9. Westgate Plaza  One. 
10. The Digital  Media Centre. 
11. Barnsley College.  
12. Gateway Plaza.  
13. Sixth form  college. 
16.44 The landmark  buildings are generally taller than surrounding buildings and incorporate 
distinctive or prominent features such as spires, towers or listed structures. They serve as 
beacons or important markers to help make it easier for people to find their way around the 
town centre. 
16.45 It is therefore important to protect and enhance the settings of landmark buildings (such as 
views and vistas) especially from road approaches into the town centre and ensure that new 
development does not adversely affect them. 
Policy BTC6 Building Heights 
Tall buildings will only be allowed in the locations in Barnsley town centre identified as suitable 
by the Buildings Heights Study. 
Planning applications for tall buildings must be accompanied by the supporting information 
required by the Buildings Heights Study. 
This includes details of daylight, sunlight and wind effects to show the impact any new building 
will have on nearby buildings and public spaces in terms of: 
Privacy; 
Levels of sunlight; and 
Extent of overshadowing. 
The details must also include the measures needed to reduce any harmful effects. 
16.46 Tall buildings  are those that are substantially taller than their neighbours or will significantly 
alter the skyline. 
187 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.47 Tall buildings  should not block important views and should not create blank or uninteresting 
frontages at ground level. Sites that are considered to be suitable for tall buildings have been 
identified by the Council’s Building Heights Study. 
16.48 It is important  that all planning applications for tall buildings are accompanied by detailed 
supporting evidence setting out the likely impacts of the proposals in terms of daylight, 
sunlight, wind effects and privacy and set out any likely mitigation measures that would be 
required. 
Movement and T ransport 
16.49 The challenge  is  to think about transport and the travel experience in a different way, and to 
avoid designing an environment that is dominated by the car. The Strategic Development 
Framework identifies the need to rethink our approach to transport within Barnsley. It sets 
out a movement hierarchy as follows: 
People with disabilities.  
Pedestrians. 
Cyclists. Bus users. 
T
rain users. 
16.50
 The Local Plan  aims to promote alternatives to unsustainable car travel, and help manage 
cars more effectively. By improving public transport and pedestrian and cycling links, viable 
alternatives for car travel into the town centre are created. 
16.51 The benefits of  an improved transport system include increased accessibility, reductions in 
congestion, better air quality and can help to address health and well being issues amongst 
other things. An improved transport system will increase the attractiveness of the town centre, 
attract visitors and make Barnsley more accessible within the context of the city regions and 
the rest of the country. 
16.52 As part of  the Network Rail programme for closure of level crossings the Jumble Lane crossing 
and associated signal box are intended to be closed. When this is confirmed there will need 
to be a replacement pedestrian bridge. Design studies are being undertaken to ensure a 
high quality 'accessible to all' bridge is provided. The closure of the level crossing and signal 
box would allow for extension of the current railway station platforms. The provision of 
extended platforms would support longer trains, including inter-city and high speed services, 
calling at the station and this in turn could warrant, through enhanced patronage and footfall, 
a comprehensive re-modelling of the railway station incorporating town centre uses so as to 
bridge the railway lines and link to the Glassworks scheme. 
16.53 As described  in  the Transport Section the Government is promoting the construction of a 
completely new high speed railway including proposals for stations at Leeds and Meadowhall 
Interchange, together with associated connectivity and regeneration packages. 
188 
Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.54 The combination  of the closure of the level crossing and signal box together with (subject to 
consultation) the HS2 related proposals would provide the opportunity to significantly upgrade 
the range of Barnlsey rail services. It would also provide an opportunity to review whether 
there was also the potential to relocate and improve the station facilities. 
Main routes  and Gateways 
16.55 The Local  Plan includes policies to improve the quality of routes into the Town Centre by 
providing: landscape design treatment, public art, gateway lighting schemes; and high quality 
development. 
16.56 The main  routes as shown on Inset Map 2 are: 
A628 Dodworth Road. 
A61 Sheffield Road. 
A635 Huddersfield Road. 
A628 Pontefract Road. 
A61 Harborough Hill  Road. 
Westway. 
Old Mill Lane. 
16.57 It is important that the main routes into the town centre are attractive and create a good 
impression for visitors to the town. The design of new buildings fronting these routes and at 
the Gateways to the town centre identified on Inset Map 2 is especially important and will be 
expected to be of a particularly high standard. These routes will also be targeted for funding 
for environmental improvements. 
189 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Policy BTC7 Gateways 
Development on or next to the gateways identified on Inset Map 2 must: 
Create a strong distinctive visual gateway to the town centre and a sense of arrival; 
Be of high quality design and use the best quality materials; 
Be designed to welcome people into the town centre and create active street frontages; 
Not detract from important views or skylines; 
Include good pedestrian links through the site and to the town centre; 
Take the opportunity to create distinctive new landmark buildings; 
Improve public spaces in accordance with the Barnsley Town Centre Public Spaces Strategy; 
and 
Creating linkages to other areas adjacent to the town centre. 
Temporary uses and phased development 
16.58 The recent  recession together with the changes in retailing such as a growing use of on line 
shopping combined with home delivery, has meant that many town centres, including Barnsley, 
have stalled redevelopment schemes. The Local Plan seeks to encourage landowners and 
developers to include the potential of phased or temporary activities with any redevelopment 
scheme programming. This is particularly important where where a redevelopment scheme 
will take several years to implement. Additionally it is considered that a continuing and 
supportive policy framework to temporary and or phased uses will play an important role in 
ensuring the town centre is refreshed with innovative attractions. This Markets District policy 
is complementary to policy GD2 of this Local Plan in dealing with temporary uses and 
buildings. 
Policy BTC8 Temporary Uses and Phased Development 
Within the Markets District temporary uses will be supported where they can demonstrate a 
positive contribution to the continuing vibrancy and vitality of the Town Centre. 
190 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Cycling 
16.59 As part of the emerging Transport Strategy we will develop a network of cycle routes and 
improvements to make the town more cycle-friendly. Any proposals will be based on an 
assessment of the main points within the town that need to be linked, and which routes are 
safest for cyclists. In some cases, a small link can create a significant advantage for cyclists. 
The provision of facilities for secure cycle parking and storage within the town centre will also 
be encouraged as part of new developments. 
The future Now 
New cycle routes will be created There are no dedicated cycle routes within 
the town centre. 
Junction improvements for cyclists will be carried out 
where feasible 
Policy BTC9 Cycling 
Development on sites that include cycle routes as identified in the emerging Transport Strategy 
will be expected to: 
Ensure that the route is designed into the scheme; and 
Either build the relevant section of the route, or make a financial contribution towards building 
it. 
We will also take account of cycle and pedestrian routes when considering proposals on nearby 
sites, which may have an effect on them. 
16.60 Cycling has  a key role to play in the delivery of an integrated transport system and the efficient 
management of the existing highway network. It can also deliver significant potential economic, 
environmental and health benefits. 
16.61 The Green  Sprint is an important part of Barnsley’s strategy to create a greener, more 
pedestrian-focused approach to travel within the town. It will be a high-quality pedestrian and 
cycle route that will start at Town End roundabout linking the town centre with the Interchange, 
the Metrodome leisure centre and the Dearne Valley Country Park. 
191 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Policy BTC10 The Green Sprint 
A pedestrian and cycle route ‘the Green Sprint’ will be created to link the town centre with the 
Dearne Valley Country Park, following the indicative route shown on Inset Map 2. Developments 
on sites that cover part of the route must: 
Ensure that the Green Sprint is designed into the scheme; and 
Either build the relevant section of the Green Sprint, or make a financial contribution towards 
building it. 
We will also take account of the Green Sprint when considering proposals on nearby sites, which 
may have an effect on it. 
16.62 Developments that  affect the Green Sprint will need to be designed to take account of it and, 
in some cases, include it. As appropriate we will use planning conditions or planning obligations 
to make sure the Green Sprint is built. 
16.63 We will prepare  further guidance to explain how we will apply this policy and to provide 
particular advice on the design requirements and specifications for the route. 
Car Parking 
16.64
 To encourage  shoppers  and visitors the town centre car parks will be managed to favour 
shoppers and visitors car parking requirements and restrict commuter long stay car parking. 
The future Now 
The level of supply, distribution and management of car 
parking will be periodically reviewed. A car parking review 
is currently being undertaken and will inform future car 
parking strategy. Around 4,200 spaces, in a range of two 
multi-storey car parks and surface car 
parks 
Policy BTC11 Car parks 
Town centre car parks will be managed to allow short stay car parking and restrict long stay car 
parking. Long stay car parks will be located on the edge of the town centre. Short stay car parks 
will be located within the town centre. 
Where they are proposed, car parks should be included within developments either in basements 
or on upper floors. 
192 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.65 The purpose  of this policy is to increase short stay parking for shoppers and visitors to the 
town centre and to reduce long stay commuter car parking. It is intended that the overall 
number of car parking spaces will remain unaltered. Around the edge of the town centre, 
new residents-only parking schemes will be introduced to make sure that these areas are 
not affected by overspill from the town centre. Parking for people with mobility issues will be 
provided in new developments. 
16.66 Surface car  parks can use up large areas of land, which goes against our aim of creating a 
compact and vibrant town centre. Therefore, car parks should be included within 
developments, either in basements or on upper floors and should be designed with safety 
in mind. This allows ‘active’ uses (such as shops) to be on the ground floor, where they are 
most accessible. A ground floor layout which provides an active frontage element but is also 
able to include car parking may be acceptable if it is innovatively designed. 
16.67 In the case of residential development, private car parking may be needed to make sure that 
residents have a secure space to park their car at any time. However, large private car parks 
for shops, offices and other commercial uses can be harmful to the town centre, by making 
poor use of land and discouraging people visiting the town centre for more than one reason. 
For developments that include a car park, conditions may be applied to make sure that the 
car park is available to members of the public. 
District and  Development Site Policies 
16.68 The Local  Plan defines the boundary of the town centre and splits it into 9 districts which 
are shown on Inset Map 1. The town centre boundary follows the recommendations of the 
Barnsley Town Centre Retail Study July 2014. Pages 71-78 of that study provides the basis 
for the following boundaries as used in the Barnsley town centre policies: 
Barnsley Town Centre. 
Primary shopping area.  
Primary and secondary  shopping frontages. 
16.69 Policies relating  to the 9 Districts and the Development Sites which fall within them are 
included in this section as follows: 
Development Site* (9)(10) District 
1 The Glassworks (3 and 4) The Markets Area 
No specific sites+ The Yards 
2 Heelis Street / New Street / Gala Bingo / Burleigh court 
Site (5) Southern Fringe 
9 *The Development  Sites are identified and appraised in the Retail Study pages 66 to 70. Shown in brackets in the above table are the Development 
Site references shown on the Retail Study plan at page 67. The Local Plan combines the Retail Study sites 3 and 4 to be consistent with the 
Glassworks redevelopment prospectus and proposals. 
10 + For a number of Districts no specific sites are highlighted in the Local Plan Policy Map Insets however, there are a number of opportunities 
which can be accommodated by the District policy. 
193 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Southgate No specific sites+ 
Westgate /  Churchfield No specific sites+ 
Market Hill  No specific sites+ 
The Lanes  No specific sites+ 
Courthouse Campus  3 Courthouse (1) 
Eastern Gateway  4 Land between the Transport Interchange and 
Harborough Hill road (5) 
16.70 The boundaries  of the Districts are shown on Inset Map 1 and the Development Sites are 
shown on Inset Map 4. Indicative extracts from a combination of the Inset Maps showing 
each District in greater detail are included in each District section. The recent Arup consultants 
Barnsley Town Centre Regeneration Plan study also offers guidance. 
The Markets  Area District 
16.71 The Markets  Area is Barnsley town centre’s primary shopping area. At present there is a mix 
of retail operators. The Alhambra and the Metropolitan Centres have a broad range of tenants, 
and the traditional Market is particularly important to Barnsley’s town centre and its offer. 
Along Market Hill, George Yard and the Arcade area there are a small number of high quality 
independent retailers that are very successful. 
Existing Form - Defined retail frontage 
- Varied age of buildings 
- Council-owned shopping centre and market 
- The Alhambra (covered shopping mall) 
- Former Council offices 
Land Use  - Shopping 
- Banks, Professional Services 
- Cafes - Car parks 
Activity -
 Heavy pedestrian usage and vitality during trading hours 
- No evening activity 
Policy BTC12 The Markets Area District 
We will allow shops, offices, leisure developments, and food and drink uses within the Markets 
District. 
Other uses will only be supported where they contribute to the vitality and viability of the town 
centre. 
194 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.72 It is intended that this District remains the focus of retail activity within the town. The 
Glassworks town centre redevelopment project has a key role in the regeneration of Barnsley 
town centre and its immediate redevelopment programme and proposals that are summarised 
in the ‘’strengths’ section earlier in the Barnsley Town Centre chapter. 
Demolition of the former County Council offices and adjacent shops; 
Redesign and redevelopment  of the Metropolitan Centre and indoor market; 
Purchase by BMBC  of the former Training and Enterprise (TEC) building and adjacent 
property to the north of Kendray Street; 
Promotion of the Kendray Street site as a leisure and retail centre; 
Construction of a new, purpose built central library/community hub; 
Creation of a new public square to accommodate a new open market and town centre 
events; 
Public realm improvements;  
Promotion to attract  new retail investment; 
Cinema and facilities  for families and the evening economy, and 
New surface car  parking. 
16.73 New pedestrian  streets will form the primary pedestrian spine around which the new 
Marketplace Barnsley scheme is organised. Pedestrian priority will be upgraded to make a 
safe environment for pedestrians and cyclists. Car parking will be on the roof top of the new 
Marketplace Barnsley development with surface level car park on the site to the south ofJumble 
Lane crossing. High quality public realm will connect to the existing fabric of the town centre 
with new public spaces at focal points and there is an opportunity for increased massing and 
height of buildings. 
195 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Policy BTC13 Development Site 1 - The Glassworks including former TEC 
building and CEAG site 
We will allow the following types of development: 
Retail, including a department store; 
Offices; 
Leisure; 
Food and drink; and 
Car parking. 
The development of the site will be expected to: 
Create new links to and within the town centre and other areas adjacent to the Town Centre 
such as the Metrodome and Oakwell; and 
Include other uses if they would support the liveliness and economic strength of the town 
centre. 
Residential development will be supported where it would support the vitality and viability of the 
town centre. 
16.74 The aim is to redevelop the existing town centre and create a new high quality retail and 
leisure centre for Barnsley. The site of the proposed Marketplace Barnsley project lies at the 
heart of the town centre, adjacent to Market Parade, May Day Green, Cheapside and Midland 
Street. Several buildings which fall within the site boundary will be redeveloped. These include 
the existing Metropolitan Centre in which the markets is located, a multi-storey car park and 
former Council offices. The site extends across the railway line to include the CEAG building. 
The site is centrally located and has excellent transport links. In the short term this site will 
be used as surface car parking however it does have the potential for future redevelopment. 
A culverted dyke runs through the site and may impact on the scale of future redevelopment. 
16.75 The Marketplace  Barnsley development is identified as a potential area for taller gateway 
development. As topography falls, the opportunity for taller development is created. 
16.76 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
196 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Markets Area District 
197 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Yards District 
16.77 The Yards District  currently contains a variety of small shops and services, together with 
some homes. It performs a useful role, supporting the town centre and serving local needs. 
Existing Form - Road network forms a barrier to town centre 
- Gateway opportunity not yet maximised 
Land Use - Small premises 
- Residential 
- Highway 
Activity -Local  shops and services 
- Traffic-dominated environment 
Policy BTC14 The Yards District 
Within The Yards District we will allow housing, offices and small scale shops and services. 
Developments will be allowed that would support to the liveliness and economic strength of the 
town centre. 
16.78 This District includes  the Alhambra Roundabout Gateway. The existing character of the 
district should be maintained with possible developments of an appropriate scale including 
the opportunity for a key gateway development between Westway, Sheffield Road and 
Harborough Hill Road. 
16.79 Development should aim  to improve the public realm, pedestrian and cycling links to the 
town centre, particularly in the evening when the link through the Alhambra shopping centre 
is closed. This District includes the Alhambra Roundabout Gateway where high density 
development may be appropriate. 
198 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Yards District 
199 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Southern Fringe 
16.80 The Southern  Fringe District is on the southern side of Westway dual carriageway, and is 
characterised by a number of large sites and buildings, some of which have scope for 
redevelopment. Proposals must complement the function of the town centre and not 
compromise its economic strength and liveliness. 
Existing Form - Holy Rood Church & St George’s cemetery (Grade II Listed) 
- Disused and underused industrial sites 
- Morrisons Supermarket  
- Georgian style  buildings on Princess St, Pitt St, & Georges St 
Land Use  - Residential 
- Retail - Surface car parking 
Activity -
 Pedestrian usage during trading hours 
- Traffic dominated environment 
Policy BTC15 Southern Fringe 
Within the Southern Fringe District we will allow housing, offices, employment and commercial 
uses. 
We will allow small scale shops and services along the Dodworth Road frontage. 
Developments will be allowed that would support the liveliness and economic strength of the 
town centre. 
16.81 The District  incorporates three important gateways into the town, at Town End, the Alhambra 
Roundabout and New Street. There is the potential for significant change through the 
redevelopment of disused and underused industrial sites for housing, offices and other uses 
complementary to the town centre. Preservation and enhancement of the architectural and 
historic character of the area is required. 
16.82 The dual  carriageway and extensive areas of surface parking make this District very vehicle 
dominated. Development should improve pedestrian and cycling links to the town centre and 
enhance the public realm. 
16.83 Proposals must  make a positive contribution to the Town End Gateway and public space 
improvements should be designed in accordance with the design brief for ‘Town End 
Roundabout’ in the Public Spaces Strategy. 
200 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Policy BTC16 Development Site 2 – Heelis Street / New Street / Gala Bingo / 
Burleigh Court Site 
We will allow mixed use developments which could include: 
Retail; 
Residential; 
Offices; and 
Food and drink. 
The development of the site must also: 
Make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the New Street Gateway; 
and 
Provide improvements to pedestrian links and public spaces around and through the site. 
16.84 This site contains a number of industrial and commercial buildings, some of which have been 
cleared. There are also some areas of surface car parking. The site is suitable for a mix of 
uses including retail, residential accommodation and offices. 
16.85 A stalled  apartment development is in the final stages of completion on this site. This site 
includes the New Street Gateway and as a result policy AAP7 Gateways applies to proposals 
in this area of the development site. Public space improvements should be designed, where 
relevant, in accordance with the design brief for ‘New Street Gateway’ in the Public Spaces 
Strategy. 
16.86 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
201 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Southern Fringe District 
202 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Southgate District 
16.87 Southgate provides  the interface between the town centre’s retail area and the commercial 
core at Westgate, and has its southernmost boundary at Pitt Street. The area is principally 
focused on entertainment and leisure activities, with some retail along the stretch of Peel 
Street to Town End roundabout contained in the district and other uses including a church 
and the YMCA. 
Existing Form - Low level development 
- Not an environment of particular quality, but with some buildings of 
interest 
- Poor public  realm 
Land Use  - Retail 
- Entertainment and leisure uses 
- Office 
Activity - Dominance of evening activity, including takeaways 
- Limited daytime usage, Lidl supermarket (opens 2012) will increase 
daytime shoppers 
Policy BTC17 Southgate District 
We will allow offices, residential development, assembly and leisure uses, hotel, food and drink 
uses and car parking within the Southgate District. Retail development will be allowed on Market 
Street, Pitt Street and as part of a mixed use development at the former Co-op Pioneer site on 
Peel Street. 
16.88 The Southgate  District has the potential to become a lively mix of residential, leisure and 
business uses and maximising its existing strengths could be considered to be Barnsley's 
entertainment quarter. This policy provides the flexibility for this to happen. 
16.89 The existing  intensification of development should be broadly maintained. Shops will not 
generally be allowed within the Southgate district, as we want to encourage them to locate 
within the market area. Exceptions to this are Market Street, which is already an established 
shopping street forming the boundary between Southgate and the Markets Area, Pitt Street 
and the Lidl store. This development site also includes one of the nodal long stay car parks 
which are proposed for the town. Small scale shops and services may also be appropriate 
elsewhere in this district. 
16.90 Opportunities to  limit vehicles and pedestrianise some streets should be investigated and 
public spaces and pedestrian routes should be improved. The architectural and historic 
character of the area should be preserved and enhanced and the quality of the townscape 
improved. 
203 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.91 The only significant development opportunity in the area is the Wellington House office 
building formerly occupied by the Council. It is not suited to large scale development, however 
it is situated in a key location in the town. 
16.92 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
The Southgate District 
204 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Westgate/Churchfields District 
16.93 The W estgate District is defined by Summer Lane and Westway on its west side, with the 
Town End roundabout providing access to its heart along Shambles Street. Market Hill runs 
down the east side towards the retail core and to the north is the Churchfields office area. It 
has always been the civic heart of the town centre because of the Town Hall. The headquarters 
for the police force in Barnsley and the Magistrates Court are also located here. However, 
more recent development has brought new uses to the district and consolidated it as the 
commercial core. This includes the mixed-use Gateway Plaza, which comprises office, hotel, 
leisure and residential uses, and the new Council offices at Westgate Plaza 1. The replacement 
Barnsley College Sixth Form has been built on the site of the former Central Library. 
- Historic building at the heart (Town Hall) and historic frontages contained within 
Conservation Area 
- Substantial public and office buildings, including new buildings of quality design 
- Public spaces at Pinfold Steps and Churchfields Existing Form 
- Civic functions including Barnsley Town Hall, Police Headquarters, Magistrates 
Court and Central Library 
- Office accommodation, including car park to Gateway Plaza 
- Leisure uses and hotel 
- Residential apartments 
- Retail on Shambles Street and Market Hill Land Use 
- Education - Barnsley College Sixth Form 
- Recent intensification of activity 
- Heavy pedestrian usage along Westgate to Westgate Plaza One and Gateway 
Plaza offices 
- Some evening activity at the Lamproom Theatre and Gateway Plaza Activity 
Policy BTC18 Westgate/Churchfields 
Within the Westgate/Churchfields District we will give priority to office development . We will also 
allow residential, shops, leisure and entertainment uses. 
Specific areas of the district will be developed for the following uses: 
Creating a civic quarter in the area bounded by Churchfields, St. Marys Gate, Westgate and 
Sackville Street, to include offices, education and small scale ancillary uses. 
Expanding the Lamproom theatre and associated facilities, and improving its setting within 
the wider Westgate area. 
A mix of office, hotel and residential uses in the area bounded by Westgate, St. Marys Gate, 
Shambles Street, Summer Lane and Fitzwilliam Street. 
205 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.94 Along with  the Courthouse Campus District, Westgate will be the knowledge hub of the town 
centre. A knowledge hub is an area where educational uses (Barnsley College, University 
Campus Barnsley and Central Library) administrative uses (local and central government 
and private companies), cultural/media uses (Cooper Gallery, Lamproom Theatre, Barnsley 
Chronicle and Experience Barnsley), law enforcement and judicial uses (police headquarters, 
courts and probation services) and regulatory functions are all concentrated. It may also be 
a future focus for digital and creative industries. As a result the area contains a number of 
uses that when combined function as a knowledge hub that serves the town and wider 
borough. It is envisaged that this role will grow in importance over the plan period and that 
this is the area in which uses such as these will be particularly encouraged to locate. 
16.95 Westgate will  be the main commercial and civic area of the town with the Town Hall as the 
focus for civic and cultural activities. There are also opportunities for residential development 
and leisure uses, and retail uses on Shambles Street which is an established shopping street. 
The existing intensification of development should be broadly maintained. 
16.96 A multi storey car park is situated beneath the Gateway Plaza development, surface car 
parks are located on Westgate and Churchfields. Development should be designed to 
strengthen east-west pedestrian routes between the Transport Interchange and Courthouse 
Car Park and the commercial core, pedestrianise Westgate, with only very limited vehicle 
access and strengthen north-south links to Shambles Street. 
16.97 Development in  this district should improve the setting of the Town Hall, enhance the physical 
strategic links between key commercial locations, repeat the scale and mass of existing new 
development and respect the Conservation Area status of part of the site, and the Grade II 
listed Town Hall. 
16.98 Gateway Plaza  1 is the town centre’s largest existing mixed use development and comprises 
apartments, offices, a hotel, restaurant/bar and further ancillary units. Gateway Plaza Phase 
2 should extend or complement existing uses and must be in keeping with the existing 
development. The precedent of quality design and finish established by Gateway Plaza Phase 
1 must be maintained. 
16.99 The site contains retail units and areas of multi storey and surface car parking. It has been 
derelict for a number of years but currently houses a gym in part of the building. It provides 
a good location for a mixed use development which could include residential, leisure, offices, 
hotel and a public car park. The topography of the site and its elongated shape adjacent to 
the main road will require a sensitively designed development. Planning permission has 
previously been granted for such a development on the site. 
16.100 Public space  improvements should be designed, where relevant, in accordance with the 
design brief for ‘The Town End Roundabout’ gateway in the Public Spaces Strategy. 
Additionally any development affecting the gateway should comply with policy BTC7 Gateways. 
Any public car park developed on this site will form one of the peripheral, long stay car parks. 
16.101 The aim is to protect the future of St. Mary’s Place through further development and securing 
a new use for the site which will retain the existing buildings, some of which are listed. The 
site consists of two stone built buildings accommodating BMBC facilities and a retail unit. In 
addition there is an out building used for storage and a car park which could be redeveloped 
as part of a comprehensive scheme. 
206 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.102 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
16.103 The intention  for this site is the re use of the buildings that once housed Beckett Hospital and 
are now offices whilst preserving the special character of the buildings and the area. 
16.104 The oldest  of the buildings on the site is the former Edwardian Becket Hospital site at the 
south western corner of Berneslai Close which was built in 1862 in red brick over 3 storeys 
with Baroque details in stone. Adjacent to this is a larger 1930s building of 4 storeys with a 
stepped elevation in a orange buff brick. Both buildings are of significant character and 
contribute to the group character of the Victoria Road Conservation area and must be retained 
with the minimal of external alterations. 
16.105 New development  on the site will be limited to the redevelopment of existing buildings on the 
site which are of lesser quality design. The later red brick wing that runs north whilst consistent 
with the earlier buildings in terms of general scale and massing is not of such high quality. 
As such, this along with the modern single storey inner courtyard buildings may offer the 
potential for appropriate redevelopment in the context of the Conservation Area. Any new 
development should not be of a greater scale or massing than the buildings which it replaces, 
and should be complementary to the retained older buildings in terms of detailed architectural 
design and materials. 
16.106 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
207 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Westgate/Churchfields District 
208 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Market Hill District 
16.107 Market Hill runs from St. Mary’s Place at its northern end to the Market itself in the south of 
the town. It is a predominantly pedestrian route running from the Town Hall down to the 
Markets Area District a central area of the town linking other Districts to each other. 
- Several large buildings of significance 
- Civic gardens to the Town Hall and green space surrounding St Mary’s 
Church Existing Form 
- St Mary’s Church 
- Barnsley Town Hall 
- Public space 
- Shops 
- Offices - Residential - Leisure - Public space (Peel Square) at the historic centre of the town 
- University Campus Barnsley Land Use 
- Significant pedestrian flow 
- Civic and worship activity 
- Retail Activity 
Policy BTC19 Market Hill District 
Within the Market Hill District on the east side of Church Street and on either side of Market Hill, 
we will allow uses and development that provide an active frontage at ground-floor level and 
conserves or enhances the character and appearance of the area. Appropriate uses include the 
following: 
Shops. 
Financial and professional services, for example, estate agents, employment agencies and 
advice bureaus. 
Food and drink, for example, restaurants, cafés and bars. 
Non residential institutions, including museums, art galleries and exhibition space. 
Assembly and leisure facilities. 
16.108 Market Hill  district is within the Conservation Area. It contains one of Barnsley’s most attractive 
and interesting streets, and Peel Square, a very pleasant public space which can be said to 
be the historic centre of the town. It includes a range of shops, pubs and cafés. We will allow 
209 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
a wide range of uses so we can keep the interesting mix of uses that characterise the area. 
However, we will not allow uses that may create a ‘dead’ frontage with no activity. Any new 
development within this area will need to protect or improve the character of the Conservation 
Area. 
16.109 The town  centre ring road system carries vehicles through the District. The impact of cars 
should be reduced. Improvements to the public spaces in this area are proposed, which 
should reflect the historic character of the environment, create better linkages between 
businesses and adjacent public spaces. 
16.110 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
210 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Market Hill District 
211 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Lanes District 
16.111 The Lanes  is a small District defined by Church Street and Market Hill to the east, Regent 
Street to the north, and Eldon Street to the southern edge which creates a triangular shaped 
area. It forms part of the Conservation Area, and has a generally good quality environment 
(with some opportunity for improvement). It has a close knit, fine grained character made up 
of a network of passages, and offers independent retailers including some very renowned 
and quality shops, as well as places to eat and drink. There are some very interesting 
buildings, including The Civic, a grade II listed building with a modern extension and Mandela 
Gardens Public Square. 
- Individual in terms of urban form and character 
- Focus is around a network of passages Existing Form 
- Civic functions offered by The Civic Building 
- Retail uses, particularly independent retailers in small shops 
- Leisure uses Land Use 
- Daytime and evening activity Activity 
Policy BTC20 The Lanes 
All new development within the Lanes District must have an active frontage at ground floor level. 
The following uses will normally be allowed at ground floor level: 
Shops. 
Financial and professional services (for example, estate agents, employment agencies and 
advice bureaus). 
Food and drink for example restaurants, cafés and bars. 
Non residential institutions including museums, art galleries and exhibition space. 
New development must conserve or enhance the specialist nature of this area by being of a size, 
scale, quality and design appropriate to the character of the area. 
Mandela Gardens must be maintained as public open space and no development that would 
harm its function and quality will be allowed. 
16.112 This policy  aims to encourage uses that will improve the existing character of the area, rather 
than radically altering it. New development must maintain and enhance the specialist nature 
of this area by being of a size, scale, quality and design appropriate to the character of the 
area and should respect the Conservation Area. Uses other than those listed in the policy 
212 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
will be considered on their own merits, but it is important that only uses that have an active 
frontage and can be used by visiting members of the public are allowed at ground floor level. 
The Lanes should remain a pedestrian dominated environment. 
16.113 Mandela Gardens  is one of the most important landscaped spaces in the town centre. It is 
also within the Conservation Area, and provides the setting for the Civic Hall. It is essential 
that it is protected and that the best possible use is made of it. 
16.114 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
213 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Lanes District 
214 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Courthouse Campus District 
16.115 The Courthouse  Campus District is currently dominated by car parking, but located within it 
are several of Barnsley town centres newest buildings; the Digital Media Centre, providing 
a working environment designed to support the success and development of creative, media 
and digital businesses, and The Core, owned and operated by Voluntary Action Barnsley 
and providing a base for voluntary and community uses within the town. The District is in a 
prime town centre location, situated close to the Transport Interchange and shopping area, 
and is currently inefficiently used. It also incorporates part of the Market Hill Conservation 
Area. 
Existing Form - Strong north to south connections link the site into the town centre. East west 
pedestrian links are less obvious 
- County Way spine road 
- New buildings and older buildings associated with the College 
- Terraced topography created by the previous use of the site as a railway station 
Land Use  - 900+ space surface car park 
- Office accommodation, business start up space, training and conference facilities 
- Adjoining land uses are typically disconnected from the Courthouse site 
Activity - Limited activity due to the dominance of car park 
- Heavy pedestrian usage, primarily between Barnsley Transport Interchange 
and Barnsley College and the town centre and the Courthouse car park 
- No evening activity 
Policy BTC21 Courthouse Campus 
We will allow the following types of development in the Courthouse Campus District. 
Education and community facilities. 
Offices. 
Developments designed to support the creative and digital industries. 
Residential development, including live-work units. 
Multi storey car parking. 
A new public park and improved public spaces. 
16.116 This policy  allows a range of uses aimed to consolidate and build on the success of recent 
developments within the District. It also requires the creation of a new multi-storey car park, 
a new public park, and enhanced public spaces. Along with the Westgate District, Courthouse 
215 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Campus is intended to become the knowledge hub of the town. It may also be a future focus 
for digital and creative industries. It is envisaged that this role with grow in importance over 
the plan period and that this is the area in which uses such as these will be particularly 
encouraged to locate. 
16.117 We want  to improve vehicle access, concentrate vehicle movement through the site on County 
Way, from which a loop system will service development, create a Disability Discrimination 
Act (DDA) compliant route along the main north south pedestrian spine including any 
connections to County Way and enable pedestrian movement across the whole area. The 
aim is also to progressively replace existing car parking in new multi storey car parks. 
16.118 Development should  be of a scale and massing to tie in to the grain and scale of the 
surrounding townscape and define the new spaces within the site and respect the 
Conservation Area status of part of the District. It should vary the use and style of new 
development to enrich the area and make it a new part of the town. Development should 
broadly maintain existing site levels and keep existing retaining walls. 
Policy BTC22 Development Site 3 - Courthouse Campus 
We will allow the following types of development: 
Education and community facilities. 
Offices. 
Developments designed to support the creative and digital industries. 
Residential development, including live-work units. 
The development of the site will be expected to: 
Include the creation of a new public open space; 
Provide improvements to pedestrian links and public spaces; and 
Conserve or enhance the Conservation Area. 
We will use planning conditions or a planning obligation to ensure the above aspects are included 
in the development. 
16.119 The aim is for the comprehensive redevelopment of this major site in Barnsley town centre, 
to provide new jobs, places to live and learn and new public spaces for the town. The 
Courthouse Campus development site lies to the immediate north of Barnsley town centre 
is within the single ownership of the Council. Its present use is largely surface car parking 
with two new buildings in the Digital Media Centre and The Core, along with several properties 
fronting on to Regent Street within its boundary. 
216 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.120 The site represents a significant opportunity for creating new jobs and community facilities 
including a new town centre park close to the Transport Interchange and could deliver a 
range of uses. The development should form an integral part of the town centre fabric, fitting 
in with established uses, street patterns and building height and scale. The northern end of 
the site is identified as a ‘strategic area of opportunity for tall buildings, and the southern end 
as a ‘sensitive area of opportunity for tall buildings’. A key issue is to relate new buildings on 
the site to existing buildings in the area, including how Courthouse might frame the new 
College building into its local context and distant skyline views. 
16.121 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
217 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Courthouse Campus District 
218 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Eastern Gateway District 
16.122 The Eastern  Gateway is a main access point to the town centre, and is where the Transport 
Interchange is located. This integrated bus and rail station is an award winning building, and 
creates a very positive sense of arrival. There is a Development Site in this District, at a key 
gateway on land between the Transport Interchange and Harborough Hill Road. 
- Transport Interchange 
- Some derelict land Existing Form 
- Transport infrastructure Land Use 
- Transport hub 
- Leisure uses 
- Heavy pedestrian usage Activity 
- Improve access and linkages to Metrodome and Oakwell 
Policy BTC23 Eastern Gateway 
We will allow transport related development, office, education, community and youth facilities 
and public spaces within the Eastern Gateway District. 
Development within the District must make provision for the Green Sprint and make a positive 
contribution to the character and appearance of the gateways. 
Other uses will only be supported where they contribute to the vitality and viability of the town 
centre. 
16.123 The new  public Transport Interchange is a key feature within the Eastern Gateway District, 
as is the creation of the new Interchange Way. This District includes two important Gateways 
to the town centre at the Interchange and Eldon Street railway bridge. 
16.124 The Green  Sprint is a pedestrian route identified in the Strategic Development Framework 
as important to the renaissance of Barnsley. This incorporates a legible east west footpath 
and cycle link through the town centre out towards the Metrodome, Oakwell and Dearne 
Valley, and enters the town centre in the Eastern Gateway District. It will provide a quick, 
pleasant route for pedestrians and cyclists, away from traffic. It is part of the new Transport 
Interchange and the route will include suitable crossings under Harborough Hill Road and at 
Interchange Way. 
16.125 There is an opportunity to enhance key routes in terms of urban design. Development should 
repeat the scale, massing and quality of existing development, and there is an opportunity 
for development and diversification of uses. 
219 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Policy BTC24 Development Site 4 – Land between the Transport Interchange 
and Harborough Hill Road 
We will allow the following types of development: 
Offices. 
Education, community and youth facilities. 
Transportation uses associated with the adjacent Transport Interchange. 
Public space. 
Residential. 
Ancillary retail. 
The development of the site will be expected to: 
Make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of gateways; 
Consider any implications arising from its location adjacent to an Air Quality Management 
Area; and 
Support the liveliness and economic strength of the town centre. 
16.126 This important  gateway site is defined by A61 Harborough Hill Road to the east and 
Schwabisch Gmund Way, the railway line and the Transport Interchange to the west. It offers 
the opportunity for a wide range of uses detailed in the policy, and is constrained by the 
presence of an operational electricity sub station. 
16.127 The site is within a sensitive area of opportunity for tall buildings however the opportunity for 
tall buildings to create accents, groupings or punctuate the skyline may be deemed appropriate 
in order to enable higher density development. 
16.128 The plan  below is an extract from the Inset Maps and shows the District in greater detail. 
220 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
The Eastern Gateway District 
221 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Implementation 
General approach  
16.129 The section  sets out the general delivery approach. 
16.130 A range of interests and agencies in the private, public and voluntary sectors will work 
individually and in partnership to realise the vision for a uniquely distinctive town centre and 
deliver the Local Plan opportunities. They will operate flexibly both pro actively promoting 
opportunities and also responding to challenges of funding and events as they arise. 
16.131 The promotion  of and participation in, City Region delivery partnerships will be a feature of 
the delivery approach. This will be on a thematic basis such as cultural quarters and sectors, 
and also associated with commercial office developments around stations coordinated with 
railway infrastructure and service enhancements. 
16.132 The organisation,  role and funding features are summarised in the table below and subsequent 
text. 
Role and funding Organisation 
The private sector will fund most of the projects and proposals set 
out in this plan. They will also contribute to the creativity needed 
to achieve our vision. Private companies 
City Region partnerships can support joint initiatives such as 
thematic and corridor programmes aided by funding from successful 
competitive bids for funding under such schemes as UK funding 
regimes. Leeds and Sheffield City 
Region stakeholder 
partnerships and agencies 
National and regional agencies such as Network Rail, and the 
Integrated Transport Authority when delivering their programmes 
can be encouraged to look to do so in such a way as to provide an National and regional agencies 
delivering public investment 
programmes 
underpinning national and regional infrastructure and service 
programmes to which delivery of appropriate Town Centre 
opportunities can be aligned. 
The European Regional Development Fund and or UK 
compensatory arrangements following exit from EU. European funding 
We have a wide ranging role in putting the plan into practice. Our 
role is set out in more detail below. The Council 
Management of Development 
16.133 We are the local planning authority. We will use our planning powers to increase the quality 
of new development within Barnsley and we will use a development team approach to have 
early discussions with developers ensuring all new development fits with the strategy set out 
in this plan. We will also ensure that development is supported by appropriate physical, social 
222 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
and economic infrastructure. In accordance with policy I1 where necessary provision is not 
made directly by the developer, contributions will be secured through planning obligations 
or through infrastructure funding. 
16.134 The Council  has statutory powers to require landowners to improve the appearance of land 
and buildings that are having an adverse effect on the amenity of an area. We will consider 
using powers available to us to ensure that the condition of land and buildings are not allowed 
to harm the appearance of the town centre. 
Highway Authority  
16.135 We are the local highway authority. We have wide ranging powers and responsibilities to 
provide an efficient transport network, encourage environmentally friendly transport and 
improve the environmental quality of roads and other transport routes with high quality design, 
landscaping and appropriate materials. We are proposing works be promoted in accordance 
with the South Yorkshire third Local Transport Plan (LTP3), which comprises the Sheffield 
City Region Transport Strategy, the South Yorkshire Implementation Plan and Annual Delivery 
Programme. Current proposals for cycling routes in the town centre are to be funded by the 
Local Sustainable Transport Fund award. 
Council Land,  Buildings and Assembly 
16.136 We will use our own land to support projects where appropriate. This may include selling 
sites to developers or other agencies. We will also buy land where this can help achieve 
development proposals. Where necessary, we will use our compulsory purchase powers. 
Public Sector  Projects and Funding 
16.137 We have  a dedicated project team to deliver projects within Barnsley urban centre. 
16.138 In the future the Economic Regeneration Service will work with developers and funding 
agencies to facilitate development on key sites and potentially secure grant funding for 
projects where appropriate. In addition the development of further sites will realise business 
rate income for reinvestment back into the town centre. 
16.139 Public space  improvements will be implemented throughout the plan period based on the 
sites identified in the Barnsley Public Spaces Strategy and shown on Inset Map 3. It is 
expected that public funds and contributions from developers generated through planning 
obligations or infrastructure funding will be used to deliver these schemes. 
Managing the  Town Centre 
16.140 The T own Team continues to work with local traders and businesses to drive forward the 
town centre proposals and make sure that the high quality environment of public spaces is 
matched by a high standard of maintenance and management throughout the town centre. 
223 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
16.141 Although the  Local Plan is concerned mainly with planning and site development issues, it 
is part of a new approach to how we want to use the town centre and how we want people 
to see it. New development is only one aspect of this, and it will continue to support a 
co-ordinated approach to the town centre on a range of issues, such as: 
Keeping the town  centre clean and free from litter, fly posting and graffiti; 
Making sure that  the town centre is well maintained; 
Providing clear, well  designed signs throughout the town centre, but avoiding creating 
a cluttered appearance; 
Making sure that  it is safe at all times of the day and night; 
Promoting events and  entertainment throughout the year; 
Encouraging town centre  businesses to maintain attractive building fronts; 
Allowing public spaces  to be used for seating for cafes, bars and restaurants in 
appropriate places; and 
Working with the police, licensing authorities and local businesses to create a safe town 
centre. 
16.142 We have  a town centre manager to deal with these issues, working with a wide variety of 
organisations with the support of various partner agencies. 
16.143 By dealing  with planning and management issues in a co ordinated way, and by delivering 
the main projects, we believe that we can change Barnsley for the better. 
Promotion 
16.144 We will promote the town centre, making sure that there is publicity for the progress that is 
made in redeveloping Barnsley and that the town has a positive image that attracts visitors 
and investment. Key Development Sites will be actively promoted to endeavour to secure 
their early delivery. 
224 Adopted Local Plan 
16 . Barnsley Town Centre 
Development Sites Implementation 
16.145 The table  below lays out the how the Development Sites will be implemented. 
Delivery mechanism and funding Delivery Agency Development Site Policy 
Reference 
Prospectus / planning brief BMBC 1.The Glassworks BTC12 
Planning applications 
BMBC and Private Developers 
Planning applications Private landowner / 
BMBC 2.Heelis Street / New Street 
/ Gala Bingo / Burleigh 
Court BTC15 
Private developer 
Masterplan BMBC 3.Courthouse Campus BTC21 
Planning applications Barnsley College 
BMBC Private developer 
Private developers 
Planning brief Private landowner 4.Land between the 
Transport Interchange and 
Harborough Hill Road BTC23 
Planning applications 
Private developers 
225 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
The Challenge 
Maintaining and strengthening our  networks of natural habitats and creating a network of 
Green Infrastructure assets 
Using Green Infrastructure to  promote sustainable growth, improve health and well being 
and adapt to and mitigate climate change and maximise biodiversity 
Protecting green space 
Enhancing the appearance, character  and quality of countryside and protecting it from 
development 
Conserving biodiversity and geological  features and mitigating any impacts on them 
Maximising biodiversity opportunities in  and around new developments through the adoption 
of good design 
Protecting what is distinctive  about Barnsley's landscape 
The Current Position  
National Planning Policy Framework  2012 
Barnsley Biodiversity Action Plan  
Green Space Strategy 
Green Infrastructure Strategy for  Barnsley, and the existing Green Infrastructure strategies 
for the Leeds City Region and South Yorkshire 
Policy Solutions  
Using Green Infrastructure to  promote and shape sustainable growth 
Identifying strategic Green Infrastructure  corridors 
Protecting existing Green Infrastructure  assets including the Green Belt and green space 
Conserving and enhancing biodiversity  and geodiversity 
226 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
227 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
Policy GI1 Green Infrastructure 
We will protect, maintain, enhance and create an integrated network of connected and multi 
functional Green Infrastructure assets that: 
Provides attractive environments where people want to live, work, learn, play, visit and 
invest; 
Meets the environmental, social and economic needs of communities across the borough 
and the wider City Regions; 
Enhances the quality of life for present and future residents and visitors; 
Helps to meet the challenge of climate change; 
Enhances biodiversity and landscape character; 
Improves opportunities for recreation and tourism; 
Respects local distinctiveness and historical and cultural heritage; 
Maximises potential economic and social benefits; and 
Secures and improves linkages between green and blue spaces; 
At a strategic level Barnsley's Green Infrastructure network includes the following corridors which 
are shown on the Green Infrastructure Diagram: 
River Dearne Valley Corridor. 
River Dove Valley Corridor. 
River Don Valley Corridor. 
Dearne Valley Green Heart Corridor. 
Historic Landscape Corridor. 
The network of Green Infrastructure will be secured by protecting open space, creating new open 
spaces as part of new development, and by using developer contributions to create and improve 
Green Infrastructure. 
We have produced a Green Infrastructure Strategy for Barnsley which is informed by the Leeds 
City Region and South Yorkshire Green Infrastructure Strategies. 
228 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
17.1 Green Infrastructure  can be described as including strategic networks of accessible, 
multifunctional sites (including playing fields, parks, woodland, informal open spaces, nature 
reserves and historic sites) as well as linkages (such as the principal transport corridors, river 
corridors and floodplains, wildlife corridors and greenways). These contribute to maintaining 
the region’s biodiversity and environmental quality as well as people’s well-being. GI networks 
should consist of a series of features (both existing and new), appropriate at various spatial 
scales, preferably with links connecting smaller, more local sites with larger, more strategic 
ones, including the region’s National Parks and key nationally and internationally important 
habitats. 
17.2 Natural England  advises that Green Infrastructure should be embedded in the plan making 
process, and that the multi functional nature of Green Infrastructure means that a number of 
development plan policies can support its implementation (e.g. landscape policy, flood risk 
policy, open space policy). An overarching policy should ensure Green Infrastructure is 
prioritised in planning decisions. 
17.3 The mental  and physical health and wellbeing, social and economic benefits of green 
infrastructure should also be maximised and can include such things as increased accessibility 
using sustainable transport such as attractive footpaths and cycleways, the creation of an 
attractive environment which improves image and encourages investment and development, 
increased property values and more tourism. There are also increased opportunities for 
landowners to reap economic benefits through managing their natural assets for woodfuel, 
carbon sequestration and local food production. 
17.4 Green Infrastructure  will have an important role to play in helping Barnsley to adapt to climate 
change. For example by moderating urban temperatures, contributing to flood risk 
management through storing excess rainfall and increasing surface porosity to ease drainage, 
such as may be delivered through policy CC4 Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), the 
positive impacts of tree planting in terms of CO2, and opportunities for the provision of 
renewable energy. 
17.5 Our Green  Infrastructure Strategy provides a vision and framework for the protection and 
enhancement of Green Infrastructure in Barnsley. This will take account of planned growth 
and includes guidelines for developers to ensure that new Green Infrastructure is provided 
to serve new development and that improvements to existing networks are made to ensure 
that new development does not place undue pressure on existing provision. 
17.6 In partnership  with Natural England we have identified an initial strategic network of Green 
Infrastructure which includes the following corridors: 
River Don V alley Corridor crosses several local authority boundaries. The Barnsley 
section of the River Don flows through a varied landscape which extends from the South 
Pennine Moors and Peak District National Park, through Penistone and on to Wharncliffe 
Chase on the Sheffield border. Whilst the Pennines are dominated by moorland and 
heath, the majority of the Barnsley section of this corridor is woodland and grassland 
and contains popular tourist destinations due to the spectacular scenery and pleasant 
villages and hamlets. 
229 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
River Dearne V alley Corridor crosses five local authority boundaries and includes a 
significant number of multifunctional sites including the Yorkshire Sculpture Park, Dearne 
Valley Country Park and the Old Moor Wetlands Centre. 
River Dove V alley Corridor, Dearne Valley Green Heart Corridor and Historic Landscape 
Corridor are mostly contained within Barnsley but have potential connections with other 
local authority areas and include a number of multifunctional sites including Worsbrough 
Country Park and Stainborough Park and Wentworth Castle, with the potential for further 
additions. 
17.7 These corridors  are shown on the Green Infrastructure Diagram. 
17.8 The strategic  corridors identified are important valued features which define the borough. 
They form part of a wider network of Green Infrastructure that allows people and wildlife to 
move through the countryside and built up areas. Whilst the corridors are the focus for creating 
and improving green infrastructure, it will also be provided and improved through new 
development and elsewhere as appropriate. Elements of existing Green Infrastructure are 
shown on the policies map, for example green space and functional floodplain. We have also 
considered the role that the Barnsley Canal, Dearne and Dove Canal and former railway 
lines could have in Barnsley's network of Green Infrastructure. 
17.9 We will work with partners, developers, the private sector and agencies to deliver Green 
Infrastructure and collaborate with adjacent local authorities to ensure that the Barnsley 
Green Infrastructure assets complement and link with cross boundary Green Infrastructure 
networks and corridors. The network of Green Infrastructure will be secured by protecting 
open space, creating new open spaces as part of new development, and by using developer 
contributions and infrastructure funding to create and improve Green Infrastructure. 
The historic routes of the Barnsley Canal and the Dearne and Dove Canal are shown on the 
policies map. 
17.10 The historic  route of the Barnsley canal runs from the boundary with Wakefield District north 
of Royston via Barnsley to Barnby Basin. 
17.11 The historic  route of the Dearne and Dove canal runs from the junction with the Barnsley 
canal near Hoyle Mill to the boundary with Rotherham Borough west of Wombwell, with two 
spurs running to Worsbrough and Elsecar. 
17.12 The historic  routes are shown on the Policies map as a historic reference and to give the 
context to those parts of the routes which are safeguarded in Policy GI2 below. We support 
proposals to protect any remaining features of the historical route or to record and signpost 
the routes. 
230 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
Policy GI2 Canals - Safeguarded Routes 
The parts of the canal routes which are in water and/ or have a green infrastructure function, or 
where a towpath exists that is a public right of way, are shown on the Policies map. 
These parts of the canal routes are protected from other forms of development to safeguard 
their existing and potential green infrastructure role and contribution to the cycling, footpath and 
horse riding networks. 
17.13 There is limited opportunity to reinstate the canals as navigable routes in Barnsley because 
of the extensive sections that have been filled in, built over or removed making their 
reinstatement (and necessary realignment) financially unviable within the plan period and 
beyond. As such safeguarding the entire historic routes cannot be justified. However it is 
recognised that the existing canals have great potential as green infrastructure and as part 
of cycling and footpath networks. Where the routes of the canals exist and have a recognised 
green infrastructure function, they are shown on the Policies map and safeguarded from 
other forms of development. The land adjacent to the safeguarded parts of the routes including 
the towpaths are also protected by this policy. 
17.14 We welcome  projects to preserve and enhance the value of the canals as wildlife habitats 
and corridors, and to re-instate sections of the canals, and to protect or extend their potential 
as cycling and footpath networks as appropriate. Any works carried out would need to address 
potentially adverse impacts on biodiversity. 
231 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
Policy GS1 Green Space 
We will work with partners to improve existing green space to meet the standards in our Green 
Space Strategy. 
Green Spaces are green open areas which are valuable for amenity, recreation, wildlife or 
biodiversity and include types such as village greens, local open spaces, country parks, formal 
gardens, cemeteries, allotments, woodlands, recreation grounds, sports pitches and parks. 
Proposals that result in the loss of green space, or land that was last used as green space, will 
not normally be allowed unless: 
An assessment shows that there is too much of that particular type of green space in the 
area which it serves and its loss would not affect the existing and potential green space 
needs of the borough; or 
The proposal is for small scale facilities needed to support or improve the proper function 
of the green space; or 
An appropriate replacement green space of equivalent or improved quality, quantity and 
accessibility is provided which would outweigh the loss. 
In order to improve the quantity, quality and value of green space provision we will require 
qualifying new residential developments to provide or contribute towards green space in line with 
the standards set out in the Green Space Strategy and in accordance with the requirements of 
the Infrastructure and Planning Obligations Policy. The Supplementary Planning Document ‘Open 
Space Provision on New Housing Developments’ offers guidance to developers on what will be 
expected in terms of open space provision in order to achieve those standards. 
Where there is a requirement to provide new green space an assessment will be carried out to 
determine the most appropriate provision, taking into account site characteristics and constraints. 
In cases where it is deemed unsuitable to make provision for open space within or adjacent to 
a development site, suitable off-site open space facilities may be acceptable either as new 
facilities or improvements to those existing. Where appropriate new green space should secure 
access to adjacent areas of countryside. 
17.15 As a component of green infrastructure, green space provides social and environmental 
benefits which in turn can be given a monetary value and have an impact on the local 
economy. The value of good quality green space can be quantified through such things as: 
Inward investment  and job creation. 
Land and property values. 
Local economic regeneration. 
232 
Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
17.16 The returns  on green space as part of broader green infrastructure investment can be 
significant. Investments in green space can improve an area’s image, helping to attract and 
retain high value industries, new business start-ups, entrepreneurs and workers. This in turn 
increases the scope for levering in private sector investment, reducing unemployment and 
creating economic growth. As towns increasingly compete with one another to attract 
investment, the presence of good parks, squares, gardens and other public spaces becomes 
a business and marketing tool. 
The following types of green space are shown on the Policies Map: 
Parks and Open Spaces including play areas, sports pitches, natural and semi natural areas, 
cemeteries and allotments 
School Playing Fields 
Parks and Gardens of Historic Interest (covered in the Historic Environment Section) 
Sites of Biodiversity and Geological Interest (covered in the Biodiversity and Geodiversity 
Section) 
Green Ways 
17.17 We will assess the quality and value of each green space to judge which spaces should be 
given the highest level of protection from development, which spaces need to be improved 
and which spaces may no longer be suitable for their current purpose. The four possible 
outcomes of this assessment are shown in the table below along with a description of the 
decisions we will need to make for each outcome. 
High quality and high value High quality and low value 
This is the category we want all green spaces 
to achieve. 
We will firstly try to improve the value of the 
space without changing its main use. 
If this is not possible, we will consider 
changing the main use of the space to improve 
its value. We will protect all spaces in this category from 
development. 
Only if both of the above are not possible will 
we consider allowing the space to be built on. 
Low quality and high value Low quality and low value 
We will try to improve the quality of the space. 
 We will firstly try to improve the quality of the 
space if this will improve its value. 
We will protect all spaces in this category from 
development.
 If this is not possible, the space may not be 
needed and we may allow it to be built on. 
233 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
17.18 New green  spaces will be provided over time and it will not be possible for the Policies Map 
to always be up to date. A separate map called the Green Space Register will be kept up to 
date and available to view on our website. 
17.19 In terms of controlling development that affects Green Ways and Public Rights of Way the 
following policy applies: 
Policy GS2 Green Ways and Public Rights of Way 
We will protect Green Ways and Public Rights of Way from development that may affect their 
character or function. 
Where development affects an existing Green Way or Public Right of Way it must: 
Protect the existing route within the development; or 
Include an equally convenient and attractive alternative route. 
Where new development is close to a Green Way or Public Right of Way it may be required to: 
Provide a link to the existing route; and/or 
Improve an existing route; and/or 
Contribute to a new route. 
In some cases, we will ask developers to make a financial contribution to meet these requirements 
in accordance with the Infrastructure and Planning Obligations Policy. 
17.20 When considering  new development, we will make sure that it helps create places that connect 
with each other, providing the right conditions to encourage walking, cycling and the use of 
public transport. 
17.21 One of the benefits of Green Ways and Public Rights of Way is that that they allow connections 
with and access to leisure and facilities. In some cases, small scale tourism and leisure 
development may improve the quality of routes. Any such proposals must meet the criteria 
of E8 (Rural Economy) and may include such things as cafes, campsites, bike hire centres, 
public art and sculpture trails. We must also ensure that there are no negative visual or 
environmental effects and that development is consistent with Green Belt policy. 
234 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
Policy BIO1 Biodiversity and Geodiversity 
Development will be expected to conserve and enhance the biodiversity and geological features 
of the borough by: 
Protecting and improving habitats, species, sites of ecological value and sites of geological 
value with particular regard to designated wildlife and geological sites of international, national 
and local significance, ancient woodland and species and habitats of principal importance 
identified via Section 41 of the Natural Environment & Rural Communities Act 2006 (for list 
of the species and habitats of principal importance) and in the Barnsley Biodiversity Action 
Plan. 
Maximising biodiversity and geodiversity opportunities in and around new developments. 
Conserving and enhancing the form, local character and distinctiveness of the boroughs 
natural assets such as the river corridors of the Don, the Dearne and Dove as natural 
floodplains and important strategic wildlife corridors. 
Proposals will be expected to have followed the national mitigation hierarchy (avoid, mitigate, 
compensate) which is used to evaluate the impacts of a development on biodiversity interest. 
Protecting ancient and veteran trees where identified. 
Encouraging provision of biodiversity enhancements. 
Development which may harm a biodiversity or geological feature or habitat, including ancient 
woodland and aged or veteran trees found outside ancient woodland, will not be permitted unless 
effective mitigation and/or compensatory measures can be ensured. 
Development which adversely effects a European Site will not be permitted unless there is no 
alternative option and there are imperative reasons of overriding public interest (IROPI). 
17.22 The biodiversity  of Barnsley is extensive due to its varied geology, topography, soils and 
climatic conditions. Protecting the natural resources of biodiversity and geological features 
not only involves protecting sites, habitats and species, but also enhancing the status of the 
whole resource through active management. Biodiversity and geodiversity provides ecosystem 
services and is integral to Green Infrastructure which itself has an important role to play in 
climate change as acknowledged in GI1 Green Infrastructure. 
17.23 The most important  habitats in the borough have been given statutory or other protection 
through designations ranging from international to national significance to those made by 
the council or through the Local Sites Partnership. These designations often overlap each 
other with areas benefiting from several layers of protection. 
235 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
17.24 Biodiversity 2020:  A strategy for England's Wildlife and Ecosystem Services (published in 
2011) provides the Governments targets for the conservation and enhancement of biodiversity 
in England. It identified a number of habitats and species considered as priorities for nature 
conservation. A revised Barnsley Local Biodiversity Action Plan (LBAP) was produced in 
2008 by the Barnsley Biodiversity Trust to reflect the UK Biodiversity value of the borough, 
and it was adopted by Barnsley Council in 2010. It is still the adopted plan but is currently 
under review (see Barnsleybiodiversity.org.uk) and it is anticipated that a revised version will 
be adopted in 2019. Further to this biodiversity 'opportunity mapping' is being undertaken at 
a regional and sub-regional level. We will use this information to develop habitat creation, 
protection and management proposals and to identify biodiversity networks and opportunities 
for enhancement. 
17.25 The key ecological  assets for Barnsley include: 
Peak District Moors  (South Pennine Moors) is designated as a Special Protection Area 
for birds (these sites are also nationally important as SSSIs and also identified as Local 
Wildlife Sites for their local importance). 
South Pennine Moors  is designated as Special Area of Conservation for its habitats 
and supporting species, which are rare in a European context. 
7 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). 
Over 100 Ancient Woodlands that have had continuous woodland cover since at least 
1600AD. 
57 Local Wildlife Sites. 
6 Local Nature Reserves. 
30 Regionally Important  Geological and Geomorphological Sites. 
A number of  protected species including the otter, water vole, great crested newt and 
bat species. 
At least 20 UK Biodiversity Action Plan / Section 41 (NERC Act, 2006) priority habitats 
/ habitats of principal importance. 
Dearne Valley Green  Heart Nature Improvement Area (NIA). 
17.26 These biodiversity  and  geological sites will be shown on the Policies Map that accompanies 
the Local Plan. The extent of the NIA is shown on the Green Infrastructure diagram. 
17.27 A Supplementary  Planning  Document will be prepared to provide further guidance on 
biodiversity and geodiversity. This will include details of how developments will be expected 
to maximise biodiversity opportunities. The type and scale of improvements will depend on 
the development proposed but could include the enhancement of existing areas, linkages 
236 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
between habitats, or the creation of new assets such as areas of woodland, ponds, green 
roofs or bird boxes and wildflower planting which encourages bees and other pollinators. 
These could be provided either on or off site. 
Special Areas  of Conservation (SACs) and Special Protection Areas (SPAs) 
17.28 Special Areas of Conservation  (SACs)  and Special Protection Areas (SPAs) are designated 
throughout Europe. They provide a network of protected sites, holding important wildlife and 
geological features that are threatened or rare in a European context. This network of 
European sites is known and Natura 2000 and is afforded the highest level of protection. 
17.29 The following SAC and SP A are shown on the Policies Map: 
Site BIO1 Peak District Moors (South Pennine Moors Phase 1) Special 
Protection Area (SPA) 
45300.54ha (Site Code UK9007021) 
The South Pennine Moors SPA includes the major moorland blocks of the South Pennines from 
Ilkley to Matlock. It covers extensive tracts of semi natural moorland habitats including upland 
heath and blanket mire. The site is of European importance for several upland breeding species 
including birds of prey and waders. 
Site BIO2 South Pennine Moors Special Area of Conservation (SAC) 
65025.5 (Site Code UK0030280) 
The South Pennine Moors SAC supports a significant presence of north atlantic wet heaths with 
Erica tetralix and Transition moors and quaking bogs. The area is considered to be one of the 
best areas in the UK for European dry heaths, blanket bogs and Old Sessile oak woods with Ilex 
and Blechnum in the British Isles. 
17.30 These sites  overlap with nationally important SSSIs and also with Local Wildlife Site Western 
Moors designated for its local importance. 
17.31 The borough contains all or  parts of the following statutory Sites of Special Scientific Interest: 
Spring Meadows, Alderman’s  Head  and Cow Croft Meadows SSSI is nationally important 
ecologically for its areas of species-rich unimproved neutral grassland. 
Pye Flatts Meadows SSSI is  three fields which contain a uniform and mature stand of 
neutral haymeadow grassland, the best of a number of known scattered examples in 
the locality. 
237 
Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
Carlton Main Brickworks SSSI's special interests are geological and within the Coal 
Measures strata, exposed by the extraction of clay. They include one of the best available 
exposures of the Top Marine Band in the Pennines coalfields. 
Stairfoot Brickworks  SSSI is a geological site which provides the best available exposure 
of the Aegiranum Marine Band within the Pennine Basin as well as the best known 
exposure of the ammonoid bearing part of the marine band in the world. 
Dark Peak SSSI  represents an extensive tract of semi-natural upland vegetation typical 
of and including the full range of moorland vegetation of the South Pennines. The 
moorland breeding bird assemblage is of great regional and national importance. 
Little Don Stream  Section SSSI is designated for its geological interest as the strata in 
the banks of the stream provide the reference for one of the major units of the 
Carboniferous System against which similar features around the world are compared. 
Wharncliffe Crags SSSI  is designated for its geological interest as the best example of 
the Wharncliffe Edge Rock Formation which makes up part of the sandstone exposures 
in the Pennines. 
17.32 Local Nature Reserves  are declared by the Council and are places with wildlife or geological 
features that are of special interest locally and offer opportunities for people to enjoy nature. 
Six LNRs are shown on the Policies Map as follows: 
Site LNR1 Carlton Marsh, Shaw Lane, Carlton 
26.22 ha LWS 
This is a Local Nature Reserve and Local Wildlife Site to the east of the mineral railway extending 
between Shaw Lane and Bleach Croft Farm. It was purchased in 1977 by the Council for the 
specific purpose of becoming a nature reserve and was formally declared as Barnsley's first LNR 
in 1980. It comprises a variety of habitats including woodlands, dry and marsh grassland, open 
water, running water, swamp and mire as well as wet woodlands, lowland dry acid grassland, 
lowland heath and reed beds. The habitats comprise a diversity of plant species and support a 
rich variety of birds and invertebrates including breeding birds, passage birds and wintering birds. 
A new meadow area has been added to the Reserve with the reclamation of the former railway 
sidings. 
238 
Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
Site LNR2 Elsecar Reservoir, Water Lane, Elsecar 
13.17 ha LWS 
This site comprises a reservoir surrounded by a variety of dry and wet habitats including woodland 
and grassland and was declared an LNR in 1996. It supports a diversity of bird interest for 
breeding, passage and wintering birds. The area was originally used as a water holding reservoir 
to feed into the Elsecar Canal. The site is of considerable natural value containing a large area 
of mature willow carr, grassland containing acid grass species, a large water area and associated 
water fringe habitats. The site is immediately adjacent to Elsecar Park and as such is particularly 
important to the community for informal recreation. 
Site LNR3 Dearne Valley Park 
49.33 ha LWS 
The site is particularly valuable to Barnsley residents as it is within 1 mile from the urban centre. 
It is a mixed use reserve developed from relict habitats and reclaimed colliery/associated uses 
around a river valley. It offers a high quality ancient acidic oak woodland together with a mosaic 
of wetland and grassland habitat and was declared a LNR in 1996. It includes a children's play 
area and 2 large ponds (one of which is leased to an angling club) some areas managed as 
amenity grassland but most as pockets of woodland with a network of public footpaths and a 
cycleway running the length of the park. The canal runs through the park and a section has a 
fishing lease. 
Site LNR4 West Haigh Wood 
38 ha LWS 
Located east of Grimethorpe at an altitude of 100m West Haigh Wood is a mixed age oak/birch 
woodland with a variety of other woody species of plant. There are also beech, sycamore and 
rhododendron. The ground flora is generally of creeping soft-grass, bluebell and honeysuckle 
and bracken. There are a few areas that are more species-rich including ancient woodland 
indicators. In the main body of the woodland some of the sycamores are up to around 120 years 
old, and there is an ancient sweet chestnut coppice stool which is perhaps 200 years old. 
Additional habitats of lowland heath and willow carr add diversity to the site. There is also a 
wealth of woodland archaeological features such as hollow-ways, lynchets, complex boundary 
earthworks, terraced tracks, charcoal heaths, regrown coppice and an abandoned Victorian 
pond. 
239 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
Site LNR5 Worsbrough Country Park, Worsbrough 
36.91 ha LWS 
This extensive site includes a former canal feeder reservoir, the canal basin and a variety of wet 
and dry habitats and was declared an LNR in 2000. The Country Park covers over 240 acres 
and incorporates a 17th century working water powered corn mill and a 60 acre reservoir which 
is open to anglers and birdwatchers. There is standing and running water, reed beds, ponds and 
canals, scrub fen, willow carr, swamp, spring and summer meadows, grassland, bluebell, 
woodlands and ancient woodland. These habitats provide good breeding and wintering habitats 
for a wide range of birds, bats insects, invertebrates and amphibians. The site supports a large 
number of species listed as RSPB Red List species such as skylark, linnet, reed bunting, spotted 
flycatcher, tree sparrow, grey partridge, bullfinch and song thrush. 
Site LNR6 Potter Holes Plantation 
8.51ha LWS 
The site is predominantly a semi mature sycamore plantation with oak, wych elm, beech and 
ash with ancient woodland indicator species present as well as bluebell. Between 1775 and 1841 
ironstone was mined here using the Bell pit method of mining and by 1841 was planted with 
trees to the shape of the present woodland. Bell pits remain present. The area was probably 
planted with trees as the mining had made the land unsuitable for agriculture but timber was a 
possible future saleable crop from these new plantations. Now the management is for wildlife 
conservation and public recreation and the site was declared a LNR in 1996 and is particularly 
important to the local community and for breeding birds. 
17.33 Regionally Important  Geological and Geomorphological Sites (RIGS), are designated by 
locally developed criteria, are currently the most important places for geology and 
geomorphology outside statutorily protected land such as Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI). The designation of RIGS is one way of recognising and protecting important earth 
science and landscape features for future generations to enjoy. The following RIGS sites are 
shown on the Policies Map. Some of them have been newly designated: 
Site Name RIGS No. 
Bentcliffe Lane Quarry 8 
Little Fall Wood Quarry 12 
Summer Ford 15 
Bradshaw Quarry 20 
Westfield Lane Quarry 28 
240 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
Thurgoland Cutting 43 
Nabbes House Cutting 44 
Huthwaite Quarry 45 
Greenmoor Quarry 48 
Well Hill Lane Quarry 50 
Hey Crook Quarry 53 
Burton Bank 65 
Lewden Quarry 86 
Quarry Hill Cutting 131 
Darfield Quarry 146 
Worsborough Dale 151 
Silkstone Bypass 156 
Hartcliff Hill 157 
Thurlstone Bank 158 
Burntshaw Q 159 
Greenmoor Delph 160 
Harden Clough 161 
Raven Rocks 162 
Cawthorne Bypass 163 
Brookhill Quarry 164 
Hobb Stones Tor 168 
Scarp; Wharncliffe Edge 169 
Winscar Reservoir 172 
Knowle Quarry 173 
183 Hollin Dike / Falthwaite Wood 183 
17.34 Allocation as  a RIGS site does not necessarily rule out any development on these sites, 
however their special nature needs to be taken into account. If development is felt to be 
appropriate it could be allowed subject to any adverse impacts on the geological interests 
being mitigated. 
241 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
17.35 Woodlands, Protected  Trees and Hedgerows 
17.36 Significant ecological value exists  in the borough’s Ancient Semi-Natural Woodlands (ASNW) 
and Plantations on Ancient  Woodland Sites (PAWS), and in hedgerows which meet the 
Hedgerow Regulations criteria and  trees covered by a Tree Preservation Order / Conservation 
Area. Ancient and veteran  trees outside of woodland areas would normally be expected to 
be retained within any  development proposals. Allocation as a ASNW/PAWS site does not 
necessarily rule out any  development on these sites, however their special nature needs to 
be taken into account.  If development is felt to be appropriate it could be allowed subject to 
any adverse impacts on  the ecological interests being mitigated. 
Local Wildlife Sites 
17.37
 Local Wildlife Sites are  defined areas, identified and selected locally for their nature 
conservation value based on important, distinctive and threatened habitats and species with 
a national, regional and local context. 59 sites are shown on the Policies Map. 
242 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
LWS No LWS name 
1. Western Moors 
2. Whitley Edge 
3. Broadstone Reservoir 
4. Ingbirchworth Reservoir 
5. Royd Moor Reservoir 
6. Scout Dike Reservoir 
7. Small Shaw and High Bank 
8. Hartcliff Hill 
9. Brock Holes 
10. Hollin and Spring Woods 
11. Gunthwaite Dam and Clough 
12. Margery Wood 
13. North Wood 
14. Royd, Vicar, Lindley and Coates Great Wood 
15. Black Moor Common 
16. Silkstone Fall Wood 
17. Daking Brook 
18. Mag Wood Meadow 
20. Hugset Wood 
21. Falthwaite and Lowe Wood 
22. Stainborough park 
23. Rockley Woods 
24. Worsbrough Reservoir 
25. Barnsley Canal at Wilthorpe 
26. Cliff Wood 
27. Carlton Marsh 
243 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
28. 
29. 30. 31. Stairfoot Disused
  Railway 
Wombwell Wood 
Short Wood and Hay Green 
Sunny Bank, Horse Carr and Storrs Wood 
32. Hood Green Pastures 
33. Redbrook Pastures 
34. West Haigh Wood 
35. Edderthorpe Ings 
36. Broomhill Flash and Wombwell Ings 
37. Gipsy Marsh 
38. Old Moor and Wath Ings 
39. Bolton-on-Dearne Wetlands 
40. Forge Rocher and Tin Mill Rocher 
41. Wharncliffe Wood and Chase 
42. West Wood 
43. Sowell Pond 
44. Black Lane 
45. Skiers Spring Wood 
46. Elsecar Reservoir 
47. Hoyland Bank Wood 
48. Bretton Park 
49. Barnsley Canal 
50. Wogden Foot 
51. Barrow Colliery 
53. Kendal Green Scrub 
54. Old Mill Lane Culvert and Bat Roost 
55. Parkhill Nature Reserve 
56. Potter Holes Plantation 
244 Adopted Local Plan 
17 . Green Infrastructure and Greenspace 
57. Swaithe Flood Meadows 
58. Wool Greaves Meadows 
59. Glow Worm Site, Thurgoland 
17.38 As new LWS’s are added or old ones deleted, changes will appear here: 
http://www.barnsleybiodiversity.org.uk/sites.html 
17.39 Further information  on these sites can be gained from the Barnsley Biological Records Centre 
via the link on the Council's website (Countryside pages) or from 
www.barnsleybiodiversity.org.uk . 
17.40 In addition  to the notations shown on the Policies Map the Barnsley Local Biodiversity 
Action Plan (LBAP) 2008-2012 was adopted in 2010 and identifies a list of habitats and 
species considered as priorities for nature conservation. The LBAP is produced by and 
managed by the Barnsley Biodiversity Trust and can be viewed at 
www.barnsleybiodiversity.org.uk . The current review of the LBAP taking place extends the 
list of habitats from 17 to 20 and recognises that any UK BAP priority / Section 41 species 
that regularly breeds or over-winters in Barnsley should be a local priority. It is anticipated 
that the revised version will be adopted in 2019. 
17.41 In addition  to this the Biodiversity Opportunity Map (BOM) for Barnsley and South Yorkshire 
will help to monitor and implement the LBAP. This identifies sites and areas with the best 
potential for the creation and repair of important habitats. 
17.42 Dearne V alley Green Heart Nature Improvement Area 
17.43 Nature Improvement  Areas (NIAs) are large, discrete areas that will deliver a step change 
in nature conservation, where a local partnership has a shared vision for their natural 
environment. The NIA grant scheme was established to help address ecological restoration 
as part of series of actions at a landscape scale to improve biodiversity, ecosystems and our 
connections with the natural environment identified by the Natural Environment White Paper 
(2011) and taking forward recommendations identified in the Lawton Review Making Space 
for Nature (2010). As set out in the Relationship with Plans and Strategies section, the 
Dearne Valley Green Heart has been designated as an NIA and its extent within Barnsley's 
boundary can be seen in the Green Infrastructure Diagram. 
17.44 The Council  expects to adopt an NIA Planning Advice Note which will encourage major 
developments to incorporate biodiversity enhancements in their proposals. 
245 Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
The Challenge 
Protecting the Green Belt and planning positively to enhance the beneficial use of Green 
Belt and protect the quality of the environment 
Policy Solutions 
Protecting the Green Belt from inappropriate development 
Releasing Green Belt for development in a manner which secures the continued function 
and protection of the remaining Green Belt 
Identification of Safeguarded Land informed by Green Belt review 
Policy GB1 Protection of Green Belt 
The general extent of the Green Belt is set out on the Key Diagram. The detailed boundaries 
are defined on the Policies Map. Green Belt will be protected from inappropriate development 
in accordance with national planning policy. 
18.1 Most of Barnsley's  countryside is Green Belt. With the changes proposed in this Local Plan 
to take land out of the Green Belt, primarily for development needs, the Green Belt will still 
account for almost 75% of the borough (The Green Belt in the last development plan proposals 
map, the UDP, amounted to 77% of the Borough). Further details can be found about proposed 
Green Belt release in the introduction section under 'our approach'. The Green Belt will 
continue to fulfill it's longstanding role in the Borough of helping to conserve the natural 
environment by restraining development and assisting in the process of urban renaissance. 
National guidance in the NPPF sets out some uses which are generally acceptable in the 
Green Belt. We will not allow proposals for other types of development unless it can be shown 
that there are very special circumstances that justify setting aside local and national policy. 
In these cases, we will weigh up the harm that would be caused by allowing development 
that would not normally be allowed in the countryside against any potential benefits. 
18.2 The NPPF states  at paragraph 89 that a local planning authority should regard the construction 
of new buildings as inappropriate in the Green Belt. Exceptions to this are: 
Buildings for agriculture  and forestry 
Provision of appropriate  facilities for outdoor sport, outdoor recreation and for cemeteries 
The extension  or  alteration of a building provided that it does not result in disproportionate 
additions over and above the size of the original building 
246 
Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
The replacement of a building provided the new building is in the same use and not 
materially larger than the one it replaces 
Limited infilling  in villages, and limited affordable housing for local community needs 
Limited infilling  or the partial or complete redevelopment of previously developed sites 
(brownfield land) 
18.3 All such buildings still have to be considered in terms of their impact on the openness of the 
Green Belt and whether they cause other harm. 
18.4 In accordance  with the NPPF and as set out in GB1, we will not allow proposals for 
'inappropriate' development in the Green Belt unless it can be shown that there are very 
special circumstances that justify setting aside local and national policy. As set out in 
paragraph 88 of the NPPF very special circumstances will not exist unless the potential harm 
to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly outweighed 
by other considerations. 
18.5 The following  policies apply to development in the Green Belt: 
Policy GB2 Replacement, extension and alteration of existing buildings in 
the Green Belt 
Provided it will not have a harmful impact on the appearance, or character and will preserve the 
openness of the Green Belt, we will allow the following development in the Green Belt: 
Replacement buildings where the new building is in the same use and is not materially larger 
than that which it replaces. 
Extension or alteration of a building where the total size of the proposed and previous 
extensions does not exceed the size of the original building. 
Dividing an existing house to form smaller units of accommodation. 
All such development will be expected to: 
Be of a high standard of design and respect the character of the existing building and its 
surroundings, in its footprint, scale and massing, elevation design and materials; and 
Have no adverse effect on the amenity of local residents, the visual amenity of the area, or 
highway safety. 
18.6 The NPPF  states that an extension to a building is not inappropriate if it does not result in 
disproportionate additions over and above the size of the original building. We will allow 
extensions provided that cumulatively they would not amount to more than a doubling of the 
247 
Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
size of the original building.(11) Original means as existing in 1948 or, in relation to a building 
constructed later, as it was built. A house which has been subdivided will not be considered 
as the original building. In the case of a replacement building, the original building means 
the building that was replaced. 
18.7 The sizes of  a building as existing and proposed will be compared by reference to their gross 
floorspace, using the following guidelines: 
Floorspace will be calculated  by external measurements of the building. 
Floorspace within roof spaces  will not be taken into account. 
Outbuildings will not be  taken into account when calculating original floorspace (but will 
be taken into account when calculating the cumulative additions to the original dwelling). 
11 The original building must remain the dominant visual feature 
248 Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
Policy GB3 Changes of use in the Green Belt 
We will allow the change of use or conversion of buildings in the Green Belt provided that: 
The existing building is of a form, scale and design that is in keeping with its surroundings; 
The existing building is of a permanent and substantial construction and a structural survey 
demonstrates that the building does not need major or complete reconstruction for the 
proposed new use; 
The proposed new use is in keeping with the local character and the appearance of the 
building; and 
The loss of any building from agricultural use will not give rise to the need for a replacement 
agricultural building, except in cases where the existing building is no longer capable of 
agricultural use. 
All such development will be expected to: 
Be of a high standard of design and respect the character of the existing building and its 
surroundings, in its footprint, scale and massing, elevation design and materials; 
Have no adverse effect on the amenity of local residents, the visual amenity of the area, or 
highway safety; and 
Preserve the openness of the Green Belt. 
In addition to the above, when a residential use is proposed, we will allow the change of use 
provided that: 
There are not strong economic reasons why such development would be inappropriate; and 
Residential use would be a more appropriate way of maintaining and improving the character 
and appearance of the building than any other use 
We will not generally allow the change of use of Green Belt land to extend residential curtilages 
for use as gardens. 
18.8 The aim of this policy is to allow existing buildings to be reused as long as they are suitable 
for reuse and the site is in a suitable place for the proposed use. 
18.9 A large part of Barnsley is rural and much of the countryside is in agricultural use. The nature 
of farming has changed in recent years and government policy supports rural diversification. 
As a result it is likely that some farm buildings will no longer be needed for agricultural use 
249 Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
and there may be opportunities to reuse them, especially in ways that support the local 
economy. However this has to be balanced with protecting the countryside and achieving 
sustainable development. 
18.10 Applicants will  need to demonstrate that they have made reasonable attempts to secure a 
suitable agricultural, business, leisure, tourism or other use which would contribute to the 
local rural economy before a residential use is allowed. 
Policy GB4 Permanent Agricultural and Forestry Workers Dwellings 
Proposals for agricultural and forestry workers dwellings will be allowed provided that: 
They support existing agricultural or forestry activities on well established agricultural or 
forestry units; 
There is clearly an established existing functional need which relates to a full time worker; 
The unit and the agricultural activity concerned have been established for at least 3 years 
and profitable for at least one of them, are currently financially sound and have a clear 
prospect of remaining so; and 
The functional need could not be fulfilled by another existing dwelling on the unit or in the 
area which is suitable and available for occupation by the workers concerned. 
Development will be expected to: 
Be of a size commensurate with the established functional need; 
Be sited directly adjacent to existing buildings wherever possible; 
Be of a high standard of design and respect the character of its surroundings, in its footprint, 
scale and massing, elevation design and materials; and 
Have no adverse effect on the amenity of local residents, the visual amenity of the area, or 
highway safety. 
Where permission is granted we may remove permitted development rights, and impose 
occupancy conditions as appropriate. 
18.11 One of the few circumstances in which isolated residential development may be justified in 
the Green Belt is when it is required to enable agriculture and forestry full time workers to 
live at or near their place of work. The aim of this policy is to ensure that such dwellings are 
genuinely linked to the farming , forestry or rural enterprise which is likely to materialise and 
capable of being sustained for a reasonable period of time and that the workers are required 
to live nearby. 
250 Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
18.12 If a new dwelling is essential to support a new farming activity it should normally, for the first 
3 years, be provided by temporary accommodation such as a caravan or wooden structure 
which can be easily dismantled. 
Policy GB5 Temporary Agricultural and Forestry Workers Dwellings 
Proposals for temporary agricultural and forestry workers dwellings will be allowed provided that: 
There is clear evidence of a firm intention and ability to develop the enterprise concerned; 
A functional need can be demonstrated; 
There is clear evidence that the proposed enterprise has been planned on a sound financial 
basis; and 
The functional need could not be fulfilled by another existing dwelling on the unit or in the 
area which is suitable and available for occupation by the workers concerned. 
Development will be expected to: 
Be of a size commensurate with the established functional need; 
Be sited directly adjacent to existing buildings wherever possible; 
Be of a high standard of design and respect the character of its surroundings, in its footprint, 
scale and massing, elevation design and materials; and 
have no adverse effect on the amenity of local residents, the visual amenity of the area, or 
highway safety. 
Where permission is granted this will be for a specified temporary period. 
18.13 In the case of a temporary building, significant investment in new farm buildings will be taken 
as a good indication of intentions and ability to develop the enterprise concerned. 
18.14 The information  that needs to be provided by an applicant relating to establishing functional 
need, and demonstrating profitability and financial soundness is relevant for both permanent 
and temporary buildings. 
18.15 A functional  test is necessary to establish whether it is essential for the proper functioning 
of the enterprise for one or more workers to be readily available at most times. This may 
arise for example if workers are needed on hand day and night in case animals or agricultural 
processes require essential care at short notice, or to deal quickly with emergencies that 
could otherwise cause serious loss of crops or products (such as frost damage or the failure 
of automatic  systems).We will consider  whether any dwellings (or buildings suitable for 
conversion to dwellings) have recently been sold or separated from the farmland concerned. 
Such a sale would constitute evidence of a lack of agricultural need. The protection of livestock 
251 Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
from theft or injury may contribute to the needs for a new agricultural dwelling, but will not 
by itself be sufficient to justify one. Requirements arising from food processing cannot be 
used to justify an agricultural dwelling. 
18.16 A financial  test is necessary to establish whether the the farming enterprise is economically 
viable and to provide evidence of the size of the dwelling which the unit can sustain. Levels 
of profitability will be considered realistically taking into account the nature of the enterprise 
concerned. Agricultural dwellings should be of a size commensurate with the established 
functional requirement. Dwellings that are unusually large in relation to the agricultural needs 
of the unit, or unusually expensive to construct in relation to the income it can sustain in the 
long term, will not be permitted. 
18.17 Permitted development  rights may be removed to ensure that proposed extensions do not 
result in a dwelling the size of which exceeds what could be justified by the functional 
requirement. Where the need for the accommodation has been accepted, it will be necessary 
to ensure that the dwellings are kept available for meeting this need. As such planning 
permission should be subject to appropriate occupancy conditions. Where occupancy 
conditions are imposed they will not normally be removed unless it can be shown that the 
long terms needs, both on that unit and in the locality, no longer warrant the dwelling's 
reservation for that purpose. 
Safeguarded land  
18.18 Paragraph 85  of the NPPF advises that when defining Green Belt boundaries, local planning 
authorities should where necessary, identify in their plans areas of 'safeguarded land' between 
the urban area and the Green Belt, in order to meet longer term development needs stretching 
well beyond the plan period. The aim of protecting this land is to make sure that the Green 
Belt boundaries will remain in the long term avoiding the need to review them at the end of 
the plan period. 
18.19 The extent  of safeguarded land is shown on the policies map and is listed in the following 
table: 
Site Area 
(hectares) Site address Site reference Reference 
4.7 North of Burton Road, West Green (a) SL1 
26.8 North of Staincross Common SL2 
16.5 West of Barugh SL3 
Hoyland Barnsley 
252 Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
14.6 Land north of Rockingham, Birdwell SL4 
10.6 East of Sheffield Road, Hoyland Common SL5 
18.2 Land North East of Hemingfield SL6 
Cudworth 
0.6 East of Sandybridge Lane, Shafton SL7 
0.9 Land behind Queens Drive, Shafton SL8 
4.3 Land off Cemetery Road, Grimethorpe SL9 
7.2 Land North of The Green View, Shafton SL10 Royston 
2.1 North of Midland Road, Royston SL11 
3.5 South of Church Hill, Royston SL12 Dearne 
9.8 South of Coniston Drive, Bolton SL13 Penistone 
2.9 West of Castle Lane, Penistone SL14 
4.8 East of Castle Lane, Penistone SL15 
253 Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
5.5 Land off Mortimer Road, Cubley SL16 
0.9 Land at Springvale, Penistone SL17 
3.1 Land off Moors Avenue, Penistone SL18 
Wombwell 
13.7 Pitt Street, Low Valley SL19 
10.3 South of Pit Lane and West of Windmill 
Road, Wombwell SL20 
Villages 
4.7 North and South of Roughbirchworth Lane, 
Oxspring SL21 
2.5 Off High Street, Great Houghton SL22 
4.4 South of New Smithy Drive, Thurlstone SL23 
0.7 South of Halifax Road, Thurgoland SL24 
0.9 East of Beech Avenue, Silkstone Common SL25 
3.8 North of Darton Road, Cawthorne SL26 
0.3 South of Wellthorne Avenue, Ingbirchworth SL27 
0.8 North of Upper Field Lane, High Hoyland SL28 
18.20 Development on  safeguarded land will normally only be allowed where it is consistent with 
the National Planning Policy Framework and which would not affect the potential for the future 
development of the site in accordance with the following policy. 
254 Adopted Local Plan 
18 . Green Belt and Safeguarded Land 
Policy GB6 Safeguarded Land 
We will only grant planning permission on sites allocated as safeguarded land for development 
that is needed for the operation of existing uses, or alternative uses where the development will 
protect the open nature of the land, and will not affect the potential for future development of the 
site. The permanent development of safeguarded land will only be permitted following review 
of the Local Plan which proposes such development. 
18.21 NPPF paragraph  85 states where necessary local planning authorities should 'identify areas 
of 'safeguarded land' between the urban area and Green Belt, in order to meet long term 
development needs stretching well beyond the plan period'. Its suitability as an allocation for 
development will be considered in a future review of the Local Plan. Any review of the Local 
Plan which includes assessment of the suitability of safeguarded land for development will 
include the normal planning considerations of the sustainability and suitability of sites for 
development. 
255 Adopted Local Plan 
19 . Climate Change 
The Challenge 
Considering central government's belief that climate change is the greatest long term 
challenge facing the world today, and a main challenge to delivery of sustainable development 
Helping to tackle and adapt to climate change through the delivery of new housing, 
employment and infrastructure 
Addressing flood risk 
Increasing and encouraging the production of renewable energy in the borough whilst 
protecting the countryside and amenity 
Policy Solutions 
Climate change cuts across many aspects of the Local Plan and many of the policies in this 
document seek to prepare for and adapt to climate change 
The planning system can help meet the targets for the reduction of emissions of greenhouse 
gases by: 
Supporting the building of zero-carbon homes and business premises that are low 
energy and produce lower carbon emissions. 
Locating development to reduce the need to travel and making walking and cycling 
essential components of new development that are accessible and attractive. 
Supporting integrated development. 
19.1 The NPPF recognises  the key role planning has in meeting the challenge of climate change 
and states that Local planning authorities should adopt proactive strategies to mitigate and 
adapt to climate change. This policy sets out how the Council will attempt to address the 
climate change issues will be addressed through the Local Plan. 
256 Adopted Local Plan 
19 . Climate Change 
Policy CC1 Climate Change 
We will seek to reduce the causes of and adapt to the future impacts of climate change by: 
Giving preference to development of previously developed land in sustainable locations; 
Promoting the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions through sustainable design and 
construction techniques; 
Locating and designing development to reduce the risk of flooding; 
Promoting the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS); 
Promoting and supporting the delivery of renewable and low carbon energy; and 
Promoting investment in Green Infrastructure to promote and encourage biodiversity gain. 
19.2 The following  policies in this section, CC2 to RE1 provide the detailed policy framework for 
the implementation of interventions/ initiatives identified in this policy. 
Policy CC2 Sustainable Design and Construction 
Development will be expected to minimise resource and energy consumption through the inclusion 
of sustainable design and construction features, where this is technically feasible and viable. 
All non-residential development will be expected, to achieve a minimum standard of BREEAM 
‘Very Good’ (or any future national equivalent). This should be supported by preliminary 
assessments at planning application stage. 
19.3 Development proposals  will be expected to consider energy efficiency and sustainable design 
from the outset and will be required to include details of their sustainability within their Design 
and Access Statement. 
19.4 For housing  development energy efficiency is regulated by Building Regulations. We will 
encourage energy efficiency that exceeds those minimum standards set out in national 
standards and take that into account where proposed in support of a planning application. 
19.5 We will use the BREEAM (British Research Establishment Assessment Method) to measure 
the environmental performance of all non domestic buildings. As well as energy use and the 
emissions generated BREEAM deals with water use, materials and waste management, land 
use and ecology, pollution, health and well-being and transport. 
19.6 We will encourage and plan for sustainable decentralised zero or low carbon energy 
generation, such as biomass-fuelled district heating or combined heat and power (CHP) 
schemes. Where a heat network is not available or viable, a contribution ensuring connection 
257 Adopted Local Plan 
19 . Climate Change 
to a future district heating scheme is required on suitable developments. Developments not 
connected and unsuitable for future connection to a heat network will rely on energy generated 
from renewables, like solar panels, photovoltaics and heat pumps. 
Flood Risk  
Policy CC3 Flood Risk 
The extent and impact of flooding will be reduced by: 
Not permitting new development where it would be at an unacceptable risk of flooding from 
any sources of flooding, or would give rise to flooding elsewhere; 
Ensuring that in the Functional Floodplain (Flood Zone 3b), only water compatible 
development or essential infrastructure (subject to the flood risk exception test) will be 
allowed. In either case it must be demonstrated that there would not be a harmful effect on 
the ability of this land to store floodwater; 
Requiring developers with proposals in Flood Zones 2 and 3 to provide evidence of the 
sequential test and exception test where appropriate; 
Requiring site-specific Flood Risk Assessments (FRAs) for proposals over 1 hectare in Flood 
Zone 1 and all proposals in Flood Zones 2 and 3; 
Expecting proposals over 1000 m2 floor space or 0.4 hectares in Flood Zone 1 to demonstrate 
how the proposal will make a positive contribution to reducing or managing flood risk; and 
Expecting all development proposals on brownfield sites to reduce surface water run-off by 
at least 30% and development on greenfield sites to maintain or reduce existing run-off rates 
requiring development proposals to use Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) in accordance 
with policy CC4; and 
Using flood resilient design in areas of high flood risk. 
19.7 It is predicted that the incidence of flooding will increase as a consequence of climate change. 
In Barnsley the rivers Dearne and Dove and the low lying areas in the east of the borough 
are particularly at risk from flooding. However, recent flood events caused by surface water 
and sewer flooding have demonstrated that areas which have not suffered from flooding in 
the past can still be at risk. It is therefore important that all new development is located and 
designed to reduce the risk of flooding to the development itself and settlements downstream, 
and provides resilience to protect against increased risk of flooding in the future. 
19.8 In accordance  with the NPPF the Council will discourage inappropriate development in areas 
at risk of flooding. This means there will be a general presumption against development 
within areas of high or medium flood risk unless there are no reasonably available sites in 
areas of lower flood risk and, in cases where it is appropriate for the exception test to be 
applied, the benefits of the development outweigh the risks from flooding. 
258 Adopted Local Plan 
19 . Climate Change 
19.9 The NPPF  and the accompanying Planning Practice Guidance categorises areas at risk from 
fluvial (river) flooding as: 
Flood Zone 1 Low Probability (less than 1 in 1000 year probability of flooding) 
Flood Zone 2 Medium Probability (1 in 1000 year probability of flooding) 
Flood Zone 3a High Probability (1 in 100 year probability of flooding) 
Flood Zone 3b The Functional Floodplain (land where water has to flow or be stored in 
times of flood). 
19.10 The Environment  Agency (EA) defines and produces maps which show the Flood Zones. 
These maps are informed by previous flood events and are updated regularly and can be 
viewed on the EA website. 
19.11 Flood Zone  3b (The Functional Floodplain) comprises land where water has to flow or be 
stored in times of flood and forms a vital part of flood control. The boundary of Flood Zone 
3b was agreed by the Council and the EA during the production of the Barnsley Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) and is shown on the Policies Map. Development will not be 
allowed in Flood Zone 3b unless it can be shown that there would be no harmful effect on 
the ability of this land to store floodwater. 
19.12 Developers will  need to take into account the SFRA and give particular consideration to the 
surface water flood maps and the emerging Local Flood Risk Management Strategy. 
19.13 The Council's  Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) indicates that the majority 
of areas where growth will be located are within Flood Zone 1. 
19.14 Development which  would increase the risk of flooding by increasing the rate or volume of 
surface water must be the subject of measures that will reduce the risk of flooding. In cases 
where development would increase the risk of flooding by increasing surface water, developers 
will have to take action to reduce flooding so the development can go ahead, for example, 
by creating balancing ponds and other facilities for holding water. 
19.15 We will consider the need to produce Surface Water Management Plans in partnership with 
stakeholders to reduce the threat of surface water flooding. 
259 Adopted Local Plan 
19 . Climate Change 
Policy CC4 Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) 
All major development(12) will be expected to use Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) to 
manage surface water drainage, unless it can be demonstrated that all types of SuDS are 
inappropriate. 
The Council will also promote the use of SuDS on minor development. 
To enable the Council to determine the suitability of a proposed SuDS scheme: 
Outline Planning applications must be supported by a conceptual drainage plan and SuDS 
design statement; and 
Detailed Planning applications must be supported by a detailed drainage plan and SuDS 
design statement, which should contain information on how the SuDS will operate, be 
managed and maintained for the lifetime of the development. 
19.16 Sustainable Drainage  Systems (SuDS) control surface water run-off as close to its origin as 
possible. The Flood and Water Management Act 2010 maintains that there is always a SuDS 
solution. As such priority will be given to incorporating SuDS into development, unless it can 
be demonstrated that SuDS are not appropriate. 
19.17 SuDS are  a non-traditional environmentally friendly way of dealing with surface water. SuDS 
rely on gravity to drain surface water from hard surfaces into drainage systems or into the 
ground. Where surface water would have traditionally drained into a combined foul and 
surface water sewer, the use of SuDS prevents relatively clean surface water from passing 
unnecessarily through the waste-water treatment process. Run-off water is collected and 
stored so that natural cleansing (sedimentation, filtration and biodegradation) happens before 
it is released into watercourses. SuDS control surface water run-off as close to its origin as 
possible, before it enters a watercourse. This involves moving away from traditional piped 
drainage systems to those that are similar to natural drainage processes. 
19.18 The SuDS  approach is particularly valuable in urban areas where high density development 
and impermeable surfaces mean surface run-off can easily cause flooding, either directly or 
indirectly through sewer flooding. SuDS has several environmental and social benefits: 
Prevents pollutants  from entering the drainage system; 
Protects or  enhances water quality and decreases demand for treated water (recycling); 
Conserves energy  and reduces carbon dioxide emissions; 
Reduces sewer  discharge and flooding; 
12 as defined in Article 2(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 and subsequent 
updates 
260 
Adopted Local Plan 
19 . Climate Change 
Provides a habitat  for wildlife; and 
Contributes to the greening of the urban environment. 
19.19 This policy  applies to all elements of the design of developments, including roads and 
footways. Including SuDS in the overall site and layout, and as part of the wider Green 
Infrastructure provision where appropriate, should be considered early in the planning and 
design stage, in consultation with the Environment Agency, the Planning Authority and the 
Highway Authority. 
19.20 Developers must  show that SuDS will work and will be maintained in the long term. Developers 
may be required to contribute towards the maintenance of SuDS, possibly through the 
establishment of a management company where appropriate. 
19.21 Infiltration type  SuDS may not be appropriate in all cases due to ground conditions. Where 
this is the case alternative (non infiltration) SuDs must be considered. Infiltration SuDS may 
not be appropriate on land that is affected by contamination, as they can mobilise contaminants 
in the ground and pollute groundwater. Developers must show that infiltration SuDS will not 
pose a risk to the quality of underlying groundwater. 
19.22 All SuDS  should be designed in accordance with the CIRIA C697 SuDS Manual or equivalent 
local guidance. 
19.23 The Council  is working with the Environment Agency to investigate the potential to deliver 
new flood storage areas. The most significant example of this is the Dearne Valley Green 
Heart Nature Improvement Area. Schemes are also proposed to commence in 2016 at 
Wombwell and Little Houghton to formalise areas that are known to flood and increase their 
capacity and biodiversity potential. We will support these schemes provided they do not affect 
the openness of the Green Belt. 
Water 
Policy CC5 Water Resource Management 
To conserve and enhance the Boroughs water resources proposals will be supported which: 
a. Do not result in the deterioration of water courses and which conserve and enhance: 
i. The natural geomorphology of water courses; 
ii. Water quality; and 
iii. The ecological value of the water environment, including watercourse corridors. 
b. Make positive progress towards achieving “good” status or potential under the Water 
Framework Directive in the boroughs surface and ground water bodies; 
c. Manage water demand and improve water efficiency through appropriate water conservation 
techniques including rainwater harvesting and grey-water recycling; and 
d. Dispose of surface water appropriately and improve water quality through the incorporation 
of SuDS, in accordance with Policy CC4. 
261 Adopted Local Plan 
19 . Climate Change 
19.24 Barnsley's water  resources form an important part of the environment and can provide wildlife 
habitats and encourage biodiversity, provide opportunities for leisure and recreation and help 
alleviate flood risk. 
19.25 This policy  seeks to address the key objectives of the Water Framework Directive and Humber 
River Basin Management Plan, specifically those of the latter which relate to the Don and 
Rother catchment, the catchment in which the borough lies. 
262 Adopted Local Plan 
20 . Renewables 
The Challenge 
Meeting the government’s carbon-cutting ambitions by promoting both higher levels of energy 
efficiency and much greater use of renewable energy 
Setting ambitious targets and reflecting local opportunities that are deliverable alongside 
wider housing and economic objectives to contribute to the government’s ambitions 
The Current Position 
Renewable energy is an integral part of the governments longer-term aim of reducing 
emissions 
BMBC Energy Strategy 2015-2025 
Policy Solutions 
Increasing renewable energy capacity and facilitating the delivery of schemes which lead 
to wider economic and environmental benefit, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and provide 
a diverse energy supply 
20.1 The Government has  set out in the National Planning Policy Framework that the environmental 
dimension to sustainable development requires the planning system to help with mitigation 
and adaptation to climate change including moving to a low carbon economy. 
20.2 One of the  core planning principles set out in the National Planning Policy Framework is to 
support the transition to a low carbon future in a changing climate, and to encourage the 
reuse of existing resources and the use of renewable resources. The NPPF also indicates 
that planning plays a key role in helping shape places to secure radical reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions, minimising vulnerability and providing reliance to the impacts of 
climate change, and supporting the delivery of renewable and low carbon energy and 
associated infrastructure. 
263 Adopted Local Plan 
20 . Renewables 
Policy RE1 Low Carbon and Renewable Energy 
All developments will be expected to seek to incorporate initially appropriate design measures, 
and thereafter decentralised, renewable or low carbon energy sources in order to reduce carbon 
dioxide emissions and should at least achieve the appropriate carbon compliance targets as 
defined in the Building Regulations. 
We will allow development that produces renewable energy as long as there is no material harm 
upon: 
The character of the landscape and appearance of the area; 
Living conditions; 
Biodiversity, Geodiversity and water quality; 
Heritage assets, their settings and cultural features and areas; 
Key views of, from or to scenic landmarks or landscape features; 
Highway safety, or 
Infrastructure including radar. 
In assessing effect, we will consider appropriate mitigation which could reduce harm to an 
acceptable level. 
Proposals will be expected to include information regarding their efficiency. 
Proposals must be accompanied by information that shows how the local environment will be 
protected, and that the site will be restored when production ends. 
20.3 Taking into  account the energy hierarchy, new buildings and conversions should in the first 
instance be designed and constructed to be energy efficient in particular through using the 
principles of passive design, including high insulation levels, solar heating, natural lighting 
and ventilation, thermal mass and passive cooling. Thereafter, decentralised, renewable or 
low carbon energy sources should be considered for use in order to reduce carbon dioxide 
emissions. 
20.4 The domestic  and industrial sectors are responsible for a majority of Barnsley’s total emissions 
and this policy aims to create a framework that promotes and encourages a reduction in 
emissions. 
20.5 Proposals for  development that produces renewable energy will be assessed against this 
policy. Such developments can include wind turbines, biomass heating systems, roof mounted 
wind turbines, photovoltaic cell, ground source heating and cooling systems and hydroelectric 
power. The policy does not apply to wind turbines, which will be considered against 
264 Adopted Local Plan 
20 . Renewables 
government policy as set out in the written ministerial statement of 18 June 2015 and clarified 
in Planning Practice Guidance. Given Barnsley's coal mining history, the potential for water 
at or near 2 the surface of flooded redundant mineworkings may form a sustainable local 
means to power ground source heat pumps. We encourage consideration of the use of this 
technology in commercial properties and in the future, as technology advances, in domestic 
properties. 
20.6 We will support proposals for renewable energy unless there are significant harmful effects 
which cannot be prevented or mitigated. Proposals should be accompanied by information 
setting out the effects of the proposal and any proposals to reduce or mitigate the effect. We 
will refuse planning permission for proposals that are not accompanied by enough supporting 
information. 
20.7 The Council's  energy strategy 2015-2025 sets out the low carbon goals for the borough. The 
wider use of renewable energy is a key component of the strategy which contains an ambition 
for 20% of the energy consumed by the borough to be derived from renewable sources by 
2025. 
20.8 In addition  our Housing Strategy 2014-2033 includes the Strategic Objective ‘to ensure the 
design and delivery of new high quality, desirable and sustainable homes’, and includes the 
key ambition ‘to achieve 15% renewable energy on new build developments’. 
20.9 Inevitably some  proposals for renewable energy will have significant effects on the local area. 
For example, large scale renewable energy developments will be prominent in the landscape. 
In these cases we will carefully weigh up the environmental, social and economic benefits 
of the proposals against effects on the local area including any effects on the National Park, 
the Green Belt and European Natura 2000 designations (presently the South Pennines Moors 
Special Area for Conservation and Special Protection Area which abut the borough’s western 
boundary). 
20.10 It is important to assess the efficiency of devices, particularly large scale installations such 
as wind turbines, in order to balance the benefits and impacts. 
20.11 The eastern  part of the borough lies within the 30km Wind Farm Safeguard Zone around 
Robin Hood Airport Doncaster Sheffield (RHADS). Within this Zone in particular wind turbines 
must not have a harmful effect on infrastructure including radar. 
265 Adopted Local Plan 
21 . Waste and Recycling 
The Challenge 
Protecting human health and  the environment by producing less waste and by using it as a 
resource wherever possible 
Moving away from waste  disposal (landfill) and towards energy recovery, recycling and 
composting, re-use and reduction 
Addressing waste as a  resource and regarding disposal as the last option, but one that must 
be adequately catered for 
The Current Position  
The government’s objectives for  sustainable development include the effective protection 
of the environment, the prudent use of natural resources, social progress that meets the 
needs of everyone, and high and stable levels of economic growth and employment 
National Planning Policy for  Waste and NPPF set out key planning objectives that planning 
strategies should seek to achieve 
Barnsley has successfully increased  its municipal waste recycling rates in recent years but 
currently uses landfills located outside the borough as its main means of disposal of residual 
waste. In partnership with Doncaster and Rotherham Councils it is actively seeking more 
sustainable methods of treatment for all waste streams 
Policy solutions  
This Local Plan does  not contains policies or text regarding waste and recycling. These 
issues are covered by a separate Joint Waste Plan prepared by the three metropolitan 
borough councils of Barnsley, Doncaster and Rotherham. This document was adopted in 
March 2012 and sets the strategic direction for the future of waste management across the 
three boroughs. 
Barnsley's Local Plan is  the planning strategy that will guide the scale and location of new 
development and the use of land in Barnsley 
266 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
The Challenge 
Ensuring the prudent, ef ficient and sustainable use of minerals and use of suitable materials 
as secondary aggregates, thereby minimising the requirement for primary extraction 
Minimising the environmental and  social effects of existing and proposed minerals sites, 
while recognising that the minerals industry forms an important contribution to sustainable 
development, the economy and employment in the borough 
The Current Position  
The main commercial interest  in Barnsley is currently in clay, both for brick making and pipe 
making. There is also one small sandstone quarry for building stone, and sites for the 
extraction of coal mine methane 
There is unlikely to  be any interest in deep mined coal during the plan period, although there 
may be increased interest in shallow coal extraction and utilisation of the coal in situ through 
clean coal technologies 
Policy Solutions  
Identifying existing permitted minerals  sites and safeguarding them from inappropriate 
development 
Identifying Areas of Search  to provide greater certainty of where future sustainable mineral 
extraction will take place 
Ensuring that secondary and recycled aggregates are maximised and primary mineral 
extraction minimised 
Encouraging mineral extraction prior to non-mineral development 
Ensuring environmental protection and high quality reclamation and aftercare 
267 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
Policy MIN 1 Minerals 
Provision will be made for non-aggregate mineral resources including primary and secondary 
resources as follows: 
Existing sites with planning  permission for the extraction of minerals will be shown on the 
Policies Map which accompanies this Local Plan and will be protected from inappropriate 
development that could result in their sterilisation. 
Areas of Search are identified in this Local Plan. 
Areas of Safeguarding are  identified in this Local Plan. 
It is expected  that  future extraction of minerals will normally take place within existing quarries 
or by site extensions rather than new sites. 
Wherever possible sustainable modes  of transport will be used in connection with primary 
mineral extraction and in the transportation of secondary aggregates. 
Proposals for the exploration  and production of oil and natural gas (excluding shale) will 
generally be supported. 
Within the licensed areas  shown on the Policies map, proposals for exploration, appraisals 
and production of shale gas will be considered on their own merits against the plan as a 
whole and in accordance with national planning policies and guidance. 
Proposals to extract minerals  prior to the commencement of non-minerals development 
which may otherwise sterilise the mineral, will generally be supported. 
Proposals for the recovery  of material from mineral waste tips and land reclamation schemes 
(which may include the recycling, blending, processing and distribution of substitute and 
secondary materials), will generally be supported in appropriate locations as part of mineral 
extraction/reclamation schemes. 
The surface coal resource  and fireclay and brick clay will be protected from sterilisation from 
non-mineral surface development. 
Supporting proposals for extraction where the stone is the original source of, or is needed 
for the repair or restoration of, a heritage asset. 
All minerals  proposals  should: 
Be of limited duration. 
Have no unacceptable adverse  environmental or amenity impacts. 
Be subject to high quality and appropriate reclamation and afteruse within a reasonable 
timescale; and 
268 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
Result in a net increase in biodiversity and/or geodiversity interests. 
22.1 This policy forms the strategic approach towards mineral resources and their extraction in 
Barnsley. It identifies how minerals will be safeguarded and supports the maximisation of 
secondary aggregates. 
269 
Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
Aggregates 
22.2 The Local  Plan aims to deliver national objectives and policies for minerals planning. National 
minerals policy guidance require authorities to contribute to the regional supply of aggregates 
and provide an adequate and steady supply of other minerals (excluding energy minerals). 
The Yorkshire and Humber Aggregate Working Party (YHAWP) is responsible for apportioning 
the requirement for producing aggregate minerals between the 17 sub regions of the Yorkshire 
and Humber region. Barnsley lies within the South Yorkshire sub region which comprises 
Barnsley, Doncaster and Rotherham. 
22.3 However, geological  information demonstrates that Barnsley has no mineral resources 
suitable for use as aggregate minerals. The apportionment for the South Yorkshire sub region 
will therefore principally be made up from crushed dolomite limestone and sharp sand and 
gravel from Doncaster borough, with further contributions from Rotherham borough, which 
also has limestone resource. 
Mineral Safeguarding  
22.4 The NPPF  requires that Mineral Safeguarding Areas are identified so that proven resources 
are not sterilised by non-mineral development whilst not creating a presumption that resources 
there will be worked. With reference to minerals found in Barnsley borough, the NPPF requires 
25 years’ worth of reserves of Brick Clay to support actual and proposed investment. The 
NPPF also states that Mineral Planning Authorities should provide the ability to extract and 
stock pile if necessary Fireclay so that it remains available for use. 
22.5 Data from  the Coal Authority British Geological Survey indicates that shallow coal (less than 
50m overburden) and Fireclay and Brick Clay (minerals commonly associated with coal 
seams) underlie virtually all the borough. The surface coal resource and fireclay and brick 
clay will be protected from sterilisation through the Local Plan. 
22.6 The NPPF  requires mineral planning authorities to meet demand for small scale extraction 
of building stone.Sandstone quarry sites that may be important for local and regional built 
heritage conservation and for building and roofing stone have not been identified in Barnsley. 
There has been very little demand for the coal measures sandstone for building in Barnsley 
in recent years (currently only one small quarry) and the demand is unlikely to increase 
significantly over the plan period. Should any suitable sandstone resources be identified in 
the future, consideration will be given to safeguarding them through a review of the Local 
Plan. 
22.7 Current safeguarded  areas for all minerals will be identified on the Policies Map which 
accompany this Local Plan and will be safeguarded from sterilisation from non-minerals 
development. 
270 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
Mineral Production 
22.8 Although Barnsley  has considerable amounts of mineral resources, there is currently very 
little demand. There are four permitted clay quarries producing clay for bricks and pipes, and 
one small sandstone quarry. The main mineral resources in the borough are coal with 
associated minerals such as brick clay, and fireclay, together with coal measures sandstone 
which is used as building stone. 
22.9 The coal  measures sandstones have been worked for many years in small scale low output 
quarries, generally linked to the maintenance of properties, and some settlements are 
characterised by their stone buildings such as Wombwell and Penistone. Proposals for the 
extraction of building stone must demonstrate a local need, and must be on a scale which 
avoids significant environmental and amenity impacts. Such proposals may also result in 
windfall production of aggregates. However, this is unlikely to be of sufficient quantity to 
qualify as a contribution towards the subregional aggregate apportionment. Brick clays and 
Fireclay also underlie the borough but current demand is low and extraction is mainly confined 
to clays for local brick making and pipe making. For all these minerals extension to existing 
workings may be more sustainable and economically acceptable than working new sites. Areas 
of Search for new minerals will be shown on the Policies Map which will accompany the Local 
Plan. 
Coal 
22.10 The Energy  White Paper 2007 notes that the UK is likely to remain reliant on fossil fuels for 
many years but highlights the security and risks of imported fossil fuels. It is expected that 
coal will still provide 14% power by 2020. The White Paper indicates that we can reduce the 
dependence by (amongst other things) utilising our remaining coal reserves, and goes on to 
state that it will continue to play a role in energy generation for the foreseeable future because 
it brings security of supply benefits. It is important therefore that coal is not sterilised in the 
borough. 
22.11 Shallow coal  extraction by opencast methods may occur before some other form of 
development takes place on a site, whether greenfield or during reclamation of a brownfield 
site. Most former colliery sites have now been reclaimed in the borough but shallow coal 
extraction can provide an opportunity to work other associated economic minerals, such as 
fireclay and brick clay. It is also important to avoid unnecessary sterilisation of coal and 
associated mineral resources by other forms of development where these can be extracted, 
within a reasonable timescale and in an environmentally acceptable way or where local or 
community benefits clearly outweigh the likely impacts to justify the grant of planning 
permission. Proposals must also comply with government guidance (NPPF and NPG). 
Proposals for coal and related energy products such as the coal gasification, coal mine 
methane and coal bed methane will be assessed on their merits against all material planning 
considerations. 
271 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
On-shore Oil And Gas 
22.12 Petroleum exploration  licences have been granted in the borough in the past, and there are 
several sites which are currently extracting coal mine methane as a source of energy. 
Following the Climate Change Act 2008, the UK Low Carbon Transition Plan (National 
Strategy for Climate Change and Energy) anticipates an increase in the research and 
development of new low carbon technologies such as the extraction of coal bed methane 
and underground coal gasification. Exploration and development of low carbon technologies 
such as these will be supported where it can be demonstrated that it would be environmentally 
acceptable in accordance with government guidance (NPPF). 
Reclamation 
22.13 Proposals for  minerals development and other reclamation proposals will only be supported 
where clear details are provided, including timetable and implementation method, for the 
reclamation of the site, including restoration and aftercare. In most cases, reclamation of the 
site will normally be to a mix of agriculture, forestry, nature conservation, suitable outdoor 
recreation or amenity. Government policy states that Local Plans should promote opportunities 
to incorporate beneficial biodiversity and geological features within the design of development. 
It is important that such features are appropriate for the local area as identified by the priorities 
set out in the Barnsley Local Biodiversity Action Plan and the Green Infrastructure Strategy. 
Secondary Aggregates  
22.14 Government policy  seeks to maximise the potential for minerals waste to be used for recycling 
to produce secondary aggregates or used in site restoration, and local authorities must 
ensure, as far as practicable, the use of substitute or recycled materials in place of primary 
materials. In 2009 the Department for Communities and Local Government published revised 
national and regional guidelines for provision of aggregates in England for the 15 year period 
2005 – 2020. Following apportionment the region is expected to produce 133 million tonnes 
of alternative materials between 2005 and 2020. 
22.15 To reduce  dependency on the extraction of primary minerals, the efficient use of secondary 
and recycled materials and substitutes is promoted. The Joint Waste Plan provides a policy 
framework for proposals outside mineral sites to recycle construction and demolition wastes 
and recover secondary and recycled aggregates. 
22.16 The Minerals  Planning Authority will in conjunction with partners in the Yorkshire and Humber 
Local Aggregates Working Party produce an annual Local Aggregate Assessment to assess 
and plan the supply of aggregates during the plan period. 
Unconventional Natural  Gas Exploration and Production 
22.17 Unconventional gas  is natural gas which is trapped deep underground by impermeable rocks, 
such as shale rock or coal beds, and which covers 3 mains types of natural gas resources: 
shale gas, tight gas and coalbed methane. 
22.18 Research by  the British Geological Survey has indicated that there are significant potential 
resources of shale gas throughout the UK and particularly so in the north of England. 
Establishing how much is economically recoverable is still in the early stages, however 
272 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
research suggests that annual UK production of shale gas could be twice that of current 
annual UK consumption of (conventional) gas and meet Britain’s annual gas demand for 
more than 40 years. The extraction of shale gas relies on fracking. The British Geological 
Survey indicates that shale gas is likely to be present in shale rock strata throughout 
Barnsley. 
22.19 The exploration,  appraisal and production of shale gas will require planning permission. 
National Government is supportive of shale gas exploration and appraisal, subject to all 
appropriate controls and regulations (including planning permission) being in place. Guidance 
is set out in Planning Practice and Guidance (Onshore Oil and Gas) 2013. Any proposals 
for shale gas exploration, appraisal and development would need to comply with this. 
Sites with  planning permission for mineral extraction 
22.20 The following  sites as shown on the Policies Map have been allocated as existing sites with 
planning permission for the extraction of minerals: 
Site MIN1 Carlton Main Brick Works Clayburn Road, Grimethorpe 
Clay 
This consists of the Carlton Main Brickworks which was originally part of the Grimethorpe Colliery 
complex but is now a separate operation. Clays and shales are extracted from an area to the 
east of the works to produce bricks, and the plant is a significant local employer. 
Site MIN2 Middlecliff Quarry, Lee Lane, Millhouse Green 
Clay The Middlecliff Quarry is made up of two sections. The area which is in operation is 13 hectares 
and produces an annual clay output of 15,000 tonnes. The maximum depth of the quarry is 20 
metres but actual extraction depths vary. The other part of the sites is 3 hectares in size and 
separated from the operational site by Burnshaw Brook. It is opposite the edge of Crow Edge 
Village and comprises agricultural fields which also have permission for clay extraction in a 
phased sequence. 
273 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
Site MIN3 Stairfoot Quarry, Hanson Brick, Stairfoot Quarry, Wombwell Lane, 
Stairfoot 
Clay 
The site area of Stairfoot Quarry is 25 hectares and extends from Wombwell Lane to the rear of 
St Paul’s Parade in Ardsley. Consisting of four separate quarries, planning permission was 
granted on the 25th November 1993 for the extraction of material and restoration. Clay material 
is used in the adjacent manufacturing complex. The site includes: 
Yew Tree Quarry (planning permission has expired and restoration has begun). 
Marine Bank Quarry (located within the South East corner of the site and is now mostly 
exhausted but still operational for water management). 
South Quarry (located to the west of Marine Bank Quarry and north of the clay stockpile 
area, it has been fully restored following land filling and is now in agricultural management). 
North Quarry (part of this site has now been fully restored following land filling with the 
remainder restored at low level). 
Site MIN4 Bankswood Quarry, South Lane, Cawthorne 
Clay Banks Wood Quarry is situated 1.5 km to the southwest of Cawthorne, 1 km to the west of 
Silkstone and 350 metres to the south of South Lane which runs between Cawthorne and 
Hoylandswaine. The quarry is used for clay extraction for the manufacture of vitrified clay pipes and fittings. The 
surrounding area is farm land. The site operates under three planning permissions with the main 
permission valid until 2022. This involves the extraction of fireclay, coal and associated materials. 
Since 1983, the quarry has been backfilled with inert waste comprising pipes and fittings, works 
waste, excavation, construction and demolition waste and subsoil and topsoil under a rolling 
programme of restoration to provide pasture and woodland. 
274 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
Site MIN5 Hillside Quarry, Cross Lane, Hillside, Thurlstone 
Sandstone 
With a site area of 0.8 hectares the Hillside Quarry is used for the extraction of sandstone and 
produces a large portion of the material used in existing buildings in the western side of Barnsley. 
In addition, material from the quarry is commonly used for extensions and alterations for many 
of the listed and sensitive properties in the borough. As such the material produced is in high 
demand. The land surrounding the site is mostly agricultural. The current planning permission involves 
the extraction of material, storage and the restoration of the site and will see the extraction of 
21,000 tonnes of sandstone. 
Site MIN6 Greenley Carr Quarry, Whiteley Road, Dunford 
Clay (and possibly sandstone in the future) 
The site covers an area of 23 hectares which is located north of Whitley Road. In 2006 the existing 
2002 planning permission was amended to allow clay extraction until 2021. Currently 13,000 
tonnes of material are permitted to be extracted from the site per annum. Part of the site has 
already been worked with a planning permission dating back to 1986, however a substantial 
area of the site remains unworked. 
Areas of Search for minerals 
22.21 The following  areas as shown on the Policies Map have been allocated as an Area of Search 
for new minerals: 
Site MINAS1 Carlton Main Brick Works, Clayburn Road, Grimethorpe, Barnsley 
Clay 
The future reserves for the brickworks are in the form of the existing area of permission which 
contains as yet unworked reserves and an adjacent Area of Search. A planning permission 
granted in 1993 includes the restoration of the quarry and the retention of a geological exposure 
which forms a Site of Special Scientific Interest within the quarry. 
275 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
Site MINAS2 – Banks Wood Quarry, South Lane, Cawthorne 
Clay 
The future reserves for the quarry are in the form of the existing area of permission and an 
adjacent area of search, which has deemed interest for the extract of Fireclay and associated 
clay materials. 
Policy MIN2 Existing Permitted Reserves and Areas of Search 
Proposals for non mineral development within or close to the Existing Permitted Reserves and 
Areas of Search identified on the Policies Map will not be permitted unless it can be demonstrated 
that the development will not compromise extraction operations or result in sterilisation of 
resources within these areas. 
22.22 The National  Planning Policy Framework recognises that minerals are essential to support 
sustainable economic growth and our quality of life. It is therefore important that there is a 
sufficient supply to provide the infrastructure, buildings, energy and goods that the country 
needs. Minerals are a finite resource and we need to ensure that deposits are used in the 
best way and safeguarded to ensure they are not sterilised by other development. The 
Policies Map identifies the existing sites with planning permission and areas of search for 
new minerals which will be safeguarded from inappropriate non-mineral development. 
22.23 Safeguarding coal  and associated minerals 
Site MINSG1 - Hillside Quarry, Cross Lane, Hillside, Thurlstone 
Sandstone 
The proposed safeguarding area is currently subject to a planning application. Minerals from 
the existing permission area are in high demand and will form a continuing basis for the continuing 
expansion to meet local and national demand. 
22.24 Minerals safeguarding  is the process whereby the presence of a mineral resource is taken 
into account in deciding whether a proposed non mineral development should be granted 
planning permission. 
22.25 The NPPF  requires Local Plans to define Mineral Safeguarding Areas and adopt appropriate 
policies in order that known locations of specific mineral resources of local and national 
importance are not needlessly sterilised by non mineral development , whilst not creating a 
presumption that resources defined will be worked. 
276 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
22.26 Shallow coal,  Fireclay and Brick Clay underlie virtually all the borough and it is important that 
these minerals are safeguarded as far as possible from sterilisation for future working. We 
will seek to avoid unnecessary sterilisation of coal and associated mineral resources by other 
forms of development where these can be extracted, within a reasonable timescale and in 
an environmentally acceptable way or where the local or community benefits clearly outweigh 
the likely impacts to justify the grant of planning permission. 
22.27 The safeguarding  of resources does not mean that they would necessarily be exploited in 
all cases, simply that there should be an opportunity to consider exploitation. Resources 
across Barnsley range from those which justify a high level of protection to those where the 
future minerals planning situation is so uncertain that little or no protection is justified. The 
minerals resource situation within an area will not generally be apparent until it is assessed 
in response to a possible risk of being lost to other development. This means that the approach 
to safeguarding must be flexible as it will need to deal with a wide range of circumstances. 
22.28 When considering  proposals for surface development, we will use the policy below to strike 
a reasonable balance between safeguarding mineral resources (not allowing surface 
development) and allowing surface development (sterilising the mineral resource). 
Policy MIN3 Non Mineral Development and Safeguarding Minerals 
Other than those proposals identified as exemptions (see supporting text below) all proposals 
for non mineral development on sites over 2 hectares in size must be accompanied by supporting 
information demonstrating that mineral resources will not be needlessly sterilised. 
The supporting information must include details of a prior extraction scheme (showing that the 
mineral can be extracted satisfactorily prior to the development taking place), or where this is 
not considered feasible, evidence that: 
Minerals resources are not present or have already been extracted; 
The mineral resource concerned is of poor quality, or no longer of any value or potential 
value; 
The development will not affect the potential for mineral extraction if required in the future; 
The prior extraction of minerals is not feasible (due to significant overburden or ground 
instability issues for example); 
The prior extraction of minerals is not viable (if it would result in abnormal costs or delays 
which would jeopardise the viability of the development for example); 
There is an overriding need for the development which outweighs the need to safeguard 
the mineral resource; and 
The prior extraction of minerals would have unacceptable impacts on neighbouring uses, 
residential amenity or environmental assets. 
277 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
22.29 In order to ensure that minor development proposals are not subject to the minerals 
safeguarding policy above, the following proposals are exemptions : 
All householder applications  (except for new dwellings). 
Infill development. 
Minor development such  as walls, gates, accesses, advertisements and shopfronts. 
Changes of use. 
Amendments to previously  approved applications and applications for Reserved Matters 
relating to an already permitted Outline application. 
Certificates of Lawfulness  of Existing Use or Development, and Certificates of Lawfulness 
of Proposed Use or Development. 
Applications for works  to trees. 
Applications for temporary  planning permission. 
22.30 Where mineral  resources underlie the urban areas, they are effectively already sterilised by 
built development. The spatial strategy focuses development on the built up areas of Urban 
Barnsley and the Principal Towns. Evidence suggests that prior extraction can occur in 
developments in urban areas, and that coal, sand and gravel are the main minerals exploited 
in this way. Whilst there is no sand and gravel in Barnsley, we do have coal, clay and 
sandstone. Mineral Safeguarding in England Good Practice Advice (2011) acknowledges 
this and advises that minor developments may be excluded from safeguarding policies. 
22.31 Given the  need to be proportionate in approach to development sites in Barnsley, it would 
be unreasonable to apply a mineral safeguarding requirement to all sites within the built up 
areas, for example in relation to householder development. As such, having regard to the 
size and nature of the site allocations proposed in this Local Plan, the requirement to 
demonstrate that minerals have not been needlessly sterilised applies only to proposals on 
sites over 2 hectares in size. 
22.32 This threshold  is based on the general scale of the development being proposed through 
this Local Plan and is considered reasonable and proportionate in the context of the site 
allocations. The majority of the housing and employment allocations are on sites which are 
above 2 hectares in size (and as such under the terms of this policy would require supporting 
information demonstrating that mineral resources will not be needlessly sterilised as part of 
any planning application). 
22.33 On sites above this threshold, applicants must establish through site specific geological 
survey data what mineral is present, the quality and quantity of the reserve, and the overburden 
to reserve ratio. Supporting evidence relating to the extent or quality of the mineral resource 
and geotechnical issues should be prepared by a mineral surveyor or geologist and should 
be informed by the most up to date mineral resource information available. 
278 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
22.34 Applicants will  need to consider the likelihood of the mineral being extracted in the foreseeable 
future and the reasonable alternative options, which would avoid or minimise sterilising 
minerals and the reasons why these are less suitable. On the basis of the geological 
information the most appropriate course of action will be determined. This will vary according 
to the quality and quantity of the mineral that would be recovered, the practicability of extraction 
and the environmental impacts of mineral extraction. It should be noted that on sites where 
there is a need to address mining legacy, the prior extraction of the remaining surface coal 
can be a more cost effective option to other remediation techniques. 
22.35 Where the  proposed development would result in a potential loss of a mineral resource we 
will not generally grant planning permission for the development unless the overall planning 
benefits of the proposed development outweigh the potential loss of the mineral resource. 
22.36 It should  be noted that where prior extraction is deemed appropriate, separate planning 
applications will be required for mineral extraction and the non minerals development. 
22.37 The National  Planning Policy Framework sets out the government's approach to facilitating 
the sustainable use of minerals and additional guidance is set out in the Technical Guidance 
to the National Planning Policy Framework. Local Plan Policy MIN1 sets out our strategic 
Minerals policy and deals with minerals proposals in the final section. The final section of 
this policy requires all minerals proposals to amongst other things 'have no unacceptable 
adverse environmental or amenity impacts'. In accordance with this and paragraph 143 of 
the NPPF, planning applications for mineral extraction will be subject to the following policy: 
279 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
Policy MIN4 Mineral Extraction 
Proposals for mineral extraction must not have unacceptable adverse impacts on the natural 
and historic environment or on human health including those from: 
Noise; 
Dust; 
Visual intrusion; 
Traffic; 
Tip and quarry slope stability; 
Differential settlement of quarry backfill; 
Mining subsidence; 
Increased flood risk; 
Impacts on the flow and quantity of surface and groundwater; and 
Migration of contamination from the site. 
Proposals must also take into account the cumulative effects of multiple impacts from individual 
sites and/or a number of sites in the a locality. 
22.38 Minerals can  only be worked where they exist, and although considered to be a temporary 
use of land, mineral operations can be long lived. It is therefore important to ensure that an 
acceptable balance is maintained between the need for mineral extraction, and protecting 
the environment and residential amenities. 
22.39 In accordance  with the Technical Guidance to the NPPF where appropriate we will require 
the submission of a dust assessment to ensure that dust emissions are controlled, mitigated 
or removed at source. We may also require a noise emissions assessment and will recognise 
that some noisy short term activities may be unavoidable to facilitate minerals extraction. 
Applicants will also need to address slope stability in line with this Technical Guidance. 
22.40 We will impose planning conditions and legal agreements where appropriate to ensure these 
environmental criteria are met. A programme of work will also need to be agreed which must 
take account, as far as is practicable, of the potential impacts on the local community over 
the expected duration of operations. For larger or more complex applications, there may also 
be a need for an application to be submitted with an Environmental Statement. 
280 Adopted Local Plan 
22 . Minerals 
22.41 Where appropriate  we will encourage and support the establishment of community liaison 
groups to help monitor, appraise, and resolve operational matters associated with mineral 
extraction sites throughout the life of the development. 
281 Adopted Local Plan 
23 . Contaminated Land and Pollution 
The Challenge 
Effectively dealing with contamination the majority of which dates back to the 19th century 
and early 20th century 
Ensuring that new development does not have, and is not at risk from a negative 
environmental effect 
The Current Position 
Barnsley’s industrial heritage means that there are areas which are potentially affected by 
contamination from coal mining and industry. The ground around these sites can contain 
substances which, in some circumstances, can present a risk to people and the natural 
environment 
The control of pollution is governed by Planning and Environmental Health laws. Various 
regulatory authorities have a role in controlling pollution, including the Environment Agency 
Policy Solutions 
Ensuring planning applications are accompanied by sufficient information regarding 
contaminated land to show that the development can go ahead safely 
Controlling potentially polluting development and protecting new development from pollution 
Policy CL1 Contaminated and Unstable Land 
Where the future users or occupiers of a development would be affected by contamination or 
stability issues, or where contamination may present a risk to the water environment, proposals 
must be accompanied by a report which: 
shows that investigations have been carried out to work out the nature and extent of 
contamination or stability issues and the possible effect it may have on the development 
and its future users, the natural and historic environment; and 
sets out detailed measures to allow the development to go ahead safely, including, as 
appropriate: 
removing the contamination; 
treating the contamination; 
protecting or separating the development from the effects of the contamination; and 
addressing land stability issues resulting from former coal mining activities. 
Where measures are needed to allow the development to go ahead safely, these will be 
required as a condition of any planning permission. 
23.1 The National Planning  Policy Framework recognises that contamination is not restricted to 
land with previous industrial uses, it can occur on greenfield as well as previously developed 
land and it can arise from natural sources as well as from human activities. 
282 Adopted Local Plan 
23 . Contaminated Land and Pollution 
23.2 Proposals for  uses on land which is known or suspected to be contaminated, or for uses 
which would be particularly vulnerable in terms of exposure to contamination (such as housing 
with gardens) must be supported by sufficient information to enable the possible contamination 
risks to be fully assessed. It is then essential that measures are put in place which allow the 
development to go ahead safely. 
23.3 We will prepare a Supplementary Planning Document to provide more information about how 
we will apply this policy. 
Policy Poll1 Pollution Control and Protection 
Development will be expected to demonstrate that it is not likely to result, directly or indirectly, 
in an increase in air, surface water and groundwater, noise, smell, dust, vibration, light or other 
pollution which would unacceptably affect or cause a nuisance to the natural and built environment 
or to people. 
We will not allow development of new housing or other environmentally sensitive development 
where existing air pollution, noise, smell, dust, vibration, light or other pollution levels are 
unacceptable and there is no reasonable prospect that these can be mitigated against. 
Developers will be expected to minimise the effects of any possible pollution and provide mitigation 
measures where appropriate. 
23.4 An important  consideration in the planning process is the precautionary principle. Where 
there is significant risk of damage to the environment planning and pollution controls will take 
into account the need to prevent or limit harm, even where there is no definite scientific 
knowledge. 
23.5 Noise and  vibration can be a serious cause of nuisance. Planning cannot control the noise 
or vibration from existing development. However it can try to make sure that new noise-
sensitive development such as housing and schools is not close to existing sources of noise, 
including industrial uses and noise created by vehicles and other forms of transport. It can 
also make sure that potential noise creating uses, including industrial processes or some 
recreational activities, are not in places where they would be likely to cause nuisance. In 
particular we will prepare a Supplementary Planning Document to provide further guidance 
on how we will deal with hot food takeaways. 
23.6 We will not allow development that could damage the quality of surface water and ground 
water. We will consult the Environment Agency on these issues. 
283 Adopted Local Plan 
23 . Contaminated Land and Pollution 
Policy AQ1 Development in Air Quality Management Areas 
Development which impacts on areas sensitive to air pollution(13)in air quality management areas 
will be expected to demonstrate that it will not have a harmful effect on the health or living 
conditions of any future users of the development in terms of air quality (including residents, 
employees, visitors and customers), taking into account any suitable and proportionate mitigation 
required for the development. 
We will only allow residential development which impacts on areas sensitive to air pollution, 
where the developer provides an assessment that shows living conditions will be acceptable for 
future residents, subject to any required mitigation. 
We will only allow development which impacts on areas sensitive to air pollution which could 
cause more air pollution, where the developer provides an assessment that shows there will not 
be a significantly harmful effect on air quality, subject to any required mitigation. 
Furthermore, development which impacts on areas sensitive to air pollution due to traffic emissions 
will be expected to demonstrate suitable and proportionate mitigation relative to the increased 
traffic emissions generated by the development. (14) 
23.7 There is an increasing recognition that air pollution can be a cause of serious health problems, 
such as respiratory illnesses. Air pollution can take the form of released gases, such as 
oxides of nitrogen, and fine dust mainly as a result of industrial processes, or smells. As the 
Environmental Health Authority, the council has an important role in controlling air quality, 
and must carry out regular reviews of air quality in its area, and assess the present and future 
quality against legal air-quality standards. If the aims are not likely to be achieved, it must 
name an air quality management area and then make an action plan for improvements in air 
quality in that area. 
23.8 We will not normally allow new residential development in air quality management areas. 
This is to make sure that all residents have satisfactory living conditions. In some 
circumstances, it may be possible for a housing development to go ahead in an air quality 
management area as long as the developer can show that there will be no harmful effects 
to the health and living conditions of future residents or that mitigation measures can be 
successfully used to address these effects. 
13 Areas sensitive to air pollution include (but are not limited to) the Borough’s air quality management areas; “exceedence” areas within the 
Borough derived from the national assessment of air pollution by defra and reported to the European Union; and housing within 20 metres 
of roads > 10k AADT (as defined within the Barnsley MBC Air Quality and Emissions Technical Planning Guidance document) 
14 Such  areas sensitive to traffic emissions are defined within the Barnsley MBC Air Quality and Emissions Technical Planning Guidance, 
Section 5, Air Quality and Emissions Mitigation Assessment 
(https://www.barnsley.gov.uk/services/environment-and-planning/pollution/air-quality ) 
284 Adopted Local Plan 
24 . Utilities 
24.1 The National Planning  Policy Framework requires local planning authorities to work with 
other authorities and providers to assess the quality and capacity of all types of infrastructure 
including utilities, and its ability to meet the forecast demands. The responsibility and resources 
to provide services rests with the utilities companies, however, we must make sure that we 
co-ordinate the development of an effective network of services with existing and proposed 
development. We will support new services development, and will work with operators to 
make sure that any proposed development is well positioned and designed. 
Policy UT1 Hazardous Substances 
We will not allow development within the defined hazardous substances consultation distances 
if it would result in an unacceptable risk to public health and safety, or to residential and other 
sensitive land uses. 
24.2 Certain industries and  processes involve making, using or storing products which may be 
dangerous. Sites where these industries and processes take place, and certain pipelines are 
known as ‘notifiable installations’. 
24.3 The siting of  such installations is controlled by Planning (Hazardous Substances) Regulations 
2015 which aims to keep these separated from housing and other sensitive land uses. We 
will consult the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) about the siting of any proposed notifiable 
installations. Proposals for development involving hazardous substances will only be permitted 
where there is no unacceptable risk to public health and safety and in accordance with the 
General Development Policy GD1. 
24.4 Whilst they are  subject to controls under health and safety legislation, we will also control 
the kinds of development permitted in the vicinity of these installations. We have maps 
showing the consultation distances for them and will consult the HSE on any proposed 
development in these areas so that we can determine what the risks are to the proposed 
development. Because these consultation distances are subject to regular review they are 
not shown on the Policies Map. 
Policy UT2 Utilities Safeguarding 
Existing services and utilities including major pipelines, transmission lines, distribution mains, 
sewerage and sewage treatment works, land drainage systems and water resources, together 
with associated equipment, installations and operational land, will be protected from development 
that will detrimentally affect them. 
24.5 The extensive existing  infrastructure which serves the borough requires protection to ensure 
the utilities companies can manage and maintain their networks and installations. We will 
make sure that the existing network of services is protected from development that would 
detrimentally affect the way it works and will impose conditions on planning permissions as 
necessary. 
285 Adopted Local Plan 
25 . Community Infrastructure 
The Challenge 
Meeting the additional demand on existing infrastructure, services and facilities which 
development brings 
Ensuring development improves existing infrastructure or puts in place new infrastructure 
to ensure sustainable communities 
Investing in education and skills to support the development of the economy and increase 
educational attainment 
The Current Position 
UDP policies, SPGs and PANs which require contributions from developers for green space, 
education facilities and affordable housing 
The Education Sites Development Plan Document has been adopted and forms part of the 
statutory development plan for Barnsley 
Policy Solutions 
Developing an Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
Providing clear guidance to developers on what is expected of them with regard to community 
infrastructure 
Allocating land for schools 
Protecting Community uses 
Preparing an SPD 
Policy I1 Infrastructure and Planning Obligations 
Development must be supported by appropriate physical, social, economic and communications 
infrastructure, including provision for broadband. 
Development must contribute  as necessary to meet all on and off site infrastructure requirements 
to enable development to take place satisfactorily. 
Where the necessary  provision is not made directly by the developer, contributions will be secured 
through planning obligations. 
Where appropriate,  pooled  contributions will be used to facilitate delivery of the necessary 
infrastructure. 
286 Adopted Local Plan 
25 . Community Infrastructure 
25.1 It is important to ensure that development is adequately supported by appropriate 
infrastructure, whether existing or new. New development should not overburden existing 
infrastructure. Where new development creates a need for new or improved infrastructure, 
developer contributions will be sought to make the development acceptable in planning terms. 
In some cases the cumulative impact of applications may be considered when assessing 
infrastructure requirements. There is increasing recognition that the community can benefit 
through the granting of planning permission. New development will create additional demands 
on existing infrastructure and where spare capacity may not exist, there will be a need for 
new infrastructure to ensure it functions satisfactorily. 
25.2 There are  three main types of infrastructure which are: 
Social infrastructure - needed to meet the day to day needs of the population such as 
schools and community facilities. 
Physical Infrastructure –  needed to enable the borough to function in a sustainable way 
such as transport, utilities and Green Infrastructure. 
Economic infrastructure - needed to support economic regeneration. 
25.3 There are  many examples of infrastructure. These include a need for new or improved 
provision of roads and other services, public transport, Green Infrastructure, recreation and 
open space facilities and infrastructure that will make Barnsley a better place such as public 
realm improvements, educational accommodation, affordable housing and also adequate 
community facilities. Investment may also be required to ensure the local economic 
infrastructure can accommodate the new development including shopping facilities and the 
availability of suitably skilled labour to support economic regeneration. New forms of 
infrastructure are also relevant including communications technology, it is particularly important 
to ensure provision for Superfast Broadband. 
25.4 It may be necessary to consider the cumulative effect of a number of developments such 
that developers may be required to contribute jointly towards necessary infrastructure. All 
new development should therefore make appropriate provision to contribute towards offsetting 
the additional pressures it has created whether this is through on or off site provision of 
facilities or financial contributions. Developers will need to demonstrate that adequate capacity 
either exists, or that provision will be made to meet the necessary infrastructure requirements 
within an appropriate timescale. 
25.5 We will work with infrastructure providers, partners and agencies to establish infrastructure 
needs and ensure that infrastructure necessary for growth is programmed and deliverable. 
The infrastructure required to achieve the spatial strategy for the borough will be set out in 
an Infrastructure Delivery Plan which will set out existing infrastructure, infrastructure funding 
committed or awaiting confirmation and future infrastructure requirements. 
25.6 Developer contributions  will be sought for infrastructure and anything considered necessary 
to make a development acceptable. We will consider whether these will be sought via planning 
obligations or through infrastructure funding. The specific requirements, type of contribution 
and how it will be secured will be determined through negotiation with the Local Planning 
287 Adopted Local Plan 
25 . Community Infrastructure 
Authority working in partnership with the appropriate public, private and voluntary agencies. 
Where infrastructure requirements are covered by infrastructure funding, planning obligations 
will not be sought. 
Policy I2 Educational and Community Facilities 
We will support the provision of schools, educational facilities and other community facilities. 
New schools, educational and community facilities such as local shops, meeting places, sports 
venues, cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship, should be located centrally to 
the communities they serve, in places where they will be accessible by walking, cycling and 
public transport. 
Such uses will be protected from development unless it can be demonstrated that the sites and 
premises are no longer required by the existing or an alternative community facility. 
25.7 One of the borough’s ambitions is to invest in education and skills to support the development 
of the economy and increase educational attainment. It is important that everyone has access 
to a good education. We will support the Remaking Learning agenda, the Building Schools 
for the Future Programme and future education initiatives. 
25.8 If local schools do not have enough places for children resulting from new housing 
development, developer contributions may be sought to ensure enough school places are 
provided before the development goes ahead, under policy I1. 
25.9 Buildings and  space for community use are important if we are to create sustainable 
communities where people want to live. The opportunity to take part in community life can 
help to engender community pride and spirit. Therefore community facilities will be protected 
where possible. 
288 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
26.1 The Local Plan  policies must have clear arrangements for monitoring and reporting to ensure 
they continue to remain effective in their implementation. Individual policies will be monitored 
against the measures below. This will allow us to assess their effectiveness and identify any 
changes required in future reviews of the Local Plan. 
26.2 The table below  sets out which Local Plan policies achieve each of the Local Plan objectives 
that are set out in chapter 2 Vision and Objectives. Some policies may contribute to achieving 
more than one objective. 
Local Plan Objective 1: Provide opportunities for the creation of new jobs and the protection 
of existing jobs 
The following policy references work towards meeting this objective: 
LG1 City Regions; E1 Providing strategic employment locations; E2 The distribution of new 
employment sites; E3 Uses on employment land; E4 Protecting existing employment land; E5 
Promoting tourism and encouraging cultural provision; E6 Rural economy; GB4 Permanent 
agricultural and forestry workers dwellings; GB5 Temporary agricultural and forestry workers 
dwellings 
Delivery/ 
implementation Aim Indicator/ Target Local Plan 
Policy 
BMBC. Landowners/ 
Developers. LEPs Ensure the provision of 
sufficient land for 
development throughout the 
plan period. Amount of employment 
land delivered (ha) 
Total Jobs E1 
Job Density Increase the number of jobs 
and businesses in the 
Borough.(NOMIS data will be 
used to monitor these 
indicators) 
BMBC Development 
Management process. 
Developers Minimise the amount of 
employment land lost to non 
employment uses. Amount of employment 
land lost to other uses 
(ha) E4 Protecting 
Existing Employment Land 
Local Plan Objective 2: Improve the conditions in which people live, work, travel and take 
leisure The following policy references work towards meeting this objective: 
GD1 General Development; GD2 Temporary buildings and uses; LG2 The location of growth; SD1 
Presumption in favour of sustainable development; E7 Loss of local community facilities in villages; 
H8 Housing regeneration areas; GT1 sites for travellers and travelling showpeople; GT2 sites for 
Traveller; T1 Accessibility priorities; T2 Safeguarding of former railway lines; T3 New development 
and sustainable travel; T4 New development and highway safety; T5 Reducing the impact of road 
289 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
travel; Barnsley Town Centre policies BTC1 - BTC24; TC1 Town centres; TC2 Primary and 
secondary shopping frontages; TC3 Thresholds for impact assessments; TC4 Retail parks; TC5 
Small local shops; HE1The historic environment; HE2 Heritage statements and general application 
procedures; HE3 Developments affecting historic buildings; HE4 Developments affecting historic 
areas or landscapes; HE5 Demolition of historic buildings; HE6 Archaeology; GB1 Protection of 
Green Belt; GB2 Replacement, extension and alteration of existing buildings in the green belt; GB3 
Changes of use in the green belt; GB6 Safeguarded land; CC1 Climate change; CC2 Sustainable 
Design and Construction; CC3 Flood Risk; CC4 Sustainable drainage systems; CC5 Water resource 
management; GI1 Green Infrastructure; GI2 Canals -safeguarded routes; GS1 Green space; Poll1 
Pollution control and protection; AQ1 Development in air quality management areas; MIN 1 Minerals; 
MIN 2 Existing permitted reserves and areas of search. MIN 3 Non mineral development and 
safeguarding minerals; MIN 4 Mineral extraction; RE1 Low carbon and renewable energy; UT1 
Hazardous substances; UT2Utilities safeguarding; I1 Infrastructure and planning obligations; I2 
Educational facilities and community uses; 
Delivery/ 
implementation Aim Indicator/ Target Local Plan 
Policy 
BMBC, Developers, 
Infrastructure providers. Ensure that development is 
supported by and were 
necessary contributes to the 
provision of appropriate 
infrastructure. Number and total 
financial contributions 
secured by planning 
obligations, by type of 
infrastructure. I1 Infrastructure 
and Planning 
Obligations 
BMBC Development 
Management process, 
Developers, Green 
Space Strategy To protect, enhance and 
provide adequate green 
space Number of planning 
applications where 
financial contributions 
are secured to contribute 
towards green space 
provision GS1 Green 
Space 
Amount of new green 
green space provided 
(ha) 
BMBC, Historic 
England, Developers, 
building owners Ensure that development 
conserves and enhances the 
historic environment. Aim is Number of designated 
heritage assets on 
Historic England 
'Heritage at Risk 
Register' HE1 The Historic 
Environment 
to reduce number of 
designated assets on the 
'Heritage at Risk Register' 
BMBC, Historic 
England, Developers Reduce/ mitigate impact on 
heritage assets. Number of planning 
applications granted for 
demolition of a listed 
building. Target zero. HE3 Developments affecting Historic 
Buildings 
290 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
TC1 Town 
Centres 
CC3 Flood  Risk 
AQ1 
Development
 in 
Air Quality 
Management Areas Ensure development reflects 
the hierarchy of centres in 
order to maintain their vitality 
and viability. 
Reduce the  extent and 
impact of flooding. No 
Planning Permission to be 
granted against sustained EA 
advice 
To restrict  development 
within AQMA's except where 
the developer provides, to 
the Councils satisfaction, an 
assessment showing 
acceptable living conditions 
for future residents/ 
occupiers and no detrimental 
impact to air quality Amount of completed 
retail, office and leisure 
development in town 
centres (defined in terms 
of completed sq metres 
gross internal floorspace 
Number of  planning 
applications granted 
contrary to advice of the 
Environment Agency on 
flood defence grounds. 
Target zero 
Number of  planning 
applications for 
development approved 
within 
Sustainable T ransport 
Travel Plans  
Air Quality  Management 
Areas. Target zero 
Local Plan  Objective 3: Widen the choice of high quality homes 
The following  policy references work towards meeting this objective: BMBC, Businesses  
and Developers 
BMBC Development  
Management process. 
Developers. 
Environment Agency. 
Lead Local Flood 
Authority (LLFA) 
BMBC, Developers  
H1 The number of new homes to be built; H2 The distribution of new homes; H3 Uses on allocated 
housing sites; H4 Residential development on small on small non-allocated sites; H5 Residential 
development on large non-allocated sites; H6 Housing mix and efficient use of land; H7 Affordable 
housing, H9  Protection of existing larger dwellings 
Local Plan  Indicator/ Target 
Policy 
H1, H4, H5 Number of net additional 
new dwellings 
Number of  dwellings 
delivered on 
non-allocated sites 
H6 A verage density of new 
homes built Aim 
Ensure that  the Boroughs 
Objectively Assessed 
Housing Need (OAHN) is 
met. 
To make the most efficient 
use of land. Delivery/ 
implementation
 
BMBC, Landowners/  
Developers 
BMBC, Developers  
291 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
H7 Number of affordable 
homes delivered 
Annual target  150 
through section 106 
GT1 Number of pitches  
delivered To deliver homes to meet 
affordable housing needs 
To meet the identified need 
for pitch provision for Gypsy 
and Travellers BMBC Development 
Management  process,
 
BMBC Housing 
Growth team, 
Housing Associations, 
Berneslai Homes 
HCA, Developers 
BMBC, Berneslai 
Homes, Gypsy
 & 
Traveller Community 
Local Plan Objective 4: Improve the design of development 
The following  policy references work towards meeting this objective: 
Local Plan Indicator/ T arget 
Policy 
D1 Number of  
developments of 10 
dwellings
 or more 
achieving
 BfL 'Green' D1 Design; CC1 Climate change 
Delivery/ 
implementation
 
BMBC Development 
Management process.
 
Developers. Design 
Panel. Aim 
No target.  Ensure that 
development fosters the 
principles of high quality 
design. Seek to achieve as 
many of 10 or more dwellings 
to achieve as many Building 
For Life 12 'Greens' as 
possible. 
Local Plan Objective 5: Achieve net gains in biodiversity 
The following  policy references work towards meeting this objective: 
BIO1 Biodiversity; GI1 Green  Infrastructure; CC4 Sustainable drainage systems; CC AC1 Water 
Local Plan Indicator/ T arget 
Policy 
BIO1 Biodiversity Number of  Local Wildlife 
and Geodiversity Sites and  Rigs sites  in 
positive conservation 
management  resource management; 
Aim 
To conserve  and enhance 
the Borough's biodiversity 
and geological features. 
National Indicator ‘Single 
Data
 List 160: biodiversity’ is 
a measure which 
government requires Local 
Authorities (LA’s) to report on Delivery/ 
Implementation 
BMBC Development
 
Management process,
 
Developers , Local 
Sites Partnership, 
Barnsley Biodiversity 
Trust 
292 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
an annual basis. The 
reported figure updates on 
the percentage of sites ‘in 
positive conservation 
management’ and reflects 
how LA’s perform a number 
of their roles, including the 
Planning process, 
management of some of their 
own wildspaces, and 
partnership-working. It 
covers both Local Wildlife 
Sites and Local Geology 
Sites (also known as RIGS), 
most of which are not owned 
by LA’s – these designations 
are non-statutory. 
The reporting  period for each 
year is a rolling five-year 
period. Barnsley’s figure for 
2015 (covering 2010-2015) 
was 17.1% of sites in positive 
conservation management 
(15 out of 88 Local Sites). 
26.3 The Infrastructure  Delivery Programme below is extracted from the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan 2016. Future Annual Monitoring Reports will contain a narrative updating on progress 
against this delivery programme. 
293 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
294 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
295 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
296 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
297 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
298 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
299 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
300 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
301 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
302 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
303 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
304 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
305 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
306 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
307 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
308 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
309 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
310 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
311 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
312 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
313 Adopted Local Plan 
26 . Monitoring & Indicators 
*The figure for the cost of primary school provision entry has been estimated based on the information provided by BMBC Education 
for the school required as part of site MU1. The estimated cost for a new school on this site is £7.5m. The local has made provision 
for an additional 2 primary schools and one extension to an existing school. The potential cost has therefore been estimated as c£22.5m 
(3x£7.5m). This is likely to be an over estimate as the extension is likely to cost less. 
314 Adopted Local Plan 
Meaning Abbreviation Term 
A use which forms a small part of a larger use. For example, 
a factory may include a small shop selling things made in the 
factory. The shop is ancillary to the main use of the site as a 
factory. Ancillary uses 
The variety of plant and animal life found in an ecosystem and 
the variation in their genetic makeup. Biodiversity is a measure 
of the health of an ecosystem, with healthy ecosystems having 
greater variety and variation in plant and animal life than 
unhealthy ones. Biodiversity 
A plan which sets out proposals to protect and improve the 
places where trees, plants, animals and insects live. BAP Biodiversity Action 
Plan 
Biomass in ecology, is the mass of living biological organisms 
in a given area or ecosystem at a given time. Biomass can also 
refer to a renewable energy source or biological material Biomass 
derived from living, or recently living organisms. Biomass is 
commonly plant matter grown to generate electricity or produce 
heat but can also include plant or animal matter used for 
production of fibres or chemicals. It excludes organic materials 
such as fossil fuels which have been transformed by geological 
processes into substances such as coal or petroleum. 
Facilities such as local shops, meeting places, sports venues, 
cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship (NPPF 
paragraph 70) Community Facilities 
Was introduced in the Planning Bill in 2007 and empowers 
local authorities to make charges on new developments to help 
finance the infrastructure needed to support growth. CIL Community 
Infrastructure Levy 
Things we buy which are not food and which are not bought 
every day or every week. Examples include clothes, furniture, 
computers and cars. Comparison goods 
Shops selling goods which are not food and which are not 
bought every day or every week. Clothes and furniture shops 
are comparison shops. Comparison shops 
A process by which people and organisations are asked their 
views about planning decisions, including the Local Plan. The 
terms involvement and participation are also used and mean 
the same thing. Consultation 1 . Glossary 
315 Adopted Local Plan 
Meaning Abbreviation Term 1 . Glossary 
Core Cities 
Decentralised Energy  
Deliverability 
Density is the number of houses in a given area. In the Local 
Plan it is used mainly in relation to housing. Density 
Designations 
Development Plan  DPD 
Document The 'major  centres of business and wealth creation that in turn 
power the economy of the surrounding region. They sit at the 
heart of travel networks, surrounded by towns and rural areas 
that are economically dependent on each other and across 
which people travel to and from work; functional economic 
areas that have developed city region partnerships to work 
across boundaries'. (Core Cities Group www.corecities.com). 
They
 include Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Liverpool, 
Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham and Sheffield. 
Energy that  is locally generated, produced close to where it 
will be used, rather than at a large plant elsewhere and sent 
through the national grid 
The likelihood  of a proposal (for example, a housing site) 
happening. The things that affect deliverability are the cost of 
developing a site, how desirable the area in which the site is, 
and the availability of funding. 
Policies and  proposals which are shown on the policies map. 
This can, for example, include sites specifically proposed for 
development such as housing. It can also include sites where 
new development is limited, for example, areas which are Green 
Belt. 
A document  that will form part of our Statutory Development 
Plan which is used to make decisions on proposals for 
development. In Barnsley, DPDs are the equivalent of the old 
Unitary Development Plan (UDP). Most DPDs include policies 
and proposals which apply to specific areas or sites, these are 
shown on the Policies Map. Once adopted the Local Plan, 
together with the Joint Waste Plan, will be the statutory 
development plan for Barnsley. 
Sites specifically set aside for employment development. 
Employment in this context mainly refers to industry, storage 
and distribution, but can include other uses. Employment 
allocations 
Provided for employment development. An end user is a 
business which is based on the site. It is used to make a 
distinction between the developer who has got the site ready 
for development (that is, by putting in roads and services). End users 
316 Adopted Local Plan 
Meaning Abbreviation Term 
By law, some planning applications for larger development 
need to be accompanied by a detailed document which looks 
at the effects the proposal will have on wildlife, water quality, 
air quality and living conditions. EIA Environmental 
Impact Assessment 
A classification of the options for the energy use and production 
which prioritises those systems which are more sustainable 
and will reduce carbon dioxide emissions. The priorities in order 
are energy efficiency - renewable - low carbon and 
decentralised resources Energy Hierarchy 
An independent process where formal objections to a DPD 
made at Submission stage are considered by a government 
inspector. The Examination itself will be run by a government EIP Examination or 
Examination in Public 
inspector. Many objections to DPDs will be considered through 
written comments made by the objector and the council. 
However, objectors have a right to make their case in person 
at the Examination if they choose. 
This is where a farm is used for other things as well as 
agriculture. Bed-and-breakfast accommodation is an example 
of this. Farm diversification 
The amount of land a development takes up. The footprint of 
a building is the amount of land it takes up. Footprint 
A policy or land use designation used to retain areas of largely 
undeveloped, wild, or agricultural land surrounding or adjacent 
to urban areas. Green Belt 
Strategic infrastructure made up of a network of connected, 
multi-functional green spaces throughout the borough. GI Green Infrastructure 
‘Green’ open areas. They include village greens, local open 
spaces, country parks, formal gardens, cemeteries, allotments, 
woodlands, wildlife areas, recreation grounds, sports pitches 
and parks. Green Space 
By law, the Health and Safety Executive must keep lists of 
certain potentially dangerous materials. These are usually 
materials used in industry. We will assess any new development Hazardous substances consultation zones 
planned in the area near to where these materials are stored. 
This area is known as a consultation zone. The list of hazardous 
substances is kept by the Health and Safety Executive, which 
is part of national government. 1 . Glossary 
317 Adopted Local Plan 
Meaning Abbreviation Term 
Development that goes in the gaps between existing buildings. 
It is usually small in scale. An infill housing development will 
usually include one to 10 houses. Infill development 
A report produced by the Planning Inspector following the 
examination. This sets out the inspector’s conclusions on the 
issues considered at the examination. The report will tell us if 
the DPD needs to be changed as a result and in what way. We 
must accept the conclusions of the report and act on them. Inspector’s report 
A document which will be used to make decisions on proposals 
for development over the next 19 years or so. Local Plan 
A document which sets out the documents we plan to produce 
as part of our development plan and the timescales for 
preparing them, including public consultation. LDS Local Development 
Scheme 
Low carbon energy is associated with a lower carbon output 
than traditional fossil fuels. Examples include district heating 
or combined heat and power (using the heat generated from 
other processes) and air or ground source heat pumps Low carbon energy 
A document produced by Central Government which sets out 
national planning policy. This is als NPPF National Planning 
Policy Framework 
The legal basis for the planning system, including the Local 
Plan. The Act Planning and 
Compulsory 
Purchase Act 
A government organisation which makes decisions about the 
policies and proposals in DPDs through a formal Examination. 
The inspectorate are a neutral organisation who make decisions 
where people and organisations do not agree with us. They 
also check whether our proposals are in line with national policy. PINS Planning Inspectorate 
A legal agreement between us and a developer which is needed 
before a development can go ahead. It will usually deal with 
things that need to happen away from the development site, 
including improvements to roads and open spaces. Planning obligation 
National statements of planning policy prepared by the 
government and which councils are expected to take into 
account when preparing LDFs. Planning Policy Guidance notes 
are being replaced by Planning Policy Statements. PPS 
PPG Planning Policy 
Statements/ Planning 
Policy Guidance 
A plan which shows policies and proposals for specific sites 
and locations. These are shown on an Ordnance Survey map. Policies Map 
318 1 . Glossary Adopted Local Plan 
Meaning Abbreviation Term 1 . Glossary 
A river and its immediate surroundings. A river corridor tends 
to be smaller in width than a river valley which can be several 
miles wide. River corridor 
This is land which is allocated in case it is needed for 
development in the long term. It is not available for development 
in the short term and the need to develop safeguarded land 
will be considered when the Local Plan is reviewed Safeguarded land 
The Act allows the policies and proposals in the current UDP 
to continue to be used to make decisions on development 
proposals until the UDP is replaced by DPDs. This process is 
known as ‘saving’. Saved Policies 
The Minister in central government who is in charge of a 
particular area of activity. SoS Secretary of State 
Considering options for sites for development in a particular 
order. For example, in terms of new shops, we would first look 
for sites within a shopping centre and then for sites on the edge 
of the shopping centre before looking at sites outside the centre. 
The same approach is applied to finding land for housing. Sequential approach 
A way in which towns, villages and hamlets are categorised 
depending on their size and role. It can help make decisions 
about new development. Settlement hierarchy 
Making sure that everyone has access to services and 
opportunities no matter what their background or income. Social inclusion Regeneration 
Regional Spatial  
Strategy 
Regulations Renewable Energy Doing things that will make an area a better place to live and 
work in. 
A document  which sets out a planning framework for Yorkshire 
and the Humber. This has now been abolished by Central 
Government. 
Legal documents  prepared by the government. They provide 
detailed information about how Acts should be applied. 
Is a natural source of energy that is not depleted when used, 
including wind, water and solar. Renewable energy production 
includes the use of wind turbines, solar panels (on houses/ 
other buildings or in commercial energy 'farms') and 
hydro-electric installations to harness the energy from running 
water. 
319 Adopted Local Plan 
Meaning Abbreviation Term 
At the examination, the inspector must assess whether the 
DPD is ‘sound’. This includes assessing whether the DPD has 
been prepared in the right way using the right procedures and 
if it is broadly in line with national planning guidance. Soundness 
Spatial planning is about deciding how much development 
there should be and where it should go. Spatial planning 
A document which explains how we plan to involve people and 
organisations in decisions on the Local Plan and planning 
applications. SCI Statement of 
Community 
Involvement 
Something that is directly needed by law, usually by a 
government act or regulation. Statutory 
Bus routes with frequent and regular bus services. Strategic bus 
corridors 
Part of the sustainability appraisal specifically covering the 
effect on the environment. Strategic Environmental Assessment 
The main roads in the borough connecting towns and villages. Strategic highways/ 
Strategic highway 
network 
The point at which the DPD is formally sent to the Secretary 
of State. Submission 
A document which helps explain how policies and proposals 
in DPDs will be applied. An example of this would be a 
document that sets out detailed requirements or guidance about 
building design. SPD Supplementary Planning Document 
The minimum size of development to which a policy applies. 
For example, housing developments above a particular size 
may have to include some public open space. Developments 
below a certain size will not need to provide public open space. Threshold 
The form and structure of the surface of the land including the 
man made and natural physical surface features of an area 
such as lakes, mountains, hills, and valleys. Topography 
The property of being viable, the ability to succeed or to be 
achievable in a practical and useful way. Viability 
Streams, rivers and drains which channel rainwater. Watercourses 1 . Glossary 
320 Adopted Local Plan 
Meaning Abbreviation Term 1 . Glossary 
Water Framework WFD This European Directive, together with emerging River Basin 
Directive Management  Plans, looks at integrated management of water 
resources, taking account of abstraction, water quality and 
flooding. 
321 Adopted Local Plan 
2 . Housing Trajectory 
Housing Completions 2014 - 2033 (Net) 
2.1 Below is the proposed  housing trajectory for the Local Plan period 2014 to 2033 
322 Adopted Local Plan 
3 . Supplementary Planning Documents 
Supplementary Planning Documents 
Below is an indicative list of the Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) we are considering 
producing. This list is not exhaustive and an up to date list of documents will be available on our 
website, together with a programme setting out timescales for production. Some topics may be 
combined in single SPDs. Some of these SPDs may be based on existing Supplementary Planning 
Guidance. 
Parking 
Affordable Housing 
Hot food takeaways 
Planning Obligations 
Green Space Provision 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity 
Renewable Energy 
Contaminated Land
 
Trees and hedgerows 
Landscape character 
House extensions
 
Designing out crime 
Advertisements
 
Shopfront Design 
Designing New Housing Development  
Buildings and Residential Amenity  
Sustainable Transport 
323 Adopted Local Plan 
4 . Evidence Base 
Evidence Base 
National 
National Planning Policy Framework  2012 
Planning Practice Guidance 
National and regional guidelines  for the provision of aggregates in England for the 15 year 
period 2005-2020 
Designing Gypsy and T raveller Sites a good practice guide 
Planning Policy for T raveller Sites 2015 
Flood and Water Management  Act 2010 
Network Rail Yorkshire and  Humber Route Utilisation strategy 
High Speed 2 Consultation  Eastern Leg 
The Coal Authority Plan  Yorkshire and Humber Regional Surface Coal Resource Areas 
1:300,000 2008 
MPG Coal Mining and  Colliery Soil 
Planning and Minerals Practice  Guide 
Good Practice Guide on  Planning for Tourism 
BREEAM and Planning 
BREEAM
 in Use 
Building for Life –  Delivering Great Places to Live 
By Design – Design  in the Planning System 
English Heritage Guidance on  Conservation Area Appraisals 
English Heritage Guidance on  the Management of Conservation Areas 
Historic England at Risk  Register 2015: Yorkshire & the Humber 
List descriptions for nationally  listed heritage assets (The National Heritage List for England 
(listed buildings, scheduled monuments, and parks and gardens of national significance)). 
324 Adopted Local Plan 
4 . Evidence Base 
City Regions/Regional/Sub regional 
Leeds City Region  Strategic Economic Plan 
Sheffield City Region  Economic Plan 
Sheffield City Region  Common Approach to Green Belt Review 
South Yorkshire Rail  Strategy and Delivery Plan 
Sheffield City Region  Transport Strategy 2011-2026 
Sheffield City Region  Growth Plan 2014 
Leeds City Region  Common Approach to Objectively Assessed Housing Need 
British Geological Survey  South Yorkshire Mineral Resources Map 1:100,000 2006 
South Yorkshire Residential  Design Guide 
Leeds City Region  Green Infrastructure Strategy 
South Yorkshire Sites and Monuments Record. 
South Yorkshire Historic  Environment Characterisation (SYHEC) 
Local 
Green Belt Review , Arups 2014 
Strategic Housing Market  Assessment, Arc4 2014 
Barnsley Gypsy and  Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment, 
Arc4, September 2015 
Barnsley Employment Land  Evidence, Mott Macdonald and Colliers International, 2016 
Barnsley Strategic Housing  and Employment Land Availability Assessment, Arups 2016 
Employment and Skills  Strategy: More and Better Jobs, BMBC 2016 
Demographic Analysis &  Forecasts Assumptions, Methodology & Scenario Results, Edge 
Analytics, 2014 
Demographic Analysis and  Forecasts Assumptions, Methodology & Scenario Results 
Addendum March 2015, Edge Analytics 
325 Adopted Local Plan 
4 . Evidence Base 
SCR Demographic Forecasts  2012-2033 Phase 1 report 2014 Edge Analytics 
SCR Demographic Forecasts  2012-2033 Phase 2 report April 2015 Edge Analytics 
Employment Land Review , BMBC 2016 
Barnsley Healthy W eight Strategy 
Barnsley Air Quality  Management Plan 
Barnsley Cycling Strategy  
Draft Infrastructure Delivery  Plan, BMBC 2016 
Market Assessment of  LDF Site Viability Report, Peter Brett Associates 2013 
Review of Employment  Policy Areas, Bennell Investments, 2013 
Industrial/ Logistics Market  Review Supply and Demand Report, CPP 2014 
Goldthorpe Masterplan 2011 
Barnsley Town Centre  Public Spaces Strategy 
BMBC 11 Barnsley  Buildings Heights Study 
Jobs and Business Plan 2014 
Housing Strategy 2014-2033, BMBC 2014 
Barnsley Settlement Assessment  & Barnsley’s Settlement Assessment 2007 Update 
Affordable Housing and  CIL Viability Summary Study, update 2015 
CIL Report 2012 
CIL Update 2015 
Town Centre Retail  Study, England and Lyle 2014 
Barnsley Smaller Centres  Study 
Conservation area maps,  appraisals and summaries, BMBC (various dates) 
Archaeology Scoping Study  of Site Allocations, Wessex (2015 and 2016) 
British Geological Survey  Barnsley Mineral Resources Dataset 2009 (Barnsley Mineral 
Resource Map IDA: 177350 IPR/117-222DW) 
326 Adopted Local Plan 
4 . Evidence Base 
Remaking Barnsley Strategic Development Framework 2003-2033 
Biodiversity Action Plan second edition 2008-2012 
327 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Viability Assessments 
Viability Assessments 
How the Council  will assess viability appraisals 
The Council will seek contributions for various issues as set out in the policies of this draft Local 
Plan. 
Where it can  be demonstrated that these requirements would prevent the delivery of a viable 
scheme or not be consistent with the viability of the development, the precise level of provision 
will be negotiated, based on a viability assessment. Any viability assessment shall be carried 
out at the expense of the applicant, according to the principles set out below: 
The applicant  will  raise any viability issues with the Council during the pre-application stage. If 
a third party appraisal is required the applicant, the Council and the third party consultant will 
meet to scope the details of the appraisal. 
An “open book”  approach is required, whereby development finances and their underlying 
assumptions are subject to appraisal in order to support a claim. 
At the very  least the applicant will need to provide evidence for the following items: 
Projected Gross Development V alue (GDV) (e.g. rents, prices, yields; discounted values) 
Construction costs and programme  (e.g. £/m², unit size (m²), build period) 
Finance, fees and all  other associated costs (e.g. rate of interest, fee rates, lump sums) 
Gross Profit margins (e.g.  % on costs; % of GDV) 
Residual Land Value (i.e.  the budget to buy the land) or Land Price (if already purchased) 
The Council acknowledges  that, in certain circumstances, a development may not be able to 
address all of the required planning obligations without the overall scheme becoming unviable. 
If an applicant considers that this is the case, then an assessment of development viability can 
be conducted but at their own cost. If the applicant and the Council agree that a development 
appraisal will be a basis for discussions, a model and its inputs will be made known to both 
parties. When an applicant provides their own model or a third party model, it should be in a 
format that enables the Council to interrogate its underlying structure and assumptions. 
Abnormal costs should  be reflected in the price paid for the site. Demolition of existing structures, 
site clearance and decontamination costs should bereflected in the land value. In the event that 
the Council has further questions, the applicant will provide supporting evidence. This could 
include Building Cost Information Service [BCIS], SPON’s Architects’ and Builders’ 
Price Book or  Valuation Office Agency [VOA] data and local market transactions. The starting 
point for any discussion should be based on a model that illustrates a development’s viability in 
the light of the Council’s existing policies with regard to affordable housing and the Council’s 
planning obligation requirements. Further satisfactory evidence may be required. 
328 Adopted Local Plan 
5 . Viability Assessments 
In the event that the initial appraisal finds the site unviable, the next step is for the applicant and 
the Council to use the appraisal model to discuss solutions for delivering a viable scheme such 
as phased payments. A cash flow model may help in assessing this. 
329 Adopted Local Plan 
6 . Superseded Policies 
Superseded Policies 
Core Strategy 
Climate Change CSP1 
Sustainable Construction CSP2 
Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS) CSP3 
Flood Risk CSP4 
Renewables 
Including Renewable Energy in Developments CSP5 
Development that Produces Renewable Energy CSP6 Location of Growth 
City Regions CSP7 
Location of Growth CSP8 
The Number of New Homes to be Built CSP9 
The Distribution of New Homes CSP10 
Providing Strategic Employment Locations CSP11 
The Distribution of New Employment Sites CSP12 Housing 
The Release of Allocated Housing Land CSP13 
Housing Mix and Efficient Use of Land CSP14 
Affordable Housing CSP15 
Affordable Housing Rural Exception Policy CSP16 
Housing Regeneration Areas CSP17 
Site for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople CSP18 Economy 
Protecting Existing Employment Land CSP19 
Promoting Tourism and Encouraging Cultural Provision CSP20 
Rural Economy CSP21 
Loss of Shops and Local Services in Villages CSP22 Transport Strategy 
Accessibility Priorities CSP23 
Safeguarding of Former Railway Lines CSP24 
New Development and Sustainable Travel CSP25 
New Development and Highway Improvement CSP26 
Parking Strategy CSP27 
Reducing the Impact of Road Travel CSP28 Local Character 
Design CSP29 
The Historic Environment CSP30 Climate Change 
330 Adopted Local Plan 
6 . Superseded Policies 
Town Centres 
Town Centres CSP31 
Small Local Shops CSP32 
Green Infrastructure 
Green Infrastructure CSP33 
Protection of Green Belt CSP34 
Green Space CSP35 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity CSP36 
Landscape Character CSP37 
Minerals 
Minerals CSP38 
Contaminated Land and Pollution 
Contaminated and Unstable Land CSP39 
Pollution Control and Protection CSP40 
Development in Air Quality Management Areas CSP41 Community Infrastructure 
Infrastructure and Planning Obligations CSP42 
Educational Facilities and Community Uses CSP43 
Unitary Development Plan (Part 1) Saved Policies 
New Housing H3 
Development on Housing Sites H4 
Access to Undeveloped Land H7 
Existing Residential Areas H8 
Existing Residential Areas Design/Amenity H8A 
Non Residential Uses in Residential Areas H8B 
Home Based Business H8C 
Infill, Backland and Tandem Residential Development H8D 
Private Garages/Access H8F 
Residential Caravans H8G 
Needs of Travellers H10 
Uses on Employment Sites ED3 
Economic Development and Residential Amenity ED4 
Existing Employment Areas ED7 
Older Commercial and Industrial Areas ED8 
Conversion of Buildings to Employment Use ED9 
Growth of Existing Firms ED10 
Expansion Land ED11 
Derelict & Degraded Land GS3 
Derelict & Degraded Land GS4 
Derelict & Degraded Land GS5 
Extent of Green Belt GS6 
The Reuse of Buildings in the Green Belt GS8A 
Agricultural and Forestry Workers Dwellings GS8B 
Removal of Agricultural Occupancy Conditions GS8C 
331 Adopted Local Plan 
6 . Superseded Policies 
Agricultural Buildings GS8D 
Replacement, Alteration and Extensions to Dwellings GS8E 
Safeguarded Land GS10 
Urban Land to Remain Undeveloped GS11 
Local Nature Reserves, Natural Heritage Sites, Ancient Woodland, RIGS, Nature 
Conservation Sites GS18 
South Yorkshire Forest GS24 
Water Based Recreation GS29 
Touring Caravan Storage GS30A 
Indoor Recreation GS40 
Archaeological Sites BE4 
Improving Existing Areas of Poorer Quality Built Environment BE5 
Advertising BE6D 
Temporary Structures BE6E 
Public Art BE7 
Landfill Gas ES10 
Control of Development in the Vicinity of Existing Wind Energy Generation Installations ES12C 
Environment Restoration M9A 
Working and Restoration M9B 
Working and Restoration M9C 
Plant and Ancillary Buildings M9D 
Oil and Gas Exploration and Production M9H 
Oil and Gas Exploration and Production M9I 
Liaison and Enforcement M9K 
Liaison and Enforcement M9L 
Agricultural Land M11 
Shopping/Commercial Centres S1 
Shopping/Commercial Centres S2 
Retail Development Outside Defined Shopping Centres S3 
Retail Development Outside Defined Shopping Centres S5 
Specialised Retail, Display or Fitting Premises S8 
Garden Centres S9 
Existing Strategic Highway Network T3 
Strategic Highways Proposal T4 
Protected Highway Alignment T5 
Highway Maintenance T8 
Bus & Rail Infrastructure T10 
Residents Parking T21 
General Safeguarding UTL3 
Unitary Development Plan (Part 2) Saved Policies 
Barnsley Urban Community Area: 
BA1, BA2, BA3, BA4, BA5, BA6, BA7, BA8, BA9, BA10, BA11, BA12, BA13, BA14, BA15, BA18, 
BA19, BA20, BA22, BA24, BA25, BA26, BA27, BA28, BA29, BA30, BA34, BA35, BA36, BA37, BA38, 
BA39, BA40 
332 Adopted Local Plan 
6 . Superseded Policies 
Barnsley Town Centre: 
TC1, TC2, TC3, TC4, TC5, TC6, TC7, TC8, TC9, TC10, TC12, TC13, TC14, TC15, TC16, TC20, 
TC24, TC25, TC26, TC28, TC29, TC30, TC31, TC32, TC34, TC35, TC36, TC37, TC38, TC39, TC41, 
TC42, TC43, TC45, TC46, TC47, TC48, TC49, TC51, TC52, TC53, TC54, TC55, TC56, TC57, TC58, 
TC59, TC60 
Darton Community Area: 
DT1, DT2, DT3, DT4, DT5, DT6, DT7, DT9, DT12, DT14, DT15, DT16, DT17, DT18 
Dodworth Community Area: 
DO1, DO2, DO3, DO4, DO5, DO6, DO8, DO9, DO10, DO13, DO15, DO16 
Royston Community Area: 
RO1, RO2, RO3, RO4, RO5, RO6, RO7, RO8, RO11, RO12, RO14 
North East Towns Community Area: 
NE1, NE2, NE3, NE4, NE5, NE6, NE7, NE8, NE9, NE10, NE11, NE14, NE16, NE17, NE18, NE21, 
NE22 
Darfield Community Areas: 
DA1, DA2, DA3, DA4, DA5, DA6, DA7, DA8, DA11, DA13, DA15, DA17 
Dearne Community Area: 
DE1, DE2, DE3, DE4, DE5, DE6, DE7, DE8, DE9, DE10, DE11, DE16, DE17, DE18, DE19, DE22 
Wombwell Community Area: 
WW1, WW2, WW3, WW4, WW5, WW6, WW7, WW8, WW9, WW10, WW11, WW12, WW13, WW14, 
WW19, WW20, WW21, WW22, WW23, WW26 
Hoyland Community Area: 
HN1, HN2, HN3, HN4, HN5, HN6, HN8, HN9, HN10, HN13, HN14, HN15, HN16, HN17 
Penistone Community Area: 
PE1, PE2, PE3, PE4, PE5, PE6, PE7, PE9, PE10, PE12, PE14, PE16, PE17, PE18, PE21, PE22 
Western Rural Community Area: 
WR1, WR2, WR3, WR8, WR9, WR10, WR11, WR13, WR14, WR15, WR19, WR20, WR21, WR22, 
WR23, WR24, WR25 
333 