 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037 
Publication Version Addendum  
January 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
2 
 Contents  
1.0 Introduction          3 
2.0 What are we consulting on?       3 
3.0 How do I make comments on the proposed  
changes within the Addendum?       4  
4.0  What will happen to the comments made to the Bassetlaw  
Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version ?    5 
 
Vision and Objectives        6 
Bassetlaw Spatial Strategy        12 
Bassetlaw Garden Village        27 
Provision of Land for Employment Development    46 
High Marnham Energy Hub       56 
Section 7: Housing         60 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity       84 
Renewable Energy Generation       91 
Transport Infrastructure        97 
Infrastructure and Delivery        105 
Monitoring Framework        111 
 
Appendix 1: Summary of Changes      126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
3 
 1.0 Introduction  
 
1.1 Bassetlaw District  Council consulted upon the Bassetlaw Local Plan  2020 -2037 : 
Publication Version , between 2 September and 21 October  2021.  
 
1.2 It was anticipated that the Publication  Plan would be the version of the plan that 
would be submit ted to the Secretary of State for independent examination, but in 
response to new evidence and a handful of representations made during the 
September -October 2021 consultation a number of focussed changes are 
proposed to the plan.  
 
1.3 These proposed focussed changes  are set out in this Addendum. The changes  
contained in this Addendum focus around policies relating to biodiversity and the 
natural environment, transport infrastructure, renewable energy generation, 
infrastructure delivery, employment land provision and the housing delivery 
strategy , including for gypsy and travellers .  
 
1.4 Additionally, and to ensure compliance with the National Planning Policy 
Framework  2021 , which requires Local Plans to plan ahead for at least 15 years 
from the date of adoption, the plan period has been extended by a year to 2038. 
This means that in relati on to a small number of sites , the number of homes 
identified need s to be changed to ensure the Local Plan is able to plan for the 
annual housing requirement for that additional year ( 2037 -2038 ). Where 
possible, the change in housing number s are on sites t hat were identified by the 
Publication Plan as deliver ing into the next plan period.  
 
1.5 The Council has also taken the opportunity to update the relevant housing and 
employment supply data to the 1 December 2021 .  
 
1.6 The Bassetlaw Local Plan  2020 -2037: Publication  Version and the proposed 
changes  as detailed within this Addendum, is the version of the plan which it is 
intended will be  submit ted to the Secretary of State for examination.  
 
2.0 What are we consulting on?  
 
2.1 National planning practice guidance and t he Planning Inspectorate advises that 
if a local authority wishes to make changes to the Publication Plan once it has 
been consulted upon, and they wish the changes to be considered alongside the 
Publication  Plan, they should prepare  an addendum to the plan containing the 
proposed changes . This should be published for consultation before the plan is 
submitted for examination.  
 
2.2 The proposed changes are published for consultation on the same basis as the 
Regulation 19 consultation that was undertaken on the Bassetlaw Local Plan 
2020 -2037: Publication Version  between September -October  2021. As such, 
they should be considered as an Addendum to the Publication  Plan.  
 
2.3 This Addendum  is not a fully revised version of the Publication Plan. It only 
contains the proposed focussed changes and any associated modifications to 
boundaries on the Policies Map.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
4 
 2.4 The proposed change s to the Publication Plan  are shown as tra ck changes, with 
text proposed to be deleted shown i n red strikethrough text (e.g. deleted text ) and 
new text proposed to be  added shown as red text (e.g. new text ). A tabulated 
summary of the proposed changes which are subject to consultation is provided 
in Appendix 1. Deleted maps are also shown as strikethrough; and where 
appropriate it will be indicated as to whether changes to maps are subject to 
consultation.  
 
2.5 In addition to the changes subject to consultation, for completeness and clarity, 
a num ber of changes are shown, intended to be for information only. These are 
shown as follows: new or deleted . This consultation is not intended to be an 
opportunity to make comments on the changes which are shown for information 
only; these changes are minor modifications which do not need to be subject to 
consultation before the Plan is submitted for its examin ation.  
 
2.6 A Sustainability Appraisal (SA) and Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA) of 
the proposed changes to the  Plan accompany this Addendum.  
 
2.7 A number of other proposed submission documents and evidence base 
documents  which were published alongside the Publication Plan have been 
reviewed and updated to support this Addendum. These include the Consultation 
Statement, the Duty to Cooperate Compliance Statement, the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan and the Whole Plan Viabilit y Assessment as well as an update to 
the Landscape Assessment ; the Site Selection Methodology ; the Land 
Availability Assessment (LAA) , the Basse tlaw Sequential Test report , the 
Bassetlaw Transport Study  and the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs 
Asses sment .  
 
2.8 New evidence in the form of the Clumber Park SSSI and Birklands and Bilhaugh 
SAC/Sherwood Forest NNR  Recreational Impact Assessment and the draft 
Bassetlaw Garden Village Geophysical Archaeological Assessment will also be 
published .  
 
2.9 The Council is also publishing updated draft Statements of Common Ground  with 
neighbouring authorities and partners . 
 
3.0 How do I make comments on the proposed change s within the 
Addendum?  
 
3.1 The purpose of this stage is to enable people to make any comments on the 
proposed focussed changes  to the Publication Plan that they want to be taken 
into account at the examination. Comments are also invited on the supporting 
documents which have been pu blished alongside the Addendum . All documents 
are available on the Council’s website www.bassetlaw.gov.uk/bassetlawplan  and 
can be viewed at the district’s town halls and libraries from the start of  the 
consultation . 
 
3.2 This consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on any 
other parts of the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version . 
Comments should only relate to the proposed focussed changes  to the plan   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
5 
 containe d within this Addendum or the additional/updated supporting documents 
and evidence  which has been published.  
 
3.3 The comments received as part of this Addendum consultation, along with the 
comments received to the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version  
consultation will be submitted to the Secretary of State for consideration at the 
examination with the plan and supporting documents.  
 
3.4 Comments can be made in the following ways:   
 
 On the Council’s website at : www.bassetlaw.gov.uk/bassetlawplan  
 Representation forms are available to download from our website at 
www.bassetlaw.gov.uk/bassetlawplan  and can be emailed to:  
thebassetlawplan@bassetlaw.gov.uk   
or printed and posted to:  
Planning Policy  
Bassetlaw District Council  
Queen’s Building  
Potter Street  
Worksop  
S80 2AH  
 
Please note that representations will be public ly available and cannot be treated 
as confidential, although personal details will not be published.  
 
3.5 Representations may be accompanied by a request to be notified at a specified 
address of any of the following:  
 
 The Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version  has been submitted 
for independent examination;  
 The publication of the Inspector’s report; and  
 The adoption of the Local Plan.  
 
3.6 For more information on this consultation please contact the Planning Policy 
Team on 01909 533495  or email thebassetlawplan@bassetlaw.gov.uk .  
 
4.0 What will happen to the comments made to the Bassetlaw Local 
Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version ? 
 
4.1 The comments received during the September -October  2021 consultation on the 
Publication Plan are being processed and analysed . These  will be  published on 
the Council’s website in Spring 2022 when they are submitted with the 
Publication Plan to the Secretary of State . Given this, it is not necessary to 
resubmit comments made to the Publication Plan in September -October  2021.   
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
6 
 Vision and Objectives  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Vision and 
Objectives . For ease of consultation, the whole of this section is shown within th e 
Addendum with the relevant tracked changes. However, comments should only be 
made on the proposed changes which are subject to consultation. As previously stated, 
these changes will be shown as follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is not an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comment s on the 
changes which are shown for information only; these changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
7 
 4.0 Bassetlaw Vision and Objectives  
A vision for Bassetlaw  in 2037  2038 : 
4.1 In 2037 2038 , Bassetlaw District will be a vibrant, prosperous place known for 
providing reside nts with a high quality of life and  increased access t o: quality, 
suitable housing, a wider range of higher skilled , well -paid jobs and training 
opportunities ; and,  high quality services and facilities which promote healthy and 
active lifestyles within a low carbon environment.  
 
4.2 The District’s economy wil l be diverse and thriving. Prominent businesses in the 
key regional growth sectors of modern manufacturing, logistics, green energy, 
modern methods of construction and engineering will be capitalising on the 
District’s locational advantage, in terms of pro ximity to the A1 and the A57 growth 
corridors, and Sheffield Doncaster Airport.  
 
4.3 The District’s significant employment land portfolio will have contributed to the 
step-change in the Bassetlaw economy, in part benefitting from the quality and 
diversity  of available sites, including the Marnham Green Energy Hub and the  
distinctive Garden Village. These will have catalysed new enterprise, supported 
the sustainable growth of existing businesses and attracted substantial inward 
investment, contributing to the District’s transition into a strong, successful and 
vibrant economy.  
 
4.4 Meanwhile, Apleyhead will have attracted significant economic  investment in the 
logistics sector  of at a regional/sub regional scale importance , supporting flexible 
market leadin g and market facing large -scale  logistics  employment space, 
bringing higher employment rates, higher personal income and greater economic 
diversification to the District, whilst generating significant gross value to  the 
regional economy . and region.  Local residents will have benefitted from the range 
of training, qualifications  and apprenticeships on offer, while the range of higher 
skilled, better paid jobs on site and within local supply chains will have encouraged 
more people to live and work in th e District.  
 
4.5 New development will have been delivered in the most sustainable locations. 
Worksop town centre and its environs will be benefitting from the start of  
comprehensive brownfield regeneration and associated environmental 
improvements that bring with it an improved community, commercial and leisure 
offer to the benefit of residents, businesses and visitors  not only  within the central 
core, but the wider town and District . Worksop  itself will have sustainably grown, 
with high quality housing,  new transport and community infrastructure in place 
around the urban edge which together with a diverse and enhanced town centre 
offer will to support the needs of the new residents and existing communities alike. 
Worksop town centre and its environs will  be benefitting from the start of 
comprehensive brownfield regeneration and associated environmental 
improvements that bring with it an improved community, commercial and leisure 
offer to the benefit of residents, businesses and visitors.   
 
4.6 The market town of Retford will have grown appropriately  in a sustainable manner , 
with a wider range of new housing available better suited to meet local residents’   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
8 
 needs irrespective of time in life, while a new country park, community 
infrastructure and transport i mprovements will provide benefits to existing and new 
communities. The growing population will be able to make good use of an 
enhanced and greener town centre offer, which will provide an attractive, 
distinctive, vibrant base strengthening the town’s  sense  of community, and whilst 
enhancing the cultural and visitor economy offer.  
 
4.7 The regeneration of Harworth & Bircotes town centre will be complete: additional 
independent  shops and services will have positively added to the retail and town 
centre offer, while the impact of heavy goods vehicles and traffic more generally 
in Harworth & Bircotes will have been reduced and the environmental quality 
improved.  
 
4.8 In the rural area, the outcomes of community -led planning will be evident. 
Residential development within the Large Rural Settlements of Blyth, Carlton in 
Lindrick, Langold, Misterton and Tuxford will have been delivered to meet strategic 
and local needs. Necessary physical, community, green and digital infrastructure 
needed to support this growth will have been delivered.  
 
4.9 The Small Rural Settlements will have seen small -scale, sensitively located 
development to support local community objectives, to meet local housing needs 
and to sustain village services. Communities across the District will continue to 
embrace neighbourhood planning, affording them the opportunity to shape the 
future of their environment and oversee what development takes place and where. 
In the wider countryside, only limited development will have taken place to meet 
specifically identified housing needs and support long -term rural sustainability.  
 
4.10 The beginnings of the new Bassetlaw Garden Village will be growing around a 
distinctive employment offer,  new public  transport network hub and quality green 
infrastructure . This new community will provide a lifestyle choice for those who 
choose to live there: a healthy, active place, with sustainability,  the green agenda  
credentials  and quality of place embedded from the outset to provide a genuinely 
alternative destination to live and work in the long term after 2037 .  
 
4.11 The diversity and quality of Bassetlaw’s countryside, natural and historic 
environment will have been protecte d and enhanced, whilst allowing for 
appropriate and sustainable growth. Appropriate access to the countryside and an 
improved range of parks and open spaces will benefit local people and visitors 
alike, whilst Bassetlaw’s rich and varied history will be ce lebrated.  
 
4.12 New housing will reflect local needs in terms of type, size and tenure and enable 
equality of access to suitable accommodation. Older people will have increased 
access to accommodation to better suit their changing needs, whilst affordable 
homes will have been delivered to enable a new generation of home owners to get 
onto the housing ladder and to meet the needs of those unable to afford market 
housing for sale. New housing developments will be high quality, well designed, 
energy efficient and respectful of their setting in order to ensure that the character 
of the District’s towns and villages is maintained and protected.  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
9 
 4.13 New development will have helped minimise the District’s health inequalities. 
Communities will have improved acces s to well designed, safe, inclusive, high 
quality multifunctional green and blue infrastructure close to home, active travel 
will be commonplace, whilst improved recreational, sport, health and educational 
facilities and existing valued community services will reduce pockets of deprivation 
and enhance skills gaps to bring stronger health and well -being outcomes for our 
communities.  
 
4.14 The reduction of locally produced greenhouse gas emissions will help minimise 
the impacts of climate change.  District will have improved resilience to the impacts 
of climate change.  Significant new renewable energy infrastructure will support a 
vibrant zero and low carbon energy generation mix, including in part by maximising 
opportunities for zero energy at  the former Ma rnham power station site,  whilst 
support for localised renewable and low carbon technologies will maximise 
opportunities for a secure, reliable, affordable energy supply for residents and 
businesses, better enabling the transition to a zero carbon district  by 2050 .  
 
4.14 A secure, reliable, affordable zero and low carbon energy mix will be  helping to 
reduce locally produced greenhouse gas emissions; the District will have played 
its part by supporting significant new renewable energy infrastructure, in part by 
maximising opportunities for zero energy generation at the former Marnham power 
station site, but also through localised renewable and low carbon technologies, 
better enabling residents and busines ses to transition to a zero carbon district by 
2050.  
 
4.15 Careful planning and design of developments will ensure that  more vulnerable  
New development is located in areas of low flood risk , and use of  new sustainable 
drainage systems will manage run -off sustainably, while provision for a flood 
management scheme in Worksop will facilitate significant regeneration and growth  
safely . Energy efficient design of homes and businesses will ensure they require 
less energy to heat, whilst  a more comprehensive  A better connected and 
extended  walking and cycling network, and improved access to public transport 
will make  mean  more residents can use active or  sustainable travel more attractive 
for local j ourneys, thus reducing the reliance on the car . Provision of infrastructure 
to support the use of electric  and/or alternative fuel vehicles  will all make a 
meaningful contribution  to reducing  a reduction in  the District’s carbon footprint.  
 
 Low carbon and energy efficient design techniques and use of renewable and low 
carbon technologies , extensive tree planting, as well as infrastructure to support 
the use of electric vehicles and alternative fuel vehicles will  also have contributed 
to a reduction in the District’s carbon footprint enabling an easier transition to a 
carbon District.  
 
4.16 Meanwhile, e xtensive tree planting , protection and enhancement of veteran trees, 
valuable habitats and species,  and biodiversity net gain will secure environmental 
quality benefits,  sequester carbon and build our resilience to clim ate change at the 
same time.  
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
10 
 Strategic Objectives  
4.1517 This vision will be achieved by meeting the following objectives:  
 1. To locate new development in sustainable locations and through a 
new settlement s that respect s the environmental capacity of the 
District , support s a sustainable  pattern of growth acr oss urban and 
rural areas, make s best use of suitable,  available  previously 
developed land and buildings and seek s to minimise  the loss of the 
District’s highest quali ty agricultural land  
 2. To provide a choice of land  to ensure that the District’s housing stock 
better meets local housing needs and aspirations of all residents by 
providing a range of market, affordable and specialist housing types, 
tenures and sizes in appropriate and sustainable brownfield and 
greenfiel d locations , within and on the edge of settlements  
 
 3. To encourage and  support a step change in the local economy and 
sustainable economic growth  by promoting a competitive, diverse 
and sustainable  economic growth stable economy  by providing the 
right conditions, land and premises to meet  in the District  and sub -
regional  to accommodate  general  employment growth  needs , to 
cater for inward investment, and also at a sub -regional/regional scale 
to contribute to meeting an identified need  in the  large -scale logistics 
sector market , market demand  those of  inward  investors , while  
thereby  helping to reduce out -commuting , create more better paid 
and higher skilled jobs, and education and training opportunities that 
to meet  local employment needs and aspirations  
 4. To support the sensitive regeneration of previously developed, 
vacant or underused sites and spaces, within urban and rural 
Bassetlaw  to facilitate the ir comprehensive redevelopment for 
housing, employment and leisure, to secure social, environmental 
and landscape improvements, and deliver positive amenity benefits 
for all 
 5. To promote the establishment of a new sustainable  heritage and 
landscape -led Garden Village focussed around well -connected 
locally distinctive neighbourhoods and spaces, which have all the 
benefits of quality place -making and place -keeping, with community, 
innovation , accessibility , sustainability  and smart, low carbon living 
at its core.  
 6. To promote rural Bassetlaw as a living and working landscape, by 
protecting and improving opportunities for homes, jobs, services and 
community infrastructure so that the District’s rural settlements 
contin ue to support their local communities, and so that quality 
countryside is retained but utilised appropriately  
 7. To support and enhance the vitality and vibrancy of town centres and 
local centres as places for shopping, leisure, cultural, commercial, 
community and residential activities, and secure their positive 
regeneration by promoting an appropriate mix and scale of 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
11 
 development and environment al improvements which maximise their 
potential for residents, businesses , developers  and visitors alike  
 8. To ensure new development, places and spaces are of a high quality 
and sustainable design which reflects local character and 
distinctiveness, respects residential amenity and enables people to 
live safe, healthy, accessible , green  and active lifestyles  
 9. To promote healthier, active  communities and help reduce health 
inequalities by minimising locational disa dvantage, promoting 
healthy  place -making , active design  to secure  securing  active 
lifestyles  and travel, and reduce  reducing  human exposure to 
environmental risks to achieve equitable outcomes for all  
 10. To protect and enhance the District’s diverse historic built and natural 
environ ments, the distinctive separate  character of settlements and 
their wider landscape and towns cape settings, thereby recognising 
the important contribution the historic environment, heritage assets  
and their settings make to securing a high quality environment and 
to the visitor economy  
 11. To protect, restore and enhance the quality, diversity, character, 
distinctiveness, biodiversity and geodiversity of the District’s natural 
environment, by creating ecological connectivity within and to the 
green/blue infrastructure network to create a ser ies of high quality, 
multifunctional, well -connected space s, sites and landscapes that 
improve people’s quality of life and where biodiversity can thrive, 
respond and adapt to climate change  
 12. To support Bassetlaw’s trans ition to a low zero carbon District 
through the careful planning and design of new development, making 
more sustainable use of land , and resources , and sustainable 
construction methods , by promoting tree and woodland planting, 
reducing exposure to flood risk, promoting energy and water 
efficiency  and management , minimising waste generation and 
promoting the use of a vibrant mix of renewable energy generation 
infrastructure, localised  renewable energy, low zero carbon and 
other alternative technologies , and sustainable construction methods  
 13. To make efficient use of the existing transport infrastructure  and help 
make walking, cycling and public transport a more attractive and 
viable choice t o access  jobs and everyday facilities  to help reduce 
the need to travel by c ar particularly for local journeys, to make travel 
as easy and affordable as possible, to and within the Main Towns , 
within the District and along key routes to and from Bassetlaw  
 14. To ensure that new development appropriately  contributes to the 
provision of necessary physical, social and green /blue  infrastructure 
to deliver planned levels of growth at the right time and to mitigate its 
impacts on existing communities and the environment.  
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
12 
 Bassetlaw Spatial Strategy  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Bassetlaw Spatial 
Strategy section . For ease of consultation, Policy ST1: Bassetlaw Spatial Strategy and 
the supporting text is shown within this Addendum with the relevant tracked changes. 
However, comments should only be made on the proposed changes which are subject 
to consultation. As previously stated, these changes will be shown as follows: new or 
deleted .  
 
This consultation is no t an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for information only; thes e changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
13 
 5.1 Bassetlaw’s Spatial Strategy  
5.1.1  At the heart of the spatial strategy is the need to use sustainable development as 
the framework for growth and change in Bassetlaw. The Local Plan provides an 
ambitious and positive framework for addressing local housing and economic 
needs and other socia l and environmental priorities to better enable the Council 
to invest in its places, housing and communities, making the most of investment 
opportunities as they arise to effectively address spatial planning challenges over 
the plan period.  
 
5.1.2  On that  basis, this Plan is in accordance with the national policy1 presumption in 
favour of sustainable development and seeks to fully meet the demands for new 
homes, jobs and services in the District in the most sustainable manner.  
 
5.1.3  This means that the growth will be distributed according to the settlement 
hierarchy. This is an appropriate structure for organising the plan, acknowledging 
the inter -relationships between Worksop, Retford and Harworth & Bircotes and 
the rural area, and t he inter -relationships between the Large and Small Rural 
Settlements and the countryside. The settlement hierarchy guides key principles 
and policies for development that are set out through this plan, as well as 
providing a context for the preparation of neighbourhood plans, and the 
monitoring of the plan.  
 
5.1.4  Policy ST1 acknowledges the importance of taking a strategic and integrated 
approach to growth, which reduces the need for travel for work, education and 
leisure by placing sustainable developmen t at its heart. It prioritises major growth 
in the three Main Towns, whilst also providing for sufficient growth in the Large 
and Small Rural Settlements to meet their local needs, balanced against 
protecting their special character and unique qualities.  
 
5.1.5  Each level of the hierarchy reflects the settlement/area’s role which includes: the 
range of services present; their accessibility by public transport; their 
infrastructure capacity; and their ability to expand to accommodate the needs 
generated by new development.  
 
5.1.6  The spatial strategy sets out the overall framework for development, growth and 
investment in Bassetlaw to 2037  2038 . It identifies locations where development 
will take place in order to create sustainable neighbourhoods. In selec ting the 
scale of housing to be provided in each settlement, account has been taken of 
constraints on development, such as flood risk, heritage, ecology and landscape, 
and the supply of potential development sites in the Land Availability 
Assessment2 and t he viability of land for development. The Sustainability 
Appraisal3 identified potential sensitivities which were taken into account.  
 
5.1.7  The distribution of development for housing and employment needs, has evolved 
over time, and is detailed in the Spa tial Strategy Background Paper, 202 14.  
5.1.8  The Key Diagram illustrates the spatial strategy in this Plan.  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
14 
  
THIS PROPOSED CHANGE IS SUBJECT TO CONSULTATION Figure 6: Key Diagram  
 
THIS PROPOSED CHANGE IS SUBJECT TO CONSULTATION Figure 6: Key Diagram  
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
15 
 Meeting the District’s housing and employment needs  
5.1.9  The spatial strategy promotes a ‘step change’ in the District’s economy to: retain 
employment locally, provide opportunities for better paid, higher skilled jobs and 
increase productivity , thereby r eflecting the priorities of the D2N2 Recovery and 
Growth Strategy5. It seeks to align economic growth with the housing offer, by 
providing the right mix of new homes in the right places, so that past trends of 
out-migration are rebalanced. This will ensure  the sustainability of our the area 
in the future as a place to both live and work. This approach reflects the priorities 
of the D2N2 Recovery and Growth Strategy5. 
 
5.1.10  The strategy also aims to address housing affordability and the supply of 
specialist housing to significantly boost the supply of homes to support 
sustainable communities. It will also help facilitate significant improvements to 
infrastructure capacity in the  District to support the identified growth.  
  
5.1.11  National planning practice guidance6 requires the Council to consider and assess 
the likely change in the number of jobs over the plan period based on an 
economic forecast. The District has a significant  employment land supply (about 
287ha) which is well progressed and being actively promoted . It is therefore 
important that this is accurately reflected in the Plan, in terms of jobs growth and 
the implications for the housing requirement.  
 
5.1.12  The Basse tlaw Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment 20207 
therefore promotes a completions trend scenario (rather than a demand led 
scenario), which considers job assumptions assessed on a site by site basis.  This 
scenario includes General Employment S ites - the sites most likely to 
accommodate the D2N2 growth sectors and support  local employment growth  – 
and an additional strategic employment site identified to meet regional/sub -
regional needs for large scale logistics only.  
 
 5.1.13  The evidenced comp letions trend scenario indicates that up to 9735 jobs7 could 
be generated overall  in the plan period . Additionality, such as displacement (not 
all jobs are new to the District some will be re -located from elsewhere) and 
multiplier effects have been taken into account. Within this scenario, 5,878 jobs 
are anticipated to be provided within the General Employment Sites7.  
 
5.1.14  This approach is considered to be consistent with national planning policy which 
states that future employment needs can be based o n the past take -up of 
employment land and property and/or future property market requirements , is 
realistic and reflects market signals . At 1 December 2021 , 200,321 sqft of 
employment floorspace had been completed8 on the General Employment Sites, 
whilst  42 ha of general employment land at Snape Lane,  Harworth  is under 
construction , whilst a  further 118.5ha has planning permission for general 
employment use .  
  
5.1.15  Apleyhead adjoins the strategic A1/A57 growth corridors . As such,  and it is 
considered to  provide  a significant inward investment opportunity to address an 
identified regional or sub regional need for large scale logistics . As such,  It is 
therefore considered separately to the general employment supply .    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
16 
 5.1.16  The Bassetlaw A1 Corridor Logistics Assessment, 20219 identifies that a 
dramatic rise in demand for large scale logistics at a national level, combined 
with supply side constraints on the M1, have led to the better connected and 
labour served areas of the A1 property market area, i ncluding within Bassetlaw, 
becoming an attractive prospect as a secondary logistics market to the M1 
corridor. On that basis, it is reasonable that Apleyhead is brought forward by this 
Local Plan to meet an identified regional/sub -regional logistics need i n the 
defined property market area  (as defined by Figure 12A) . 
 
5.1.17  The site would also bring significant economic benefits to the District and region 
both in terms of jobs , including higher skilled jobs  (the evidence7 indicates that 
3,857 jobs could be generated), opportunities for higher educational attainment, 
an increase in real wages and gross value added, thereby maintaining a greater 
share of jobs for local residents. On that basis, the spatial strategy plans for a 
realistic proportion of jobs on this site in the plan period. Planning for fewer jobs 
could lead to an imbalance with the housing requirement, leading to unplanned 
housing growth across the District over the plan period.  
 
5.1.12  To better reflect the ty pe and mix of employment land in the supply, local market 
activity and the different mix of jobs that are anticipated on each by 2037 the 
Bassetlaw Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment 20207 
adopts a supply led approach, focussed around job assumptions assessed on a 
site by site basis. The supply led approach provides for up to 9735 jobs7. 
Additionality, such as displacement (not all jobs are new to the District some will 
be re -located from e lsewhere) and multiplier effects have been taken into 
account.  
 
5.1.13  This approach is considered to be realistic and reflects markets signals; at 1 April 
2021  200,321 sqft employment floorspace had been completed8 on the General 
Employment Sites, whilst 131.4ha has planning permission.  
  
5.1.14  Within this jobs forecast, 5,878 jobs is anticipated to be provided within the 
General Employment Sites7 (the sites most likely to accommodate the D2N2 
growth sectors and meet identified local employment needs). Gi ven the support 
of D2N2 LEP for the Plan and strong market signals, the Council is confident that 
the projected general job growth can be delivered.  
 
5.1.15  Additionally, 3,857 jobs are anticipated at the Apleyhead Strategic Employment 
Site7. This is capab le of attracting large scale inward investment of a regional or 
sub regional nature, so is considered separately to the general supply. The site 
would bring significant economic benefits to the District and region both in terms 
of jobs, including higher sk illed jobs, promote opportunities for higher educational 
attainment, and gross value added, and is being actively promoted.  
 
5.1.16  Apleyhead adjoins the strategic A1/A57 growth corridors so provides a significant 
opportunity for the large scale logistics market. The Bassetlaw A1 Corridor 
Logistics Assessment, 20219 identifies that a dramatic rise in demand for large 
scale logistics at a national level, combined with supply side constraints on the 
M1, have led to the better connected and labour served areas  of the A1 property 
market area, including within Bassetlaw, becoming an attractive prospect as a   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
17 
 secondary logistics market to the M1 corridor. On that basis, it is reasonable that 
Apleyhead is brought forward by this Local Plan to meet an identified regi onal-
sub-regional logistics need in the defined property market area.  
 
5.1.17  To reflect the Council’s desire to improve educational attainment, increase real 
wages and provide for greater training opportunities in the District, thereby 
maintaining a greater share of jobs for local residents,  the spatial strategy plans 
for a realistic  proportion of jobs on this site in the plan period. Planning for fewer 
jobs could lead to an imbalance with the housing requirement, leading to 
unplanned housing growth across the District over the plan period.  
 
5.1.1 8 In order to establish the minimum number of homes needed, the local housing 
need assessment7 was undertaken using the Standard Method as required in 
Planning Practice Guidance6. In addition to the local housing need figure, any 
needs that cannot be met within neighbouring areas should also be taken into 
account in establishing the amount of housing to be planned for. Through Duty 
to Cooperate it has been agreed that each authori ty within the North Derbyshire 
and Bassetlaw Housing Market Area will meet its own needs.  
 
5.1.19 The Standard Methodology calculates a minimum housing need for Bassetlaw of 
288 dwellings per annum for the period 2020 -2037  2038 . This is the starting point  
for delivery of housing, and should be reviewed at least every 5 years. The base 
date for the calculation of housing need, 1 April 2020, is consistent with national 
planning practice guidance6. The evidence7 demonstrates that pursuing a 
housing target bas ed purely on the standard methodology minimum figure means 
that the Plan would not provide a sufficient number of dwellings to support the 
economic growth objectives in the District. Such a low level of housing 
development would have other  significant cons equences including:  
 
 Demand for new housing outstripping supply for particular groups, potentially 
leading to younger people being unable to stay in the area;  
 Economic growth being constrained because of a shortage of skilled local 
labour;  
 Increased leve ls of in -commuting to support economic growth, which would not 
be sustainable and would put greater strain on the transport network  
 
5.1.2 0 The housing requirement of 591 dwellings per annum in this Plan ( 10,047  10,638  
dwellings by 2037  2038 ) has therefore  been set at a level to support the level of 
jobs growth (9,735 jobs) as identified in the Bassetlaw Housing and Economic 
Development Needs Assessment 20207. House building is recognised as a key 
driver of economic growth and will deliver much needed infra structure and 
facilities to support sustainable communities, a key objective of the strategy for 
growth over the plan period. Policy ST1 therefore  prioritises growth in locations 
where there may be opportunities for infrastructure improvements alongside 
development.  
 
5.1.21  In order to meet Bassetlaw’s housing requirement, delivery needs to remain at 
the high levels experienced over the last few years, averaging 584 dwellings per 
annum8 over the past five years. Identifying a sufficient land supply is a ke y 
element. The Council will engage with its partners, developers and public sector   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
18 
 organisations in order to ensure build out rates over the plan period maintain this 
level consistently to meet the full objectively assessed housing need.  
  
5.1.22  The housing requirement will be the basis for calculating the five year supply of 
deliverable housing land following the adoption of the Local Plan. In accordance 
with national policy and guidance10, an appropriate buffer (a minimum of 5%) will 
be added when calculating the five year housing land supply. The buffer helps 
increase flexibility and choice in the market for housing.  
 
5.1.23  Housing completions will be assessed annually against the housing requirement 
to monitor performance and determine whether a ny action is required to improve 
delivery rates. The Government’s Housing Delivery Test looks at completions 
over a three year rolling average. If this falls below the Local Housing Need 
produced by the standard methodology then certain  actions, identified  by 
indicators are set out in the monitoring framework (in section 13) will need to be 
taken depending on the scale of the shortfall. The indicators are set out in the 
monitoring framework (in section 13) . When annual  monitoring indicates the 
trigger will be reached the Council will review relevant policies in the Plan to 
identify if a Local Plan review is necessary, or by bringing additional sites forward 
into the supply.  
 
Housing Supply  
5.1.24  The expected annual housing delivery rates are expressed as a trajectory for the 
plan period. Appendix 3 contains the detailed housing trajectory. Planning 
permissions and sites under construction play an important role in delivering 
homes in the short term until the allocations in this Plan come forward. From 2020 
and for every year throughout the plan period, the housing trajectory 
demonstrates at least a five year supply of deliverable housing land.  
 
5.1.25  Housing land is provided in accordance with the settlement hierarchy as identified 
in Policy ST1. Taking int o consideration past delivery rates, analysis of historic 
trends and consideration of future windfall sources the Council considers a 
windfall allowance of 100 dwellings per annum ( 1200  1300  during the plan 
period) to be justified. This has been identified from 2025 -2026 onwards, and 
included in the housing supply.  
  
Figure 7: Housing supply sources  Housing supply as at 1 April 2020  December 2021    No of 
dwellings  
Housing Completions (1 April 2020 to 31 March 2021)  775 
Committed sites with outstanding planning permission on 
both large and small site as of April December  2021  6117  6347  
Outstanding ‘made’ NP allocations without planning 
permission  467 459  
New Local Plan Allocations  3014  3332  
Proposed Allocations in Worksop Central DPD  625 725  
Windfall allowance  1200 1300  
TOTAL SUPPLY 2020 – 2037  2038  12,198  12,938    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
19 
 5.1.26  Figure 7 shows that the Plan provides housing land for 12,198  12,938 dwellings 
over the plan period. Using the full objectively assessed need of 591 new homes 
per year, the total housing requirement is a minimum of  10,047  10,638  dwellings 
for the 17 18 years from 2020 -2037  2038 .  
 
5.1.27  In accordance with national guidance10, to pro vide flexibility and boost the supply 
of housing land the Plan proposes to allocate sites to provide close to a 9% 
supply buffer above the objectively assessed housing need excluding the windfall 
allowance. Adding the windfall allowance of 1200  1300 dwelli ngs increases the 
buffer to 18%. The buffer allows for an additional housing supply in Bassetlaw to 
be maintained throughout the Local Plan period. It provides flexibility should 
unforeseen circumstances result in a delay in bringing sites forward and will  
provide a choice of sites. Additionally, it minimises opportunities for speculative 
unplanned development that in some cases has adversely affected our 
communities over the last 10 years or so.  
 
5.1.28  Further details relating to the housing land supply, how the requirement has been 
met, and implementation are set out in the Housing Land Supply Background 
Paper11. 
 
Gypsy & Travellers and Travelling Showpeople Need  
5.1.29   Policy ST1 identifies a requirement to deliver a minimum of 10 21 new pitches 
for Gypsy and Travellers by 2029  in the first five years of the Plan (up to 2025) , 
with a further 30 21 pitches up to 2037  2038 . The Bassetlaw Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Needs Assessment, 201912 notes that most of the need, if not 
all, can be accommodated on existing authorised  Gypsy and Traveller sites or 
through  by requiring current arrangements on sites owned by  or leased to  
Gypsies and Travellers to be formalised . Policy ST30  ST32  identifies that this 
land should be considered first when seeking to meet the needs of Gypsies and 
Travellers. The evidence12 indicates that there is no requirement for new sites for 
Travelling Showpeople in Bassetlaw.  
 
Retail Needs  
5.1.30  The national  retail sector is characterised by rapid change, retail market 
restructuring and changing consumer demands related to new technologies and 
the impact of the 2020 -21 Covid pandemic. The Bassetlaw Retail and Leisure 
Study, 201713 states there is no identified  need for new retail development to 
2035. It identifies limited opportunities in and around Worksop and Retford town 
centres for growth. A sustainable small -scale extension to Harworth & Bircotes 
town centre is identified by Policy ST13 to support the wide r regeneration 
ambitions of the town and its neighbourhood plan14.  
 
Distribution of Growth  
5.1.31  In order to meet objectively assessed development needs, Policy ST1 sets out 
the scale and distribution of new housing, employment and retail development 
across the District during the plan period up to 2037  2038 .  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
20 
 5.1.32  Consistent with the principles of sustainable development, and to make the most 
efficient use of land, through Policy ST1 this Plan takes a proactive approach to 
bringing forward as much pre viously developed land  and/or underused land  as 
possible, including within the development boundaries of the Main Towns. The 
strategy seeks to maximise the use of all suitable, available and viable previously 
developed land, including all of those that have a realistic prospect of delivering 
within the plan period.  
 
5.1.33  Despite Bassetlaw’s strong record in bringing previously developed land back 
into use, the effective re -use of suitable previously developed sites will only meet 
a proportion of the Di strict’s overall need for new homes and may not necessarily 
deliver significant infrastructure improvements.  
 
Housing Growth  
5.1.34  Using the objectively assessed housing need, the total requirement is a minimum 
of 10,047  10,638  dwellings for the 17 18 years from 2020 -2037  2038 .  The 
Housing Trajectory in Appendix 3 shows that as at 1 April December  2021 almost 
50% 60% of the housing requirement is on committed sites wi th extant planning 
permissions, and 4% of the requirement is on sites allocated in made  
neighbourhood plans, but without planning permission.  
 
5.1.35  Housing growth will be directed to the most sustainable settlements 
commensurate with their place in the settlement hierarchy with Worksop 
absorbing about a third of the growth; a large part al ready has planning 
permission.  
 
5.1.36  This approach also maximises the delivery of affordable and specialist housing 
in a sustainable manner by allocating more sites of a larger scale on the edges 
of the Main Towns, where access to shops and services is m ore straightforward.  
 
New Allocations  
 
5.1.37  The housing supply is 12,198  12,938. Following consideration of existing 
completions in 2020 -2021, existing sites with planning permission, sites allocated 
in made neighbourhood plans, and the windfall allowance, the residual Local Plan 
allocations for the period 2020 -2037  2038  is therefore  3639  4,057 new homes.  
 
5.1.38  To meet the residual requirement within this plan period; as well as redeveloping 
brownfield sites and identifying small scale greenfield sites within the 
development boundaries, two large urban extensions are identified; on the 
northern edge of Worksop at  Peaks Hill Farm for 1000  1,080  dwellings; and, at 
Ordsall South in Retford for 800 890 dwellings.  
 
5.1.39  The Land Availability Assessment2 and Sustainability Appraisal3 concluded that 
these sites are those which cause least harm to the environment, are suitable for 
development and would take the development of the urban area up to clear and 
defensible boundaries. Both would also contribute to the provision of significant 
infrastructure over the plan period and beyond and deliver a mix of housing to   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
21 
 meet affordable and specialist needs. Together these sites are considered to be 
the most appropriate and suitable locations for the future expansion of our towns.  
 
5.1.40  The strategy directs housing growth to locations attractive to the market, whilst 
ensuring  there are no locations that are over -burdened by development, or that 
other locations are not receiving the opportunity to grow especially where this is 
required to support local service provision.  
  
5.1.41  As can be seen from Figure 8 below the allocati ons to meet the residual 
requirement are largely focused on Worksop and Retford, with 1870  2,060  new 
homes in Worksop, 1194  1,332 in Retford, and 75 in the Lar ge Rural Settlement 
of Tuxford.  There will be no new allocations in Harworth & Bircotes as a 
consequence of the  where there is  1,676  1799  existing commitments.  
 
 Completions 
2020 -21 as at 
1 April 2021  Extant 
planning  
permissions 
as at 1 
December 
2021  Made 
neighbourhood 
plan allocations 
without planning 
permission   as 
at 1 December 
2021  Local Plan 
site 
allocations  Total 
growth  % growth  
     
Worksop  171  1228  1263  0  1870  2060  3269  3494   29.7 30.0 
Retford  136  798 813 0  1194  1332 2128  2281  19.3 19.6 
Harworth & 
Bircotes  82  1676  1799  0 0 1758  1881   16.0 16.2 
Large Rural 
Settlements  48  1171  1203  202 199 75 1496  1525   13.6 13.1 
Small Rural 
Settlements  324  1188  1213  261 256 0 1773   1793   16.1 15.4 
Other Villages & 
Countryside  14 56 4 0 74  0.67 0.64 
Bassetlaw 
Garden Village  0 0 0  500 590 500 590 4.6 5.1 
TOTAL  775  6117  6347   467 459  3639  4057 10998   
11638 100.00  
Windfall  0  1200  1300  0 0 1200  1300   
TOTAL with 
windfall  775  7317  7647  467 459  3639  4057 12198 
12938  
Figure 8: Distribution of housing growth  
 
5.1.42   Distribution of employment land is influenced by the market and accessibility; by 
to local labour and also to strategic transport routes to make the movement of 
employees,  goods and supplies more straightforward. Worksop and Retford are 
allocated additional employment land adjoining the development boundary to 
support local business needs. Both towns are also expected to experience 
growth in employment generating uses over t he plan period, including in the town 
centres. However, much of the employment growth, evidenced by market 
demand is for land along the A1 and A57 growth corridors. A significant 
proportion has planning permission (see Policy ST7). Additional employment 
land is allocated to support accessibility to economic growth in the rural area; 
including through the regeneration of the former Bevercotes Colliery  High 
Marnham former power station site  and to act as a catalyst for the new Garden 
Village.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
22 
 Worksop  
5.1.43  Worksop is the principal town in the District, has a population of approximately 
41,82015, and enjoys relative ease of access to a range of higher order health, 
education, cultural, retail and employment opportunities.  
 
5.1.44  It is the most sustainable l ocation for significant growth and provides the best 
opportunity to deliver the objectives of D2N2 Growth and Recovery Strategy5: the 
town and its catchment is expected to deliver substantial employment growth 
(see Policy ST7) reflecting its easy access to  the A1 and A57 growth corridors 
and its ability to maximise sustainable transport choices. As such, it is the place 
where most new jobs will be created over the lifetime of the plan. Significant 
regeneration is expected to start in the town centre and its  environs by 2037  2038  
(see Policy ST5).  
 
 5.1.45  Over the past three years, Worksop has experienced high levels of housing 
growth, with areas such as Gateford Park seeing over 250 housing completions. 
As can be seen from Figure 8, at 1 April December  2021  about  over 1400 of the 
expected housing growth in Worksop has been delivered, or is on committed 
sites, with the remainder to come from new allocations. Consequently, there is a 
requirement to allocate land for a minimum of 1870  2,060  dwellings in Worksop. 
This includes 625 725 of the proposed  dwellings to be delivered through the 
Worksop Central Development Plan Document16. 75 are included as existing 
commitments.   
Retford   
5.1.46  Retford is the second town in the District and has 22,0 13 residents15. It has a 
wide range of services, shops, and employment opportunities with good public 
transport links. It is a sustainable location for growth: the town is expected to 
deliver local employment growth (see Policy ST7) appropriate to meet local 
needs, and to maximise opportunities to sustainable transport choices, including 
at the East Coast Mainline Retford Railway Station. Enhancements to the town 
centre are expected to be underway by 2037  2038  (see Policy ST14) facilitated 
by a neighbourhood plan.  
 
5.1.47 Over the past three years, Retford has seen strong housing growth with about 
350 dwellings completed. As at 1 April December  2021, 934 949 of the expected 
housing growth in Retford has already been delivered or is on committed sites 
with extant planning  permission.  The remainder of the growth will be delivered 
from new allocations in the Plan providing for about 1194  1,332 additional 
dwellings.  
 
Harworth & Bircotes  
5.1.48  Focussed around the ongoing regeneration of the former Harworth  Colliery and 
reflecting the aspirations of the Harworth & Bircotes Neighbourhood Plan14 the 
town has benefitted from significant investment and regeneration in recent years. 
It has a population of 7,94815. Harworth & Bircotes has a good range of shops 
and services and benefits from easy access to the A1 (M) and South Yorkshire. 
Significant employment growth (see Policy ST7) is expected to capitalise on its 
strategically advantageous location. Given its growth to date, Policy ST14   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
23 
 promotes a small scale exp ansion of the town centre to meet the needs of the 
growing community.  
 
5.1.49  Over the past three years, Harworth & Bircotes has seen additional housing 
growth with over 364 homes being delivered. A significant amount of land is also 
committed with planni ng permissions for over  1676  1799  homes, and 82 
completions in 2020 -2021. On that basis, no new allocations are proposed for 
Harworth & Bircotes as delivery will be largely met from existing commitments in 
this Plan which fulfils its role in the settlement  hierarchy.  
 
Large Rural Settlements  
5.1.50  The size of the District’s rural settlements, and the level of services and facilities 
in them varies considerably. Similarly, their ability to accommodate growth in 
keeping with their character and form varies.  
 
5.1.51  The Bassetlaw Rural Settlement Study, 202017 finds that the Large Rural 
Settlements - Blyth, Carlton in Lindrick and Costhorpe, Langold/Hodsock, 
Misterton and Tuxford - are the most sustainable due to them having the largest 
populations, a range o f employment, shops and services and having more 
frequent and commercially viable public transport services to nearby larger 
towns and cities. All also act as service centres for the surrounding rural area.  
 
5.1.52  It is expected that the Large Rural Sett lements will deliver about 1496  1525  
dwellings over the plan period. This will largely come from existing planning 
permissions and allocations in neighbourhood plans. There will be no new 
allocations except for the site proposed at Ollerton Road, Tuxford f or 75 dwellings 
which will contribute to the housing requirement of Tuxford. Providing for housing 
development in this tier of the hierarchy will help maintain rural vitality by allowing 
these settlements to grow to support existing facilities and provide a focal point 
for use by residents of surrounding settlements. During 2018 -2021, 111 dwellings 
were delivered in the Large Rural Settlements.  
 
5.1.53  The spatial strategy identifies that growth in the Large Rural Settlements should 
not exceed the number of  dwellings in these settlements by more than 20%, to 
ensure that they retain their identity and distinctiveness, and so that development 
is in keeping with their size, the level of services and infrastructure capacity.  
 
Small Rural Settlements  
5.1.54  As wi th the Large Rural Settlements evidence17 finds that the sustainable growth 
of the Small Rural Settlements would also help to sustain these villages in the 
long term. But it is recognised that their often greater environmental constraints 
can limit the abi lity of each settlement to accommodate growth (see Policy ST2).  
 
5.1.55  The growth in the Small Rural Settlements will be primarily delivered through 
committed sites with planning permission and from made neighbourhood plans, 
as well as appropriate develo pment consistent with the provisions of Policy ST2. 
Considering the large number of settlements in this tier of the hierarchy it is 
expected that about 1773  1,793  dwellings of the District’s housing requirement 
will be delivered from the Small Rural Settlements during the plan period. Since   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
24 
 the 1 April 2020 the Small Rural Settlements have contributed significantly to 
boosting housing delivery in Bassetlaw with 324 completions.  
 
5.1.56  The spatial strategy and Policy ST2 identifies that to promote sustainable 
development, growth should not exceed the number of dwellings in eligible Small 
Rural Settlements by more than 5%. The level of growth will also be monitored 
to inform the preparation of neighbourhood plans.  
 
5.1.57  Settlements which do not meet the criteria as a Large or Small Rural Settlement 
are considered to be in the countryside. Proposals for residential development 
and employment uses in the countryside will be assessed against other relevant 
policies in this Plan.  
 
5.1.58  In addition, throughout the settlement hierarchy, new housing sites which are in 
accordance with other policies in the Local Plan can be allocated through relevant 
neighbourhood plans.  
 
5.1.59  Policy ST1 therefore makes provision for a minimum of 10047  10,638  dwellings 
from 2020 to 2037  2038 . Of this, approximately 7359  7,581  dwellings have 
already been built or committed (through the granting of planning permission, or 
through allocatio n in neighbourhood plans) with a further 1200  1,300  anticipated 
on windfall sites. Policy ST1 therefore provides housing land for approximately 
3,639  4057 dwellings.  
 
Bassetlaw Garden Village  
5.1.60  Located strategically at the A1/A57 junction on a strategic growth corridor, the 
Bassetlaw Garden Village is not associated with meeting the growth needs of 
any particular settlement. Rather it contributes to achieving the wider aspirations 
of the D2N2 Growth and Recovery Strategy5, increasing the product ivity of the 
local economy, reducing out -commuting, increasing the number and quality of 
better paid jobs in the District and improving accessibility to services for the rural 
communities.  
 
5.1.61 The Garden Village provides a genuinely long -term sustaina ble growth plan for 
Bassetlaw, beyond the lifetime of the Local Plan. On that basis, 500 590 dwellings 
will be provided by 2037  2038  providing greater flexibility in the housing supply 
through increased choice and competition whilst contributing to necessary 
strategic  physical, social and green/blue infrastructure  on site and where relevant 
in the locality . 
 
Infrastructure Delivery  
 
5.1.62 In order to deliver the level of growth associated with Policy ST1, the Plan will 
facilitate  the delivery of that necessary infrastructure, services and facilities 
proportionate to the level of growth identified by this Plan in this plan period are 
delivered . Site-specific policies identify the key infrastructure requirements 
identified as necessary to support the delivery of each site.  An Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan18 (IDP) has bee n prepared alongside this Plan; this details which 
identifies  the key infrastructure requirements  necessary to deliver this plan ,   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
25 
 anticipated costs , delivery partners  and expected delivery  timeframes . Policy 
ST58 identifies the mechanisms the Council anticipates using to secure 
infrastructure as part of the development process.  The Infrastructure Schedule 
contained within the IDP sets out an overview of the key infrastructure 
requirements necessary to deliver this Plan.  
 
POLICY ST1: Bassetlaw’s Spatial Strategy  
1. The spatial strategy for Bassetlaw will be delivered over the plan period 2020 -2037  
2038  through:  
 
a) managed sustainable development and growth, appropriate to the size of each 
settlement to meet the evidenced need for new homes and jobs, to regenerate 
the District’s town centres, and to support necessary improvements to 
infrastructure, services and facili ties will be achieved  by:  
 
i. promoting the efficient and effective use of land and the re -use of previously 
developed land in sustainable locations, unless there are overriding amenity, 
biodiversity or heritage matters that preclude such use; and by seeking  to 
minimise  the use of the most versatile Grade 1 -3 agricultural land, where 
practicable;  
ii. emphasising the need to develop in sustainable locations in close proximity to 
transport hubs and key public transport nodes, and by encourage  encouraging  
higher density development in those locations;  
iii. ensuring that sufficient physical, social and green/blue infrastructure is 
delivered to meet identified  needs in a timely manner.  
 
b) enabling the provision of housing land for a minimum of 10,047  10,638  dwellings 
(591 dwellings per annum), through completed sites, sites with planning 
permission, new site allocations in this Local Plan, or and from site allocations in 
made neighbourhood plans in accordance with the settlement hierarchy below:  
 
i. at the Main Towns:  
1. approximately 2569  2,769  dwellings in Worksop Outer Area;  
2. approximately 700 725 dwellings in the Worksop Central DPD;  
3. approximately 2128 2,281 dwellings in Retford;  
4. approximately 1758  1,881  in Harworth & Bircotes;  
ii. by supporting the delivery of 1496  1,525  dwellings in the Large Rural 
Settlements;  
iii. by supporting the delivery of 1733  1,793  dwellings in the eligible Small Rural 
Settlements;  
iv. by supporting the development of 500 590 dwellings through a site allocation 
at the Bassetlaw Garden Village;  
 
Category  Settlement  
1. Main Town  Worksop, Retford and Harworth & Bircotes  
2. Large Rural Settlement  Blyth, Carlton in Lindrick and Costhorpe, Langold, 
Misterton and Tuxford  
3. Small Rural Settlement  Barnby Moor, Beckingham, Clarborough, Clayworth, 
Cuckney, Dunham on Trent, East Drayton, East   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
26 
 Markham, Elkesley, Everton, Gamston, Gringley on 
the Hill, Hayton, Laneham, Lound, Mattersey, 
Misson, Nether Langwith, Normanton on Trent, North 
Leverton, North and South Wheatley, Rampto n, 
Ranby, Ranskill, Rhodesia, Scrooby, Shireoaks, 
South Leverton, Styrrup, Sutton cum Lound, Sturton 
le Steeple, Treswell, Walkeringham, West Stockwith  
4. New settlement  Bassetlaw Garden Village  
5. Countryside  All areas not identified above  
 
c) windfall  sites, which are expected to be a reliable source of housing supply during 
the plan period contributing 1200  1,300  homes.  
d) considering  places not identified in the settlement hierarchy are considered  to be 
part of the wider countryside, where development will be supported where 
consistent with other policies in this plan and /or to address an identified local 
need and /or can be  where  justified through a neighbourhood plan or national 
policy;  
e) providing for 10 21 pitches for Gypsy and Travellers by 2025  2029 and a further 
30 21 pitches by 2037  2038  to meet identified local needs;  
f) contributing to the provision of approximately 9,735 additional jobs  169ha of land  
in the E(g), B2 and B8 Class Uses  between 2020 – 2037  at the General 
Employment Sites , and to meet the needs for sub-regional/regional logistics use 
only on approximately 118ha of land at the Apleyhead Strategic Employment Site  
between 2020 – 2038 ;  
g) safeguarding , regenerating and enhancing the role of the District’s town centres 
at Worksop, Retford and Harworth & Bircotes to secure their longevity as vibrant 
centres that provide appropriate housing, business, retail, leisure and community 
facilities to serve each  settlement, and its catchment effectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
27 
 Bassetlaw Garden Village  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Bassetlaw 
Garden Village section . For ease of consultation, Policy ST3: Bassetlaw Garden Village 
Design Framework  and Policy ST4:  Bassetlaw Garden Village and the supporting text 
is shown within this Addendum with the relevant tracked changes. However, comments 
should only be made on the proposed changes which are subject to consultation. As 
previousl y stated, these changes will be shown as follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is not an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for information only; these changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
28 
 5.3 Bassetlaw Garden Village  
 
5.3.1  The Bassetlaw  Garden Village is covers  223ha and is strategically located 
between Worksop and Retford to take advantage of existing road and rail 
infrastructure.  The site is bordered by the A1 on its western edge and the 
Sheffield -Lincoln railway line along its northern edge. Mansfield Road bisects the 
site east -west providing a good access between Retford, the A57, A1 and 
Worksop. Clumber Park SSSI lies to the south west of the A1 and Doncaster 
Sheffield Airport is within 20 miles. The site (see Figure 9) comprises agricultural 
land, but includes the non designated Morton Hill Farm and its outbuildings in the 
northern part of the site.  
 
 
Figure 9: Bassetlaw Garden Village  
 
5.3.2  Consistent with the National Planning Policy Framework1, the Local Plan 
recognises that the long term supply of new homes can sometimes be best 
achieved through planning for a new settlement , and that delivery may need to 
extend over an individual plan period . Such proposals can be considered 
appropriate This is  provided that they are well located  and designed , with quality 
standards identified, the have scope for wider  economic potential  and 
environmental gains and infrastructure investment  are considered , and 
supported by the necessary infrastructure and facilities including a genuine 
choice of transport modes. and that new residents will have good access to 
services and employment  and that quality standards are id entified.   
 
5.3.3  Delivering growth at the Garden Village promotes a long -term self-sustaining 
sustainable location for new development. It will provide a positive  legacy to the 
benefit of future generations and the environment by providing specific benefi ts 
that would not be  achievable elsewhere in the district. Notably the potential for a 
new railway station and parkway; better accessibility to sustainable/public 
transport, local shops and community facilities for the district’s rural communities; 
as well  as providing opportunities to build in positive and  zero carbon 
technologies , green/blue infrastructure  and gains to biodiversity from the outset.  
 
5.3.4  Additionally,  The Garden Village will also help the District in addressing its 
economic growth aspirations, in particular contributing to the diversification of the 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
29 
 economy, with the D2N2 LEP recognising it’s the Garden Village’s ‘significant 
role’ in helping to deliver  a step change in the economy by facilitating  employment 
in key regional growth sectors over the plan period  and beyond . 
 
5.3.5  On that basis, the Bassetlaw Garden Village will have a unique and vibrant  
identity, over time becoming a destination in its own right, distinct from 
surrounding towns and villages. It will transform  into a new self -sustaining, 
healthy, green community, representing a lifestyle choice for those who wish to 
live or work there.  
 
5.3.6 The scale of development will mean that the Garden Village provides the basis 
of a genuinely long -term sustainable growth plan for Bassetlaw, beyond the 
lifetime of the Local Plan ; an approach consistent with national policy1. In 
recognition of its de livery timeframe, the Bassetlaw Garden Village Vision 
Statement 202122 sets out a 30 year vision, supported by development and 
locally -led Garden City design principles, to inform the development of a 
developer -led masterplan framework for the site allocation.  
 
5.3.7  Policies ST3 and ST4 reinforce the vision. Policy ST3 sets out the strategic 
design principles that development within the strategic allocation in Policy ST4, 
should accord with  Garden Village, includin g land within the . Policy ST4 sets out 
the more detailed policy framework that the masterplan framework and 
development should address. This includes the more detailed infrastructure 
requirements to support the first phase of housing, employment and commer cial 
development expected to be delivered in this plan period to 2038.  
 
Garden City Principles  
5.3.8  The Town and Country Planning Association (TCPA) locally -led Garden City 
principles below provide a framework for good place -making, delivery and 
management at a Garden Village level. The TCPA promotes innovation, 
imagination and use specific to a local co ntext to ensure the Bassetlaw Garden 
Village is unique and appropriate to place. Nevertheless, it is the first two criteria 
that make a Garden Village distinctive from other housing allocations.  
 
 Land value capture for the benefit of the community;  
 Strong  vision, leadership and community engagement;  
 Community ownership of land and long -term stewardship of assets;  
 Mixed -tenure homes and housing types that are genuinely affordable;  
 A wide range of local jobs in the Garden Village within easy commuting distan ce of 
homes;  
 Beautifully and imaginatively designed homes with gardens, combining the best of 
town and country to create healthy communities, and including opportunities to grow 
food;  
 Development that enhances the natural environment, providing a comprehen sive 
green infrastructure network and net biodiversity gains, and that uses zero -carbon 
and energy -positive technology to ensure climate resilience;  
 Strong cultural, recreational and shopping facilities in walkable, vibrant, sociable 
neighbourhoods;  
 Integr ated and accessible transport systems, with walking, cycling and public 
transport designed to be the most attractive forms of local transport.  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
30 
 5.3.9  Additionally, Sport England’s Active Design principles23 provide a framework to 
encourage sport and physic al activity through the design and layout of the built 
environment. These will be used as the basis for delivering healthy place -making 
at the Garden Village, considered particularly important to help redress the 
significant health inequalities that exist in the District.   
 
5.3.10  Embedding these principles in policies ST3 and ST4 will ensure that the Garden 
Village comes forward as an exemplar form of sustainable  development, 
appropriate to local character and distinctiveness. Design, development and 
delivery will epitomise the highest standards of place -making and place -keeping 
across all aspects of planning and delivery, consistent with national policy1.  
 
5.3.1 1 The site has a number of existing challenges that development would need to 
address. The site is within 950m of the Clumber Park SSSI and the Sherwood 
Forest ppSPA, and within 15km of Birklands and Bilhaugh SAC/ Sherwood 
Forest NNR.  A Recreational Impact  Assessment has been undertaken for both 
protected sites . In relation to Local Plan growth t hese identify  that a range of 
mitigation measures  are likely to be sought  at Clumber Park and at relevant 
development sites  the Garden Village  (see Policy ST40 A). A draft Recreational 
Impact Assessment is underway: this is expected to confirm the mitigation 
identified by Policy ST4: that a Suitable Accessible Natural Greenspace (SANG) 
should be established on site in the early phase of development to ensure 
potential  recreational impacts are managed, that contributions are secured 
towards ongoing Strategic Access Management & Monitoring.  
 
5.3.12  At the Garden Village,  The delivery of a Suitable Altern ative Natural Greenspace 
(SANG)  in the first phase of development will be required to ensure potential 
recreational impacts from the Garden Village on the Clumber Park SSSI are 
managed appropriately.  The western edge of the site allocation falls within the 
exclusion  zone of the SSSI. Amongst measures designed to protect the important 
bird species associated with Clumber Park,  On that basis , a 400m green 
infrastructure buffer will be implemented by Policy ST4  to minimise cat 
predation24 into the more sensitive areas of Clumber Park . 
 
5.3.13  A necessary part of the proposal  is to ensure that development creates no harm 
to heritage assets on or off site. The Bassetlaw Garden Village Desk Based 
Archaeological Assessment 202125 and the Bassetlaw Garden Village 
Geophysical Assessment  2021  confirms cropmarks associated with late Iron Age 
and Romano -British settlement activity , indicating archaeological remains on 
site. A geophysical survey is underway to help identify the extent and further 
characterise the archaeological resource across the site.  this is expected to 
confirm that  Evidence confirms that the applicant will be required to undertake 
intrusive site investigations will be required  prior to development, to inform the 
detailed design and masterplan framework, and to ensure appropriate mitigation 
identified by Policy ST4 can be secured . Where appropriate, archaeological 
remains should be preserved and left in situ, forming part of the green 
infrastructure network for example.  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
31 
 5.3.1 4 Additionally, the non -designated heritage asset at Morton Hill Farm should be 
protected a nd positively integrated within development. The approach should 
reflect the significance of the asset both in terms of design and materials used.  
 
5.3.1 5 The design of the site should be in accordance with relevant National Grid 
guidance26 due to overhea d power lines crossing parts of the site;  Overhead 
power lines cross  parts of the site;  the siting of buildings and their height must be 
carefully considered and access for maintenance maintained. The design of the 
site should therefore be in accordance wi th relevant National Grid guidance26 and 
should to make positive use of land underneath and in proximity of the overhead 
lines, creative use of  such as for green/blue infrastructure  would be supported .  
 
Mix of Uses  
5.3.16 Policy ST4 provides for 10ha of employment land by 2038 to support the 
diversification of the local economy  and to provide for approximately 1200 jobs7. 
A significant opportunity exists to showcase the green energy and zero carbon 
employment sector and mod ern methods of construction  on site . Land for more 
traditional E(g) and B Class employment, supportive incubator space as well as 
space for local businesses to grow will be supported . A series of hubs across the 
site will provide for a range of employment generating  jobs for local residents.  
 
5.3.17 The Garden Village will also provide land for a substantial level of quality housing 
that will deliver around 4000 new homes over its lifetime , 590 dwellings by 2038. 
Given the complex nature of delivering a Garden Village, the housing trajectory 
in Appendix 3 clarifies that the Plan is not reliant on housing development coming 
forward for approximately 10 years, and no completions have been iden tified on 
site until 2031 -2032 at the earliest.  
 
5.3.18  Levels of growth would be accelerated in the next plan period to match future 
demands once initial strategic infrastructure needs have begun to be addressed, 
helping to ensure that the first phase  of development is not car -dominated. The 
future  delivery rates for of this site will be kept under review monitored , and as 
national policy states, if circumstances change, the allocation can be  revisited  
reflected as policies are updated upon through the  first review of the Local Plan.   
 
5.3.19 Housing is expected to be delivered by volume national developers, smaller local 
and regional construction companies as well as individuals constructing their own 
homes  through self-build plots. This type of diversi ty in construction partners will 
ensure that year -on-year delivery can be boosted and maintained moving 
forward.  
 
5.3.20 As a new settlement, the Garden Village must provide for an appropriate housing 
mix in terms of type, size and tenure, including for ma rket and affordable housing , 
specialist housing and starter homes . As the Garden Village will be built over 
more than one two plan period s, housing mix will be agreed on a phase by phase 
basis to ensure the mix is in accordance with the most up to date loc al housing 
needs assessment.  
 
Green and Blue Infrastructure    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
32 
 5.3.21 The Garden Village extends to around 223 hectares. Not all of this land will be 
needed for development. A requirement of Policy ST3 the Garden Village  is 
delivery of environmental quality through all aspects of its design. On that basis, 
40% of the site area should comprise a comprehensive green/blue infrastructure 
network.  The initial landscape -led design in the Vision Statement22 demonstrates 
that this is feasible , whilst also accommodati ng the local character and 
distinctiveness of its rural location and its heritage . has been heavily influenced 
by the local character and distinctiveness of its rural location and its heritage, 
whilst significantly contributing to environmental quality. Mo ving forward, as part 
of the collaborative masterplanning process, the design will  also need to respond 
to particular constraints. Even so, it must make provision for 40% green/blue 
infrastructure across the site.  
 
5.3.22 The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 202127 advises that this 
interconnected network should also provide for an integrated flood management 
and sustainable drainage scheme . A Drainage Phasing Plan based on the SuDS 
train method will be required to ensure adequate drainage infrastru cture 
manages surface water run -off appropriately  is provided  throughout the 
development ’s life. to ensure surface water run -off in particular can be 
appropriately managed .  
 
5.3.23 Sustainable drainage can also make significant contributions to the higher 20% 
biodiversity net gain target identified for the  sought on site . However the Garden 
Village should also contribute  This should include a contribution towards 
biodiversity opportunities mapping targets28 sought by Policy ST40 , such as for 
wood pas ture, species rich grasslands, and woodlands whilst ensuring that new 
habitats can be sensitively managed to minimise breeding opportunities for 
protected bird species from nearby Clumber Park SSSI, as defined by the 
Habitats Regulations Assessment 202124.  
 
5.3.24 An arboriculture survey and management plan will ensure the mature trees on 
site are protected and carefully integrated into the design, and that new provision 
is complementary, contributing to the 20% tree canopy cover target for the 
Garden Village. Such me asures will create a distinctive setting, deliver air quality 
benefits and help the district adapt to the changing climate, whilst recognising its 
setting adjacent to Sherwood Forest.  
 
5.3.25 The green/blue infrastructure should be multi -functional to accommodate suitable 
recreational space such as a park.  A green wheel around the perimeter should 
be capable of buffering potential impacts from adjoining infrastructure, whilst 
providing  clear settlement edges with the adjoining countryside, and providing  
appropriate amenity for future occupiers and neighbouring residents, including 
the farmholding to the south east.  
 
Green/blue infrastructure should include a linear park and a green wheel around 
the perimeter . The green/blue infrastructure should be multi -functional to 
accommodate suitable recreational space such as a park. This multi -purpose 
landscape feature can also function as a Suitable Alternative Natural 
Greenspace, act as a buffer to the A1 corridor  and the railway line, provide . A 
green wheel  around the perimeter should be capable of buffering potential   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
33 
 impacts from adjoining infrastructure, whilst providing clear settlement edges with 
the adjoining countryside, and providing appropriate amenity for future occupiers 
and neighbouring residents,  including the farmholding to the south east.  
 
5.3.26 Together these new features should connect to a network of smaller 
neighbourhood  spaces for recreation, sport, play, active travel, food production 
and wildlife. This will ensure all neighbourhoods  users have easy access to 
quality green/blue infrastructure, Design details such as space for inclusive 
cycling,  whilst inclusive design such as , storage for mobility scooters and 
pushchairs will ensure residents of all ages and abilities are able to enjoy a 
healthy lifestyle  and experience social interaction .  
 
5.3.27 Indoor and outdoor sports facilities will be required to meet the informal and 
formal needs of all ages and abilities to encourage healthy, active lifestyles. The 
level and type of provision will be agreed with Sport England on a phase by phase 
basis in ac cordance with the latest Playing Pitch Strategy and Built Indoor  Sports 
Facilities Strategy.  
 
Healthy active lifestyles  
5.3.28 Healthy place -making is a cross cutting theme underpinning  underpins the design 
of the Garden Village, reflecting World Health Organisation guidelines for 
physical activity29. On that basis, Policy ST3 requires the design and development 
to promote healthy, active lifestyles, focussed around  the ‘15 minute 
neighbourhood’ concept. The Vision Statement22 identifies that this can be 
achieved, by focussing development around  the provision of three community 
hubs, which  contain complementary everyday services and community facilities, 
that are accessible by active travel through walking, cycling and public transport , 
thereby minimising the need to use the private car  should underpin the approach . 
 
5.3.29 Each hub should have a different focus: the northern hub is focussed around the 
safeguarded railway station/transport interchange; whereas the central hub 
should host education,  health/community facilities and a local centre, in response 
to the local education authority’s  requirement for an integrated primary/secondary 
school to be centrally located on site. The eastern hub could provide for a range 
of complementary small -scale co mmercial and community uses. Design of active 
buildings will be supported.   
 
5.3.30 Consistent with national policy1 and the National Design Guide30, densities 
should vary across the site, ensuring different neighbourhoods have their own 
character and iden tity. To reflect the principle of the 15 minute neighbourhood, 
higher densities will be supported around key activity and transport nodes. A 
density plan will be required to accompany the masterplan framework  to ensure 
the principles of the Bassetlaw Garde n Village Vison Statement24 are delivered.  
 
Sustainability  
5.3.31  The Garden Village should fully embrace  is expected to epitomise  the green 
agenda: new housing development  will be of the relevant  designed to  meet the   
achieve  the highest relevant standards in each development the first  phase, 
ensuring that each subsequent phase is designed to meet the relevant highest 
standards  including  for water efficiency and energy efficiency. This can be   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
34 
 achieved through  A range of design measures, sustainable construction 
techniques and materials, and, use of green/blue infrastructure will be sought to 
make the Garden Village resilient to the effects of climate change.  
  
5.3.32 Zero-carbon and energy positive  technologies should be built -in to the design. 
This could include  A range of measures appropriate to local context, including 
localised energy delivery through district heating systems and co -generation . The  
and development of appropriate community energy schemes will be supported. 
A Green Energy Assessment should inform the masterplan framework to 
demonstrate how opportunities have been maximised.  
 
Active Travel, Public Transport and Connectivity  
5.3.33 Transport , and the movement of vehicles and people, is vital to the successful 
development of the Garden Village. The design should embed the promotion of 
active travel choices by such as walking, cycling, bus and rail over the use of the 
private car from the outset . To enable this step -change, a highly legible, attractive 
and accessible movement network should be focussed around the delivery of, 
and connectivity to,  an integrated transport interchange and public transport 
network  on site.  
 
The Garden Village has direct access to the Sheffield -Lincoln railway line 
providing a significant opportunity to deliver meaningful transport infrastructure 
and associated economic and environmental benefits to the district. Policy ST56 
safeguards land for a new railway sta tion and associated infrastructure which will 
act as the anchor for the new transport interchange.  
 
5.3.34 In the early stages of development it is important that residents do not become 
car dependent. A new bus service should be provided in the first phas e to and  
through the site , supported by bus priority measures,  to enable strong direct 
connect ions to Worksop and Retford and  their nearby  employment areas, as well 
as supporting sustainable movement for residents  within the site . In the medium 
term, this should improve accessibility for rural residents to community facilities 
on site and to the railway station.  
 
5.3.35 Safe, convenient walking and cycling links to Worksop across the A1 will be 
required from the outset . Improvements to the existing on road provision will be 
sought in the short term to enable suitable access  to and from the site , whilst the 
potential for a pedestrian/cycle bridge over the A1 will be explored  in later phases . 
Early discussions with Highways  National  Highways and the National Trust are 
essential to ensure its appropriate delivery. In the long term, access to Retford 
off road via public rights of way to Ordsall South should be considered.  
 
5.3.36 Two level crossings adjoin the site an d a third is within close proximity to the 
south -east. Once construction begins the on site Howards crossing will be closed 
to maintain the safe operation of the railway network. After 2037  2038 , the closure 
of the Rushey’s Sidings level crossing to the so uth-east will be required alongside 
the diversion of the road network between Jockey Lane and Mansfield Road to 
enable the safe movement of vehicles , cyclists and pedestrians  and traffic . Early 
discussions with Network  Rail and the Local Highways Authority  will be 
required.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
35 
 5.3.37 Given its location, and likely advances in vehicle technology over the plan period 
and beyond, the transport network will be expected to incorporate infrastructure 
to enable the charging of electric/ alternative fuel technology ve hicles at private 
dwellings , for public transport  and in public car parking areas . The transport 
interchange should enable this to be undertaken at a strategic level.  
 
5.3.38 The Garden Village has direct access to the Sheffield -Lincoln railway line 
providing a significant opportunity to deliver meaningful transport infrastructure 
and associated economic and environmental benefits to the district. Policy ST56 
safeguards land fo r a new railway station and associated infrastructure which will 
act as the anchor for  at the new transport interchange.   
 
5.3.39 Even with these requirements, a development of this scale is expected to 
generate impacts to the highway network. On that basi s, the Garden Village 
transport infrastructure  has been identified as a priority project in the County 
Council’s Strategic Infrastructure Plan 202 230.  
 
5.3.40 Advice from the Local Highways Authority will inform the partial re -alignment of 
Mansfield Road between the A1/B6420 roundabout and the Mansfield Road level 
crossing. Built to distributor road standard it will act as the spine for the 
development but also provide added benefits, by enhancing highways  safety and 
accessibility for pedestrians and cyclists through segregated walking and cycling 
infrastructure .  
 
5.3.41 Policy ST4 requires that where off site impacts are significant, improvements to 
the local road and rail network will be required31. Detailed evidence will be 
required through a site specific  Transport Assessment and Travel Plan for each 
phase of development .  
 
The delivery of the Garden Village is expected to take many years. A delivery 
strateg y and phasing plan will be required alongside the masterplan framework. 
This should include safeguarding land for new infrastructure on site in 
accordance with Policy ST56, such as a new integrated primary -secondary 
school. Policy ST4 requires that this st rategy be reviewed to accompany each 
development phase. This will ensure that each phase of development 
appropriately mitigates its impact on strategic and local infrastructure and 
contributes to the delivery of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan18 in a proportionate 
and timely manner.  
 
Stewardship and Legacy  
5.3.40  Essential to the successful delivery of the Garden Village is maintaining the 
quality of green/blue infrastructure and community assets. At the appropriate 
point, they should be transferred into community ownership to secure the long -
term collaborative ste wardship for future generations.  
 
5.3.41  The Council will establish a Stewardship Management Group to facilitate the 
approach and procedures for delivery. This will be locally -led involving the 
landowners, existing local community representatives, and ov er time new 
residents and developer partners. A Stewardship and Legacy Plan must   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
36 
 accompany the masterplan framework and should identify opportunities for 
community participation.  
 
Masterplanning  
5.3.42 Policy ST4 ST3 requires development to be guided by a comprehensive 
developer -led masterplan framework for the whole village  site allocation , 
accompanied by an agreed suite of supporting strategies, design code, 
parameter plans, delivery strategy and  phasing plan. These  will jointly form a 
framework for informing planning applications and the phased delivery of the 
Garden Village .  
 
5.3.43 The masterplan framework should be agreed with the Council and be approved 
by the Bassetlaw Garden Village Consultative Group; a partnership facilitated by 
the Council, comprising key stakeholders and the landowners, who have 
facilitated the delivery of the Garden Village to date . Membership of the Group is 
identified in the Bassetlaw Garden Village Vision Statement 2021.  It is expe cted 
that work will be completed on the masterplan framework by 2025, to inform 
implementation. This is anticipated to tie in with funding bids to Government and 
other organisations.  
 
Infrastructure provision  
5.3.44 The delivery of the Garden Village is e xpected to take many years. However , the 
National Planning Policy Framework recognises  that infrastructure requirements 
associated with new settlements may not be capable of being identified fully at 
the outset. On that basis, this Local Plan recognises th e importance of ensuring 
each phase is not reliant on the car, it is essential  that infrastructure is 
appropriately phased alongside development .  
 
5.3.4 5 This will  To ensure that each phase of development appropriately mitigates its 
impact on strategic and local infrastructure, and so that each phase is not overly 
reliant on the car, the delivery strategy and phasing plan will be expected to 
deliver the requirements  of Policy ST3 and Policy ST4 and the provisions set out 
in and contributes to the delivery of  the Infrastructure Delivery Plan18 in a 
proportionate and timely manner. This should include safeguarding land for new 
infrastructure on site in accordance with Policy ST4  and Policy ST56 , such as  a 
new integrated primary -secondary school.  As such, Policy ST4 requires a  the 
delivery strategy and phasing plan be prepared and  will be reviewed to 
accompany each application phase.  
 
To ensure infrastructure is appropriately phased alongside development a  
delivery strategy and phasing and implementation plan will be required alongside 
the masterplan framework. This should include safeguarding land for new 
infrastructure on site in accordance with Policy ST4 ST56,  such as a new 
integrated primary -secondary school. Policy ST4 requires that this strategy be 
reviewed to accompany each development phase. This will ensure that each 
phase of development appropriately mitigates its impact on strategic and local 
infrastruc ture and contributes to the delivery of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan18 
in a proportionate and timely manner.   
 
Stewardship and Legacy    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
37 
 5.3.46 Essential to the successful delivery of the Garden Village is maintaining the 
quality of green/blue infrastructure and community assets. At the appropriate 
point, they should be transferred into community ownership to secure the long -
term collaborative ste wardship for future generations. The Council will establish 
a Stewardship Management Group to facilitate the approach and procedures for 
delivery. This will be locally -led involving the landowners, existing local 
community representatives, and over time ne w residents and developer partners. 
A Stewardship and Legacy Plan  should  must  accompany the masterplan 
framework and should  identify opportunities for community participation.  
 
 
POLICY ST3: Bassetlaw Garden Village Design  and Development  
Principles  
 
1. All development within  Bassetlaw Garden Village  A masterplan framework will be 
required to be produced to inform the development of initial application for  the 
Bassetlaw Garden Village site allocation.  The overall design and layout The will be 
expected  to reflect the locally -led Garden City principles as set out by the Town and 
Country Planning Association (TCPA) and be in accordance with the following 
Bassetlaw Garden Village Vision Statement22 key design principles  below : 
 
a) a healthy active place – a healthy garden village designed to reflect Sport 
England’s Active Design principles23, focussed around the 15 minute 
neighbourhood and three hubs connected by active travel, with integrated 
multifunctional open space that incorporates edible space, sport, recreation and 
play, private and community gardens, active non residential buildings and access 
to nature;  
b) a well -connected and integrated place – an accessible garden village that 
prioritises active travel through  walking and cycling, integrated public tr ansport, 
with strong sustainable  links to the A1, nearby towns, Clumber Park and the 
surrounding rural community, built in capacity in homes, businesses and open 
space to enable innovative transport solutions and safe neighbourhoods with 
natural surveillan ce and smart lighting;  
c) a sustainable place – a resilient garden village, masterplanned to achieve 
exemplary sustainable design and relevant sustainable building standards, using 
sustainable building materials, that integrate zero carbon and positive energy  
technologies and build in climate change resilience with tree planting, sustainable 
drainage, integrated water management and adaptable homes that support a 
mixed community and a range of diverse businesses ;  
d) a place where innovation is built in – an adaptable garden village that showcases 
innovative construction methods and new technologies, integrates efficient and 
cost saving energy and water networks and smart technologies to support smart 
living and workin g practices and transport solutions;  
e) a place where community ownership and participation is embraced – a cared for 
garden village of attractive distinctive built and natural environments, meaningful 
space for community interaction and events, with resident s actively involved in 
managing public space and community facilities;  
f) a quality place - a landscape -led garden village designed to achieve 40% 
green/blue infrastructure cover, 20% biodiversity net gain and 20% tree canopy   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
38 
 cover, that responds positively t o landscape, heritage, ecology, topography and 
aspect, which integrates a robust sustainable drainage scheme and sensitive 
heritage management.  
 
2. The masterplan framework will be expected to incorporate the proposed location and 
distribution of uses across the site in accordance with the following key development 
principles : 
a) to provide for an appropriate range of densities across the site to ensure a highly 
walkable and highly connected street -based layout th at encourages segregated 
walking and cycling. This should be evidenced by a density plan;  
b) to comprise a scheme of an appropriate scale, layout, form and materials which 
respects the significance and setting of affected heritage assets, and takes into 
account the results of the Bassetlaw Garden Village Desk Top Based 
Archaeological Assessment 202125, the Bassetlaw Garden Village Geophysical 
Assessment 2021, intrusive site investigations, the applicant’s heritage statement  
and mitigation strategy ; 
c) that incorporate s a network of green/blue infrastructure, landscape and heritage 
assets and locally important ecologically important habitats , informed by the 
applicant’s Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment . This  should:  
i. show all structural landscaping and the treatments to be provided including 
boundary treatments and measures to ensure a depth buffe r with the A1 and 
the railway line, and a 100m separation with existing properties on the south -
eastern boundary;  
ii. show how development will safeguard, maintain and where possible enhance 
sightlines and key views in and across the allocation, including the retention 
of long open views towards Retford and to the south;  
iii. include the mix of open space uses as identified by the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan18; 
iv. show how existing trees, woodland and important hedgerows will be protected, 
and the location of new tree  and woodland planting, informed by the 
applicant’s arboriculture assessment to ensure their long term management;  
d) to comprise a scheme of an appropriate scale, layout, form and planting which 
takes into account relevant mitigation to manage potential recreational disturbance 
upon the nearby Clumber Park SSSI , in accordance with  Policy ST40A ; the 
Bassetlaw Habitats Regulations Assessment 2021 and the applicant’s project level 
shadow HRA including winter bird surveys  by: 
i. ensuring that housing d evelopment is situated outside the 400m exclusion 
zone of the Clumber Park SSSI and the Sherwood Forest ppSPA  boundaries ; 
ii. ensuring that no habitat suitable for breeding by ground nesting birds 
associated with Clumber Park SSSI and Sherwood Forest ppSPA  is created 
within 400m of housing development ; 
iii. providing for a Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace on site;  
 
f) to show how surface water will be managed on site, through an integrated flood 
management and Drainage Phasing Plan informed by the applicant’s Flood Risk 
Assessment and a Surface Water Management Masterplan and Strategy. This 
should include whole life management and maintenance arrangements;  
g) by providing  for a zero carbon and renewable energy network including identifying 
opportunitie s for localised heating systems, use of sustainable design and   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
39 
 construction , and provision of infrastructure to support electric and clean vehicle 
alternatives , informed by the applicant’s Green Energy Assessment;  
h) by identify ing the proposed transport links, including access to the site, main 
internal highway network, a dedicated access to the farmholding adjoining the 
south -east boundary ; principal walking, cycling and bridleway links  through the site 
towards the transport interchang e and community  hubs , including l inks to the 
surrounding network , and ensuring the public right of way is retained, maintained 
and enhanced;  
i) to show the location and nature of the public transport interchange and associated 
infrastructure, including land for the provision of a new Railway Station and 
associated infrastructure and how the development will maximise opportunities for 
a comprehensive and connected public transport service ; 
j) by providing  for an appropriate level of formal and informal sports pitches and 
facilities to meet the evolving needs of the community informed by the Bassetlaw 
Playing Pitch Strategy33 and the Bassetlaw Built Facilities Strategy34;  
k) to show how the closure of the affected le vel crossings in the locality can ensure 
the safe movement of vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists, as a result of consultation 
with Network Rail and the Local Highways Authority;  
l) by identify ing the location and form  of the local centre, the health hub, the 
community facilities and provision of 8ha of land on site for the development of an 
integrated primary -secondary school and early years facility;  
m) to respond positively  to the National Grid assets present within the site and the 
Network Rail assets along the northern boundary, which  by demonstrat ing how the 
National Grid Design Guide and Principles and relevant Network Rail guidance 
have been applied and how the impact of the assets has be en reduced through 
good design.  
 
4. Where planning permission is granted, Permitted Development Rights may be 
removed in order to control future alterations or extensions that may impact on the 
quality, appearance and character of the Garden Village.  
 
5. The masterplan framework should be produced in consultation with the Bassetlaw 
Garden Village Consultative Group and local communities and the provisions of 
Policy ST58, and include a statement that sets out how community and stakeholder 
engagement has inf luenced the design and layout and its intended delivery.  
6. The final masterplan framework should be submitted to the Council for its approval 
prior to the submission of the initial planning application for the site.  
 
 
POLICY ST4: Bassetlaw Garden Village  
 
1. Land at the Bassetlaw Garden Village, as identified on the Policies Map, will be 
developed as a self -sustaining new settlement over the next 30 years. The scale of 
the development means that the site should meet  the highest design quality 
standard s in accordance with the principles identified in Policy ST3.  
2. Within this Plan period, to contribute to the growth ambitions within the Local Plan, 
the first phase of development is expected to provide approximately 590  new 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
40 
 dwellings, 10 hectares of employment land and 5 ha of commercial land, and an 
appropriate level of infrastructure, delivered in a timely and proportionate manner to 
ensure that the settlement is non -car dominant from the outset. By 2038  this should 
include:  
 
a) an appropriate  mix of housing types, sizes and tenures to help meet local housing 
need, including affordable housing, specialist housing, extra care 
accommodation, and, where appropriate, serviced plots for self -build and custom 
build homes with an  appropriate amount of outside private amenity space;  
b) a robust employment mix of E(g), B2 and B8 uses to support job growth, 
employment diversification and enterprise to complement the wider development 
proposed in the locality of the Garden Village;  
c) comm ercial land  adjacent to the A1/ Mansfield Road junction comprising an 
appropriate mix of E(b) use and visitor accommodation;  
d) provision for appro priate utilities infrastructure;  for water  supply , foul water , 
electricity  supply and digital connectivity  through consultation  with relevant 
infrastructure providers;  
e) provision for, at least, 18ha of green and blue infrastructure, including a Suitable 
Alternative Natural Greenspace on site;  
f) provision of  the first phase of community infrastructure , which as a minimum  
should include the development of a convenience store and a community hub;   
g) provision for an appropriate level of outdoor and indoor sports facilities  
commensurate to the level of housing proposed ; 
h) necessary school transport services to nearby education facilities prior to the 
delivery of on -site education facilities;  
i) the safe and suitable vehicular access into the site from the A1/Mansfield Road 
junction;  
j) the partial realignment of Mansfield Road t o distributor standard to support the 
delivery of the first development phase , including segregated walking and cycling 
links; 
k) enhanced  walking and cycling provision  over the A1 ; 
l) the closure of Howards No1 Level Crossing;  
m) the provision of a dedicated and h igh frequency bus service to and through t he 
site to Worksop, Retford and nearby employment sites.  
 
3. Beyond 2038, further phases of development at the Garden Village should deliver:  
  
a) the remaining 3 410 new dwellings;  
b) a range of main town centre uses , in order to optimise the settlement’s self-
sufficiency and to support the village’s residential and working community. This 
should include:  
i. local shops and services that meet the day to day needs of the local 
community without impacting upon the vitality and viability of existing town 
centres in accordance with Policy ST13;  
ii. additional community facilities including indoor and outdoor sports 
facilities  commensurate to the level of housing proposed ; 
iii. provision of on site primary and community healthcare facilities;  
iv. a co-located 4 Form entry primary and secondary school with capacity to 
co-locate one early years nursery facility and associated sup porting 
infrastructure;    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
41 
 c) the ongoing provision of at least a further 71ha of green and blue infrastructure 
to achieve the 40% site coverage ; 
d) walking and cycling infrastructure as necessary to support the development 
proposed in each subsequent phase , including:  
i. a new dedicated walking and cycling crossing over the A1 ; and  
ii. an enhanced walking and cycling link from the site to HS13: Ordsall South;  
e) an integrated transport hub including a railway station with a platform and 
necessary supporting infrastruc ture located to the north of the railway line, public 
transport interchange, electric vehicle charging hub , and cycling hub and 
supporting infrastructure;  
f) the ongoing re -alignment and upgrade of part of the B6420 Mansfield Road 
between the A1/B6420 roundab out and Mansfield Road level crossing to 
distributor road standard, including appropriate junctions with the existing B6420 
Mansfield Road to support the level of development proposed in each phase;  
g) the closure of Rushey’s Sidings Level Crossing , and, the redirection of vehicular 
and pedestrian/cycle movements to Jockey Lane via a new road link to enable 
the safe crossing of the railway line in accordance with advice from Network Rail 
and the Local Highways Authority;  
h) additional utilities infrastructure  to support the level of development proposed in 
each phase in consultation with relevant infrastructure providers.  
 
4. The applicant’s Delivery Strategy and Phasing Plan will be expected to demonstrate  
that the Garden Village  will be coordinated with the timely and proportionate delivery 
and implementation of infrastructure (on and off site) as identified as necessary by 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. This will ensure that:  
a) identified potential adverse impacts are satisfact orily and appropriately mitigated;  
b) adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure will allow the establishment of a 
self-sufficient and cohesive community;  
c) occupiers have an appropriate range of sustainable travel options from an early 
stage, includin g access to bus services and the cycle and pedestrian link to 
Worksop  and nearby employment areas ; 
d) each phase is making an appropriate and proportionate financial contribution to 
the site allocation’s strategic and local infrastructure requirements as identified 
by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  including:  
i. the delivery of off -site transport infrastructure improvements , including to the 
junction of the B6420/A620; and , to the junctions at the A614 Blyth 
Road/A57/A1 ; the A60 Mansfield Road/A619 ; the A57/Sandy Lane; the 
A57/Claylands Avenue/Shireoaks Common; the A57/B6034/Netherton Road 
and the A57/B6040;  
ii. for a high frequency bus service from the site to Worksop and Retford, and to 
nearby employment areas;  
iii. towards the new Garden Village railway st ation and associated infrastructure;  
iv. for appropriate highway demand management measures to be in operation 
throughout the lifetime of the construction of the site;  
v. towards the phased delivery of on site  sports, community facilities, healthcare 
facilities and education facilities;  
vi. towards a new public transport interchange . 
 
5. Planning obligations will be sought to secure the timely transfer of the land required  
to accommodate the infrastructure  identified by 2 and 3 above. Other i nfrastructure   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
42 
 shall be secured by planning condition, agreement and/or other mechanism 
considered appropriate . 
6. Upon review of the Local Plan the Council will undertake a review of infrastructure 
delivery, to ensure any potential im pacts and mitigation associated with the additional 
3410 dwellings at the Garden Village are identified in consultation with relevant 
infrastructure partners. In relation to transport and highways this should take into 
account:  
i. the optimisation of existing, and the introduction of further, sustainable 
transport measures where appropriate along with the need to provide wi der 
infrastructure improvements;  
ii. any additional transport and highways infrastructure on and off site that will be 
needed to suppor t the delivery of the Bassetlaw Garden Village taking into 
account implemented and committed highway schemes.  
 
7. The masterplan framework  shall include a Stewardship and Legacy Plan which 
addresses the long -term governance and stewardship arrangements (inclu ding the 
management, maintenance and renewal) of the green and blue infrastructure, the 
public realm, community and other relevant public facilities. Planning obligations will 
be sought to secure the long term funding, maintenance and stewardship of the 
assets where necessary.  
 
POLICY ST4: Bassetlaw Garden Village  
 
1. Land at Bassetlaw Garden Village, as identified on the Policies Map, will be 
developed for approximately 500 dwellings, 10 hectares of employment land and 5ha 
of land for employment generating uses and associated infrastructure in this plan 
period, and a f urther 3500 dwellings and associated infrastructure thereafter as part 
of a safe, sustainable, quality new settlement.  
2. Proposals to develop land at Bassetlaw Garden Village will be expected to deliver:  
 
a) development in accordance with Policy ST3;  
b) a mix of housing types, sizes and tenures to meet local needs including 
affordable housing, specialist housing and extra care accommodation, and, 
where appropriate, serviced plots for self -build and custom homes, with outdoor 
amenity space appropriate to property t ype; 
c) a robust employment mix of E(g), B2 and B8 uses to support job growth, 
employment diversification and enterprise clustering to complement the wider 
development proposed in the area;  
d) a commercial area adjacent to the A1/Mansfield Road junction comprisi ng 
employment generating uses to include an appropriate mix of E(b) use and visitor 
accommodation;  
e) a heritage -led landscape scheme of an appropriate scale, layout, form and 
materials, supported by a Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment, which 
integrates  a network of green/blue infrastructure, landscape and heritage assets 
and locally important ecologically important habitats. This  should include:  
i. sensitive use of soft landscaping, such as trees, hedgerows, and an in 
depth green buffer along the periphery  of the site to provide a clear 
boundary, and along the south -eastern boundary to provide 100m 
separation with existing properties;    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
43 
 ii. maintaining sightlines and views from and through the development, 
including the retention of long open views towards Retfor d and to the south 
through use of green/blue infrastructure;  
iii. ensuring that housing development is situated outside the 400m exclusion 
zone of the Clumber Park SSSI boundary;  
iv. an appropriate landscaping strategy to ensure that housing development 
is not situ ated within 400m of habitats associated with the protected 
ground nesting bird species associated with Clumber Park SSSI;  
v. density appropriate to place, such as lower density development on the 
periphery of the site with higher densities towards the activit y nodes;  
vi. use of level access accommodation, such as bungalows, along the urban -
rural interface;   
f) a scheme of an appropriate scale, layout, form and materials which respects the 
significance and setting of affected heritage assets, supported by a heritage 
statement to be informed by the Bassetlaw Garden Village Desk Top Based 
Archaeological Assessment 202125 and geophysical survey, intrusive site 
investigations, and mitigation strategy ; 
g) a Habitats Regulations Assessment24, including winter bird surveys to i dentify 
potential impacts on the Birklands and Bilhaugh SAC and Sherwood Forest 
ppSPA;  
h) ensure that potential recreational impacts upon Clumber Park SSSI, Birklands 
and Bilhaugh SAC, Sherwood Forest NNR are appropriately managed and 
mitigated, informed by t he Recreational Impact Assessment for the sites in 
accordance with Policy ST40;  
i) an integrated flood management and Drainage Phasing Plan informed by a Flood 
Risk Assessment and a Surface Water Management Masterplan and Strategy, 
to manage surface water dr ainage on site to include whole life management and 
maintenance arrangements;  
j) a multifunctional, coherent and connected green/blue infrastructure network to 
include the mix of uses as identified by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan18 and a 
Suitable Alternat ive Natural Greenspace to enable a circular walk. The future 
management and maintenance shall be agreed through a planning application;  
k) a tree strategy to protect existing trees and woodland and important hedgerows, 
and to manage new tree and woodland planting, supported by an arboriculture 
assessment to ensure their long term management;  
l) a design that enables access by the relevant bodies to the overhead power lines 
crossing the site and to the railway line along the northern boundary to enable 
whole l ife management and maintenance;  
m) sufficient health capacity, which is expected to comprise a primary healthcare 
facilities, community health services and ancillary facilities;  
n) a new multi -purpose community facility including changing accommodation and 
indoo r and outdoor space for sport informed by the Bassetlaw Playing Pitch 
Strategy33 and the Bassetlaw Built Facilities Strategy34;  
o) sufficient education capacity; in this plan period this will comprise an appropriate 
financial contribution towards school tran sport provision to primary and 
secondary facilities in the locality until the on site provision is operational; and, 
provision of serviced land to accommodate an integrated early years facility, 4 
Form Entry primary school, and secondary school (approximat ely 8ha) and 
associated supporting infrastructure after 2037, as identified by the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan18;   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
44 
 p) a Local Centre to include a convenience goods store of an appropriate size, 
commensurate to its location and other local shops and services t hat meet the 
day to day needs of the local community without impacting upon the vitality and 
viability of existing town centres in accordance with Policy ST13;  
q) a low carbon and renewable energy network including opportunities for localised 
heating systems,  sustainable design and construction to meet relevant 
sustainable building standards such as in accordance with Policy ST50, informed 
by a green energy assessment;  
r) all necessary transport infrastructure improvements through direct mitigation or 
contributio ns to new and improved infrastructure, referring to the development’s   
Transport Assessment and Travel Plan, informed by Local Highways Authority 
advice, detailing:  
i. the re -alignment and upgrade of part of the B6420 Mansfield Road 
between the A1/B6420 round about and Mansfield Road level crossing to 
distributor road standard, including  appropriate junctions with the existing 
B6420 Mansfield Road and the A1/ B6420 junction;  
ii. an appropriate financial contribution towards the improvement of the 
junction at the B6 420/A620; and the roundabout at the A614 Blyth 
Road/A57/A1;  
iii. provision of appropriate infrastructure to support electric and clean vehicle 
alternatives;  
iv. provision for an integrated transport hub in accordance with Policy ST54 
including a railway station with a platform and necessary supporting 
infrastructure located to the north of the railway line, public transport 
interchange, electric vehicle charging hub and cycling hub and supporting 
infrastructure;  
v. a strategy for the safe closure of the level crossi ngs in the locality, and to 
ensure the safe movement of vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists, through 
early consultation with Network Rail and the Local Highways Authority;  
vi. an appropriate financial contribution towards a high frequency bus service 
from the site to Worksop and Retford, Clumber Park and nearby 
employment areas to support the first phase of the development;  
vii. high quality infrastructure to support walking and cycling throughout the 
site, and provision of links to adjacent employment areas, to Clumber Park 
and to other nearby locations;  
viii. appropriate highway demand management measures to be in operation 
throughout the lifetime of the construction of the site;  
ix. an appropriate financial contribution towards the new Garden Village 
railway station and associated infrastructure;  
x. dedicated access to the farmholding adjoining the south -east boundary.  
 
3. The proposed development at the Garden Village should deliver a scheme in 
accordance with a comprehensive masterplan framework informed by the 
Bassetlaw Gard en Village Vision Statement 202122 and in accordance with the 
provisions set out above and Policy ST58. The masterplan framework must be 
agreed with the Local Planning Authority and approved by the Bassetlaw Garden 
Village Consultative Group.  
4. To ensure th e long term sustainable governance and stewardship arrangements of 
the public and community assets are delivered and phased appropriately the   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
45 
 masterplan should be accompanied by a Stewardship and Management Plan, to be 
approved by the Bassetlaw Garden Vill age Stewardship Working Group.  
5. Where planning permission is granted, Permitted Development Rights may be 
removed in order to control future alterations or extensions that may impact on the 
quality, appearance and character of the Garden Village.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
46 
 Provision of Land for Employment Development  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Provision of Land 
for Employment Development section . For ease of consultation, Policy ST7: Provision 
of Land for Employment Development  and the supporting text is shown within this 
Addendum with the relevant tracked changes. However, comments should only be 
made on the proposed changes which are subject to consultation. As previously stated, 
these changes will be shown as follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is not an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for information only; these changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
47 
 6.1 Promoting Economic Growth   
6.1.1  A strong local economy is vital to maintaining and enhancing the overall 
prosperity and well -being of the District and its communities.  In recent decades, 
the District’s economy has begun a transformation: employm ent in traditional 
industries; such as heavy manufacturing and coal fired power generation has 
declined significantly, resulting in the District beginning to experience a step -
change in economic growth. The Council Plan1 is committed to diversify ing the 
economy  further , by attract ing inward investment and help ing existing businesses 
thrive.  
 
6.1.2  Consistent with national policy2 and based upon robust and up -to-date evidence , 
this Local Plan translates that commitment into a positive economic strategy 
capable of delivering  sustainable economic growth that is responsive to strong 
market signals and is based upon robust and up -to-date evidence . In Bassetlaw, 
specialised manufactu ring continues to buck national trends and grow, providing 
high value jobs with good growth prospects . The logistics sector continues to 
grow, with recent significant development at Symmetry Park and Manton Wood, 
and current substantial construction at Sna pe Lane, evidence that potential exists 
for the District to capitalise on its strategic accessibility along the A1 and A57 
corridors .  
 
6.1.3  The approach taken reflects the aims of the D2N2 Recovery and Growth Strategy 
20213: to support low carbon growth;  promote productivity, particularly around 
employment and skills; business growth and innovation; and endorse 
connectivity and inclusion, including integrated infrastructure and place shaping.  
The aim of the strategy is to reduce the gap in economic activi ty across the region 
by 2030 : lead the most ambitious carbon turn -around in the country  and attract 
more high value employment to the area  by capitalising on existing institutions 
and the manufacturing base to build high quality jobs.   
 
 6.1.4  Bassetlaw is  a key location where this activity is expected to take place . At a sub -
regional level, the D2N2 LEP recognise the role the District can play in developing 
identified growth sectors: cre ative and digital technologies; construction, 
particularly modern methods of construction; renewable energy and lo w carbon 
energy production; engineering and civil engineering ; and the visitor economy.  
 
6.1.5  Additionally, t he D2N2 LEP recognise that in the future, the logistics sector would 
be well-positioned to integra te with other sectors, such as robotics, information 
technology and analytics , reinforcing  the Council Plan1 ambitions  to enhance 
economic productivity over the plan period . 
 
6.1.6  Policy ST1 identifies the District -wide spatial strategy for meeting the gr owth 
associated with economic (business) development: within class E (g) ( uses which 
can be carried out in a residential area without detriment to its amenity) , B2 
(industry), B8 (storage and distribution), by 2037 2038 . 
 
6.1.7   The Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment 20204 indicates  
that the District’s recent  economic growth could be sustained particularly for 
manufacturing and logistics over the longer term. Policy ST7 therefore builds on   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
48 
 the Council Plan1 aspirati ons and capitalises on the District’s locational 
advantage by promoting employment locations with proximity to the A1/A57 
strategic road network and local labour, which also provide strategic connectivity 
to the M1, the wider East Midlands region and South  Yorkshire .  
 
6.1.8  However, to build in long term  economic resilience and facilitate a step -change 
in the long term , Policy ST7  resists over -reliance on these sectors, by also 
identifying  locations, such as the Bassetlaw Garden Village and at Carlton Forest 
and Marnham Energy Hub  that are capable of meeting the needs of other D2N2 
employment growth sectors.  Other allocations  are capable of supporting the 
general  employment needs role of the Main Towns  and rural area , and/or are 
capable of accommodating the range of D2N2 regional/sub -regional employment 
growth sectors . 
 
6.1.8  Policy ST7 therefore builds on the Council Plan1 aspirations and capitalises on 
the District’s locational advantage by promoting employment locations with 
proximity to the A1/A57 strategic road network and local labour, which also 
provide strategic connectivity to the M1, the wider East Midlands region and 
Sheffield City Region. Other identified sites are capable of supporting the role of 
the Main Towns, and/or are capable of accommodating the range of D2N2 
regional/sub -regional employment growth sectors.  
 
6.1.9  Having a more diversified economy will therefore support the Council Plan 
aspirations to increase economic productivity. The approach taken by Policy ST7  
will help increase the number and quality of jobs , particularly higher skilled jobs, 
improve access to training opportunities, increase wage levels  for residents 
across all sectors  (contributing to raising real wages by 40% in median weekly 
earnings3), and reduce out -commuting, thereby introducing real economic 
benefits to residents and the District.  
 
6.1.10  Nine General Employment Sites and a  Strategic Employment Site make up the 
District’s designated employment land portfolio  identified by Policy ST7 . Totalling 
287.9ha, these designated employment sites play an important role in meeting 
local economic growth as well as identified sub -regional/regional logistics growth  
needs.  
 
General Employment Sites  
6.1.11  The Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment 20204 identifies 
that the employment land need has increased from 63ha in 2019 to 84ha. But 
national planning policy stat es that future needs can be based on the past take -
up of employment land and property and/or future property market requirements. 
As Policy ST1  highlights, to ensure the District’s employment land supply is 
appropriately reflected in this Plan  the evidence4 recommends using a supply -led 
completions trend  approach  scenario  to better reflect that a significant supply of 
employment sites is well progressed and being actively promoted in the District . 
in response to high levels of market activity and demand for economic growth 
evident in the District .  
 
6.1.12  National planning policy states that future needs can be based on the past take -
up of employment land and property and/or future property market requirements.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
49 
 In this context,  by planning for future B2/B8 land needs at the rate of past 
completions including outliers, it is possible that needs are met almost completely 
through planning permissions and allocations  in the supply . An additional 10ha 
allocation is promoted at the Bassetlaw Garden Village. This is considered 
appropriate  as part of the sustainable strategy for that new settlement.  Although 
184.3ha of general employment land  is considered  an appropriate target  by the 
evidence4, Policy ST7  identifies a developable area for the general employment 
sites at a slightly lower 169.2  128.5 ha (as at 1 December 2021) . This provides 
some flexibility in supply  delivery  moving forward.  
 
6.1.1 3 The G eneral Employment Sites are considered essential to the long -term 
economic success of Bassetlaw ; are able to support the D2N2 growth sectors as 
well as local employment needs, and are able to diversify the economy and 
support jobs that can upskill residents  and contribute to an increase in real wages 
essent ial to support other quality of life aspirations our communities have.  
 
6.1.1 4 On that basis, P olicy ST7 will only cons ider other types of  development  on these 
sites in exceptional circumstances  - it is the Council’s intention to protect Ge neral 
Employment Sites from non -employment uses  outside the E(g) and B Use 
Classes  which could impact upon their viability as employment locations . Small-
scale ancillary  uses will be supported in the General Employment S ites where 
this meets the day  to day needs of workers  employees on the employment sites.  
 
6.1.1 5 The sites are based on evidence in the Land Availability Assessment 20215. This 
reflects the requirements of national guidance6 - it includes up to date information 
relating to site suitabi lity, market attractiveness, land availability and 
deliverability.  
 
6.1.1 6 The sites selected will provide a balanced, flexible supply of general  employment 
land over the plan period. As of 1 April December  2021, there is 169.2  128.5 ha 
of developable employment land on the General Employment Sites. 42ha  at 
Snape Lane, Harworth is under construction , a further  105.8  118.5  ha has 
planning permission and is considered to be deliverable in the early part of  the 
plan period.  
 
6.1.1 7  In addition, Policy ST7 makes a positive policy intervention to secure the 
regeneration of the former colliery  power station  site at High Marnham  
Bevercotes  for the green energy sector . This is regarded as essential to support 
local rural  communities as well as the wider economic aspirations for the District , 
in this plan period and the next . A Local Development Order will facilitate delivery 
in accordance with Policy ST8 . 
 
Strategic Employment Site  
6.1.1 8 The National Planning Policy Framework2 requires  policies to address specific 
locational requirements of different sectors, including provision for storage and 
distribution operations (logistics) at a variety of scales and in suitably accessible 
locations. In this case , the logistics market is defined a s large scale units and 
operations (100,000 sqft to 1,000,000 sqft or more)  rather than final mile 
distribution.  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
50 
 6.1.1 9 Bassetlaw’s general functional economic market area is  broadly self -contained, 
with the District having  strong links to Sheffield City  Region  South Yorkshire  and 
further links to Nottinghams hire authorities to the south. The Sheffield City 
Region Strategic Employment Land Appraisal 20208 recognised the potential of 
the A1 corridor in Bassetlaw, and but that further assessment should follow to  
enable a better understanding of the logistics needs in the City Region area.  
 
6.1.20 But The Bassetlaw A1 Corridor  Logistics Assessment 20219 recognises that 
occupiers considering large scale units cover wider areas of search than  typical 
travel to work area s or general or potentially strategic functional economic market 
area boundaries. National planning practice guidan ce7 supports this; recognising 
that the logistics industry has  distinct locational requirements that need to be 
considered separately from those rela ting to general employment  industrial  land.  
 
6.1.1921 In this case , the evidence9 states that the property market area for large scale 
logistics is considered a more appropriate area of search (identified by Figure 
12A below) . The A1 (Doncaster to Newark with Bassetlaw at the core) is identified 
within a larger demand area paralleling the M1 corridor running from Nottingham 
to the near side of Barnsley . 
 
THIS PLAN IS SUBJECT TO CONSULTATION Figure 12A: A1 logistics pro perty market area and 
focussed area of search within Bassetlaw  
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
51 
  
6.1.2022 The impact of the Covid -19 pandemic has significantly increased demand for 
large scale logistics, with the market indicating  market indicates  that the property 
market area  encompassing Bassetlaw has seen a dramatic rise in logistics 
interest ; the A1 has connectivity, available labour and land to meet logistics 
needs that the wider property market area is currently not providing. The role of 
the A1, is identified as by the evidence, is that of  a sister logistics market to the  
M1 corridor.  
 
6.1.2123 With the Local Plans  Plan expected to plan for 15 years from adoption (expected 
to be in 2022  2023 ) and the Bassetlaw A1 Corridor  Logistics Assessment 20219 
suggesting that the  recent past rate of take up / delivery under represents future 
need , it is considered that a site  in Bassetlaw could contribute to meeting this 
future economic sub -regional/regional need for logistics . 
 
6.1.2224 Policy ST7 aims to capitalise on this opportunity, by allocating site SEM001: 
Apleyhead Junction as a site capable of accommodating a sub regional/regional 
investment  need  for large scale logistics only within the property market area  over 
the plan period to meet an identified need across  within the property market area . 
The site is considered to be sub-regionally unique;  capable of delivering up to 
4.75m sqft of employment space , and is considered to be sub-regionally unique 
in this context, in being  able to meet  and the widest range of logistics occupier 
needs including the largest floorspace and site requirements in the market , as 
well as meeting the distinct locational requirements of the logistics industry - 
namely accessibility to the strategic road network and a local labour market.  
 
6.1.2 5 The site is being actively promoted; pre -application consultation was undertaken 
in November 2021, indicating a commitment to move forward with a policy 
compliant scheme in the short term.  
 
6.1.26  As a sub -regional/regional site , it is vital that economic benefits associated with 
Apleyhead are not lost from  the property market area.  Policy ST7 therefore 
ensures that proposals should reinforce  rather than adversely impact delivery of 
relevant economic growth strategies and Local Plans . On that basis, o ngoing 
Duty to Cooperate and a draft Statement of Common Ground  confirms  that 
partner authorities are accepting of Apleyhead addressing an identified need for 
large scale sub-regional/ regional logistics .  
 
 Furthermore, the site adjoins the A1/A57 strategic transport corridors, so is 
considered to meet the distinct locational requirements of the logistics industry - 
namely accessibility to the strategic road network and the labour market.   
 
 Ongoing Duty to Cooperate and Statements of Common Ground with partner 
authorities including in the property market area will ensure any benefits 
associated with this policy are not lost at a strategic level to D2N2 LEP or 
Sheffield City Region LEP, and do not adversely impact upon the economic 
growth strategies of the District or any other authority in the property market area 
defined by t he A1 Logistics Assessment 2021.  
 
Employment and Skills Plan    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
52 
 6.1.2 7 To support the District’s growth agenda  it is necessary to secure equivalent 
growth in the area's employment base. The Council Plan1 recognises the 
importance of initiatives to improve local employment , educational attainment  
and upskill residents. A highly skilled and employable workforce, with access to 
training and work opportunities  is essential to support the delivery of Policy ST 7 
by helping to attrac t inward investment and enable  local businesses to grow.  
 
6.1.2 8 Policy ST 7 aims to assist delivery of the job opportunities needed to achieve this 
ambition through securing  an Employment and Skills Plan Plans  from major 
employment development. These  will support and promote opportunit ies for local 
people and businesses to be involved in the construction and implementation 
stages of new development. Each plan should be agreed with the Council’s 
Economic Development team to ensure each scheme , and where relevant each 
phase,  contributes a ppropriately.  
 
6.1.2 9 The Council encourages the use of a Planning Performance Agreement , where 
appropriate. This  will ensure that where appropriate,  a dedicated, specialist 
officer team is in place to progress each site allocation through the planning 
system  in a timely manner . 
POLICY ST7: Provision of Land for Employment Development  
1. To deliver the Council's strategy for economic prosperity and inward investment  and 
to support job growth and upskilling of residents , sustainable economic growth will 
be directed to the General Employment Sites and a Strategic Employment Site in this 
plan period.  
2. Development within the General Employment Sites that is not within E(g)/B2/B8 use 
and at the Strategic Employment Site that is not within B8 use will only be supported 
where it is for an ancillary use . In these cases, proposals will need to demonstrate 
that they  support, maintain or enhance the primary business and employment 
function of the site; and that the number and distribution of ancillary units would no t 
result in an over -concentration that might affect the function and appearance of the 
area.  
3. Major development proposals within the General Employment Sites and the Strategic 
Employment Site will be required to enter into a site related Employment and Skil ls 
Plan to maximise local employment and training opportunities in each phase of the 
development during construction and at end user stage.  
 
General Employment Sites  
4. Employment land will be developed in this plan period for E(g) (uses which can be 
carried out in a residential area without detriment to its amenity) , B2 (Industrial) and 
B8 (Storage and Distribution) uses to meet local employment needs  at the following 
General Employment Sites to support the delivery of growth  to meet local 
employment needs : 
 
Reference  Site Name  Site 
Area 
(Ha) Available 
Employment 
Land (Ha)  Available 
Employment 
Land (Ha)  by 
2037  2038  
Sites with planning permission    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
53 
 EM001  Shireoaks Common  26.0 7.5 7.5 
EM002  Symmetry Park  21.95  14.4 14.4 
EM003  Explore Steetley  Centre 
of Excellence for Modern 
Construction  46.5 16.0 16.0 
EM00 4 Welbeck Colliery  29.6 3.0 3.0 
EM005  Carlton Forest  10.6 10.6 5.0 
EM006  Trinity Farm  11.11  5.0 2.7 5.0 2.7 
EM007  Snape Lane  80.9 74.9 32.9 69.9 27.9 
EM008a  Former Bevercotes 
Colliery  80.0 42.0 42.0 
Site allocations  
EM008  High Marnham Green 
Energy Hub  60.0 60.0 38.4 
EM009  Bassetlaw Garden 
Village  223.0  10.0 10.0 
TOTAL   298.55  
529.66  201.4 139.1  169.2 128.5  
 
Strategic Employment Site  
5. Proposals for land at SEM001: Apleyhead  Junction (118.7ha), as identified on the 
Policies Map, will be developed in this plan period to meet the needs for sub -regional 
and/or regional logistics ( Class B8) only within the property market area defined by 
the Bassetlaw A1 Corridor Logistics Assess ment 20219. Proposals should:  
a) be in accordance with Policy ST9;  
b) provide evidenced support from D2N2 LEP in relation to  delivery;  
c) be supportive of the role of key urban centres, such as Worksop;   
d) demonstrate the ability to deliver significant economic development benefits in 
terms of development value and gross value added for the District, and to the wider 
property market area;  
e) not adversely adverse  impact upon the economic growth strategies and 
compromise the deliverability of other employment allocations in this Local Plan 
and/or within the property market area in relation to large scale logistics;  
f) be satisfactorily accommodated by critical infrastructure, in terms of capacity and 
timescales ass ociated with investment works;  
g) have good access to key strategic transport routes;  
h) provide for a significant number of new permanent jobs including skilled 
employment.   
 
Strategic Employment Site  
Proposals for land at SEM001: Apleyhead Junction (118.7ha),  as identified on the 
Policies Map, will be developed in this plan period to meet the needs for sub -regional 
and/or regional logistics needs (Class B8) only within the property market area 
defined by the Bassetlaw A1 Logistics Assessment 2021  in this plan period . 
Proposals  should subject to the requirements of Policy ST9:  
All proposals on this site will be required to:  
i) be in accordance with Policy ST9 ; 
j) provide  evidenced support from demonstrate D2N2 LEP in relation to support for 
delivery;  
k) be supportive of the role of key urban centres, such as Worksop;     Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
54 
 l) demonstrate the ability to deliver significant economic development benefits in 
terms of development value and gross value added for the District, and to the wider 
property market area , D2N2 and Sheffield City Region LEPs;  
m) not adversely adverse impact upon the economic growth strategies and 
compromise the deliverability of other employ ment allocations in this Local P lan 
and/or within the  property market area in relation to large scale logistics authorities 
in the logistics property market area defined by the Bassetlaw A1 Logistics 
Assessment 20219; 
n) would not compromise the viability or deliverability of other employment allocations 
identified by this Local Pla n; 
o) be satisfactorily accommodated by critical infrastructure, in terms of capacity and 
timescales associated with investment works;  
p) have good access to key strategic transport routes;  
q) provide for approximately 3857 jobs in accordance with the provisions of  Policy 
ST1, including a significant number of new permanent jobs including skilled 
employment.   
   
 
Policies Map addition: Former Bevercotes Colliery  
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
55 
  
Policies Map change : Former Marnham Power Station site  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
56 
 High Marnham Energy Hub  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the High Marnham 
Energy Hub  section . For ease of consultation, Policy ST8: EM008: High Marnham 
Energy Hub  and the supporting text is shown within this Addendum with the relevant 
tracked changes. However, comments should only be made on the proposed changes 
which are subject to consultation. As previously stated, these changes will be shown as 
follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is not an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for  information only; these changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
57 
 6.2 Site EM008: High Marnham  Green Energy Hub  
6.2.1   Land at the former High Marnham Power Station (60.0ha) provides a long -term 
opportunity to positively re -use a longstanding, substantial brownfield site and 
facilitate its redevelopment (see Figure 12). Its closure directly affect ed 
employment in the rural area, and indirectly affected local supply chains.   
 
6.2.2  Its regeneration provides a significant opportunity to catalyse the growth of the 
green and low carbon employment sector in the District and promote the sensitive 
growth  and investment in this part of the rural area. The site is expected to be 
delivered over two plan periods, with 38.4ha by 2037 and the rest thereafter.  
 
 
Figure 12: High Marnham Green Energy Hub and Local Development Order boundaries  
6.2.3  With the capability of connecting directly into national grid and digital 
infrastructure the site offers a unique opportunity to create a distinctive hub 
focussed around the needs of the renewable energy and low carbon sector, 
including research, developme nt, engineering and manufacturing. Opportunities 
exist to link operations and their supply chain with nearby further education 
establishments. This mutually beneficial arrangement would strengthen the 
bespoke business offer but also help enhance the skills  and opportunities to the 
local community.   
 
6.2.4  By doing so, the High Marnham Green Energy Hub will make a significant 
contribution to the D2N2 Recovery and Growth Strategy 20213: to support low 
carbon growth, whilst contributing to national and local object ives to reduce 
carbon emissions, reduce energy demand through on -site efficiencies, and 
reduce excess energy waste through the sites circular energy potential. The 
development of the site will also contribute positively towards the step -change in 
the local  economy through the potential for attracting new employers and quality 
jobs that bring a different offer to that promoted at other employment sites across 
the District.   
 
6.2.5  The site’s infrastructure capabilities also provide an opportunity for commer cial 
scale renewable and low carbon energy production (excluding wind energy), 
such as ground mounted solar beyond the employment land boundary, as 
identified by Figure 12, consistent with Policy ST51.  
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
58 
  
6.2.6   Due to its rural location in eastern Bassetlaw , any development will need to 
ensure potential impacts are appropriately mitigated, such as traffic movements 
upon local settlements of Ragnall and Grassthorpe, and upon the amenity of local 
communities at nearby High and Low Marnham, Fledborough, Normant on on 
Trent and Ragnall.  
 
6.2.7   There are a number of heritage assets in the locality including the designated St 
Gregory's Church and Manor Farm and the viaduct and bridge over the River 
Trent. A planning application should be informed by a heritage stat ement and 
archaeological assessment, which will inform the design, scale, layout and 
materials of development and will ensure all assets, including their settings are 
protected and where possible enhanced.  
 
6.2.8  The site lies within an important part of the green/blue infrastructure network.
 The Marnham Railway Yard Local Wildlife Site and Fledborough to Harby 
Dismantled Railway Local Wildlife Site adjoin the northern and eastern boundary 
respectively. Their ecological value is afforded protection. Meanwh ile the eastern 
boundary of the site also lies within the buffer of the River Trent Main Green 
Corridor, defined by Policy ST39. Any development within their buffers, should 
improve the quality and functionality of the green/blue infrastructure. This could  
be through biodiversity enhancements appropriate to context, measures to 
improve ecological connectivity and/or measures to enhance water quality of the 
River Trent for example. All should be informed by an Ecological Impact 
Assessment as sought by Policy  ST40.  
 
6.2.9  The Level 2 Bassetlaw Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 202110 identifies the site 
is partly located within Flood Zones 2 and 3 and that there are surface water 
constraints due to its topography. On that basis, a Flood Risk Assessment 
incorporating a Surface Water Management Strategy and Management Plan will 
be requi red to inform the design and development.  
 
6.2.10  Several organisations, including the National Grid, have infrastructure assets on 
or that cross the site. The design must be in accordance with relevant 
organisations guidance; the siting of buildings and structures and their height 
must be carefully considered and access for maintenance maintained. To make 
positive use of land underneath and in proximity of the overhead lines, creative 
use of green/blue infrastructure would be supported.  
 
6.2.11  Given the  unique opportunities this site presents, and the complexities 
associated with the site and its surrounds, Policy ST8 requires that the future 
development, including for commercial scale renewable energy, be guided by a 
specialist planning tool: an Local D evelopment Order (LDO). An LDO will provide 
permitted development rights for identified appropriate land uses and will detail 
the location, scale and design parameters of development, helping to enable 
growth by positively and proactively shaping the site.  It will also play an important 
role in incentivising development by simplifying the planning process and 
enhancing the attractiveness of the site to businesses in the green energy sector.  
    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
59 
 6.2.12  The LDO will set out the framework to enable initial deli very from early in the plan 
period. It is anticipated that work will be completed on the draft LDO by Autumn 
2022, to inform implementation following adoption of the Local Plan. An LDO can 
be modified outside the Local Plan process; this provides more flex ibility to adapt 
to any changing national legislation and guidance, changing market requirements 
and the needs of the sector, to the benefit of businesses, regional economies, 
and local communities.  
 
POLICY ST8: EM008: High Marnham Green Energy Hub  
1. Land at site EM008: High Marnham Green Energy Hub, as identified on the Policies 
Map, will be developed in a comprehensive and sensitive manner to support low 
carbon growth, reduce carbon emissions and to leave a positive low carbon economic 
and environmen tal legacy for Bassetlaw.  
2. Proposals will be required to provide E(g)/B2/B8 employment functions connected 
with renewable energy and low carbon technology sectors for approximately 38.4ha 
of employment land in this plan period, and a further 21.6ha thereaf ter as part of the 
comprehensive and sensitive redevelopment of the site.  
3. Proposals for commercial scale renewable energy and low carbon technologies, 
should be in accordance with Policy ST51;  
4. Proposals should ensure the safe operation of national energy  infrastructure and 
other physical infrastructure on site and maintain access to enable whole life 
management and maintenance;  
5. The proposed development at site EM008: High Marnham Green Energy Hub  should 
deliver a scheme in accordance with a comprehensive Local Development Order. 
Proposals which would jeopardise the site’s comprehensive redevelopment or that is 
contrary to Local Development Order will not be supported.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
60 
 Section  7: Housing  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the housing section . 
For ease of consultation, Policy ST15: Housing Distribution, Policy 16: Peaks Hill Farm, 
Policy 21 Trinity Farm, Policy 27: Ordsall South  and Policy ST32: Gypsy and Travellers 
and the relevant supporti ng text is shown within this Addendum with the relevant tracked 
changes. However, comments should only be made on the proposed changes which 
are subject to consultation. As previously stated, these changes will be shown as 
follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is not an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for  information only; these changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
61 
 7.1 Provision of Land for H ousing  
7.1.1  Since the start of the plan period on the 1 April 2020, t he District has benefitted 
from a significant number of housing sites with planning permission, a number of 
housing completions , as well as  sites allocated through made  neighbourhood 
plans. But this does not fully meet the objectively assessed housing need  for the 
District set out in Policy ST1: Bassetlaw’s Spatial Strategy .  
 
7.1.2  Housing allocations are therefore required to provide for the changing housing 
needs of our communities; such as for affordable housing and housing for older 
people; to support economic growth; to contribute to the delivery of strategic 
infrastructure; and, to maintain a five -year housing land supply.  
 
7.1.3  This means, as required by national poli cy1, Policy ST15 w ill allocate sufficient 
land for housing in accordance with the spatial strategy, which concentrates 
housing development in the three Main Towns , followed by the  Large Rural 
Settlements.  
 
7.1.4 A site allocation is a planning policy that describes what type of land use, or mix 
of uses, would be acceptable on a specific site or whether the site is protected 
for certain types of development. The purpose of the site allocations in Policy 
ST15  is to allocate sites for housing development. Site allocations are important 
because they give guidance and certainty to developers and landowners and 
they help local people understand what may happen in their neighbourhood in 
the future. They provide a positive  policy about the future development of the site 
and help ensure an appropriate amount and type  of development  housing  
happens in the right place, supported by infrastructure  that addresses the needs 
and impacts generated by that development on local commu nities .  
 
7.1.5  Each site allocation has been assessed through the Land Availability 
Assessment  20212, with account taken of constraints on development, such as 
flood risk; and infrastructure partners ’ views. Further detailed assessment was 
provided  by the Sustainability Apprai sal3 which identified potential sensitivities, 
and the Bassetlaw Heritage Methodology 202 24 which ensured the historic 
environment was given due consideration in the site selection process, as well 
as a wide range of other  Loca l Plan evidence. The Site Selection Methodology 
20225 used all available evidence to undertake  inform  a robust site selection 
process for the site allocations contained in this Local Plan. The W hole Plan 
Viability Assessm ent 20226 ensure s that development is capable of delivering 
infrastructure required as a consequence of its development.  The Local Plan 
evidence base is available on the Council’s website www.bassetlaw.gov.uk   
 
7.1.6  The Land Availability Assessme nt 20222 identifies  each  site as either deliverable 
within the first 5 years of the plan period or developable later within the plan 
period. The envisaged start date and duration of construction for each allocation 
(taking account of the extent of site pre paration and upfront infrastructure 
provision required, together with expected overall a nnual delivery rates) is 
reflected in  the housing  trajectory  in Appendix 3.  Each housing  allocation  is 
supported by a site -specific policy  in this Plan . 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
62 
 7.1.7  In the early part of the plan period more housing development will be delivered 
by commitments in sustainable locations in Worksop, Retford and Harworth & 
Bircotes in accordance with Policy ST1. Similarly, during the same timeframe, 
housing development wil l take place in the Large Rural Settlements either 
through neighbourhood plan allocations, or via commitments. The ongoing 
organic growth of the Small Rural Settlements will complement development 
elsewhere.  
 
7.1.8  Moving through the plan period, allocations will continue to come forward, 
alongside the initial phases of development of strategic sites at HS1: Peaks Hill 
Farm and HS1 3: Ordsall South. This will be supported by appropriate growth in 
the rural area. Towards the end of the plan period Bassetlaw Gard en Village will 
start to deliver quality housing as part of the beginnings of this new community 
settlement . 
 
7.1.9 Sites allocated in this Plan will be expected to deliver the approximate  net number 
of dwellings  identified in the relevant site -specific po licy. To make best use of 
available land this should form part of an appropriate density across each site, 
reflecting site context and location, in accordance with Policy ST30.  
 
7.1.10  Each site allocation policy highlights site -specific planning issues. Matters that 
apply to all development e.g. design, are not repeated in each site allocation 
policy. The site allocation policy must therefore be read alongside other policies 
in this Plan to ensure all relevant planning issues are properly considered.  
 
7.1.11  To achieve sustainable development, the Council will require developers of each 
site, in conjunction with Nottinghamshire County Council and other infrastructure 
partners, and in accordance with Policy ST58 to produce a masterplan 
proportionate to the nature and scale of the development.  in accordance with 
Policy ST58  that sets out  This should include  the necessary  delivery strategy for 
that site.  
 
7.1.12  The Bassetlaw Whole Plan Viability Assessment 20226 states that the 
infrastructure identified for sites : HS1, HS3, HS4, HS7, HS11 and HS13 can  
reasonably be sought through on site delivery and developer contributions as 
part of a deliverable scheme provided that the site is exempt from the Community 
Infras tructure Levy  (CIL). Infrastructure provision for the other sites will be sought 
through on site delivery, a CIL charge  and developer contributions planning 
obligations , and secured via planning conditions, legal agreements or other 
appropriate mechanisms.  
 
7.1.13  The Council will encourage developers to u se a Planning Performance 
Agreement to ensure that a dedicated, specialist officer team is in place to 
progress site allocations of 50 or more units through the planning system  in a 
timely manner . 
 
POLICY ST15 : Provision of Land for Housing  
1. In addition to the delivery of completions since the 1 April 20 20, sites with planning 
permission and site allocations in made neighbourhood plans , land for   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
63 
 approximately  3011   3334  3332  new dwellings  will be allocated  during the plan 
period , and a further 4070   3810  dwellings thereafter  in the following locations:   
 
Reference  Site Name  Total 
Available 
(Ha) Approximate 
Overall C apacity 
(net new 
dwellings)  Approximate 
net new 
dwellings by 
2037 2038 
HS1 Peaks Hill Farm, 
Worksop  53.0 1120  1000  1080  
HS2 Bassetlaw Pupil 
Referral Centre, 
Worksop  0.88 20 20 
HS3 Radford Street, 
Worksop  3.5 120 120 
HS4 Former Manton 
Primary School, 
Worksop  3.7 100 100 
HS5 Talbot Road, 
Worksop  0.44 15 15 
 
HS7 Trinity Farm, 
Retford  11.15  244  305 244 305 
HS8 Milnercroft, Retford  0.46 5  5  
HS9 Former Elizabethan 
School, Retford  1.3 
 46 46 
HS10 St. Michael’s View, 
Retford  0.38 20 20 
HS11 Fairy Grove, 
Retford  2.7 61 61 
HS12 Station Road, 
Retford  0.1 5 5 
HS13 Ordsall South, 
Retford  106.56  1250  800 890 
HS14 Land south of 
Ollerton Road, 
Tuxford  2.9 75 75 
New 
settlement  Bassetlaw Garden 
Village  223.0 4000  500 590 
*There is no site HS6  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
64 
 7.2 SITE HS1: Peaks Hill Farm, Worksop  
7.2.1  Situated on the northern edge of Worksop, Peaks Hill Farm (in Figure 14) adjoins 
an existing residential area to the south and Existing Employment Site EES10: 
Carlton Forest, to the north -east. The site (53  ha) provides an opportunity to 
create a sustainable and well integrated urban extension – for 112 0 dwellings 
and 10.6ha of employment land - to significantly contribute to Worksop’s housing 
and local business needs in this plan period and the next. The site will have good 
access to a range of local employment, retail and community facilities within th e 
planned development and Worksop itself.  
 
7.2.2  Site HS1 will be guided by a comprehensive masterplan framework, including an 
agreed suite of supporting strat egies, a design code, delivery strategy  and an 
infrastructure and  phasing plan in accordance with  Policy ST58. Together these 
will provide a visionary framework appropriate to the site’s delivery timeframe, as 
required by national policy1. All will require community consultation and Council 
approval.  
 
7.2.3  The first step was the site promotors  Peaks Hill Farm Concept Plan 20208. This 
set out the vision and broad development strategy for the site , illustrated by a 
concept plan . A public and stakeholder consultation took place alongside the 
November 2020 Local Plan9 consultation. Comments will be used  by the site 
promotor , where appropriate, to inform the masterplan framework for the site.  
 
Figure 1 4: Peaks Hill Farm  
 
7.2.4  Given the complex nature of delivering a large urban extension, it is considered 
appropriate to se t a Local Plan growth target of  1000  1080  dwellings to help meet 
local housing needs and strategic infrastructure priorities in this plan period, with 
the remaining homes to be delivered thereafter . On that basis , the Housing 
Trajectory shows that housing delivery  is not expected to star t on site until at 
least 2026 -2027.  
 
7.2.5  The site will provide a range of house types and sizes to contribute to meet ing 
housing needs . These should include  affordable homes, family homes, specialist 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
65 
 housing and the opportunity to  provide self -build plots should demand exist.  
Sustainable, innovative design of new development will be supported.  
 
7.2.6  Complementing this will be the delivery of employment land  – the principle has 
been agreed through a planning permission - allocated by Policy ST7 for 5h a in 
this plan period with a further 5.6ha of land thereafter, expected to creat e 
approximately 1000 jobs including in the green technology sector10.  
 
7.2.7  A high quality, landscape -led design influenced by its wider rural fringe location, 
prominent natu ral assets and heritage associations will be required. As a result, 
the development will sit within an extensive, interconnected multifunctional 
green/blue infrastructure network. This should include space for recreation, sport, 
play, active travel, food p roduction and wildlife in accordance with relevant open 
space standards in Policy ST46 and the priorities for sport identified by Policy 
ST47. This will ensure all neighbourhoods have easy access to quality 
greenspace to meet their day to day needs.  
 
7.2.8 The site adjoins the Worksop built up area but is situated within Carlton in Lindrick 
parish. As an urban extension to Worksop it can reasonably be expected that 
residents from this development will use the town for the majority of their service 
and infr astructure needs. On that basis, the housing numbers generated by 
Peaks Hill Farm contribute to Worksop’s housing growth and infrastructure 
requirements.  
 
7.2.9 The creation and enhancement of green /blue  infrastructure will help achieve 
biodiversity opportunities mapping targets11, partly through a requirement for 
10% biodiversity net gain  in accordance with Policy ST40 . Proposals must be 
accompanied by an Ecological Impact Assessment, in accordance with relevant 
nationa l legislation.   
 
7.2.10  The site has a distinctive woodland setting - a requirement will be to retain and 
enhance  these mature  woodland s. An arboriculture  management plan will be 
required to ensure that the wooded landscape is appropriately integrated int o the 
design , and that new woodland planting is appropriate to the setting . The existing 
strong woodland significantly limits views from the wider landscape to the north. 
It will be important to retain and enhance this natural boundary treatment  to 
reinforce the new development boundary of Worksop and the wider countryside.  
 
7.2.11  On that basis, GG3: Carlton in Lindrick/Worksop North Green Gap (see Policy 
ST38) will ensure the continued separation of Worksop from Carlton in Lindrick . 
To reflect its location adjoining a green gap, appropriate  design techniques such 
as soft landscaping, tree planting , low level accommodation  and lower density 
development should be considered , particularly along the northern periphery to 
reinforce lands cape quality.  
 
7.2.12  Short views from Carlton Road east, across the landscape to the mature 
woodland is recognised , by the Site Allocations: Landscape Study 201912, as 
important, and should be maintained. This land should therefore remain open. Its 
use a s publicly accessible green/blue infrastructure to complement the woodland 
and provide an attractive gateway to the site should be sensitively integrated.     Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
66 
 7.2.13  The site has a distinctive history; in the northern part of the site is a World War II 
Polish aircr aft crash site dating from 1944. The design should incorporate a 
memorial in honour of the Polish Airmen who lost their lives there. This should 
be undertaken in consultation with the Council and the local community.  
   
7.2.14  Additionally, there are a num ber of other heritage assets in the locality including 
the listed Broom Farm and Freshfields. A planning application should be informed 
by a heritage statement and archaeological assessment, which will inform the 
design, scale, layout and materials of deve lopment and will ensure all assets, 
including their settings are protected and where possible enhanced.  
 
7.2.15  Provision for active travel and public transport to and through the site will ensure 
that existing and new communities are well -integrated and connected. 
Opportunities to connect to the nearby public rights of way network should be 
taken. The design should ensure that most residents are within a 20 minute 
walk/cycle of local services and public transport. On that basis, the new Local 
Centre, educ ation facilities, community hub/sports facilities, and open space 
should be appropriately located to encourage sustainable access, to reduce car 
use for local journeys.  
 
7.2.16  Peaks Hill Farm will provide a new distributor road linking Blyth Road (B6045) to 
Carlton Road (A60). This road will be dual purpose supporting a green corridor 
with complementary, segregated pedestrian and cycle links and public transport 
corridor. Further benefits will be seen elsewhere in Worksop: the Bassetlaw 
Transport Study 202 213 shows that the new road will significantly  improve the 
flow and movement of traffic in and around Worksop , including through the town 
centre .  
 
7.2.17 This evidence13 also considers the impacts of Peaks Hill Farm on a number of 
local junctions around the town. These include improvements to Blyth 
Road/Kilton Hill  and Blyth Road/Farmers Branch. More detailed evidence in 
relation to traffic impacts will be required throug h a Transport Assessment for the 
site. 
  
POLICY 16 : Site HS1: Peaks Hill Farm, Worksop  
1. Land at Peaks Hill Farm, Worksop, as identified on the Policies Map will be developed 
for approximately 1000  1080  dwellings, 5ha of employment land and supporting 
infrastructure as identified by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan7 in this plan period, and 
a further 120 40 dwellings, 5.6ha of employment land and associated infrastructure 
thereafter as part of a safe, su stainable, quality living and working environment.  
2. In this plan period,  proposals to develop land at Peaks Hill Farm will be expected to 
deliver:  
 
Good quality design and promote  local character  
a) a scheme of an appropriate scale, layout, form and materials, supported by a 
landscape statement,  which protects and enhances the GG3: Carlton in Lindrick -
Worksop North Green Gap in accordance with Policy ST38. This  should include:  
i. sensitive use of soft lan dscaping, such as trees, hedgerows ;   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
67 
 ii. maintaining sightlines and views from and through the allocation 
development , including the retention of short open views from Carlton 
Road east through use of green /blue  infrastructure;  
iii. lower density development on the periphery of the site with high er 
densities towards the centre  of the site  and its activity nodes ; 
iv. use of level access accommodation , such as bungalows, along the urban -
rural interface , where appropriate ;   
b) the sensitive design and location of buildings that maintain  appropriate residential 
amenity for existing and future residents  in accordance with Policy 48 ;  
c) a scheme of an appropriate scale, layout, form and materials which respects the 
significance and setti ng of affected heritage assets, including and a 
commemorative memorial in recognition of the World War II plane crash site , 
supported by a heritage statement to include the results of an archaeological 
assessment  comprising a geophysical survey , intrusive site investigations and 
mitigation strategy ; 
d) a scheme that e nsure s the requirements for n on-minerals  development in Minerals 
Safeguarding Areas in the Nottinghamshire Minerals Local Plan14 have  been met.  
 
Mix of uses 
e) a mix of housing types, sizes and tenures to meet local needs , including affordable 
housing, specialist housing , and serviced plots for self -build and custom homes , 
where appropriate, in accordance with Policy ST30 ;  
f) a residential care home, unless market evidence demonstrates a lack of de mand  
in which case the land should revert to specialist housing designed to meet the 
needs of older people;  
 
Green /blue  infrastructure  
g) a multifunctional , coherent and connected  green /blue  infrastructure network 
designed  to promote climate resilience and to include:  
i. 18.3 7.6 ha of  publicly accessible open space as identified by the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan7, to include the land between Carlton Road 
and the woodland to the east . The future management and maintenance 
shall be agreed through a planning application ; 
ii. the retention of  approximately 8.1ha of existing woodland as well as  and 
important hedgerows, as well as  replacement planting for trees lost to 
development of at least equal amenity and ecological value of a local 
provenance . This should be informed an arboriculture management plan  
to ensure their positive integration and enhancement;  
iii. a green, tree lined active travel corridor alongside the distributor road with 
species rich verges to support ecological connectivity;  
iv. an in depth woodland buffer along the northern periphery of the site to 
provide a positive rural interface;  
v. a green buffer along the southern boundary to provide appropriate 
separation with existing resident ial properties;  
 
Social and community facilities  
h) 2.5ha  of serviced land and an appropriate financial contribution towards enabling 
a 2 form entry secondary school satellite facility on site  to address pupil growth 
associated with the development ;   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
68 
 i) a Local Centre on site  to be located within a safe, easy walking and cycling 
distance to the majority of new households on the site , including a  convenience 
goods store of an appropriate size, commensurate to its location;   
j) an appropriate financial contrib ution towards enabling off-site primary and acute 
healthcare services to address patient growth associated with the development;   
k) a community hub with sports pitches and appropriate ancillary accommodation on 
site; 
Transport and connectivity  
l) all necessary transport infrastructure improvements through direct mitigation or 
contributions to new and improved infrastructure, referring to the development’s  
Transport Assessment and Travel Plan, informed by  advice of the Local Highways 
Authority including : 
i. the alig nment and technical specification of  a new road designed to distributor 
standard, between  a point of access on the A60 Carlton Road and a point of 
access on  the B6045  Blyth Road ; the alignment and technical specification 
should be  capable of accommodating public transport and as a minimum a 
marked  stepped  cycle  track either side of the carriageway lane; 
ii. a well-connected street hierarchy  that provides  high quality, safe and direct 
walking, cycling and public transport routes  within the site;   
iii. new pedestrian and cycle links from the site to neighbouring areas  to the south , 
and if feasible to EES10 Carlton Forest to the north ;  
iv. appropriate highway demand management measures to be in operation 
throughout the lifetime of the construction  of the site;  
v. a financial contribution towards a high frequency bus service from the site to 
Worksop town centre and the wider area supported by appropriate on site public 
transport infrastructure;  
vi. connections to the public rights of way network to the ea st and west  of the site ; 
vii. appropriate improvements to off-site highways infrastructure as identified by the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  in the locality of the site including towards  an 
appropriate  financial contribution  towards the improvement of  the B6045 Blyth 
Road/Farmers Branch, Worksop; and to  the B6045 Blyth Road/ B6041 Kilton Hill , 
Worksop  and to junctions at the A60 Mansfield Road/A619 and at the 
A57/Claylands Ave/A60/Shireoaks Common junction A57/A60 junction at 
Shireoaks/C laylands Avenue .  
 
Infrastructure shall be secured by planning condition , agreement  and/or other 
mechanism  considered appropriate by the relevant infrastructure partners, the Council 
and the developer.  
 
3. The proposed development on land at Peaks Hill Farm  should d eliver a scheme in 
accordance with an agreed masterplan framework for the site in accordance with the 
provisions above and Policy ST58.  
 
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
69 
 7.8 SITE HS 7: Trinity Farm, Retford   
7.8.1  Situated on the north -west edge of Retford, Trinity Farm is adjacent to a growing 
mixed -use area . Planning permission has been granted for Phase 1 (in blue in 
Figure 19) comprising 196 dwellings and 11.11ha of employment /employment 
generating uses  land and commercial units  (2.7ha allocated for employment uses 
by Po licy ST7) , and supporting infrastructure.   
 
7.8.2  Site HS7  forms a logical, sustainable extension  – for a further  244 305 dwellings 
on 11.15 ha - to contribute to meeting Retford’s housing needs in the longer term. 
The site will have g ood access to a range of employment, retail and community 
facilities within the wider planned development and Retford itself.  
 
 
Figure 19: Trinity Farm, Retford  
 
7.8.3  Site HS7  will be guided by a comprehensive masterplan framework, including an 
agreed suite of supporting strategies, a design code , and delivery strategy an 
infrastructure  and phasing plan in accordance with Policy ST58 . The masterplan 
framework should be prepared in such a way so that both phases of development 
form one cohesive neighbourhood. All will require community co nsultation and 
Council approval . 
 
7.8.4  The L and Availability Assessment 20222 identified  the site as suitable to 
contribute to the housing requirement in Retford. Phase 1 is expected to 
commence  within the next year  underway . On that basis , the Housing Trajectory 
shows that Phase 2 is expected to start from 2029-2030 . 
 
7.8.5  Site HS7 should seek to diversify the housing offer available in the area, ensuring 
that there is a better range of quality  homes available.  On that basis, Policy 21 
requires  a mix of house types and sizes to be provided to contribute to meet ing 
local housing needs, including for affordable homes and specialist housing. 
Retford has a slightly higher proportion of residents age d over 65. Opportunities 
to provide retirement accommodation, extra care and/or a care home should 
therefore be considered.  
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
70 
 7.8.6  Site HS7 lies within the impact zone of the nearby Sutton and Lounds Gravel Pits 
SSSI. In line with Policy ST40, all relevant assessments should be undertaken to 
ensure there is no adverse impact upon this protected site. On that basis, a high 
quality, green /blue  infrastructure -led design influenced by its rural fringe location  
is required.  Opportunities to maximise ecological co nnectivity to the nearby 
Sutton and Lounds Gravel Pits SSSI and Idle Valley Nature Reserve, as well as 
to woodland to the north  and Retford Beck should be taken .  
 
7.8.7  As a result of The Retford Beck running along the northern boundary means that  
this part of the site lies within Flood Zone 3 and Flood Zone 2. In accordance with 
national policy1, residential development will be located in the sequentially 
preferable part of the site i.e. in Flood Zone 1, with open space occupying the 
land at higher floo d risk adjacent to the beck. A Flood Risk Assessment will be 
required to inform the design to ensure the housing can be safely accommodated 
and that the development generates no increase in flood risk elsewhere. 
Consequently, the design will also be requir ed to incorporate a comprehensive 
sustainable drainage scheme in order to mitigate any future flood risk.  
 
7.8.8 The northern part of the site lies within an archaeological zone. Cropmarks on 
site indicate the potent ial for archaeology of regional importance. The site was 
also the location of Second World War aircraft crash site. A planning application 
should therefore be informed by a heritage statement and archaeological 
assessment including a geophysical survey  and intrusive site investigations 
which will inform the design  and layout of development and will ensure assets 
and their settings are protected and where possible enhanced.  Where 
appropriate, archaeological remains should be preserved and left in situ, formi ng 
part of the green/blue infrastructure network for example.   
 
7.8.9  Overhead p ower lines cross the site. The design should  be in accordance with 
relevant National Grid guidance19; the siting of buildings and their height must be 
carefully considered and access for maintenance  maintained. To make  Positive 
use of land underneath and in proximity of the overhead lines,  creative use of  for 
green/blue infrastructure  would be supported.  
 
7.8.10 The site has the capacity to accommodate 1.5ha of multifunctional o pen space 
to meet new residents’ needs. This should include space for  children’s play, 
amenity greenspace and allotments as well as a new community woodland to 
provide carbon offsetting benefits . Green /blue  infrastructure should  also provide 
a substantial landscape buffer to the railway line along the western boundary, to 
protect future residents ’ amenity.  
 
7.8.11  Opportunities should be taken to enhance provision for active travel and public 
transport, particularly to nearby facilities and employment oppor tunities. Cycle 
routes in particular should cross the wider site, connect to the green /blue  
infrastructure network , the new housing development to the south,  and Retford 
town centre.  Connection to the  A public right of way exists  to the north east of the 
site, a connection to this  will be sought to improve recreational access to the 
countryside, whilst the existing foot way p rovision along the North Road frontage  
should be extended along the site frontage . More detailed evidence in relation to 
traffic impacts will be required through a Transport Assessment for the site.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
71 
  
7.8.12  The development must also mitigate its impact on local infrastructure to help 
deliver relevant requirements set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan7. 
 
POLICY  21: Site HS7:  Trinity Farm, Retford  
1. Land at Trinity Farm, Retford, as identified on the Policies Map will be developed in 
the plan period for approximately 244 305 dwellings and supporting infrastructure as 
identified by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan7, as part of  a safe, sustainable, quality 
living environment.  
2. Proposals to develop land at Trinity Farm will be expected to deliver:  
 
Good quality design and promote  local character  
a) the sensitive design and location of buildings that maintain appropriate resi dential 
amenity for existing and future residents in accordance with Policy 48;  
b) a flood management scheme which incorporates an appropriate Sustainable 
Drainage System (SuDS), including green /blue  infrastructure measures , informed 
by a Flood Risk Assessmen t (FRA) , a hydrology assessment and , a Surface Water 
Management Masterplan and Strategy, in accordance with Policy ST52. W hole life 
management and maintenance arrangements must be  agreed through the 
planning application process;  
c) a design that enables access by the relevant bodies to the overhead power lines 
crossing the site and the railway line along the western boundary to enable whole 
life management and maintenance;  
c) a positive strategy for responding to the National Grid assets present within the 
site and the Network Rail assets along the western  boundary, which demonstrates 
how the National Grid Design Guide and Principles and relevant Network Rail 
guidance have been applied and how the impact of the assets has been reduced 
through good design.  
d) a scheme that ensures the requirements for non -minerals development in Minerals 
Safeguarding Areas in the Nottinghamshire Minerals Local Plan14 have been met;  
e) a scheme of an appropriate scale, layout, form and materials which respects the 
significance and setting of affected heritage assets supported by a heritage 
statement and archaeological assessment comprising a geophysical survey , and 
intrusive site investigations, and a mitigation strategy;  
 
Mix of uses  
f) a mix of housing sizes and tenures to meet local  needs , including affordable 
housing and specialist housing, and serviced plots for self -build and custom 
homes , as where appropriate in accordance with Policy ST30;  
 
Green /blue  infrastructure  
g) quality green/blue infrastructure to achieve a multi functional, biodiverse, coherent 
and connected network  that integrates with Phase 1 of the  Trinity Farm 
development  to the south , adjoining ecological assets including Retford Beck, the 
woodland to the north and Sutton and Lounds Gravel Pits SSSI ;  
h) approximately 1.5 ha of high quality, multifunctional publicly accessible open 
space, as identified by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan7, to include approximately 
0.5ha for community woodland as well as a neighbourhood play area ;    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
72 
 i) a depth landscape buffer adjacent to the railway line along  the west ern boundary  
to mitigate noise pollution and protect residential amenity;  
 
Social and community facilities  
j) an appropriate financial contribution towards enabling primary and acute 
healthcare services to address patient growth associated with the development;   
 
Transport and connectivity   
k) all necessary transport infrastructure improvements through direct mitigation or 
contributions to new and improved infrastructure, referring to the development’s  
Transport Assessment and Travel Plan, informed by Local Highways Authority 
advice including:  
i. an appropriate access point to the site from North Road, capable of 
accommodating public transport;  
ii. a well-connected street hierarchy  that provides  high quality, safe and di rect 
walking, cycling and public transport routes within  the site, to Phase 1 of the 
Trinity Farm  development  including via a cycle track,  and to neighbouring areas ; 
iii. a new footway along  the North Road frontage to connect to the existing footway 
to the south of the site;  
iv. an appropriate financial contribution towards improving public transport 
infrastructure to address public transport usage associated with the 
development;  
v. appropriate hig hway demand management measures to be in operation 
throughout the lifetime of the construction of the site;  
vi. a public right of way through the site to connect to the existing network to the 
north east;  
vii. a strategy assessing potential detailing that the schem e will not generate  
adverse safety impacts at the nearby Botany Bay level crossing on Sutton Lane, 
and where necessary appropriate mitigation , through early consultation with 
Network Rail ; 
viii. appropriate  improvements to off-site highways infrastructure identified by the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  in the locality of the site including an appropriate 
financial contribution  towards:  
a. improvements to  the junction at A620 Babworth Road / B6420 Mansfield 
Road / A620 Straight Mile / Sutton Lane;  
b. improvements to the junction at Ordsall Road/A620 Babworth Road;  
c. improvements to  the junction at  London Road / Whinney Moor Lane / 
Bracken Lane;  
d. improvements to  the junction at  London Road / Whitehouses Road.  
 
Infrastructure shall be secured by planning condition, agre ement and/or other 
mechanism  considered appropriate by the relevant infrastructure partners, the Council 
and the developer.  
 
3. The proposed development on land at Trinity Farm  will deliver a scheme in 
accordance with an agreed masterplan framework for the site  in accordance with the 
provisions above and Policy ST58 .  
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
73 
 7.14 SITE HS13: Ordsall South  
 
7.14.1  Situated on the southern edge of Ordsall, Retford,  Ordsall  South (in Figure 25) is 
adjacent to an existing residential area. The site (106.5ha) provides an 
opportunity to create a sustainable and well -integrated extension – for 1250 
dwellings, open space and community uses - to significantly contribute to 
Retford ’s housing needs in this plan period , and the next . The site will have g ood 
access to a range of local employment and other local services  within the wider 
planned development and Retford  itself.  
 
7.14.2  Site HS13 is well located for local services , health  facilities and employme nt, and 
is accessible by foot/bike, thus reducing the need to travel by car.  
 
7.14.3  The Land Availability Assessment 202 22 identified the site as suitable to 
contribute to the housing requirement in Retford. Given the complex nature of 
delivering a large urban extension, it is considered appropriate to set a Local Plan 
growth target of 800 890 dwellings to help meet local housing needs and strategic 
infrastructure priorities in this plan period, with the remai ning homes to be 
delivered thereafter. On that basis, the Housing Trajectory shows that housing 
delivery is not expected to start on site until at least 2027 -2028 2026 -2027 .  
 
7.14.4  The site (see Figure 25 overleaf  below ) includes an area of land currently used 
by Retford Golf Club as a training range. In accordance with national policy the 
Built Sports Facility Study, the loss of the training range should be mitigated by 
an appropriate financial contribution being secure d through a planning obligation 
that would be used towards enhancements to the club’s Retford Golf Course.  
Its loss does not adversely affect the ability of the golf club to maintain its sporting 
offer but a financial contribution equivalent to the loss of  the training range will be 
sought to improve the quality of the offer at the golf club.   
 
Figure 2 5: Ordsall South  
 
7.14.5  Site HS13 will be guided by a comprehensive masterplan framework, including 
an agreed suite of supporting strategies, a design code , and an infrastructure  a 
delivery strategy  and phasing plan in accordance with Policy ST58. Together 
these will provide a visionary framework appropriate to the site’s delivery 
timeframe, as required by national policy1. The masterplan framework should be 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
74 
 prepared in such a way so that all the land parcels are designed to function as 
one scheme. All will require community consultation and Council approval.  
 
7.14.6  The scale of the site will enable the provision of a ran ge of house types and sizes 
to contribute to meeting local housing needs. These should include affordable 
homes, family homes, specialist housing and the opportunity to provide self - build 
plots should demand exist. Sustainable, innovative design of new de velopment 
will be supported.  
 
7.14.7  Retford has the highest number of residents aged over 75 in the District 
(10.6%)10. Ordsall South provides a significant opportunity to make provision for 
this age group, so that they can ‘age well in place’. On that ba sis, in addition to 
the requirements of Policy ST27 5% of market housing will be designed to the 
higher Building Regulation wheelchair standard (M4 (3)), and provision will be 
made for extra care accommodation  on site . Proximity to the on site community 
hub will therefore be a requirement so that residents can enjoy community life 
and retain their independence . 
 
7.14.8   The GG7: Retford -Eaton Green Gap (see Policy ST38) will ensure the continued 
separation of Ordsall  and Retford from Eaton. To reflect its location in a green 
gap, a landscape -led design appropriate to local context will be required. The 
Site Allocations: Landscape Study 201912 identifies use of green/blue 
infrastructure to sensitively integrate the dev elopment into the landscape, whilst 
use of strong boundary treatments, using species of local provenance, 
particularly along the western and southern peripheries will strengthen  landscape 
quality . Appropriate use of design techniques such as soft landscapi ng and low  
level accommodation  should be considered to maintain long views south to Eaton 
and across the Idle Valley. A new 23ha country park on the western boundary 
will integrate the site development  with Whisker Hill to the north whilst providing 
signif icant opportunities for recreation for residents.  
 
7.14.9  National policy1 is supportive  of creating beautiful places that reflect local 
character. It states that design codes should be used to provide a local framework 
for creating beautiful and distinctive places with a consistent and high quality 
design. The National Design Guide 201920 adds that where the scale or density 
of new development is different to the existing place, it may be appropriate to 
create a new identity. Character may also respond  to how the communities ’ 
lifestyles could evolve in the future for example.  
 
7.14.10  On tha t basis, Policy 27 recognises that Ordsall South may benefit from a variety 
of character areas  so that different neighbourhoods each have their own identity  
and density, appropriate to location on site, whether it is edge of urban area or 
rural fringe for example . The approach taken should be detailed through a design 
code and density plan for the site.  
 
7.14.11   The creation and enhancement of an extensive multifunctional green /blue  
infrastructure network will provide space for recreation, sport, play for children 
and young people, active travel, food production  and wildlife , ensuring  all 
neighbourhoods have easy access to quality greenspace  to meet their needs . A 
green buffer around the periphery should help integrate the existing development   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
75 
 with the  new, whilst providing sufficient space to protect the amenity of existing 
and new residents.   
 
7.14.12  Biodiversity opportunities mapping targets11 should be met through a 
requirement for at least 10% biodiversity net gain on site to help reverse the 
decline in priority habitats and species.  Opportunities exist t o strengthen the 
biodiversity value on site . This could include the expansion of nearby lowland  
heath into the country park, and a greater mix of habitats within the buffers 
alongside all waterways adjoining the site (e.g. watercourses, drainage 
channels) . Careful design to incorporate a 2km walking/cycling route would 
deliver a Suitable Alternative  Natural Greenspace helping to address wider 
recreational impacts upon protected sites.  Such measures would also contribute 
to the Local Plan requirement for at least 10% biodiversity net gain (see Policy 
ST40).  Proposals must be accompanied by an Ecological Impact Assessment , in 
accordance with relevant national legislation  and Policy ST40 .  
 
7.14.13  The River Idle is in close proximity to the eastern boundary , and both that and  
the western boundary are is bounded by an unnamed watercourse , and drainage 
channels  are in proximity to both . The outer edges of these boundaries slightly 
lie within Flood Zone 3 and Flood Zone 2. In accordance with national policy1, 
residential  development will be located in the sequentially preferable part of the 
site i.e. in Flood Zone 1, with open space occupying the land adjacent to the 
watercourses .  
 
7.14.14  The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 202116 shows  that surface water 
ponding and run off occurs  on site . Existing flow paths should be retained and 
integrated with in green /blue  infrastructure. A range of measures should be 
considered to manage surface water run -off on site; including, perm eable 
surfaces , grey water recycling,  soft landscaping , as well as de -culverting the 
drainage channel along the western boundary . On that basis, a  Surface Water 
Management Masterplan and Strategy will be required to ensure that the risk of 
flooding on or off site is not increased and that the  approach taken to sustainable 
drainage  manages flood risk appropriately but delivers wider benefits for 
biodiversity, amenit y, water quality and recreation.  
 
7.14.15  Provision for active travel and public transport to and through  within the site will 
ensure that existing and new communities are well -integrated and connected. 
Opportunities to extend  the public rights of way network should be taken. The 
design should ensure that most residents are within a 20 minute walk/cycle of 
local serv ices and public transport. On that basis, the new on site Local Centre, 
health hub and community hub/sports facilities , new primary school  and open 
space sho uld be appropriately located to encourage sustainable access  within 
the site and to neighbouring ar eas, to reduce car use for local journeys.  
 
7.14.16  A new two-point distributor standard access  will be required to enable safe 
access from Ollerton Road to the eastern and western part of the site. This should 
be designed to allow a bus loop to run throug h the wider  whole site, bringing 
public transport within easy reach of existing and future residents. It will also have 
the added benefit of slowing traffic on Ollerton Road.  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
76 
 7.14.17  The Retford Transport Assessment, 202121 considers  the impact  of Ordsal l South 
on a number of strategic and local highways junctions in Ordsall , Retford  and in 
the wider area . As a consequence of the increase in traffic expected to be 
generated by the development, Policy 27 identifies  several junctions requiring  
improvements including the A620 Babworth Road / Ordsall Road and at London 
Road/ Whitehouses Road.  Contributions to traffic calming /management  scheme s 
in Ordsall Old Village  and at Main Road, Eaton will help manage traffic flow 
through the wider area . The definitive provisions for transport infrastructure will 
be agreed through the future planning application s, informed by a detailed 
Transport Assessment and Travel Plan for the site, undertaken by the promoters, 
to be agreed with the Local Highways Authorit y. 
 
7.14.18  Demand management measures will be sought to help manage transport 
demand on the local network over the development’s  construction  lifetime. 
Measures should seek to promote public transport use , including provision of a 
high frequency bus service to Retford town centre  and active travel  from the early  
first phase  stages  of development, and be responsive to changing travel patterns 
in each phase of development to reduce vehicle use on the network particularly 
for short , local journeys.  
 
7.14.19  An infrastructure, phasing and implementation strategy will be required alongside 
the masterplan framework.  Policy ST27 requires that the delivery strategy  this be 
reviewed to accompany each development phase. This will ensure that each 
phase of development appropriately mitigate s its impact on strategic and local 
infrastructure and contributes to the deliver y of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan7 
in a timely manner.  
 
POLICY 27: Site HS13: Ordsall South, Retford   
1. Land at Ordsall  South , Retford  (106.5ha) , as identified on the Policies Map will be 
developed in this plan period for approximately 800 890 dwellings and supporting 
infrastructure, and a further 450 360 dwellings and associated infrastructure 
thereafter as set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan7 as part of  a safe, sustainable, 
quality living environment.  
2. Proposals to develop land at Ordsall South will be expected to deliver : 
 
Good quality design and promote local character  
a) a scheme of an appropriate scale, layout, form and materials, informed by a 
landscape statement and density plan,  which protects and enhances the GG7: 
Retford South -Eaton Green Gap  in accordance with Policy ST38. T his sho uld 
include:  
i. sensitive use of soft landscaping, such as trees, hedgerows ; 
ii. use of an appropriate density across the site within a range of 15 -30 dwellings 
per hectare  defined by local neighbourhood character areas and a design code ; 
iii. maintaining sightlines and views from and through the development  allocation  
across the Idle Valley and to Eaton including through the new country park ; 
b) the sensitive design and location of buildings that maintain appropriate residential 
amenity for existing and future residents  in accordance with Policy 48 ;  
c) a flood management scheme informed by a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA), and, 
a Surface Water Management Masterplan and Strategy, in accordance with Policy   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
77 
 ST52, which ensures that development is located outside the areas of higher risk 
fluvial flooding risk  in the most sequentially preferable parts of the site in areas at 
least risk of flooding; and, which i ncorporates an appropriate Sustainable Drainage 
System (SuDS), including green /blue  infrastructure measures . Whole life 
management and maintenance arrangements must be  agreed through the 
planning application process;   
d) the requirements for n on-minerals  development in Minerals Safeguarding Areas in 
the Nottinghamshire Minerals Local Plan14; 
 
Mix of uses 
e) a mix of housing types, sizes and tenures to meet local needs including : 
i. affordable housing;  
ii. sheltered housing courts for older people ;  
iii. 5% of dwellings to be designed to Building Regulations standard M4(3)  to be 
accessible to those in wheelchairs ;  
iv. extra care accommodation;  and 
v. where appropriate serviced plots for self -build and custom homes;  
 
Green/blue infrastructure  
f) a multifunctional, co herent and connected green/blue infrastructure network to 
promote climate resilience. A long term management and maintenance plan must 
be agreed through the planning application process. Provision should include:  
i. a new 23ha country park to include a Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace  
and community woodland  on the western boundary of the site;  
ii. 4ha of high quality  recreational  open space to meet needs identified by the 
Open Space Assessment Update 202018 as identified by the Infrastructure 
Delivery  Plan7 throughout  the site, including provision for children and young 
people;  
iii. an in depth landscape buffer around the periphery of the site to facilitate off road 
walking and cycling ; appropriate separation between  with existing residential 
properties  and connectivity  between existing and new development; and, 
buffers alongside waterways;  
iv. de-culverting of the drainage channel along the western boundary to enhance 
biodiversity value and flood management;  
v. edible space , such as for allotments and community pl anting;  
 
Social and community facilities  
g) a Local Centre on site to include a convenience goods store of an appropriate size, 
commensurate to its location, as well as other local shops and services ;  
h) a health hub on site including space for a  general practitioners branch surgery and 
supporting community health care facilities;  
i) a built community facility including indoor and outdoor space for sport  and changing 
accommodation , informed by the Bassetlaw Playing Pitch Strat egy17 and the 
Bassetlaw Built Facilities Strategy22;  
j) offsetting improvements, via  an appropriate financial contribution, equivalent to the 
loss of the golf training range, to be used  to enhance the quality of  to the Retford 
Golf Course;  
k) appropriate provision of 2.5 1.5ha of serviced land to accommodate a 1.0 Form 
Entry primary school and early years facility and associated  supporting   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
78 
 infrastructure; and an appropriate financial contribution towards enabling primary 
school education to address pupil g rowth associated with the development;  
l) a local recycling ‘bring’ bank;  
 
Transport and connectivity  
m)  all necessary transport infrastructure improvements through direct mitigation or 
contributions to new and improved infrastructure, referring to the development’s   
Transport Assessment and Travel Plan, informed by Local Highways Authority 
advice, detailing : 
i. a two -point distributor standard access to the east and west parts of the site 
from Ollerton Road for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians from Ollerton Road ; 
ii. a well-connected street hierarchy  that provides  high quality, safe and direct 
walking, cycling and public transport routes within  the site and to neighbouring 
areas  by non vehicular modes of transport;  
iii. appropriate  improvements to off-site highways infrastructure as identified by the 
Infrastructure Deli very Plan  in the locality of the site including an appropriate 
financial contribution  towards:  
a. improvements to  the junction at the A620 Babworth Road / B6420 Mansfield 
Road / A620 Straight Mile / Sutton Lane;  
b. improvements to  the junction at Ordsall  Road/A620 Babworth Road;  
c. improvements to  the junction at  London Road / Whinney Moor Lane / 
Bracken Lane;  
d. improvements to  the junction at  London Road / Whitehouses Road;  
e. junctions at the: A614 Blyth Road/A57/A1; the A60 Mansfield Road/A619; 
the A57/Sandy Lane; the A57/Claylands Avenue/Shireoaks Common; the 
A57/B6034/Netherton Road and the A57/B6040; and the A57/A614/A1 Five 
Lanes End roundabout  
f. the provision of off -site traffic calming /management  schemes along Main 
Road, Eaton and at Ordsall Old Village ; 
iv. appropriate highway demand management measures to be in operation 
throughout the lifetime of the construction of the site;  
v. new and improved pedestrian and cycle links from the site to neighbouring 
areas including  to Old Ordsall Village :  
vi. a new footpath and marked cycle path along the Ollerton Road frontage (east 
and west) to connect to the existing network at Ordsall;  
a. new and improved pedestrian and cycle links from the site to neighbouring 
areas;  
b. an appropriate financial contribution towards a marked cycle  lane along 
Brecks Road from West Hill Road;  
c. a financial contribution towards improvements to pedestrian and cycle 
infrastructure into Old Ordsall Village from the site;  
vii. improvements to the existing public rights of way that cross the site and run 
along it s boundaries;  
viii. a financial contribution towards a high frequency bus service from the site to 
Retford town centre and the wider area supported by appropriate public 
transport infrastructure within the site.  
 
Infrastructure shall be secured by planning condition, agreement and/or other 
mechanism  considered appropriate by the relevant infrastructure partners, the Council 
and the developer.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
79 
  
4. The proposed development on land at Ordsall South  will deliver a scheme in 
accordance with an agreed masterplan framework for the site  in accordance with 
the provisions above and Policy ST58 .  
 
7.20  Providing for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople   
7.20.1  The overarching aim of the National Planning Policy for Traveller Sites28 is to 
ensure fair and equal treatment of the travelling community, in a way that facilitates 
their traditional and nomadic way of life while respecting the interests of the settled 
community. As part of this, the Council is required to proactively plan to meet the 
housing needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople in the District.  
 
7.20.2  The Bassetlaw Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment 201929 
and its Addendum 2021  identifies Gypsy and Traveller need in accordance with 
the definitions of Government Policy.  
 
7.20.3  There is a need for a minimum of 10 21 additional pitches in the first 5 10 years of 
this plan (to 2030),  by 2029  with a further 30 21 pitches by 203729 2038 . It does 
not identify a need for sites for Travelling Showpeople. It has been agreed through 
Duty to Cooperate that the Council and neighbouring authorities is able to meet its 
own needs in full with no dependence on neighbouring areas.  
 
7.20.4  To support  the delivery of the spatial strategy and t o ensure that these  the 
identified needs are met in full, Policy ST32 seeks to protect existing authorised 
sites, and allocate new sites to meet identified needs for the first ten years of the 
Plan ( to 2029 2030 ).  Policy ST32 will address additional needs thereafter by 
setting out the criteria against which planning applications for Gypsy and Traveller 
sites will be determined.  
 
7.20.5  Due to the nature and size of land required for Gypsy and Traveller 
accommod ation, the evidence30 and the Land Availability Assessment  2022 
identified – through engagement with the Gypsy and Traveller community - 
deliverable sites for allocation. All are  extensions to existing sites, or require 
current arrangements on sites owned by Gypsies and Travellers - who accord with 
the national policy definition - to be formalised.  
 
7.20.6  As with sites identified for the settled community, it is important that each Gypsy 
and Traveller site s are located in sustainable locations  is considered  in accordance 
with the principles of sustainable development : National guidance28 states that in 
general , new sites in the countryside, away from existing settlements, or where a 
site could dominate the nearest settled  community, should be resisted. But a s with 
bricks and mortar housing: well -planned and well -designed sites that make 
effective use of previously developed land and/or that positively enhance the 
environment w ill be supported. Enclosing a site with hard landscaping, high walls 
or fences, may give the impression that the site and its occupants are deliberately 
isolated from the rest of the community and will not be supported.   
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
80 
 7.20.7  Similarly, it is vital that residents are able to access education, health and 
community facilities in the same way that the settled community can. Gypsy and 
Traveller sites may also need to have good access to the road network to 
accommodate the movement of larger vehicles associated with their livelihood, as 
well as their nomadic and traditional way of life.  Consistent with Policy ST44 
opportunities for promoting healthy lifestyles are supported.  
 
7.20.7  As with bricks and mortar housing: well -planned and  well-designed sites that make 
effective use of previously developed land and/or that positively enhance the 
environment will be supported. Enclosing a site with hard landscaping, high walls 
or fences, may give the impression that the site and its occupant s are deliberately 
isolated from the rest of the community and will not be supported. Consistent with 
Policy ST44 opportunities for promoting healthy lifestyles are supported.  
 
7.20.8  A Gypsy and Traveller pitch is normally conditioned through a planning a pplication. 
The approach taken wil l be site -specific, and will reflect the needs of the 
households expected to live on the site, the size of the site, and its location. 
Licenses are a legal requirement for all caravan sites, and must be obtained from 
the C ouncil's Environmental Health Team prior to occupation of sites.  
 
 A Gypsy and Traveller pitch is normally conditioned through a planning application. 
The approach taken will be site specific, and will reflect the needs of the 
households expected to live on the site, to be for up to two touring caravans per 
pitch, one static caravan and a day room. This is dependent upon the size of the 
site pitch/plot proposed, and the location of the site. Licenses are a legal 
requirement for all caravan sites, and must be obtained from the Council's 
Environmental Health Team prior to occupation of sites.  
 
7.20.9  The Bassetlaw Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment 201929 
identifies that there is a need for some form of emergency stopover provision for 
the Gyp sy and Traveller community within the District. Negotiated stopping, 
accompanied by a protocol to be prepared by the Council’s Strategic Housing team 
will help the Council and its partners effectively manage unauthorised 
encampments in the District.  
 
POLICY  ST32: Sites for Gypsies and Travellers  
1. The accommodation needs of  the District’s Gypsy and Traveller community will be 
met through the provision for 40 42 pitches by 2037  2038 , with approximately 10 21 
pitches to be  delivered by 2025  2029, by: 
a) protecting existing authorised sites ;  
b) supporting the establishment or re -establishment of pitches on vacant plots 
and/or the extension of existing authorised  Gypsy and Traveller sites; and/or the 
following  formalisation of existing Gypsy and Traveller sites to be formalised  at: 
 
i. GT001: Land at Hayton ( for 17 10 additional pitches);  
ii. GT002: Land at Treswell ( for 5 additional pitches);  
iii. GT003: Land at Daneshill ( for 4 additional pitches)  
iv. GT004: Land at East Drayton ( for 3 1 additional pitch es) 
v. GT005: Land at North Blyth (for 4 additional pitches)    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
81 
 vi. GT006: Land at Elkesley  (for 9 additional pitches)  
 
2. To meet the identified needs of the Gypsy and Traveller community,  development of 
new Gypsy and Traveller sites or extensions to other  existing autho rised Gypsy and 
Traveller sites  over the plan period should:  
a) address an unmet need identified in the Bassetlaw  Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Needs Assessment 201929 and the Bassetlaw Gypsy and 
Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment  Addendum 2021 , or any 
successor ;  
b) be located in a sequentially preferable location:  within a settlement boundary, 
then in an edge of settlement location ; and , only if suitable sites are not available 
should out of settlement sites be considered,  evidenced by a sequential 
assessment;  
c) be located outside high flood risk areas as defined by national p olicy1; 
d) in the case of an extension, be small scale, intensify the use of an existing 
authorised, well managed site  and/or make  effective use of brownf ield land;  
e) be within safe walking/cycling distance  easy access  of a settlement, with access 
to a range of services including health and education provision  in the locality ; 
f) be of a scale that is appropriate to local character, its local services and 
infrastructure and would not dominate the nearest settled community;  
g) have suitable, safe and convenient access to the highway network;  
h) have the ability to be well integrated into the local town scape or landscape, have 
no adverse impact on biodiversity  and/or heritage assets and use  boundary 
treatments and screening materials which are sympathetic to the existing urban 
or rural form;  
i) ensure the amenity of the Gypsy and Traveller community and th e settled 
community is managed appropriately in accordance with Policy 48 ; and  
j) ensure that there is sufficient space for the planned number of pitches caravans , 
outdoor space, day rooms, parking and the safe movement of personal and 
commercial vehicles;  
 
3. Where the identified need has been fully met, small extensions to, or intensification 
of, an existing authorised, well managed site may be supported if there is a need 
specific to the family  household  on site and the proposal accords with section 2 of 
this policy .  
4. Any development granted under this policy will be subject to a condition limiting 
occupancy to Gypsies and Travellers.   
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
82 
  
Policies Map addition: Site GT005 Land at Elkesley  
 
Policies Map addition: Site GT00 6 Land at North Blyth  
 
Policies Map addition: Gypsy and Traveller Site distribution  
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
83 
  
Policies Map deletion : Gypsy and Traveller Site distribution  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
84 
 Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity  section . For ease of consultation, Policy ST40: Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity and Policy ST40A: Recreational disturbance and Mitigation Strategy  and 
the supporting text is shown within this Addendum with the relevant tracked c hanges. 
However, comments should only be made on the proposed changes which are subject 
to consultation. As previously stated, these changes will be shown as follows: new or 
deleted .  
 
This consultation is not an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for  information only; these changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
85 
 8.6 Protecting and Enhancing Biodiversity and Geodiversity   
8.6.1  Biodiversity and geodiversity are important components of the planning system: 
a high quality, vibrant natural environment helps strengthen the connection 
between people and nature and contributes to health an d well -being. National 
policy1 seeks the protection and enhancement of  valued biodiversity and 
geological conservation interests , seeking  measurable net gains in biodiversity.  
 
8.6.2  Policy ST40  aims to prevent harm to biodiversity and geodiversity from direct 
impacts such as land take, and from indirect impacts such as recreation, 
changes to the quality of a watercourse , as well as  any potential cumulative 
impacts.    
 
Designated sites  
8.6.3  Internationally designated  sites : Special Protection Areas (SPA), Special 
Areas of Conservation (SAC) and Ramsar Sites are strictly protected. None lie 
within the District but th e Birklands and Bilhaugh SAC is approximately 3km from  
the District boundary . Nati onal policy1 states  that the presumption in favour of 
sustainable development does not apply to development that may affect these  
sites. Proposals likely to have an adverse recreational impact on Birklands and 
Bilhaugh SAC will be assessed per policy ST40A (see paragraphs 8.6.7 -8.6.15  
below).  
 
8.6.4  The Sherwood Forest ppSPA lies within the District. The Habitats Regulations 
Assessment 202114 identifies  that some potential sites within Bassetlaw contain 
habitats that have the potential to support the b reeding and/or foraging of the 
Sherwood Forest ppSPA bird population.  
 
8.6.5  On that basis, any schemes that lie within the 5km buffer zone of the Sherwood 
Forest ppSPA will require a project level ‘shadow -level’ Habitats Regulations 
Assessment to ensure any significant adverse effects on the Sherwood Forest 
ppSPA are identified and appropriately mitigated.  
 
8.6.6 Nationally designated sites:  Bassetlaw contains a large number of sites 
designated for their biodiversity and geodiversity importance.  Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest (SSSI) , National Nature Reserves (NNR) and  Ancient 
Woodland  have a high level of statutory protection, with national po licy1 advising 
that developments that are likely to advers ely affect these assets  should 
normally be refused. As such, any development within their impact zone should 
be accompanied by an Ecological Impact Assessment to ensure that the integrity 
of these assets is protected.  
 
Recreational disturbance Avoidance an d Mitigation Strategy  
 
8.6.7  Natural England identify that the Sherwood Forest Visitor Centre and surrounding 
forest (including the Clumber Park SSSI, Birklands and Bilhaugh  SAC/Sherwood 
Forest NNR) is a regional recreational resource, drawing visitors from a wide 
area. Residential development in the District, including the proposed Bassetlaw 
Garden Village (see Policy ST4) has the potential to increase the recreational 
distu rbance on existing sensitive habitats  at these protected sites .   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
86 
 8.6.8  Recreational disturbance has been considered in an Appropriate Assessment . 
This led to Recreational Impact Assessments being undertaken (for Clumber 
Park SSSI and for Birklands and Bilha ugh SAC/Sherwood Forest NNR). These 
have been undertaken with a partnership group, comprising: Newark & Sherwood 
District Council, Natural England, the National Trust and RSPB (the landowners) 
and neighbouring authorities. The assessments identify where re creational 
disturbance is happening at both sites, the main recreational uses causing the 
disturbance, the zone of influence for each site and broad measures required to 
mitigate the recreational impact of the expected increase in population in each 
zone.  
8.6.9  The Recreational Impact Assessments  show  that the housing developme nt 
proposed within the Local Plan  would not have an adverse recreational impac t 
on the Birklands & Bilhaugh SAC. On that basis, there is no requirement for a 
Recreational disturbance  Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (RAMS)  for 
Birklands and Bilhaugh SAC within the L ocal Plan. 
8.6.10  Following consultation with Natural England , the Council will establish a strategic 
solution to deliver fair, consistent and effective mitigation , throug h a RAMS, to 
address identified recreational impacts at Clumber Park.  
8.6.1 1 A RAMS requires a strategic partnership approach where by authorities falling 
within the 24.7km zone  of influence of Clumber Park would need to work 
collaboratively  to implement av oidance and mitigation measures  designed to 
resolve the in -combination impacts associated with recreation from residential 
development. The Council will therefore continue to work with the partnership 
group to establish a strategic solution . 
 
8.6.1 2 In line with other strategic mitigation around the country  the RAMS  should 
comprise  a package of mitigation measures which would consist of : 
 Strategic Access Management and Monitoring measures at Clumber Park : a 
range of measures designed to make visitors more aware of their impacts and 
ensure access is better managed such as wardens, educational material, 
physical i nfrastructure such as footpaths ; and/or 
 Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace  (SANG)  on development  sites:  this is 
a new gre enspace, or an existing greenspace that is enhanced to create a 
SANG capable of accommodating a route of approximately 2km within the 
development site boundary, in order to encourage everyday recreational 
activity close to home, rather than at Clumber Park .  
8.6.13  Other opportunities  for off site mitigation will be explored, through for example,  
providing dedicated cycle routes or enhancing connectivity to encourage 
recreational use away from Clumber Park . 
8.6.14  Mitigation would need to be carefully planned, tailored to the site and agreed with 
stakeholders, in particular the National Trust and the RSPB.  
8.6.1 5 Any residential development within the identified zone of influence will be 
required to either contribut e towards mitigation measures identified in the RAMS   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
87 
 or, in exceptional circumstances, identify and implement bespoke mitigation 
measures to ensure compliance with the Habitats Regulations  and Wildlife and 
Countryside Act 1981 . 
8.6.1 6 The level of financial contribution sought per dwelling will be confirmed  by the 
RAMS. However, t o inform the policy approach t he Whole Plan Viability 
Assessment 202 215 has considered on a per dwelling financial contribution 
options  reflective of costs identified for similar strategic RAMS elsewhere. This 
confirms that the contribution s can be secured as part of a financially viable 
development  in the District over the plan period.  
8.6.1 7 Prior to the adoption of a RAMS  as a Supplementary Planning Document , and 
following discussion with Natural England, residential development of 50 
dwellings or more in the zone of i nfluence in the district will be required to make 
an appropriate assessment of the in -combination impact of the development and 
identify suitable mitigation proposals, in line with Natural England advice.  
8.6.18 Locally designated sites:  At a local level, the District has 4 Local Nature 
Reserves, 290 Local Wildlife Sites and 24 Regionally Important Geological Sites . 
All contain habitats, species or geological features of local importance. All have 
been designated by the Nottinghamshire Ecological and Geological Data 
Partnership  in accordance with locally agreed selection criteria.  
 
8.6.1 9 Policy ST40  will help ensure these sites are protected during development and 
are managed appropriately for the features for which they are designated.  
Proposals can sometimes affect land surr ounding, or neighbouring these 
designated  sites as well as impacting them directly. Policy ST40  therefore 
requires that appropriate buffers are maintained  to ensure that features for which 
a site is designated are not lost , and that potential impacts are i dentified through 
an Ecological Impact Assessment .  
 
Protected and Priority Habitats and Species  
8.6.20  Habitats and Species of Principal Importance identified under the Natural 
Environment  and Rural Communities Act 2006  include legally protected species 
such as Great Crested Newts and badgers, as well as local priority habitats and 
species.  
 
8.6.21 Proposals that will potentially affect these species will be required to submit 
information to enable an assessment  of their impact, in accordance with relevan t 
national legislation.  
 
Nature Recovery  Network   
8.6.2 2 Biodiversity is not confined to designated sites or to the District boundary. Many 
features serve as wildlife corridors, links and stepping stones, which play a vital 
part in the Nature Recovery Network, integral to the delivery of the government’s 
25 year Environment Pl an13. The Bassetlaw Nature Recovery Network will form 
part of the national network of wildlife -rich places, and will be instrumental in the 
movement of species within and beyond Ba ssetlaw , to the Humberhead Levels 
Nature Improvement Area in Doncaster and North Lincolnshire  for example.  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
88 
 8.6.2 3 The District’s Nature Recovery Network provides a local baseline, with the draft 
Nottinghamshire Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping14 identify ing opportunities to 
help tackle network fragmentation . Policy ST40  will ensure that development 
within or adjoining the Nature Recovery Network maintains the integrity, value 
and continuity of the network . Opportunities to enhance and expand its 
functionality and biodiversity particularly for the four main habitat networks  - 
woodland, heathland and acid grassland, and other grassland and wetland  - 
should be considered . Proposals that lead to fragment ation  will be resisted.  
 
8.6.2 4 The Local Plan w ill contribute to the delivery of  a more coherent and resilient 
ecological network, by connecting  designated sites with notable habitats, sites 
and ecological corridors ; trees and woodland identified by Policies ST40 and 
ST41; as well as with land with str ong biodiversity value.   
 
8.6.2 5 It will also ensure that the b iodiversity value of undisturbed greenfield sites  as 
well as many  brownfield sites and built features will be captured. Where possible, 
these features  will be integra ted into the functional net work and appropriate 
management sought to retain their importance.  
 
Biodiversity Net Gain  
 
8.6.2 6 Biodiversity net gain aims to leave the District’s biodiversity assets in a better 
state than currently exists. Reflecting the principles and definitions of the updated 
draft Environment Bill 2019 Act 2021 , all new development  will be expected to 
secure at least 10% net gain in biodiversity  so that  the biodiversity value of the 
development exceeds the pre -development on site habitat value by at least 10%.  
 
8.6.2 7 Net gain should be delivered on site. Only in exceptional cases where this is not 
practicable will compensatory off site contributions be appropriate. In general, it 
is expected that biodiversity net gain can be achieved through good design of 
new development: features such as sustainable drainage or tree planting are 
requirements of other Local Plan policies so their use should not create additional 
costs to development . Use of the latest Natural England metric will be supported 
to evidence applica tions.  
 
8.6.2 8 The requirement for 10% biodiversity net gain is not expected to be a legal 
requirement until 2023. But the Whole Plan Viability Assessment 202215 confirms 
that biodiversity net gain can be secured as part of a financially viable 
development.  On that basis, and to reflect the multiple benefits to biodiversity, 
the natural env ironment and climate the Local Plan supports its introduction on 
adoption of this Plan.  
 
8.6.2 9 Reflecting emerging  national legislation a commuted sum equivalent to 30 years 
maintenance will be sought and should be accompanied by a management plan 
to ensure the continued protection of features . Furth er guidance will be set out in 
the Greening Bassetlaw  SPD.  
 
POLICY  ST40: Biodiversity and Geodiversity    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
89 
 1. The Council will seek to protect and enhance the biodiversity and geodi versity of 
Bassetlaw, including:  
 
International Sites  
a) a proposal that may impact on a Special Area of Conservation (SAC), Special 
Protection Area (SPA), Ramsar site and/or the Sherwood Forest ppSPA will only 
be supported where it can be demonstrated that there will be no likely significant 
effects on their int egrity, unless there are no alternative solutions and it is justified 
by an 'imperative reasons of overriding public interest' assessment under the 
Habitats Directives.  Recreational impact on the Birklands and Bilhaugh SAC will 
also be subject to Policy ST 40A; 
b) any scheme within the 5km buffer zone of the Sherwood Forest ppSPA will require 
a project level ‘shadow level’ Habitats Regulations Assessment to ensure any 
significant adverse effects on the Sherwood Forest ppSPA are identif ied and 
appropriately miti gated;  
 
National Designations  
c) a proposal that may either directly or indirectly adversely  impact a Site of Special 
Scientific Interest  (SSSI), National Nature Reserve (NNR) or ancient woodland and 
their buffer zones will be  refused other than in wholly exceptional 
circumstances.  All proposals should seek to protect and enhance these features 
wherever possible.  Recreational  impact on Clumber Park SSSI  and the Sherwood 
Forest NNR will also be subject to Policy S T40A 
d) where it can be demonstrated that housing development within the identified zones 
of in fluence of Clumber Park SSSI, and Sherwood Forest ppSPA will create 
adverse recreational impacts on the integrity of these designated sites the 
development will make provision for appropriate mitigation measures including on 
the development site, and/or as a financial contribution towards mitigation, 
management and monitoring at the designated asset.  
 
Local Designations and Locally Important Ecological Features  
e) proposals  having a direct or indirect adverse effect on a Local Nature Reserve, 
Local Wildlife Site or Local Geological Site and their buffer zones or other 
biodiversity/geodiversity asset, will only be supported where there are no 
reasonable alternatives; and the case for development clearly outweighs the need 
to safeguard the ecological, recreational and/or educational value of the site.  
 
2. In all cases, where the principle of development is considered appropriate the 
mitigation hierarchy must be applied so that:  
a) firstly ha rm is avoided wherever possible;  then  
b) appropriate mitigation is provided to ensure no net loss or a net gain of priority 
habitat and local populations of priority species;   
c) as a last resort , compensation is delivered to offset any residual damage to 
biodiversity;  
d) they protect, restore, enhance and provide appropriate buffers around wildlife 
and geological features at a local and wider landscape -scale to deliver robust 
ecological networks, to help deliver priorities in the  draft Nottinghamshire  
Biodiversity Opportunity Model for Bassetlaw and Idle Valley 201814; 
e) they establish additional ecological links to the Nature Recovery Network . 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
90 
 Biodiversity Net Gain  
3. All new development should make provision for at least 10% net biodiversity gain on 
site, or where it can be demonstrated that for design reasons this is not practicable,  
off site th rough an equivalent financial contribution.  
4. A commuted sum equivalent to 30 years maintenance will be sought to manage the 
biodiversity assets in the long term.  
POLICY  ST40A : Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy 
(RAMS)  
1. Where identified through a project level H abitat Regulations Assessment , in 
compliance with the Habitat Regulations and Habitats Directive , to mitigate any 
recreational disturbance impacts, residential development will need to implement on -
site mitigation to avoid and/or reduce recreational disturbance impact through 
sensitive layout and design measures , and, green /blue infrastructure proporti onate 
to the scale of the development.  
 
2. New residential development within the Clumber Park SSSI Zone of Influence and/or 
the Birklands and Bilhaugh  SAC/Sherwood Forest NNR  Zone of Influence will be 
subject to proportionate financial contributions to deli ver off site mitigation measures 
at the relevant protected site and/or appropriate Suitable Alternative Natural 
Greenspace and/or other infrastructure projects on the relevant development site as 
identified by the  relevant strategic  RAMS.  
 
3. Prior to the completion of a long term strategic solution , the Council will negotiate 
bespoke site -specific mitigation from all residential development of 50 or more 
dwellings in the district within the identified Clumber Park SSSI zone of influence , as 
evidenced by the project level Habitats Regulations Assessment  for each proposal . 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
91 
 Renewable Energy Generation  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Renewable 
Energy  section . For ease of consultation, Policy ST52: Renewable Energy Generation  
and the supporting text is shown within this Addendum with the relevant tracked 
changes. However, comments should only be made on the proposed changes which 
are subject to consultation. As previously stated, these changes will be shown as 
follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is not an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for information only; these changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examinat ion. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
92 
 Renewable and Low Carbon  Energy Generation  
 
10.2.1  The UK Government has committed to cut Greenhouse gas emissions  by 78% 
by 2035 and to achieve net  zero by 20503 in line with the  Zero Carbon Strategy . 
Strategic planning policy can contribute towards this commitment by positively 
supporting forms of renewable energy and/or low carbon  developments in the 
District over the plan period.  Whether commercial or domestic, appropriate 
renewable energy and/or low carbon developments will contribute towards 
reducing the reliance on more conventional forms of energy and the use of fossil 
fuels.   
 
10.2.2  The Government’s National Policy Statements apply to Nationally Significant 
Infrastructure Projects. As such, Policy ST51 applies only to renewable and low 
carbon energy development of 50 megawatts or less installed capacity . Many 
small scale renewable technologies are now permitted development, therefore 
the requirements of Policy ST51 do not apply in those cases.  
 
10.2.3  Renewable energy includes two forms of energy generation:  
 
a) low-carbon: where technologies emit low lev els of carbon emissions or no 
net carbon emissions are created (carbon emissions created are balanced 
by taking the same amount out of the atmosphere e .g. through tree planting); 
and,  
b) zero-carbon: where technologies emit no carbon emissions.  
 
10.2.4  In Bassetlaw, the preference is for zero -carbon energy generation to make a 
positive contribution to meeting national energy targets and to minimise the 
District’s impact on Climate Change. Whether commercial or domestic, 
appropriate renewable energy devel opments will help contribute towards 
reducing the reliance on more conventional forms of energy and the use of fossil 
fuels facilitating an easier transition to zero carbon by 2050. Elsewhere, micro to 
medium scale commercial renewable energy generation an d community wind 
generation will be supported where they are consistent with relevant policies in 
this Plan.  
 
10.2.5  This approach will also help transition Bassetlaw from a net carbon producer 
(historically the District housed three coal fired power stat ions) to a net contributor 
of zero carbon and low carbon renewable energy.  
 
10.2.6  Proposals should consider a diverse mix of renewable energy technologies. This 
will help facilitate a secure, reliable, affordable  net zero energy system that is 
resilient in 2050 and that is not overly reliant on any one technology.  
 
The National Planning Policy Framework2 emphasises that a positive strategy 
should be adopted to promote energy from renewable and low carbon sources, 
with policies de signed to maximise the development of low carbon energy.  
 
Opportunities exist District -wide for appropriately located large scale commercial 
renewable energy schemes (excluding wind energy). Through the 
comprehensive redevelopment of the former High Marnh am Power Station the   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
93 
 ability to connect to the high voltage electricity grid provides a significant 
opportunity to promote a large area for these technologies, adjacent to and within 
the employment site identified by Policy ST8.  
 
10.2.7  Large scale ground mounted proposals for solar farms are capable of contributing 
substantially to total sol ar power generation nationally, and the District is currently 
experiencing an increase in interest for such schemes. But in the District  This 
has the potential for adve rse impacts, so in accordance with the UK Solar 
Photovoltaics Strategy11,12, the preference is for future expansion of solar 
photovoltaics to be on commercial and industrial roof -space. Nevertheless, large 
scale ground mounted proposals may be acceptable s ubject to meeting the 
criteria in Policy ST51.  
 
             Area  of Best Fit  for Renewable Energy Development  
 
10.2.8  The National Planning Policy Framework2 emphasises that a positive strategy 
should be adopted to promote energy from renewable energy sources, with 
policies designed to maximise the development of renewable energy and heat. It 
states that plans should consider identifying suitable areas for ren ewable and low 
carbon energy sources, and supporting infrastructure, where this would help 
secure their development.  
 
10.2.9  In Bassetlaw, when assessing the suitability of land for renewable energy 
development, developers should first consider whether the proposal could be 
located within the Area of Best Fit as identified by Policy ST51 and on the Policies 
Map.  
 
10.2.10  The Area of Best Fit focus es renewable energy development at the former High 
Marnham Power station , recogni sing the site’s  previous use for energy 
generation; and its ability to provide a significant opportunity for direct 
connectivity to the national electricit y grid, via existing energy switching and/or 
transmission infrastructure . 
 
10.2.11  Additionally, this approach promotes the positive regeneration of  an area of 
brownfield land whilst minimising likely associated impacts on the wider 
environment and nearby communities.   
 
10.2.1 2 The Area of Best Fit does not preclude renewable energy development 
elsewhere in the district nor does it mean that land within the area must be 
developed for renewable energy exclusively.  
 
10.2.1 3 On that basis, proposals within the Area of Best Fit should be guided by a 
comprehensive masterplan framework , a delivery strategy  and phasing plan in 
accordance with Policy ST58. The masterplan framework should include all 
relevant technical assessments considered necessary to address s ite-specific 
issues relevant to the site such as relating to the historic and/or the natural 
environment.  Together these will coordinate  delivery of the site. Community 
consultation and Council approval will be required prior to submission of a 
planning  application.  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
94 
 10.2.1 4 In practice , there will be other parts of the District that will be suitable for 
renewable energy. The benefits of delivering increased renewable energy 
capacity will need to be assessed against any potential adverse effects. The typ e 
of possible impacts will vary depending on the technology being used, but the 
need to protect residential amenity is likely to be a common issue for many 
scheme types. Other considerations will include impact on the local environment 
or wider landscape, harm to sites of biodiversity  value, impact on heritage assets 
and interference with telecommunications and aviation equipment.  
 
10.2.1 5 The District also has two other former power station sites ; at Cottam (see Policy 
ST6) and Wes t Burton. The Council recognise  the significant regeneration that 
will need to be undertaken at both sites in the long term, which could include 
some form of  zero carbon energy generation. Both are at different stages in the 
decommissioning process; on that basis the Council wi ll continue to work with 
the landowners and site promotors to ensure that the opportunities for 
regeneration of both sites , and potentially zero energy generation , are maximised  
appropriately through the review of the Local Plan.  
 
10.2.1 6 As the number of renewable energy developments across the District continues 
to increase, the issue of cumulative impact will need to be carefully considered.  
Cumulative impacts can relate to landscape and visual amenity, bird populations 
and other wildlife,  the historic environment or any other matter.  Such impacts 
may be experienced through the provision of a new renewable energy 
development alongside existing or proposed schemes, and/or by the extension 
and intensification of an existing scheme. Policies ST40, ST42 and ST37 are 
particularly relevant when considering these issues.  
 
10.2.1 7 All proposals will be considered in terms of their impact on neighbouring land 
uses and the affected community. Developers can should  demonstrate 
community support throug h an appropriate developer led pre -application 
consultation or through the neighbourhood planning process, where applicable. 
This should demonstrate the community response, including from the relevant 
parish/town council, is positive overall.  
      
10.2.1 8 Where planning permission is required for renewable energy projects , this shall 
include a planning condition requiring the removal of associated infrastructure 
and the  reinstatement of a building or restoration of land to its original condition 
or appeara nce within three years of the equipment becoming permanently non -
operational.  
 
10.2.1 9 Proposals which include the generation of energy from waste are a  County matter 
and as such will be dealt with by Nottinghamshire County Council.  
 
10.2. 20 Policy ST51 requires developers to provide evidence based assessments of 
power generation based upon actual yield rather than installed capacity. This is 
necessary to enable the Council to have a robust understanding of the district’s 
contribution to wards  national zero carbon targets. Further details are found in the 
Local Plan’s monitoring framework.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
95 
 10.2.2 1 More detailed guidance relating to the provision of renewable energy or local zero 
carbon technology development will be set out in the Greening Bassetlaw 
Supplementary Planning Document following the adopt ion of the Local Plan . 
 
POLICY ST 51: Renewable and Low Carbon  Energy Generation   
1. Development that generates, shares, transmits and/or stores zero carbon and/or 
low carbon renewable energy  will be  supp orted in principle at the Area  of Best Fit 
at the former High Marnham power station site , as identified on the Policies Map as 
a result of the ability of on site development to connect to the on site national 
electricity grid infrastructure.  
2. Proposals for renewable energy development on land at the Area  of Best Fit should 
deliver a scheme in accordance with an agreed masterplan framework, relevant 
supporting technical assessments, delivery strategy and phasing plan for the site in 
accordance w ith Policy ST58, and other relevant policies in this Plan.  
3. Outside the Area  of Best Fit, development that generates, shares, transmits and/or 
stores zero carbon and/or low carbon renewable energy including community 
energy schemes will be expected to demon strate an operational and/or economic 
need for the development in that location, and the satisfactory resolution of all 
relevant site specific and cumulative impacts  that the scheme could have on the 
area, taking into account operational and approved devel opments , as well as any 
proposed intensification to operational or approved proposals . An assessment 
should address cumulative visual and landscape impacts, as well as heritage, 
hydrology, hydrogeology, ecology, traffic and transport, noise, recreation and  local 
amenity impacts.  
4. All renewable energy development will be expected to provide details of the 
expected power generation based upon yield or local self -consumption to enable 
effective monitoring of the district’s contribution to the national zero carbon targets.  
5. A decommissioning programme will be required to demonstrate the effective 
restoration of land and/or buildings to their original use (such as agriculture) and 
condition three years after cessation of operations.  
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
96 
  
Policies Map add ition: Former Marnham Power Station site Area of Best Fit  
 
POLICY ST51: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
1. Development that generates, shares, transmits and/or stores renewable and  low 
carbon energy,  including community energy schemes,  will be supported  subject to the 
provision of details of expected power generation based upon yield or local self -
consumption of electricity and by demonstrating the satisfactory resolution of all 
relevant wider impacts (including cumulative impacts) upon :  
 
a) location, setting and position in the wider landscape, resulting from its siting and 
scale;  
b) the historic environment and natural environment, the most versatile agricultural 
land, air and water quality resulting from its location, scale, design, height  or 
construction;  
c) affected existing dwellings and communities from its scale, noise, light, glare, 
smell, dust, emissions or flicker;  
d) existing highway capacity and highway safety.  
 
2. Development should address the cumulative impact that the scheme could have on 
the area, taking into account operational and approved developments, as well as any 
extensions to operational or approved proposals. An assessment should address 
cumulative visual and landscape impacts, as well as heritage, hydrology, 
hydrogeology,  ecology, traffic and transport, noise, recreation and local amenity 
impacts.  
3. Community engagement proportionate to the type and scale of the proposal will be 
required for all commercial scale renewable energy and low carbon energy proposals 
to demonstrate  how they will deliver environmental, social and economic benefits.  
4. A decommissioning programme will be required to demonstrate the effective 
restoration of land and/or buildings to their original use (such as agriculture) and 
condition three years after cessation of operations.  
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
97 
 Transport Infrastructure  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Transport 
infrastructure  section . For ease of consultation, Policy ST54: Transport Infrastructure  
and the supporting text is shown within this Addendum with the relevant tracked 
changes. However, comments should only be made on the proposed changes which 
are subject to consultation. As previously stated, these changes will be shown as 
follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is no t an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for information only; thes e changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
98 
 11.1 Transport Infrastructure and Improvement Schemes   
11.1.1  Improving connectivity and the  existing  transport infrastructure  network  is a key 
principle which  essential to and will support the level of  growth of the District  
identified by this Local Plan . By facilitating the movement of people between their 
home, work, shops , services  and enabling the movement of goods to and across 
the District, it will help to facilitate local and sub -regional/regional economic 
growth  opportunities, inward investment, re generation  and contribute towards the 
delivery of sustainable development . 
 
11.1.2  Delivering and maintaining sustainable, reliable and adaptable transport 
infrastructure  across Bassetlaw  will help reduce traffic congestion, provide 
sustainable transport o ptions to for residents  and encourag e increased  use, 
particularly for local journeys. This brings added social, economic and 
environmental  benefits to the District , as identified by Policy ST50 and Policy 
ST46,  by improving air quality, the environment , the wellbeing of people  and 
promoting climate resilience.  
 
11.1.3  In order to facilitate the growth identified by the spatial strategy,  there will need 
to be improvements to the existing  transport infrastructure  network  where 
proposed development causes a direct impact .  
 
11.1.4  The Bassetlaw Tran sport Study 20221 sets out the required or potential transport  
mitigation  solutions  to help deliver sustainable  the new development identified by 
this Local Plan.  This evidence1 for the District replaces the previous assessments 
and provides the most up to date information and traffic assessments, to ensure 
the approach taken to transport infrastructure improvements is consistent with 
the spatial strategy and to provide a robust transport evidence base. Transport 
improvements include capacity/congestion improvements, changes to the 
network and traffic routing, as well as sustainable and public transport initiatives, 
promotion of active travel, safety improvements and traffic manag ement 
improvements.  
 
11.1.5  The evidence1 does not identify any necessary improvements to transport 
infrastructure outside the District as a consequence of growth associated with the 
Local Plan. This includes the impact of consented growth in Harworth  & Bircotes 
upon the ad joining Doncaster Council area, whereby necessary transport 
mitigation has been agreed, and will be delivered through, consented 
development schemes . The Council will continue to work positively with 
neighbouring authorities to ensur e that cross boundary transport issues continue 
to be dis cussed and managed appropriately .  
 
11.1. 6 Transport improvements can include capacity/congestion improvements, 
changes to the network and traffic routing, as well as sustainable and public 
transport  initiatives, promotion of active travel, safety improvements and traffic 
management improvements.  Policy ST54 identifies  Additionally,  a number of new 
highway schemes and improvements are required  to deliver this Plan, such as 
the new distributor road in Worksop  as part of  at site HS1: Peaks Hill Farm . Such  
schemes , and those that are  required to mitigate the impacts of each housing   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
99 
 and employment allocation , are detailed in relevant site -specific  allocation  
policies.  
 
11.1. 7 As new development at the site  allocations and elsewhere in the district comes 
forward, there will be a need for the developer to look in more detail at the specific 
transport and access impacts associated with individual sites. Where 
development would generate a significant amount of travel, a Transport 
Assessment will be needed  to be undertaken by the developer . The 
determination of whether significant amounts of travel are generated will be dealt 
with on a site by site basis. This will need to review the transport implications of 
development as well as appropriate mitigation  identified by Local Plan policies, 
where relevant . Promotion of measures that enable sustainable transport choices 
will be especially important, and where relevant a Travel Plan will be required to 
demonstrate how these measures will be delivered. In all cases, a Travel Plan 
and, in some cases, a Transport  Assessment will be required to accompany a 
planning application. These will be expected to provide more detail about the 
provision of relevant transport infrastructure requirements, and should be agreed 
with the relevant authorities, including the Local H ighways Authority.  
 
11.1.8   The scoping of Transport Assessments should be done in agreement with 
Nottinghamshire County Council as the highways authority and in line with latest 
national policy. It is also important that developers take account of require ments 
for infrastructure in the area identified by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. In 
addition, there may be a need to take account of cumulative impacts of 
development, for example whe re this relates to delivery of particular 
infrastructure improvements.  
 
11.1. 9 As a strategic transport corridor, the A57 between the A1 and the M1 
accommodates a significant level of regional and sub -regional traffic , not only in 
the District but also in the neighbouring authority of Rotherham . The Bassetlaw 
Transport Study identifies that the p arts of this route  in the District  are at or over 
capacity and more substantial mitigation may be required.  
 
11.1.10  Recognising  its importance for strategic movement and connectivity, the County 
Council recently identified this stretch of road as a priority in their Strategic 
Infrastructure Plan 2022 .  
 
11.1.1 1 The Council is committed to working collaboratively with the Local Highways 
Authority, National Highways, neighbouring authorities and adjoining landowners 
on a vision statement, and to develop a longer term Improvement Plan for the 
A57. Collaborative working is also con sidered essential to seek to secure 
external funding to enable delivery of improvements to ensure the effective 
operation of the A57 over the lifetime of this plan and beyond.    
 
11.1.12  The improvement plan would also provide the basis for securing appropriate and 
proportionate, and potentially pooled, financial contributions from relevant new 
development towards improving the A57 corridor. The Council is committed to 
working with this partnership group  to seek to secur e sources of external funding 
to enable delivery of improvements to ensure the effective operation of the A57 
over the lifetime of this plan and beyond.      Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
100 
 As a strategic transport corridor, the A57 between the A1 and the M1 
accommodates a significant level  of regional and sub -regional traffic. The 
Bassetlaw Transport Study 20211 has identified that by 2037, parts of this route 
will likely be at or over capacity and that more substantial mitigation may be 
required. To plan for this, the Council is working with its partners, including the 
Local Highways Authority, Highways England,  neighbouring authorities and 
adjoining landowners on an Improvement Plan for the A57. The Highway 
Authority recently identified this stretch of road as a priority in their Strategic 
Infrastructure Plan 2021. Therefore, appropriate and proportionate financ ial 
contributions from development, along with external funding will be required to 
address future improvements and to ensure its continued effective operation over 
the lifetime of this plan and beyond.    
 
11.1. 11 Whilst improvements to the highway infrast ructure is important, managing 
existing and future commuting patterns and reducing congestion by improving 
public transport provision and implementing more  demand management 
measures to reduce single car occupancy and reliance on the car for local 
journeys  is essential. This will be particularly important at the strategic site 
allocations , through the introduction of more extensive public transport provision 
for example,  to help create sustainable new communities.  
 
11.1. 12 The majority of public transport trips in the District are made by bus. As part of 
delivering the growth in this Local Plan in a sustainable manner, the Council will 
continue to work with the bus operators, Nottinghamshire County Council and 
neighbouring authorities through an Enhanced Pa rtnership  to deliver the 
Nottinghamshire Bus Service Improvement Plan , including to improve operating 
conditions for buses, such as to and within the strategic site allocations , through 
demand responsive transport in the rural area , and to neighbouring authorities 
such as Rotherham and Doncaster . Such improvements can also help our 
communities have better access to shops and services, particularly from the rural 
area where current services are more limited.  
 
11.1.1 3 The rail network is a significant publ ic transport asset for the District. The potential 
for a new train station at Bassetlaw Garden Village will improve movement within 
the District and support more sustainable future commuting needs, notably to 
Sheffield and Lincoln for existing and future r esidents, particularly important for 
improving accessibility by our rural community. The Council will continue to work 
with Network Rail, Northern Rail and other stakeholders to secure improvements 
to the wider rail network , including from Worksop, Shireoa ks and Retford stations .  
 
11.1.1 4 Increasing opportunities for accessible and safe walking and cycling is a key 
priority for the Council Plan3. As well  as providing walking and cycling routes to 
and through the strategic  site allocations, local improvements, such as measures 
to enhance connectivity within and to the town centres and their environs, 
recognised by Policy ST14 will be taken where appropriate through the delivery 
tools for each town centre area . 
 
Longer term transport i mprovements  
11.1.1 5 The Local Plan identifies sizable strategic site allocations, such as site HS1: 
Peaks Hill Farm , HS13:  Ordsall South  and the Bassetlaw Garden Village, and   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
101 
 priority areas for regeneration, including Wo rksop Central (identified  by Policy 
ST5) . Their delivery will go beyond this plan period. On that basis, transport 
infrastructure improvements may not be fully delivered by 2037  2038 .  
 
11.1.1 6 The National Planning Policy Framework recognises that large scale new 
development and new settlements, as identified by the Local Plan, may be 
delivered over more than one plan period. Associated infrastructure requirements 
may not be capable of being identified fully at the outset. On that basis, this Local 
Plan recognises the importance o f ensuring that infrastructure, in this case 
transport infrastructure, is appropriately phased alongside development. The 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  202218 identifies the transport infrastructure required 
to deliver the growth identified by this Local Pl an in a proportionate and timely 
manner.   
 
11.1.17  Additionally, w here relevant,  land will be safeguarded by Policy ST54  ST56  for 
transport infrastructure and protected from development that would prejudice 
their delivery. These planned transport improveme nt schemes are  identified on 
the Policies Map .  
 
11.1.1 8 The Local Plan acknowledges that many transport infrastructure improvements 
will be developer funded. Nevertheless, the Council will continue to pursue a 
range of funding mechanisms in order to finance infrastructure, through liaison 
collaborative partnership work  with the D2N2 LEP , Homes England  and 
Nottinghamshire County Council for example. Further information  on the  delivery 
and funding of transport infrastructure  is set out in the Bassetlaw Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan 202 24. 
 
POLICY ST54: Transport Infrastructure and Improvement Schemes  
 
1. The Council will work with Nottingha mshire County Council and other transport 
infrastructure partners to:  
 
a) support and facilitate the delivery of measures identified in the Local Transport 
Plan and the Bus Service Improvement Plan for the district;  
b) deliver the transport infrastructure which improves movement within and to 
Bassetlaw,  including measures that help support delivery of the site allocations 
identified by this Local Plan as identified by the Bassetlaw Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan;  
c) ensure that the impacts of new development on the strategic and local road 
network, including the A57 and A1, are adequately identified through a vision 
statement and Improvement Plan , and are appropriately and proportionately 
mitigated  through partnership working with the Local Highways Authority , 
relevant neighbouring planning and highways author ities, and National 
Highways ; 
d) support, in association with major development, the delivery of new or improved 
roads, such as a distributor road and  sustainable transport improvements, linked 
where appropriate ; 
e) support and facilitate  measures that improve the management of the strategic 
and local highways network including through demand management, traffic   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
102 
 management and calming initiatives required as a result of site allocations 
identified by this Local Plan;  
f) support and where appro priate, enable sustainable transport measures that 
improve access to/from proposed major development around Worksop, Retford 
and Harworth & Bircotes and the Bassetlaw Garden Village;  
g) support plans for enhanced active travel connectivity within Worksop Cent ral, 
Retford town centre and Harworth & Bircotes town centre and to surrounding 
areas;  
h) promote  through major development the delivery of a more comprehensive 
network of multi user transport nodes and a new transport interchange at the 
Bassetlaw Garden Vill age;  
i) support delivery of the safeguarded transport improvements in Policy ST56 as 
required to help deliver the development required in this plan period and beyond;  
 
2. Proposals for new development  which have significant transport implications that 
either arise from the development proposed or cumulatively with other development 
proposals will need to submit a Transport Assessment or a Transport Statement, and 
where relevant a Travel Plan  alongside an application . These documents will need 
to take into account Nottinghamshire County Council guidance and national Planning 
Practice , and where appropriate, the scope should be agreed with National 
Highways . 
 
3. Appropriate provision for works and/or contrib utions may be required towards 
providing 1a -i of this policy to provide an adequate level of accessibility by all modes 
of transport and to mitigat e the impacts of development up on the transport network. 
Consideration should be given to the cumulative impact of relevant development both 
in Bassetlaw and within neighbouring authorities, and how this links to planned 
infrastructure improvements. This should take into account the most recent 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan and Local Plan Transport Assessments , which, where 
relevant, will inform the scoping of the Transport Assessment and Travel Plan.  
 
4. Where relevant, evidence obtained from a site -specific Transport Assessment or 
Transport Statement will inform the number and phasing of homes to be permitted 
on proposed development sites and will be established (and potentially conditioned) 
through the planning application process, in consultation w ith the highway authority.  
 
 
 
1. To improve connectivity and enhance the District’s transport network, the Council, 
will work with its infrastructure partners, developer partners and neighbouring 
authorities to:  
 
a) deliver the highways infrastructure which improves movement in and around 
Worksop, including:  
i. a new east -west distributor road and public transport corridor from the A60 to 
the B6045 at HS1: Peaks Hill Farm, as identified on the Policies Map;  
ii. improvements to A60 Mansfield Road/A619 Priority Roundabout, Worksop  
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
103 
 iii. measures to improve the B6045 Blyth Road/B6041 Kilton Hill, 3 -Arm Signal 
Junction, Worksop  
iv. measures to improve the B6045 Blyth Road/Farmers Branch, 3 -Arm Priority 
Junction, Worksop  
v. measures to improve traffic flow at Victoria Square;  
 
b) deliver the highways infrastructure which improves movement in and around 
Retford including:  
i. improvements to the junction at A620 Babworth Road / B6420 Mansfield Road 
/ A620 Straight Mile / Sutton Lane;  
ii. improvements to the junction at Ordsall Road/A620 Babworth Road;  
iii. improvements to London Road / Whinney Moor Lane / Bracken Lane;  
iv. improvements to London Road / Whitehouses Road;  
v. provision of a traffic calming scheme at Ordsall Old Village;  
 
c) deliver the highways infrastructure to support the delivery of the  Bassetlaw 
Garden Village, including:  
i. the re -alignment and upgrade of part of the B6420 Mansfield Road between 
the A1/B6420 roundabout and Mansfield Road level crossing to distributor 
road standard including  appropriate junctions with to the existing B642 0 
Mansfield Road and the A1/ B6420 junction ; 
ii. improvements to the roundabout at the A614/A57/A1(T) Priority Roundabout, 
East of Worksop;  
 
d) ensure that the impacts of new development on the strategic A57 road network 
are appropriately mitigated including:  
i. improvements to the A57/A60/B6024/St Anne’s Drive, Signal Roundabout, 
Worksop;  
ii. improvements to the A57/Sandy Lane, Priority Roundabout, Worksop;  
iii. improvements to the A57/Claylands Ave/Shireoaks Common, Priority 
Roundabout, Worksop;  
iv. improvements to the A57/B 6034/Netherton Road, Priority Roundabout, 
Worksop;  
v. improvements to the Priority Roundabout, Mantonwood, Worksop;  
vi. improvements to A614 Blyth Road/A57/A1(T), Priority Roundabout, East of 
Worksop;  
vii. improvements to A57/B6041 Gateford Road, Priority Roundabout, Worksop;  
 
e) support measures in the rural area that address the impacts of new development, 
including:  
i. improvements to the A57/A6075 Darlton/ East Drayton junction;  
ii. improvements to the A57/ Darlton Road, Darlton junction;  
iii. improvements to the A57/Woodcotes La ne, Darlton junction;  
iv. improvements to the A57 Main Street Darlton/Dunham junction;  
v. provision of a traffic calming scheme at Main Road, Eaton.  
 
f) plan positively for bus service improvements within the District that support 
connectivity to areas of new develo pment and help reduce congestion, including:  
i. provision of a new bus corridor along the new east -west distributor road at site 
HS1: Peaks Hill Farm;    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
104 
 ii. provision of an extended bus service to serve site HS13: Ordsall South (east 
and west);  
iii. a new bus interchange within Bassetlaw Garden Village and a new bus 
corridor and associated infrastructure along the re -aligned B6420 Mansfield 
Road;  
iv. an extended bus corridor along the A57 to SEM001: Apleyhead Junction.  
 
g) support the provision of measures which improve cycling and walking networks 
within and between towns and villages in the District and to help reduce traffic 
congestion including:  
i. provision of an active travel network within Bassetlaw Garden Village, and to 
provide appropriate connectivity  to the existing network with Worksop, Retford 
and Clumber Park;  
ii. delivery of an active travel network to serve site HS1: Peaks Hill Farm and to 
provide appropriate connectivity south into Thievesdale and along Carlton 
Road and Blyth Road;  
iii. provision of an a ctive travel network to serve site HS13: Ordsall South and to 
provide appropriate connectivity to the existing network, Ordsall, Retford Town 
Centre and the wider countryside;  
iv. promotion of new routes and improvements to the existing network within 
Worksop  Central to neighbouring employment areas and along green/blue 
infrastructure corridors identified by Policy ST39.  
 
h) support improvements to the rail network including safeguarding land for a new 
railway station, and associated infrastructure north and sout h of the Sheffield -
Lincoln railway line at the Bassetlaw Garden Village.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
105 
 Infrastructure and Delivery  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Infrastructure 
and Delivery  section . For ease of consultation, Policy ST58: Provision and Delivery of 
Infrastructure  and the supporting text is shown within this Addendum wit h the relevant 
tracked changes. However, comments should only be made on the proposed changes 
which are subject to cons ultation. As previously stated, these changes will be shown as 
follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is not an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for information only; these changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
106 
 12.3 Provision of Infrastructure  
 
12.3.1  Bassetlaw’s future growth and environmental sustainability cannot be achieved 
without a wide range of necessary infrastructure.  A consistent theme of the 
National Planning Policy Framework2 is to align growth with infrastructure to 
enable  the sustainable development of communities . In some cases new 
development can be sited to enable new infrastructure in locations that will 
promote longer term sustainable growth.  To do so,  it requires the Local Plan to 
make sufficient provision for:  
 physical infrastructure: including  for flood risk, transport, telecommunications, 
security, water supply and wastewater ;  
 social infrastructure: including that for education and health ; and  
 green /blue  infrastructure : including open space , habitat and wildlife creation 
and measures to address climate change mitigation and adaptation.  
 
12.3.2  This is not an exhaustive list and there may be a range of other services and 
facilities that could constitute infrastructure, which will be required to deliver this 
Plan.   
 
12.3.3  The Council will work with infrastructure  partners such as the Local Highways 
Authority, National  Highways England , the Local Educa tion Authority, the utility 
companies, NHS Bassetlaw CCG , and neighbouring local authorities to anticipate 
and bring forward the necessary infrastructure that is required in order to deliver 
the spatial strategy . 
 
12.3.4  Many of the site allocations, particularly the strategic sites may be in multiple 
ownership or require new or upgraded infrastructure. These issues  are more likely 
to be overcome, and the optimal use of sites realised, where development is 
brought forward comprehensively  in line with a masterplan.  To h elp ensure the 
community and stakeholders better understand the principles of each proposal , a 
masterplan should be  submitted for all site allocations, at the outline  planning 
application stage where relevant,  or alternatively at full planning application stage. 
The level of detail should be proportionate  with the nature and scale of 
develo pment proposed, taking account of site -specific requirements  identified by 
the site allocation policies and other policies in this Plan . Depending on individual 
circumstances , this may include: land uses, quantum and distribution of 
development; layout and design; access, circulation and parking; open space and 
landscaping; safeguarded land and infrastructure.  More detailed ma sterplan 
frameworks will be required for the strategic site allocations.  
 
12.3.5  A delivery s trategy will ensure  certainty on outcomes sought for each  site 
allocation. Coordination between landowners and other stakeholders, including 
infrastructure partner s, will help to ensure that proposals do not prejudice each 
other, or the wider aspirations of the spatial strategy and this Plan. Sites that are 
designed and brought forward com prehensively through the Local Plan  process 
will help to alleviate issues that  may arise through piecemeal development, and 
are more likely to maximise wider public benefits.  Where relevant, site promoters 
and developers should also , explore the approach to  long-term stewardship of 
assets with the local community.  For the strategic site allocations, a phasing plan 
will also be a requirement in line with site -specific policies.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
107 
 Bassetlaw Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
12.3.6  Planning for infrastructure is a key part of preparing this Local Plan. In particular , 
it is important to ensure that the infrastructure necessary to serve new 
development is provided in a timely and financially viable way. The starting point 
is the Infrastructure Delivery Plan Baseline Assessment 20203. This  establishes 
the capacity of exi sting infrastructure to accommodate the demands arising from 
the occupiers of new development.  
 
12.3.7  The Bassetlaw Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)4 supports this Plan and sets out 
the details of the infrastructure required to deliver the growth identified by this Local 
Plan; the costs, delivery partners and the timing of provision. Infrastructure 
required as part of the development of housing and emp loyment allocations is 
identified by the IDP and in site -specific policies.  
 
 The Bassetlaw Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)4 supports this Plan and sets out 
the details of the infrastructure required to deliver the spatial strategy. This will 
include de tails of the type of infrastructure required to deliver the growth identified 
by this Local Plan; the costs, delivery partners and the timing of provision. 
However, in some cases new development can be sited to enable new 
infrastructure in locations that w ill promote longer term sustainable growth. 
Infrastructure required as part of the development of housing and employment 
sites allocations is identified by the IDP and is set out in site -specific policies.   
 
12.3.8  The IDP is a living document – when apply ing the policies in this Local Plan the 
Council will be guided by the most up to date IDP, together with advice from 
infrastructure partners - and will be reviewed annually to measure progress. This 
will be reported through the Council’s Infrastructure Fun ding Statement.  
 
 Infrastructure Delivery  
12.3.9  Infrastructure can be provided in many different ways. The utility providers are 
private companies that charge for their services, so their upfront provision costs 
are off -set by what developers pay in term s of initial charges and by future 
revenues from billing new customers. The use of other infrastructure, such as new 
public roads, schools and health facilities may not be directly charged to users. 
Although some Government funding sources pay for elements  of this type of 
infrastructure, planning obligations (the Community Infrastructure Levy, developer 
contributions and provision sought through planning conditions) can be sought 
where the extra capacity required directly arises from a new development.  
 
12.3.10  Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) enables 
local planning authorities to negotiate with developers, so that they either directly 
build, or make financial contributions towards, infrastructure. The rules for 
negotiati ng developer contributions are subject to national legal tests concerning 
whether they are necessary in order to make the development acceptable in 
planning terms, directly related to the development, and fairly and reasonably 
related in scale and kind.  
 
12.3.11  Policy ST58 identifies that some infrastructure, such as open space may be 
provided on site, and in most cases will be secured through a planning condition. 
When infrastructure cannot be provided within, or is not appropriate to be located   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
108 
 on, the development site, developers will be expected to make a contribution to 
provide the infrastructure elsewhere. In these cases, infrastructure may be 
secured by developer contributions or through a Community Infrastructure Levy 
(CIL)  charge .  
 
12.3.1 2 In som e cases, development may be phased to ensure the provision is secured. 
Conditions attached to the planning permission or a S106 agreement will be used 
to secure phasing arrangements. The Council will use planning conditions or legal 
agreements to facilitat e the provision of strategic infrastructure. Where necessary 
this will involve suitable phasing of development and forward funding of its 
supporting infrastructure. In addition to developer funding, where necessary, the 
Council will collaborate with its pa rtners to lobby central Government and funding 
partners for additional funding sources for strategic infrastructure projects.  
 
12.3.13  In some cases, to support the level of growth planned, early delivery of strategic 
and necessary infrastructure may be required in advance of all contributions 
having been collected. It will therefore be necessary to obtain forward funding from 
alternative s ources and to collect developers' contributions retrospectively for 
these infrastructure projects. In order to appropriately recover forward -funding, 
when planning applications for development which will be enabled by and/or 
benefit from such infrastructur e come forward, the Council may seek retrospective 
financial contributions from all relevant development, at the appropriate 
contribution rate, even if those applications are not made until after the relevant 
infrastructure has been completed and/or fully or partially funded.  
 
12.3.14  The Council intends to progress the introduction of the Community Infrastructure 
Levy (CIL) as soon as possible after the Local Plan Examination. CIL is a charge, 
used to fund strategic  and local infrastructure projects for t he benefit of local 
communities. The CIL Charging Schedule is subject to independent Examination. 
CIL is payable upon the granting of planning consent. This enables the Council to 
raise funds from development and provide some certainty 'up front' about how  
much funding  developers will be expected to contribute.  
12.3.1 5 Policy ST58 recognises that the CIL and developer contributions may be pooled, 
allowing the funding of necessary infrastructure required to support a number of 
developments in a timely manner. The Council will pass a proportion of CIL 
receipts to parish/town councils in line with legislation.  
 
12.3.1 6 The Highways Authority’s preferred method for the delivery of highway 
infrastructure is through agreements  by planning conditions to be delivered  under 
Sections 38 and 278 of the Highways Act 1980. S106 agreements should be used 
to secure improvements to public transport and potentially traffic management 
and/or traffic calming such as those identified by Policy 27: Ordsall South. 
Addition ally, the County Council recognise that S106 agreement s should be used 
to secure appropriate and proportionate contributions to strategic transport 
improvements, particularly where more than one development may be contributing 
to the infrastructure  provisi on. Where the need for improvements to education 
provision are identified, the Local Education Authority will seek contributions in 
accordance with the Securing Education Contributions from Development, 20195 
(or subsequent updates).    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
109 
 12.3.1 7 Policy ST58 re quires developers to consider all the infrastructure requirements of 
a scheme. This may include improvements to roads in neighbouring Districts as a 
result of growth in Bassetlaw. The Council will continue to work closely with the 
Local Highways Authority,  National  Highways England  and neighbouring planning  
authorities, to ensure a coordinated approach to delivering such road 
improvements.  
 
12.3.1 8 The Whole Plan Viability Assessment 20226 reviewed the costs associated with 
the Local Plan policies in order to understand their individual and cumulative 
impact on development viability. It confirms that the approach to affordable 
housing in Policy ST29, together with the planning obligations developer 
contributions  sought  in this Local Plan and prioritised by the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan 20224 can be achievable for site allocations of less than 50 dwellings  with the 
proposed CIL rate identified in the draft CIL Charging Schedule 2021. Site 
allocations delivering 50 or more dwellings are expected to provide for significant 
infrastructure  on site and/or through developer contributions , so will be exempt 
from the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL).   
 
12.3.1 9 However, the Council recognises that there will be exceptional cases where a 
scheme may not be able to provide policy compliant affordable housing and 
developer contributions  planning obligations .  
 
12.3. 20 If the applicant considers that a policy complian t scheme cannot be afforded and 
that all possible steps have been taken to minimise the unmitigated impacts, Policy 
ST58 requires an open book viability assessment consistent with  national 
guidance7. Only where an independent review, funded by the developer supports 
the conclusions of the applicant's viability assessment will a non policy compliant 
scheme be considered.  
 
12.3. 21 If it is clear from an open book viability assessment that at the point o f application 
a policy compliant scheme is not possible, but the position could change - due to 
reductions in costs, increases in values and reduced risk - as a development is 
built out, Policy ST58 provides for use of a review mechanism in the S106 
agreem ent. This will ensure that developer contributions are maximised as a result 
of any future improvement in scheme viability. Additional provision will be set as 
that for a policy compliant scheme.  
 
12.3. 22 Further guidance on the implementation of Policy S T58 will be set out in the 
Affordable Housing and Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning 
Document that will be published following adoption of this Local Plan.  
 
POLICY  ST58: Provision and Delivery of Infrastructure  
 
1. The Council will work with neighbouring Local Authorities and infrastructure partners 
to ensure that the spatial strategy is supported by the timely , and where appropriate 
phased,  provision of necessary physical, social and green /blue  infrastructure and 
where appropriate its mainten ance.  
2. Proposals that form all or part of a site allocation must be accompanied by a 
masterplan  for the site  proportionate to the scale and nature of the allocation . The 
masterplan will be expected to :   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
110 
 a) set out how development will contribute to the delivery  of the objectives of the 
Local Plan and the site allocation;   
b) where relevant, demonstrate that the proposal will not prejudice the future 
development of other parts of the site and adjoining land, or otherwise 
compromise the delivery of the site allocati on an d outcomes sought for the area;  
c) contain a  delivery strategy , and where relevant, a phasing plan, that identifies 
how the development will be implemented and managed over its lifetime , and 
should  address any relevant matters to be resolved ; such as , land assembly and 
preparation, infrastructure requirements and likely need for developer 
contributions , where appropriate.  
d) identify , where relevant t he number /floorspace  and phasing of homes and/or 
employment development to be permitted and the infrastru cture delivery linked 
with the level and type of development proposed. Proposals should ensure that:  
i. infrastructure needs and delivery timescales have the support of the relevant 
infrastructure partner(s), informed by relevant  assessments and other relevant 
policies in this Plan;  
ii. the infrastructure required to support each phase should address the specific 
site constraints, potential impacts of each phase and harness the site 
opportunities, evidenced by the site’s delivery  strategy in accordance  to deliver 
the relevant infrastructure set out in with the most up to date  Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan 2021 or any successor4. 
 
3. Developers must consider the infrastructure requirements needed to support and 
serve the proposed developme nt. For residential development  of 10 dwellings or 
more , or a site of 0.5ha or more , and/or non residential schemes of 1000sqm or 
more, where additional infrastructure capacity is deemed to be necessary, 
mitigation must be agreed with the relevant infrastructure partner (s). S uch 
measures may include, though not exclusively:  
a) on site provision of new infrastructure (which may include building works and/or 
the provision of land);  
b) off-site capacity and/or  safety improvement works of infrastructure;  
c) financial contributions towards new or expanded facilities infrastructure ; 
 
4. Infrastructure will be sought by means of planning conditions attached to a planning 
permission, and/or developer contributions and/or t hrough the Bassetlaw 
Community Infrastructure  Levy  charge  or other mechanisms.  
5. Where necessary, developers may be required to make a proportionate contribution 
on a retrospective basis towards such infrastructure as may have been forward -
funded from other sources where the provision of that infrastru cture is necessary to 
facilitate and/or mitigate the impacts of their development (including the cumulative 
impacts of planned development).  
6. Where on -going maintenance and management of infrastructure is required, a 
management plan will be required to ensure the quality of the provision remains in 
the long term. This will be agreed through a S106 agreement or any other suitable 
mechanism ; 
7. In exceptional circumstances, where the developer contends th e developer 
contr ibutions sought, including that for affordable housing , would make a proposal 
unviable the Council will require an open book viability assessment in support  of the 
proposal .    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
111 
 8. The Council will consider use of a review mechanism in a S106 agreement to secure  
developer contributions in the following circumstances:  
a) for an approved scheme with a non -policy compliant offer ; 
b) for phased, larger scale developments ; 
c) for developments that have abnormal costs . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
112 
 Monitoring Framework  
 
A number of changes  are proposed , subject to consultation, within the Monitoring 
framework  section . For ease of consultation, the Monitoring Framework is shown within 
this Addendum with the relevant tracked changes. However, comments should only be 
made on the proposed changes which are subject to consultation. As previously stated, 
these changes will be shown as follows: new or deleted .  
 
This consultation is no t an opportunity to make comments on any unchanged parts of 
the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version .  
 
Equally this consultation is not intended to be an opportunity to make comments on the 
changes which are shown for information only; thes e changes are minor modifications 
which do not need to be subject to consultation before the Plan is submitted for its 
examination. These  are shown as: new or deleted .  
.   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
113 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
Policy  ST1 : Bassetlaw’s 
Spatial Strategy  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO6, SO8, 
SO10, SO11, SO13, SO14   Meetin g housing and employment needs for 
District 2020 -2038  2037 . 
 Failure to deliver 95% of the number of net 
new homes required over a 3 -year rolling 
period will require an Action Plan setting out 
actions to be taken by the Council and other 
parties.  
 Failure to deliver 85% of the number of net 
new homes required over a 3 -year rolling 
period will require a 20% buffer on the 
Council’s five year housing land supply.  
 Failure to deliver 75% of the number of net 
new homes required over a 3 -year rolling 
period will lead to the Council undertaking a 
full or partial review of the Local Plan.  
  10,638  10,047  dwellings by 2037  2038  or 591 units 
a year.  
 To deliver the following within the Plan period to  
2037  2038 :  
 Around 2569  2,769  dwellings in Worksop Outer 
Area.  
 Around 700 725 dwellings in Worksop Central 
Area.  
 Around 2128  2,281 dwellings in Retford;  
 Around 1758  1,881  in Harworth and Bircotes  
 Around 1496  1525  dwellings  from committed sites, 
allocated sites in made neighbourhood plans and 
75 from the South of  Ollerton Road site in Tuxford 
for the Large Rural Settlements  
 Around 1773  1793  from existing commitments and 
sites allocated in made neighbourhood plans for 
the Small Rural Settlements.  
 Around 500 590 dwellings at the Bassetlaw 
Garden Village.  
 21 10 pitches for Gypsy & Travellers by 2029 within 
the first five years  and a further 21 pitches beyond.  
 Creation of  approximately 9735 additional 
employment jobs   169.2 ha of land  between 2020 –
2038, through approximately 169ha of land  in the  
E(g), B2 and B8 Class Uses between 2020 -2038  
at the  General Employment Sites and 
approximately 118ha of land at the Apleyhead 
Strategic Employment Site to provide for sub -
regional/regional logistics development  
Policy ST2 : Residential 
Growth in Rural Bassetlaw  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO6, SO8, 
SO10, SO14   No. of dwellings permitted and completed in 
each settlement in the rural area.  
 No of dwellings completed and committed in 
made Neighbourhood Plans.  
 No of affordable housing dwellings permitted 
and completed in the rural area.  
 No of dwellings permitted and completed on  Large Rural Settlements: to  deliver at least 1,496  
1525  new dwellings  
 Small Rural Se ttlements: to deliver at least 1,773  
1793  new dwellings.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
114 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
brownfield sites.  
 No of dwellings permitted and completed 
through the conversion of existing buildings.  
 No of permitted and completed   homes on 
rural exception site.  
Policy ST3 : Bassetlaw 
Garden Village Design 
Framework  
 
 
 
Policy ST4: Bassetlaw 
Garden Village  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO6, 
SO7, SO8,  SO9, SO10, 
SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14   No of dwellings completed on Bassetlaw 
Garden Village.  
 Appropriate mix of  housing types and 
tenures.  
 Provision of a residential care home.  
 Provision of a public transport hub  
 Access to new employment land.  
 Provision of community hubs.  
 The provision of a multifunctional green and 
blue infrastructure network.  
 The enhance tree canopy coverage on the 
site, to include the retention of existing 
woodland.  
 To embed sustainable and inspirational 
environmentally -led design principles to 
ensure that landscape -led design quality can 
be achieved.  
 The development of a comprehensive 
masterplan, design guidance and parameter 
plans and accompanying strategies.   To deliver 590 500 net new dwellings by 2038 .  
 The construction of a mix of housing types, sizes 
and tenures to meet local needs including 
affordable housing, specialist housing and extra 
care accommodation, and, where appropriate, 
serviced plots for self -build and custom homes, 
with outdoor amenity space appropriate to property 
type.  
 The delivery of 10ha of employment land in the  
E(g), B2 and B8 Class Uses  and 5ha of land for 
employment generating uses and associated 
infrastructure in this plan period.  
 The proposed development at the Garden Village 
should deliver a scheme in accordance with a 
comprehensive masterplan framework and design 
code informed by the Bassetlaw Garden Village 
Vision Statement 2021. The masterplan framework 
must be agreed with the Local Planning Authority 
and approved by the Garden Village Consultative 
Group.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
115 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
Policy ST5: Worksop 
Central  
 
 
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO7, 
SO8, SO9, SO10, SO11, 
SO12, SO13, SO14   No of dwellings permitted and completed in 
the Worksop Central Area.  
 No of permitted and completed housing 
development on brownfield sites in the 
Central Area.  
 No of dwellings permitted and completed 
through the conversion of existing buildings.  
 Amount of permitted and completed 
employment land (ha) in the Worksop Central 
Area  
 Amount of permitted and completed 
employment development on brownfield sites 
in the Central Area (ha).  All specific targets to the indicators will be provided 
in the Worksop Central Area DPD.  
Policy ST6: Cottam Priority 
Regeneration Area  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4 , SO6, 
SO8, SO9, SO10, SO11, 
SO12, SO13, SO14   Creation of a masterplan for the site to be 
agreed with the Council.  All specific targets to the indicators will be provided 
with the Cottam Priority Regeneration Area 
Masterplan.  
Policy ST7: Provision of 
Land for Economic 
Development  
 
 SO1, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO8, 
SO12, SO14   Total floorspace (sqm) developed for 
economic purposes.  
 Total varied type of economic land use(s) 
completed.  
 Amount of vacant industrial floorspace.  
 Employment status by res idents and job type.  
 Average gross weekly earnings.  
 No and size of businesses at both Enterprise 
and Local Unit Level.   By 2038  2037 , creation of  169.2 ha of new 
employment land at General Employment Sites.  
 By 2038  2037 , creation of  118.7ha for strategic 
employment land  for logistics .  
Policy ST8: Site EM008 : 
High Marnham Green 
Energy Hub  
 SO1, SO3, SO4, SO6, SO8, 
SO10, SO11, SO12, SO13, 
SO14   Provision of land for employment uses within 
the energy and low carbon technology 
sectors and their supply chain .    A minimum of 38.4 ha of employment use 
related to Renewable and Low Carbon Energy 
Generation by 2037.   
Policy 9: SEM001: 
Apleyhead Junction, 
Worksop  
 
 SO1, SO3, SO8, SO11, 
SO12, SO13, SO14   The amount of employment land (ha) 
completed at Apleyhead  Junction, Worksop.  
 Sustainable construction on site.  
 Total floorspace (sqm) developed for logistics 
use on the Strategic Employment Site.   118.7ha strategic employment land available for  
logistics development to meet a sub -
regional/regional need.  
 Achieve  BREEAM very good -excellent standards.  
 
Policy ST10: Existing 
Employment Sites  SO1, SO3, SO4, SO6, SO8   Total new floorspace permitted or completed 
for employment uses.   The protection of the identified Existing 
Employment Sites  for new or additional   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
116 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
 
 
  Amount of existing employment land lost to 
non-economic uses (ha).  
 Total floorspace sqm constructed for E(g),  B 
use economic purposes on existing 
employment sites  development in the E(g), B2, B8 use classes or for 
small -scale ancillary uses required to suppor t 
employment development.   
Policy ST11 : Rural 
Economic Growth and 
Economic Growth Outside 
Employment Areas  
 
 SO1, SO3, SO4, SO6,  
SO7, SO8, SO10, SO13, 
SO14   Total floorspace permitted or completed for 
employment uses in Rural Bassetlaw.  
 The amount of employment permitted and 
completed on greenfield and brownfield sites 
in ha.  
 Amount of existing employment land lost to 
non-economic uses (ha).  
 The no of new or existing employment related 
developments in rural areas.   No target identified b y policy.  
Policy ST12 : Visitor 
Economy  
 
 
 SO1, SO3, SO4, SO6, SO 
7, SO8, SO10, SO13, SO14   The no of new or extensions to existing sites 
for camping, caravans and chalet, in terms of 
plots/pitches.  
 The no of existing and new tourist facilities, 
including visitor accommodation, within the 
Main Towns, Large and Small Rural 
Settlements.   Proposals for the creation of new or the expansion 
of existing visitor attractions will be supported 
where this would enhance the District’s visitor 
economy offer.  
Policy ST13: Town 
Centres, Local Centres, 
Local Shops and Services  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9   The use of specific Town Centre plans 
including the Worksop Central Development 
Plan Document, the Retford Town Centre 
Neighbourhood Plan and t he Harworth and 
Bircotes  Neighbourhood Plan and Town 
Centre Masterplan.  
 No and distribution of non -E(a) class uses at 
ground floor level in Primary Shopping Areas.  All specific targets to the indicators to be provided in 
the relevant Neighbourhood Plans and Masterplans 
for the Town Centres and the DPD for Worksop 
Central.  
Policy ST14 : Management 
of Town Centres  
 
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO7, 
SO8, SO9, SO13, SO14   The amount of E uses in the Primary 
Shopping Area in town centres.   
 Three new Local Centres at Peaks Hill Farm, 
Ordsall South and at the Bassetlaw Garden 
Village.  
 Total new convenience goods and floorspace 
in District.    The Council will continue to work in partnership 
with town centre stakeholders, infrastructure 
partners and developers to help meet the 
identified vision and objectives for each town 
centre, including through the regeneration of key 
sites and buildin gs for retail and other appropriate 
Main Town Centre Uses provided that the   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
117 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
 Total new comparison goods floorspace in 
District.  
 Total vacant shop units per town/local centre.  
 Land lost to non -town centre uses.  development is in accordance with other policies 
in this Local Plan.  
Policy ST15 : Provision of 
Land for  Housing  
 
  SO1, SO2, SO6   The provision of land for new homes in 
Bassetla w. 
 The number of allocated housing units 
completed.  
 Annual dwelling completions.   The delivery of approximately 3332 3011  net new 
dwellings on the housing allocation sites.  
Policy 16: HS1: Peaks Hill 
Farm, Worksop  
 SO1, SO2, SO3   Number of dwellings completed on Peaks Hill 
Farm.  
 Access to a variety of housing types.  
 Incorporation of a Local Centre  
 Provision of a community hub  
 Access to new employment land (ha).  
 Protect existing woodland and important 
hedgerows.  
 The provision of publicly accessible open 
space.   To have approximately 1080  1000  net new 
dwellings completed by the 2038  2037   
 The construction of a range of housing types, 
sizes and tenures.  
 Incorporation of a Local Centre, with a 
convenience goods store.  
 Incorporation  of a community hub.  
 The provision of at least 5ha of employment land  
use to 2038  2037  
 Protect 8.1ha of existing woodland and important 
hedgerows  
 Provision of at least 18.3 7.6ha publicly accessible 
open space.  
 Appropriate provision of serviced land to 
accommodate a 2.0 Form Entry secondary school 
and associated supporting infrastructure.  
Policy 17: HS2: Bassetlaw  
Pupil Referral Centre, 
Worksop  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO8, SO9, 
SO14   No of dwellings completed on Bassetlaw 
Pupil Referral Centre allocation.  
 Access to a variety of housing types.   To have approximately 20 net new dwellings 
completed by 2038  2037  
 The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures.  
Policy 18: HS3: Radford 
Street, Worksop  
 
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO8, SO9, 
SO13, SO14   No of dwellings completed on Radford Street 
allocation.  
 Access to a variety of housing types.   To have approximately 120 net new affordable and 
low cost dwellings completed by 2038  2037 . 
 The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures.  
Policy 19: HS4: Former 
Manton Primary School, SO1, SO2, SO4, SO8, 
SO12, SO13, SO14   No of dwellings completed on Former Manton 
Primary School allocation.   To have approximately 100 net new dwellings 
completed by 2038  2037    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
118 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
Worksop  
  Access to a variety of housing types.  
 The provision of multifunctional publicly 
accessible ope n space   The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures.  
 Provision of approximately 1.15ha of 
multifunctional open space on site to incorporate 
the existing 0.7 ha of onsite  amenity open space.  
Policy 20: HS5: Talbot 
Road, Worksop  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO8, SO9, 
SO12, SO14   Number of dwellings completed on Talbot 
Road allocation.  
 Access to a variety of housing types.   To have approximately 15 net new dwellings 
completed by 2038  2037  
 The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures.  
Policy 21: HS7: Trinity 
Farm, Retford  
 
 SO1, SO2, SO8, SO9, 
SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14   Number of dwellings completed on Trinity 
Farm allocation  
 Access to a variety of housing types.  
 The provision of multifunctional publicly 
accessible open space.  
 The provision of a community woodland.  
  To have approximately 305 244 net new dwellings 
completed by 2038  2037  
 The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures.  
 The provision of 1.5ha of multifunctional publicly 
accessible open space.  
 Provision of at least 0.5 ha community woodland . 
Policy 22: HS8:  
Milnercroft, Retford  S01, SO2, SO4, SO8,  
SO9, SO11, SO12, SO13, 
SO14   No of dwellings completed at the Milnercroft 
allocation  
 Access to a variety of affordable housing 
types   To have approximately 5 net new affordable 
dwellings completed by  2038  2037  
Policy 23: HS9: Former 
Elizabethan High School, 
Retford  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO12, SO13, SO14   No of dwellings completed on the Former 
Elizabethan School allocation  
 Access to a variety of housing types   To have approximately 46 net new dwellings 
completed by 2038  2037  
 The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures  
Policy 24: HS10: St 
Michael’s View, Retford  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO8, SO9, 
SO11, SO13, SO14   No of dwellings completed on the former St 
Michael’s View allocation  
 Access to a variety of housing types   To have approximately 20 net new apartment 
dwellings completed by 2038  2037  
 The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures.  
Policy 25: HS11: Fairy  
Grove,  Retford  
 
 SO1, SO2, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO13, SO14   No of dwellings completed on the Fairy Grove 
allocation  
 Access to a variety of housing types   To have approximately 61 net new dwellings 
completed by  2038  2037  
 The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures.  
Policy 26: HS12: Station 
Road, Retford  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO13, SO14   No of dwellings completed on the Station 
Road allocation  
 Access to a variety of housing types   To have approximately 5 net new dwellings 
completed by 2038  2037    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
119 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
Policy 27: HS13: Ordsall 
South , Retford  
 
 SO1,SO2, SO7, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO11, SO12, SO13, 
SO14   No of dwellings completed on Ordsall South 
allocation  
 Access to a variety of housing types.  
 Provision of a country park and community 
woodland.  
 Provision of high quality recreational open 
space.  
 Provision of a Local Centre.  
  To have approximately 890 800 net new dwellings 
completed by 2038  2037  
 The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures including:  5% of dwellings to be 
designed to Building Regulations standard M4(3) 
to be accessible to those in wheelchairs; extra care 
accommodation; and  where appropriate serviced 
plots for self -build and custom homes.  
 The creation of a  23ha country park and 
community woodland  Suitable Alternative Natural 
Greenspace . 
 The provision of 4ha high quality recreational open 
space.  
 Include a Local Centre with a convenience goods 
store.  
 Provision of a health hub  on site . 
 Provision of a built community facility  on site .  
 Appropriate provision of serviced land to 
accommodate a 1.0 Form Entry primary school 
and early years facility and associated supporting 
infrastructure.  
Policy 28: HS14: Ollerton 
Road,  Tuxford  
 SO1, SO2, SO6, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO11, SO13, SO14   No of dwellings completed on Ollerton Road 
allocation  
 Access to a variety of housing types.  
  To have approximately 75 net new dwellings 
completed by 2038  2037  
 The construction of a range of housing  types, sizes 
and tenures.  
Policy ST29 : Affordable 
Housing  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO8, SO9   No of affordable housing completed in the 
District.  
 No of affordable social rent and home 
ownership units in the District.  
 Type of affordable housing permitted and 
comple ted in the District.  
 Average house prices.   Where affordable housing is provided, provision 
for 15% of dwellings on brownfield sites should be 
for affordable housing.  
 Where affordable housing is provided, provision 
for 25% of dwellings on greenfield sites should be 
for affordable housing.  
 Where affordable housing is provided, 10% of 
dwellings should be for affordable home ownership  
Policy ST30 : Housing Mix  
 SO1, SO2, SO4, SO5, SO6, 
SO7, SO8, SO9, SO12   Annual dwelling completions  
 Population projections and  forecasts.  
 No of dwellings completed for self and custom  The construction of a range of housing types, sizes 
and tenures.  
 Delivery of serviced self -build plots to meet the   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
120 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
build  
 No of dwellings delivered by type.  
 Mix of new housing delivered.  needs of the households on the Self Build and 
Custom Housebuilding Register.  
 On housing allocations of 100 dwellings or more, 
2% of the proportion of developable plots should 
be set aside for self -build and custom 
housebuilding.  
Policy ST31 : Specialist 
Housing  
 SO1, SO2, SO5, SO8, SO9, 
SO13, SO14   No of specialist housing for older people 
provided in Bassetlaw District.  
 No of wheelchair accessible dwellings 
provided in the District.  
 No of further spaces in nursing and residential 
care homes provided in the District.  
 No of accessible dwellings provided in the 
District.   The provision of all market dwellings to meet the 
optional M42 optional accessible and adaptable 
Building Regulations  standard by 2038  2037  
Policy ST32:  Sites for 
Gypsies and Travellers  
 
 SO1, SO2, SO6, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO11, SO12, SO13, 
SO14   No of permanent pitches for gypsies and 
travellers permitted.  
 Net additional transit and residential pitches 
(Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling 
Showpeople) permitted and completed to 
meet identified needs.   Provision for a minimum of 10 permanent Gypsy 
and Traveller residential pitches by 2025; with a 
further 30 by 203 7. 
 The provision for 42 pitches by 2038, with 
approximately 21 pitches delivered by 20 29 
Policy 33 : Houses in 
Multiple Occupation (HMO)  
 
  SO1, SO2, SO4, SO7, SO8, 
SO9, SO13, SO14   No of completed multiple occupation housing 
in Worksop Article 4 Area.  
 The number of permitted change of use from 
single residential unit to HMO in Bassetlaw.   In Worksop Central Area's Article 4 Direction Area, 
applications for Homes in Multiple Occupation will 
not be supported unless the proportion of houses 
in multiple occupat ion (including the proposal) 
does not exceed 10% of the total dwelling stock 
within 100 metre radius of the application site and 
the application site does not locate a C3 dwelling 
unit between two HMO properties.  
 Confirmation of Article 4 for Worksop Centr al Area  
Policy 34 : Agricultural and 
Forestry Workers Dwellings  SO1, SO2 SO3, SO6, SO8   No of Agricultural or Forestry dwellings 
completed or removed across the District.    No target identified by policy.  
Policy ST35 : Design 
Quality  
 
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4,  SO5, 
SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO11, SO12, SO13, 
SO14   Referenced within other policy indicators.   The Bassetlaw Design Code will be published as 
part of the Design Quality SPD following adoption 
of this Local Plan.  
Policy 36:  Shopfronts, SO1, SO3, SO, SO7, SO8,  No target identified by policy.   No target identified by policy.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
121 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
Signage and Security  SO10  
Policy ST37: Landscape 
Character  
 
 SO1, SO6, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO11   The amount of development permitted or 
completed in Green Gaps District wi de.  The need to mitigate against impacts to landscape 
character will be determined on a site by site basis 
during the planning process.  
Policy ST38: Green Gaps  
 
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, 
SO6,SO8, SO9, SO10, 
SO11, SO12   The amount of development permitted or 
completed in Green Gaps District wide.   To retain Green Gaps and preserve their integrity.  
Policy ST39:  Green and 
Blue Infrastructure  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO6, SO8, SO9, SO10, 
SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14   No of development permitted or completed 
within 30 metres of a major green corridor.  
 No of development permitted or completed 
within 15 metres of a minor green corridor.  
  Ensure major corridors have a minimum buffer of 
30 metres.  
 Ensure minor corridors have a minimum buffer of 
15 metres.  
Policy ST40 : Biodiversity 
and Geodiversity  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, 
SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14   The amount of new space for biodiversity net 
gain.  
 The amount of land lost with high biodiversity 
value.  
 No of losses/ creations of wildlife 
designations.  
 No of trees within development site with 
preservation orders in place.  
 Percentage of permitted  development 
permitted  providing biodiversity value e.g. 
green/brown roof, living wall, native planting . 
 The amount of protected birds identified 
through surveying within the Sherwood 
Forest ppSPA within a 200m buffer of the A57   All new development to secure at least 10% 
biodiversity net gain.  
Policy ST40a: 
Recreational Disturbance 
Avoidance and Mitigation 
Strategy (RAMS)  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO6, SO7, SO8, SO 9, 
SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14   The number of new residential development 
applications within the Clumber Park SSSI 
Zone of Influence  
 The amount of developer contributions 
collected towards delivery of the RAMS 
annually  
 The amount of Suitable Alternative Natural 
Greenspace provided at strategic sites 
annually   Within  the Clumber Park SSSI Zone of Influence 
for new residential development to  mitigate 
adverse recreational impact through the Clumber 
Park SSSI interim RAMS strategy.     Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
122 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
Policy 41: Trees, 
Woodlan ds and Hedgerows  
 
 
 SO1, SO4, SO5, SO8, SO9, 
SO10, SO11, SO12, SO14   The amount of trees, woodland and 
hedgerows lost or created due to new 
development.   The Council will protect existing trees, woodland 
and hedgerows and secure additional planting that 
increases canopy cover in the interests of 
biodiversity, amenity and climate change 
adaptation.  
Policy ST42 :  The Historic 
Environment.  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, S O6, SO7, 
SO8, SO10, SO11   The amount of development permitted or 
completed that will adversely affect heritage 
assets.   Reduce/ mitigate the impact of developments on 
heritage assets.  
 The historic environment will be conserved and 
enhanced, sensitively manag ed, enjoyed and 
celebrated for its contribution to sustainable 
communities.  
Policy 43: Designated and 
Non-Designated Heritage 
Assets  
 
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO6, 
SO7, SO8, SO10, SO11   The amount of development permitted or 
completed that will adversely affect heritage 
assets per settlement.  
 No of listed buildings at risk.  
 No and percentage of Listed Buildings (all 
grades), Scheduled Monuments, Registered 
Parks and Gardens, Registered B attlefields, 
conservation areas and heritage assets at 
Risk.  
 No of historic buildings repaired and brought 
back into use.   Aim for no increase in the no of designated assets 
on the Heritage at Risk Register.  
Policy ST44 : Promoting 
Healthy, Active Lifestyl es  
 
 
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9. 
SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14   No of new allotments permitted during the 
planning period (up to  2038  2037 ).  
 Examination of a range of factors for the 
District, including: the indices of deprivation; 
access to se rvices; method of travel to work; 
journeys made by walking, cycling or public 
transport; road casualties; life expectancy; 
residents with limiting long -term illness; 
childhood obesity; air quality; student 
attainment at school; economic activity and 
inacti vity.  
 Street level crime statistics.   Residential sites of 50 or more dwelling to submit 
a Rapid Health Impact Assessment Matrix.  
 Working in partnership with the health authorities 
to maintain and where practicable improve access 
to the full range of health services for residents, 
including through the co -location of health facilities 
with other community facilities, open space and 
sports facilities, through multi -purpose buildings 
and sites.  
Policy ST45: Protection 
and Enhancement of SO1, S03, SO4, SO5, SO6, 
SO7, SO8, SO9, SO13,  Amount of development permitted or 
completed that results in the loss of  In accordance with the needs as identified in the 
Local Plan evidence base. These will be   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
123 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
Community Facilities  SO14  community facilities per settlement.  
 The amount of development permitted or 
completed that results in the gain of 
community facilities per settlement.  determined on a  site by site basis during the 
planning process.  
Policy ST46:  Delivering 
Quality, Accessible Open 
Space  
 
 SO1, SO4, SO5, SO6,  
SO8, SO9, SO11, SO14   No. of new green spaces/ play areas provided  
 Amount of new green spaces/ play areas 
provided (ha)  
 No of ope n spaces receiving Green Flag 
Award.   Provision of 0.61ha of parks per 1,000 people 
throughout the district.  
 0.14ha of children’s play space per 1,000 children 
throughout the district  
 1.03ha of amenity greenspace per 1,000 people 
throughout the district.  
 2.4ha of natural and semi natural greenspace per 
1,000 people throughout the district.  
 Provision of 4 .46ha of publicly accessible open per 
1,000 people.  
Policy ST47: Promoting 
Sport and  Recreation  
 SO1, SO8, SO9, SO11, 
SO14   The amount of new play ing pitches provided 
per settlement  
 The amount of playing pitches lost without 
replacement per settlement.   In accordance with the needs as identified in the 
Local Plan evidence base. These will be 
determined on a site by site basis during the 
planning process.  
Policy 48:  Protecting 
Amenity  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO8, SO9   No target identified by policy.   The need to mitigate against impacts to amenity 
will be determined on a site by site basis during the 
planning process.  
Policy 49: Contaminated 
and Unstable Land  
 SO1, SO4, SO8, SO9, 
SO11   The amount of contaminated land reclaimed 
and brought back into effective use.   Allocation of 100ha of  brownfield land for 
regeneration and re -use, including the former 
power station site at High Marnham . 
Policy ST50: Reducing 
Carbon Emissions, Climate 
Change Mitigation and 
Adaptation  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO5, SO6, 
SO8, SO9, SO12, SO13, 
SO14   The amount of trees provided to contribute to 
carbon offsetting.  
 The amount of electric charging points 
available per major development.   
 The amount of schemes submitted with an Air 
Quality Management Plan   The provision of 5 trees per new dwelling or per 
1000sqm of non -residential floorspace for the first 
5 years of the Plan.  
 All proposals, including the change of use of 
existing buildings and s paces, should seek to 
reduce carbon and energy impacts of their design 
and construction.  
Policy ST51 : Renewable 
Energy Generation  
 SO1, SO3, SO4, SO6, SO8, 
SO10, SO11, SO12   Total level of renewable energy gener ated 
(MW)  annually . 
 No. of renewable and low carbon energy 
applications granted   In accordance with national policy, this Local Plan 
seeks to reduce greenhouse gases in accordance 
with the provisions of the Climate Change Act 
2008. In 2021, the UK Government committed to 
cut Greenhouse gas emissions by 78% by 2035   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
124 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
 No. of renewable and low carbon energy 
applications developed  
 The location of current and proposed sites to 
examine cumulative impacts.  
 No of development permitted or completed 
that utilises existing structures to allow 
renewable energy generation.   and to achieve net zero by 2050.  
Policy ST52:  Flood Risk 
and Drainage  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO6, SO8, SO11, SO12, 
SO14   The amount of development permitted or 
completed in a Flood Zones 2 and 3.  
 Number of Planning Applications Granted 
with a Sustained Objection from the 
Environment Agency.  
 Residential properties flooded from main 
rivers.  
 Percentage or number of permitted 
developments incorporating SuDS.   All proposals are required to consider and,  where 
necessary, mitigate the impacts of the proposed 
development on flood risk, on -site and off -site, 
commensurate with the scale and impact of the 
development.  
 Requirement that all development (where 
appropriate) incorporate SuDS in accordance with 
national standards.  
Policy ST53:  Protecting 
Water Quality and 
Management  
  SO1, SO4, SO8, SO9, 
SO11, SO12   Percentage of new development 
incorporating water efficiency measures.   In line with the objectives of the Water Framework 
Directive, the quantity and q uality of surface and 
groundwater bodies will be protected and where 
possible enhanced in accordance with the Humber 
River Basin Management Plan.  
Policy ST54 : Transport 
Infrastructure and 
Improvement Schemes  SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO8, SO9, SO13, SO14   Significant improvements made to the 
existing transport infrastructure throughout 
Bassetlaw District.  
  See Policy ST54 for a full list of projects.   
 The Council will work with neighbouring Local 
Authorities and infrastructure partners to ensure 
that the spatial strategy is supported by the timely, 
proportionate and where relevant phased 
provision of necessary transport infrastructure.  
 Requirement that  all transport infrastructure 
required as a consequence of Local Plan growth is 
secured via planning condition, planning 
obligation, Community Infrastructure Levy charge 
or other suitable mechanism  
Policy ST55: Promoting  
Sustainable Transport and 
Active T ravel  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO6, SO8, SO9, SO12, 
SO13, SO14   The amount of public and sustainable 
transport schemes provided by new 
development.   
 The number of agreed Travel Plans in  In accordance with the needs as identified in the 
Local Pl an evidence base. These will be 
determined on a site by site basis during the 
planning process.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
125 
 Policy  Link to Strategic 
Objectives  Indicator  Target  
operation.  
Policy ST56:  Safeguarded 
Land  
 
 SO1, SO5 SO8, SO13, 
SO14   Protection of land to deliver transport 
infrastructure in the next plan period   Land is safeguarded, as identified on the Polices 
Map, to support the delivery of the following 
infrastructure schemes:  
 land for an east -west distributor link road between 
Blyth Road and Carlton Road at site HS1: Peaks 
Hill Farm in accordance with Policy 16;  
 land for a link ro ad at Harworth & Bircotes between 
Blyth Road and Scrooby Road through the former 
Harworth Colliery site;  
 land to accommodate a new railway station, 
transport hub and associated infrastructure at the 
Bassetlaw Garden Village in accordance with 
Policy ST4;  
 Site to accommodate an integrated primary and 
secondary school and associated infrastructure at 
the Bassetlaw Garden Village in accordance with 
Policy ST4;  
 land between Shireoaks and Worksop to 
accommodate water storage as part of the wider 
Worksop Flood Ma nagement Scheme in 
accordance with Policy ST52.  
Policy ST57 : Digital 
Infrastructure  
 
 S01, SO3, SO5, SO6, SO14   The percentage of the District covered by 
Superfast Broadband.   All new dwellings, including conversions must be 
designed and constructed in a way that enables 
them to meet or exceed the Government’s Building 
Regulations relating to provision of high speed 
fibre to the premises or any subsequent national 
equivalent standar d should the Building 
Regulations and/or national policy be reviewed in 
the future.   
Policy ST58: Provision and 
Delivery of Infrastructure  
 SO1, SO2, SO3, SO14   The amount of total CIL contributions 
annually.  
 The amount of developer contributions 
secured annually through planning 
obligations.    The Council will work with neighbouring Local 
Authorities and infrastructure partners to ensure 
that the spatial strategy is supported by the timely 
provision of necessary physical, social and 
green/blue infrastructu re and where appropriate its 
maintenance.    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
126 
 APPENDIX 1: SUMMARY OF CHANGES  
 
This appendix includes a schedule of  the proposed changes which are subject to consultation as part of this Addendum to the 
Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037: Publication Version.  
 
Section  Para/Policy  Modification  Modification Detail  Reason for 
Modification  
4.0: Bassetlaw 
Vision and 
Objectives  Introductory 
sentence, para 
4.1, 4.10  and  Extension to the plan 
period  Reference  to the previous end date of the plan 
period (2037) have been replaced by  the new 
end date of 2038  For compliance with 
national policy  
4.0: Bassetlaw 
Vision and 
Objectives  4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.14 -
4.16 and 
Objectives 1, 3 
and 12  Changes to the 
wording of parts of 
the vision and three 
objectives  Changes made to the Vision and Objectives to 
take account of the changes to the proposed 
employment allocations in Policy ST7; 
specifically, the removal of the Former 
Marnham Power Station site, the inclusion of 
Bevercotes Colliery and to clarify the use o f 
Apleyhead; and to take into account the new 
designation at Marnham for zero carbon and 
renewable energy generation in Policy ST52  To reflect the changes 
within the housing, 
employment and 
renewable energy policies  
5.0: Bassetlaw 
Spatial Strategy  5.1.6 , 5.1.19, 
5.1.31  Extension to the plan 
period  Reference  to the previous end date of the plan 
period (2037) have been replaced by  the new 
end date of 2038  For compliance with 
national policy  
5.0: Bassetlaw 
Spatial Strategy  5.1.20, 5.1.25 -
5.1.27, 5.1.34, 
5.1.37 -5.1.38, 
5.1.41, 5.1.45, 
5.1.47, 5.1.49, 
5.1.52, 5.1.55, 
5.1.59 -5.1.60 and 
Figures 7 and 8  Changes to the 
wording , housing 
numbers and 
employment land 
developable area  Changes made to Policy ST1: Spatial Strategy 
to take account of the changes to the proposed 
employment allocations in Policy ST7; 
specifically, the removal of the Former 
Marnham Power Station site, the inclusion of 
Bevercotes Colliery , the amendment to the  
Trinity Farm developable area  and to clarify the 
use of Apleyhead; to take into account changes 
to the proposed housing numbers in Policy 
ST15, changes to the housing supply as a 
consequence of extending the plan period and  
changes to the proposed number of pitches for To reflect the changes 
within the housing, 
employment and 
renewable energy policies    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
127 
 Section  Para/Policy  Modification  Modification Detail  Reason for 
Modification  
gypsy and travellers as a consequence of 
extending the plan period  
5.0: Bassetlaw 
Spatial Strategy  New Figure 6 (Key 
Diagram)  Removal of 
Marnham Energy 
Hub Change made to the Key Diagram to reflect the 
change to the  proposed employment allocation  
in Policy ST7 specifically, the removal of the 
Former Marnham Power Station site  To reflect the changes 
within the employment 
policies  
5.0: Bassetlaw 
Spatial Strate gy 5.1.12 -5.1.13, 
5.1.15, 5.1.42  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
employment sites 
and delivery  Proposed changes to the supporting text to 
take into account the proposed change in 
Policy ST1 and Policy ST7 in relation to the 
employment site allocations ; specifically the 
removal of the Former Marnham Power Station 
site and to clarify the use of Apleyhead  To reflect the changes 
within the employment 
policies  
5.0: Bassetlaw 
Spatial Strategy  5.1.29  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
gypsy and traveller 
sites and pitch 
supply  Proposed changes to the supporting text to 
take into account the proposed change in 
Policy ST1 to the plan period in relation to the 
gypsy and traveller supply  To reflect the changes 
within the gypsy and 
traveller policy  
5.0: Bassetlaw 
Spatial Strategy  Policy ST1  Changes to the 
wording, housing 
numbers and 
employment land 
developable area  Changes made to Policy ST1: Spatial Strategy 
to take account of the changes to the proposed 
employment allocations in Policy ST7; 
specifically, the rem oval of the Former 
Marnham Power Station site, the inclusion of 
Bevercotes Colliery , the change to the 
developable land at Trinity Farm  and to clarify 
the use of Apleyhead; to take into account 
changes to the proposed housing numbers in 
Policy ST15, change s to the housing supply as 
a consequence of extending the plan period 
and changes to the proposed number of pitches 
for gypsy and travellers as a consequence of 
extending the plan period  To reflect the changes 
within the housing, 
employment and 
renewable e nergy policies  
5.3 Bassetlaw 
Garden Village  5.3.7, 5.3.11 -
5.3.13, 5.3.15 -Changes to the 
wording relating to Proposed changes to the supporting text to 
take into account new evidence, the proposed To reflect outputs of new 
evidence  and demonstrate   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
128 
 Section  Para/Policy  Modification  Modification Detail  Reason for 
Modification  
5.3.20, 5.3.30 -
5.3.31, 5.3.34 -
5.3.35, 5.3.38 -
5.3.43  recreational impact, 
archaeology, 
infrastructure, 
masterplanning and 
delivery  change in Policy ST3 to clarify the approach to 
be taken to masterplanning the Garden Village, 
and the  proposed change in Policy ST4  to be 
taken to securing infrastructure in this plan 
period and thereafter  to support the level of 
development proposed in each phase.  deliverability of a self -
sustaining settlement  
5.3 Bassetlaw 
Garden Village  5.3.36  Extension to the plan 
period  Referenc e to the previous end date of the plan 
period (2037) have been replaced by  the new 
end date of 2038  For compliance with 
national policy  
5.3 Bassetlaw 
Garden Village  Policy ST3  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
masterplanning  Proposed change  to Policy ST3 to clarify the 
approach to be taken to masterplanning the 
Garden Village  For clarification  
5.3 Bassetlaw 
Garden Village  Policy ST4  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
recreational impact, 
archaeology, 
infrastructure, 
masterplanning and 
delivery Proposed change in Policy ST4 to reflect new 
evidence, and to clarify the approach to be 
taken to securing infrastructure in this plan 
period and the next to support the level of 
development proposed in each phase  To reflect outputs of new 
evidence  and demonstrate 
deliverability of a self -
sustaining settlement  
6.1 Promoting 
Economic Growth  6.1.6  Extension to the plan 
period  Reference  to the previous end date of the plan 
period (2037) have been replaced by  the new 
end date of 2038  For compliance with 
national policy  
6.1 Promoting 
Economic Growth  6.1.7 -6.1.13  Changes to the 
wording detailing the 
economic strategy 
for the district  Proposed changes to the supporting text to 
take into account the proposed change in 
Policy ST7 to clarify the approach taken  to the 
economic strategy and the employment land 
supply  To better reflect links to 
the Council Plan and 
evidence  
6.1 Promoting 
Economic Growth  6.1.15 -6.1.16, 
6.1.20, 6.1.23 -
6.1.24  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
employment sites 
and delivery  Proposed changes  to the supporting text to 
take into account the proposed change in 
Policy ST7 in relation to the employment site 
allocations specifically the removal of the 
Former Marnham Power Station site, addition 
of Bevercotes Colliery, amendment to the To reflect the changes to 
the proposed employment 
allocations  
   Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
129 
 Section  Para/Policy  Modification  Modification Detail  Reason for 
Modification  
Trinit y Farm developable area and to clarify the 
use of Apleyhead and its proposed catchment 
area, and to provide an up to date employment 
land supply position  
6.1 Promoting 
Economic Growth  New Fig ure 12A  New figure to clarify 
the logistics market 
area To clarify the extent of the logistics property 
market area  To reflect the changes to 
the proposed employment 
policy for Apleyhead  
 
6.1 Promoting 
Economic Growth  6.1.22  Expected adoption 
date of the  Local 
Plan Reference to the previous adoption date (2022) 
have been replaced by  the new end date of 
2023  For compliance with the 
Local Development 
Scheme  
6.1 Promoting 
Economic Growth  Policy ST7 Part 4, 
5 & 6  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
employmen t sites 
and delivery  Proposed changes to ST7 to clarify the 
approach to general employment sites; 
specifically available land and developable land 
in this plan period as a consequence of High 
Marnham being deleted, the inclusion of 
Bevercotes Colliery, change to developable 
land at Trinity Farm, the ongoing development 
of Snape Lane, Harworth and also the 
approach to the strategic employment site at 
Apleyhead  To reflect the changes to 
the proposed employment 
allocations at Marnham, 
Trinity Farm, Bevercotes 
and Apleyhead  
 
6.1 Promoting 
Economic Growth  Policies Map  Amendment to 
Policies M ap to 
reflect changes to 
proposed 
employment 
allocations  Amend Policies Map to delete reference to 
EM008 High Marnham Green Energy Hub, to 
add reference to EM00 8a Bevercotes  Colliery 
and to amend the boundary for EM00 6 Trinity 
Farm  To reflect the changes to 
the proposed employment 
allocations at Marnham, 
Trinity Farm, Bevercotes  
7.1 Housing 
Distribution  Policy ST15  Summary of site 
allocation net 
capacity as a result 
of exte nded plan 
period  Peaks Hill Farm – 1000  1080 by 2038  
Trinity Farm – 244, 305 by 2038  
Ordsall South – 800, 890 by 2038  
Bassetlaw Garden Village – 500, 590 by 2038  To re flect the new plan 
period    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
130 
 Section  Para/Policy  Modification  Modification Detail  Reason for 
Modification  
7.2 Peaks Hill Farm  7.2.2  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
masterplanning  Proposed changes to the supporting text to 
take into account the proposed change in 
Policy 16 to clarify the approach to be taken to 
masterplanning Peaks Hill Farm, and to be 
taken to securing infrastructure in this plan 
period.  To ensure deliverability of 
a strategic site  
7.2 Peaks Hill Farm  7.2.4 , Policy 16  Change to the yield 
for Peaks Hill Farm  
 Proposed changes to housing numbers as a 
consequence of the extended plan period  To reflect the amendment 
of the yield for the 
proposed hous ing 
allocation  
 
7.2 Peaks Hill Farm  Policy 16  Changes to the 
wording relating to, 
infrastructure and 
delivery  Proposed changes to Policy 16 to clarify the 
approach to be taken to infrastructure delivery 
and the type of infrastructure sought and the 
mecha nism by which it will be sought; 
specifically for transport infrastructure and 
community facilities  To ensure deliverability of 
a strategic site  
7.8 Trinity F arm 7.8.2 , Policy 21  Change to the yield 
for Trinity Farm  
 Proposed changes to supporting text to 
housing numbers as a consequence of the 
extended plan period  To reflect the amendment 
of the yield for the 
proposed housing 
allocation  
 
7.8 Trinity Farm 7.8.3, 7.8.10  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
masterplanning  Proposed changes to the supporting text to 
take into account the proposed change in 
Policy 21 to clarify the approach to be taken to 
masterplanning Trinity Farm, and to be taken to 
securing infrastructure in this plan period.  To ensure deliverability of 
a strategic site  
7.8 Trinity F arm Policy 21  Changes to the 
wording relating to, 
infrastructure and 
delivery  Proposed changes to Policy 21 to clarify the 
approach to be taken to infrastructure delivery 
and the type of infrastructure sought and the 
mechanism by which it will be sought; 
specifically for transport infrastructure and open 
space  To ensure deliverability of 
a strategic site    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
131 
 Section  Para/Policy  Modification  Modification Detail  Reason for 
Modification  
7.14 Ordsall South  7.14.3, Policy 27  Change to the yield 
for Ordsall South  
 Proposed changes to Policy 27 to housing 
numbers  as a consequence of the extended 
plan period  To reflect the amendment 
of the yield for the 
proposed housing 
allocation  
7.14 Ordsall South  7.4.14, Policy 27  Changes to the 
wording relating to 
offsetting sports 
facilities  Proposed change to supporting tex t to clarify 
the approach to be taken to offsetting the loss 
of land at Retford Golf Course  To facilitate deliverability 
of a strategic site  
7.14 Ordsall South  7.4.12, Policy 27  Changes to the 
wording relating to, 
infrastructure and 
delivery  Proposed changes to Policy 27 to clarify the 
approach to be taken to infrastructure delivery 
and the type of infrastructure sought and the 
mechanism by which it will be sought; 
specifically for transport infrastructure, open 
space and education  To ensure deliverabi lity of 
a strategic site  
7.20 Gypsy & 
Traveller 
Accommodation  7.20.2, 7.20.5, 
Policy ST32  Changes to reflect up 
to date evidence  Proposed change to supporting text to 
appropriately reference up to date evidence  To reflect up to date 
evidence  
7.20 Gypsy & 
Traveller 
Accommodation  7.20.3, Policy 
ST32  Change to the yield 
for Hayton and E 
Drayton, allocation of 
new sites  
 Proposed changes to Policy ST32 to pitch 
numbers as a consequence of the extended 
plan period, change in capacity on identified 
site alloc ations and the introduction of two 
additional permanent gypsy sites specifically at 
Blyth and Elkesley  To reflect the amendment 
of the yield for two 
proposed sites , to reflect 
outputs of new evidence 
and to ensure the plan 
meets identified needs  
7.20 Gypsy & 
Traveller 
Accommodation  7.20.6 -7.20.7 & 
Policy ST32  Changes to wording 
to relating to pitch 
numbers  Proposed changes to the supporting text to 
clarify the approach to pitch numbers and 
design of sites.  To reflect up to date 
evidence  
7.20 Gypsy & 
Traveller 
Accommodation  Policies Map  Amendment to the 
Policies Map, to 
reflect additional new 
sites Amend Policies Map to identify new sites at 
Elkesley and N Blyth  To reflect the changes to 
the proposed gypsy and 
traveller site allocations  
8.6 Biodiversity & 
Geodiversity  8.6.3, 8.6.7 -
8.6.17, Policy 
ST40  Changes to reflect up 
to date evidence  Proposed change to supporting text and Policy 
ST40 as a consequence of  up to date evidence To reflect up to date 
evidence    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
132 
 Section  Para/Policy  Modification  Modification Detail  Reason for 
Modification  
relating to  the impacts of mitigating recreational 
disturbance at  Clumber Park.  
8.6 Biodiversity & 
Geodiversity  Policy ST40a  Changes to reflect up 
to date evidence  New policy as a consequence of new evidence 
relating to the impacts of  mitigating 
recreational pressure at Clumber Park; 
specifically to clarify the approach taken to 
planning applications and likely mitigation  To reflect up to date 
evidence  
10.2 Renewable 
Energy Generation  10.2 & Policy 
ST52  Changes to wording 
to reflect n ew 
designation of Area 
of Best Fit  Proposed change to supporting text and Policy 
ST52 required as a consequence of the 
identification of Marnham as an Area of Best Fit 
for renewable energy generation.  To reflect the amendment 
to the employment policy  
10.2 Renewable 
Energy Generation  Policies Map  Amendment to the 
Policies Map, to 
reflect designation of 
Marnham as an Area 
of Best Fit  Amend Policies Map to identify new Area of 
Best Fit designation at Marnham  To reflect the amendment 
to the renewable energy  
policy  
11.1Transport 
infrastructure  11.1.7  Changes to wording 
to reflect approach 
being taken to 
delivery of transport 
infrastructure on the 
local and strategic 
road network  Proposed changes to supporting text and to 
Policy ST54 to clarify the approach t o be taken 
to infrastructure delivery, the type of 
infrastructure sought and the mechanism by 
which it will be sought; specifically for transport 
infrastructure  To reflect new evidence 
and to facilitate 
deliverability of the Plan  
11.1Transport 
infrastruct ure 11.1.12  Extension to the plan 
period  Reference  to the previous end date of the plan 
period (2037) have been replaced by  the new 
end date of 2038  For compliance with 
national policy  
12.3 Infrastructure 
Delivery  12.3.1, 12.3.7, 
12.3.12 -12.3.14, 
12.3.18 , Policy 
ST58  Changes to the 
wording relating to, 
infrastructure and 
delivery  Proposed changes to supporting text and to 
Policy ST58 to clarify the approach to be taken 
to infrastructure delivery, and the mechanism 
by which it will be sought; specifically for 
phasing of infrastructure, mechanism for 
recovering forward funding for infrastructure, To reflect new evidence 
and to facilitate 
deliverability of the Plan    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020 -2037:  
  Publication Version Addendum  
133 
 Section  Para/Policy  Modification  Modification Detail  Reason for 
Modification  
and the mechanisms to be used to secure 
infrastructure from new development  
13.0 Monitoring 
framework  Monitoring 
Framework  Changes to the 
wording of parts of 
the monitoring 
framework  Changes made to the Monitoring Framework to 
take account of the changes to the Addendum; 
specifically, to the plan period in relation to the 
housing supply, housing distribution, 
developable employment land, the removal of 
the Former Marnham Power Station site, the 
inclusion of Bevercotes Colliery and to clarify 
the use of Apleyhead; and to take into account 
the new designation at Marnham for zero 
carbon and renewable  energy generation in 
Policy ST52  To reflect the changes 
within the housing, 
employment and 
renewable energy policies  
 