Bath and North  
East Somerset
Part 1 of the Local PlanCore  StrategyAdopted July 2014
For more information on the Core  
Strategy, Placemaking Plan and other  
planning policy documents please  
contact the Planning Policy team at:  
planning_policy@bathnes.gov.uk
This document can also be viewed  
on our website:  
www.bathnes.gov.uk/corestrategyThe Core Strategy can be made available  
in a range of languages, large print, Braille,  
on tape, electronic and accessible formats  
by contacting Planning Policy on:  
Telephone: 01225 477548Thank you to the following individuals  
or organisations whose photographs  
have been included in the Core Strategy.Bath in Time  
p26, 27, 31,52Flickr  
Somerdale from river  Gavin Loynes
Boat on Avon  Gavin Loynes
Somerdale winter sunset Andy Powell
Tyning and Braysdown batches  
from Rackvernal  StewBl@ck
Five arches  StewBl@ck
Design by Steers McGillan Eves  
www.steersmcgillaneves.co.ukForeword
The Core Strategy was adopted by the 
Council on 10th July 2014. The Core 
Strategy is one of the Council’s key 
strategies. It sets out the spatial elements of the Council’s Vision and objectives and 
translates them into a deliverable plan for 
now and the future. The Core Strategy enables the Council to shape the nature 
and direction of physical change within 
Bath and North East Somerset. It forms  
a key part of the Council’s statutory 
Development Plan for determining 
planning applications. 
The document establishes the strategic 
policy framework for how we manage the 
development and use of land up to 2029. 
It balances the requirements of new development and growth with the 
protection of the area’s key environmental 
assets and provides direction in our response to climate change. In short it will 
help us to secure a sustainable future and 
enable Bath and North East Somerset to be the place in which to live, work and 
visit. It will influence the investment 
decisions of the Council and other key stakeholders, be used as the basis for the 
promotion of individual sites and areas, 
and guide the management of change within the district.The Core Strategy places great  
emphasis on the different places that 
make up Bath and North East Somerset, 
responding to and reflecting their particular characteristics and local 
distinctiveness. It sets out a clear 
framework to enable their development needs to be met sustainably and in a  
way that respects their specific qualities. 
The preparation of the Core Strategy 
involved close working with local
residents and a variety of national and 
local organisations and businesses.  
The Council wishes to acknowledge the efforts of all those that have contributed to its preparation.
Cllr Tim Ball  
Cabinet Member for Homes  
and Planning
Contents
1  Vision & District-wide strategy  6
1a  Introduction  8
1b  Spatial Portrait and Key Strategic Issues 9
1c  Spatial Vision & Strategic Objectives  15
1d  Development of the Spatial Strategy  20
1e  Infrastructure  27
 
2  Bath   32
2a  Setting the Agenda  34
2b  Vision and Spatial Strategy for the City 39 
2c  The Central Area and Enterprise Area 44
 The Central Area  47
 Western Riverside  53
 Twerton and Newbridge Riversides 54
2d  Bath's Neighbourhoods  58
2dd Development on the edge of Bath 60
2e  The World Heritage Site and its Setting  68
2f  Bath’s Universities  70
2g  Infrastructure and Delivery 72 
 3  Keynsham  76
3a  Setting the Agenda  78
3b  Vision and Spatial Strategy  81
3c  Town Centre and Somerdale  87
3cc  Development on the edge  
of Keynsham 90
3d  Infrastructure and Delivery  984  Somer Valley  100
4a  Setting the Agenda  102
4b  Vision and Spatial Strategy  105
4c  Midsomer Norton Town Centre  110
4d  Radstock Town Centre 112
4e  Infrastructure and Delivery  115
 5  Rural Areas  118
5a  Setting the Agenda  120
5b  Vision and Policy Framework  122
  Meeting Local Need for Housing  
and Employment 124
 Community Facilities  126
 Rural Affordable Housing  127
 Rural Economy  128
5cc Development at Whitchurch  130
5c  Infrastructure and Delivery  132
 6  Core Policies   134
6a  Introduction  136
6aa Sustainability Principles  136
6b  Responding to a Changing Climate  138
6c Environmental Quality  148
6d   Affordable Housing, Mix of Housing, Gypsies and Travellers 160
6e  A Prosperous Economy  168
6f  Well Connected  172
6g  Infrastructure  1747  Monitoring & Review  176
Appendices  182
Appendix 1:  Replaced Local Plan Policies 183 
Appendix 2:  Saved Local Plan Policies  185
Appendix 3:  Policies Map Revision –  
Bath City Centre Boundary  188
Policies Map Revision – Central Area Boundary 188
Policies Map Revision – Enterprise Area  
Boundary   189
Policies Map Revision – geographic two-way  
split for affordable housing 190
Policies Map Revision – Strategic Site allocation  
for Land adjoining Odd Down, Bath and the revised detailed Green Belt boundary. 190
Policies Map Revision – Strategic Site allocation  
for Land adjoining East Keynsham and the  
revised detailed Green Belt boundary and allocation of Safeguarded Land.  191
Policies Map Revision – Strategic Site allocation  
for Land adjoining South West Keynsham and  
the revised detailed Green Belt boundary 192
Policies Map Revision – Strategic Site  
allocation for Land at Whitchurch and the  
revised detailed Green Belt boundary 193
Glossary  194
Although the majority of the  
policies and paragraphs are  
numbered sequentially there  
are some exceptions where a policy  
or paragraph has been deleted  
through the plan preparation process.Index
Policies   
DW1  District Wide Spatial Strategy 25 
B1  Bath Spatial Strategy  41 
B2  Central Area Strategic Policy  47 
B3   Strategic Policy for Twerton and  
Newbridge Riverside  56 
B3A  Land adjoining Odd Down, Bath –  
Strategic Site Allocation  62 
B3C Extension to MoD Ensleigh 66 
B4  The World Heritage Site and its Setting  69 
B5  Strategic Policy for Bath’s Universities  71 
KE1  Keynsham Spatial Strategy  83 
KE2  Town Centre/Somerdale Strategic Policy  88 
KE3A  Land adjoining East Keynsham –  
Strategic Site Allocation  92 
KE3B Safeguarded Land at East Keynsham 94 
KE4  Land adjoining South West Keynsham 
– Strategic Site Allocation 96 
SV1  Somer Valley Spatial Strategy  108 
SV2   Midsomer Norton Town Centre  
Strategic Policy  111 
SV3  Radstock Town Centre Strategic Policy  114
RA1   Development in the Villages meeting  
the listed criteria  125 
RA2   Development in Villages outside  
the Green Belt not meeting Policy  
RA1 Criteria  125 
RA3  Community Facilities and Shops  126 
RA4  Rural Exceptions Sites  127 
RA5  Land at Whitchurch – Strategic Site Allocation  129 
SD1  Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development  137 
CP1  Retrofitting Existing Buildings  139 
CP2  Sustainable Construction  140 CP3  Renewable Energy  141
CP4  District Heating  143
CP5  Flood Risk Management  147 
CP6  Environmental Quality  150
CP7  Green Infrastructure  152
CP8  Green Belt  154 
CP8a Minerals 157
CP9  Affordable Housing  162 
CP10  Housing Mix  164 
CP11   Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  166 
CP12  Centres and Retailing  171 
CP13  Infrastructure Provision  175 
 Diagrams   
1  Structure of the Core Strategy Document  8 
2  Sub-regional Context  12 
3  Bath and North East Somerset  13 
3a Housing Trajectory as at adoption 24 
4   Bath and North East Somerset:  
The Key Diagram  26 
5  Bath Spatial Strategy  40 
6  The Central Area and Enterprise Area  45 
7  General Extent of the Central Area  46
8  The Central Area in 2029  51 
8a Western Riverside  54 
9  Twerton and Newbridge Riversides  55 
10  Bath's Neighbourhoods  61 
11  21st Century Keynsham  79 
12  Keynsham Spatial Strategy  85
13  Keynsham Town Centre/Somerdale  86
14  Somer Valley Location  103
15  Somer Valley Strategy  106 16  Midsomer Norton Town Centre  110 
17  Radstock Town Centre  112 
18  Rural Villages  123 
19  District Heating Priority Areas  144 
  District Heating Priority Areas  
(Keynsham)  145 
  District Heating Priority Areas  
(Somer Valley)  145
20  Illustrative Green Infrastructure Network  153 
20a  General extent of the surface coal  
Mineral Safeguarding Area  158 
20b  Geographic two-way split for  
affordable housing (indicative)  163 
21  The Economy in 2029  169 
 Tables 
1A Objectively assessed need for housing 21 
1B  Spatial Distribution of the housing 
requirement  22 
1  Locational Policy Framework 25
2  Key District-wide Infrastructure  27 
3   Policy Framework and Mechanisms for Delivering the Strategic Objectives  29
4  District and Local Centres within Bath  60 
5  Summary of Key Infrastructure in Bath  75 
6   Summary of Key Infrastructure in Keynsham 99 
7   Summary of Key Infrastructure in the Somer Valley 117 
8   Bristol/Bath Green Belt within Bath  
and North East Somerset 155 
8A  Geographical Split for Affordable  
Housing  161 
9  Monitoring of Strategic Objectives  178x1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
6
Demography
Challenges
Equality
LocalityGrowthEconomy1Vision and 
District-wide Strategy
1a Introduction  8
 Diagram 1  Structure of the Core Strategy Document   8
1b  Spatial Portrait and Key Strategic Issues  9
 Diagram 2  Sub-regional Context  12
 Diagram 3  Bath and North East Somerset   13
1c  Spatial Vision & Strategic Objectives  15
1d  Development of the Spatial Strategy  20
 Table 1a Objectively assessed need for housing   21
 Table 1b  Spatial distribution of the housing requirement   22
 Diagram 3a  Housing Trajectory as at adoption  24
 Table 1 Locational Policy Framework   25
 Policy DW1  District Wide Spatial Strategy   25
 Diagram 4  Bath and North East Somerset: The Key Diagram   26
1e  Infrastructure  27
 Table 2 Key District-wide Infrastructure   27
  Table 3 Policy Framework and Mechanisms for Delivering the  
Strategic Objectives  29Regeneration
Uniqueness
Land Supply
CultureInnovationEnterprise
Local Communities
EnvironmentalStrategic
Vision
ChangeDirectionDelivery
Spatialx1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
8
Introduction 
1.01 The Core Strategy is a key  
policy document for Bath &  
North East Somerset (B&NES) that 
puts in place a strategic planning framework to guide change and development in the District over  
the next 20 years and beyond.Vision and District-
wide Spatial Strategy 
1a
1  Introduction, Vision  
& District-wide spatial strategy
6 Core Policies 2 Bath
3 Keynsham
4 Somer Valley
5 Rural Areas
7 Monitoring & ReviewDiagram 1  
Structure of the  
Core Strategy document1.02 The Core Strategy is shaped by 
the challenges that are specific to the 
District and the aspirations of its communities. These have been captured within two key documents:
• The Sustainable Community 
strategy  is the 'overarching' strategy 
for B&NES which has been prepared 
by the Local Strategic Partnership and sets out a vision for the area to become a "distinctive place, with vibrant sustainable communities, where everyone fulfils their potential". The Core Strategy is the spatial expression of the B&NES Sustainable Community Strategy; 
• The Council's long-term economic 
and regeneration aspirations for the main urban centres within the District are set out in the Futures for 
Bath, Keynsham and Somer Valley.  1.03 This chapter sets out:
• Where we are now: The Spatial 
Portrait uses a wide evidence base of information, statistics, studies and community involvement to identify the District's main social, physical and economic characteristics and the key, strategic issues it faces.
• Where we would like to be:  
The Spatial Vision and Strategic Objectives look forward to 2029, setting out how we expect the District and its places to have changed and developed. 
• How we get there: The Spatial 
Strategy is the means of delivering the vision and objectives.
1.04 Subsequent chapters set  
out the policy framework for the District's different places, as well  
as general policies.  
1.05 The Core Strategy, Part 1 of the 
Local Plan, does not set out site-specific proposals, other than the Strategic Site Allocations; instead it looks at the broad locations for delivering new development. Policies  
in the Core Strategy do not overlap with each other and therefore the Core Strategy should be read as a whole. The Placemaking Plan, Part 2 of the Local Plan, will cover site allocations, detailed development management policies as well as local designations for the different places within the District, and the Joint Waste Core Strategy prepared by the four West of England authorities sets out a spatial strategy for dealing with waste including the allocation of sites. Details of other documents under preparation are set out in the Local Development Scheme. Spatial Portrait  
& Key Strategic 
Issues
Spatial Portrait
What is the  
District like now?Key Strategic IssuesFacing the DistrictVision & ObjectivesHow should the District 
change and what kind  
of place should it be  
in the future?Spatial Strategy  
Place-based Policy Frameworks and  
Core Policies
Making sure new 
development delivers  
the Vision & ObjectivesVision and District-
wide Spatial Strategy 
1bSpatial Portrait
1.06 B&NES is a richly varied District 
in the south west of England. It 
stretches from the edge of Bristol, south into the Mendip Hills and east  
to the southern Cotswold Hills and Wiltshire border. It covers a total  
area of 570 km2 and is home to  
about 178,000 people. The District encompasses a diverse range of places, with their own history,  
identity and communities. Its main urban centre is the city of Bath complemented by a range of towns and villages. It contains a series of outstanding historical, cultural and environmental assets, with a tradition of innovation and enterprise. A more detailed description of places within the District is painted in chapters 2-5. 1.07 The District forms part of the 
West of England sub-region which  
has a population of just over 1.1 million. With a working population of 510,000, the West of England has the second highest economic productivity outside of London. It enjoys a strategic location, reasonably well-served by the M4 and M5 motorways and rail links to London and the rest of the country. Bristol International Airport  
is one of the fastest growing regional airports in the UK. 
1.07a  In addition to being part of  
the West of England sub-region  
the District has close functional  
and physical links with places within 
Wiltshire and Mendip. For example Bath acts as an employment and services and facilities centre for surrounding populations evidenced  
by journey to work patterns and public transport provision, the Somer Valley area transcends the administrative boundary between B&NES and Mendip and important Green Infrastructure corridors link B&NES and the neighbouring areas. Bath1.08 Bath is one of the UK's most 
liveable cities and offers an excellent quality of life. Its population is around 90,000. Bath is well known as an international visitor destination,  
thanks to its cultural and built  
heritage, thermal springs and landscape – encapsulated in its inscription as a World Heritage site. Bath is a key economic centre in the West of England and is also one of  
the most important places of learning in the South West. The city also  
serves as a regional shopping centre, characterized by independent and boutique shops. 1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
10
Keynsham
1.09 Despite its proximity to Bristol 
and Bath, Keynsham has retained its own identity and is surrounded by countryside which is protected by  
the Bristol / Bath Green Belt. The population is about 15,500 people with a high proportion of adults aged 65 and over. The town's dominant employer is the public sector. The town centre is characterized by local independent retailers, some large nationals, and charity shops. The full effects of the closure of the Chocolate Factory at Somerdale, are yet to be felt in the town.The Somer Valley1.10 The Somer Valley covers the 
urban areas of Midsomer Norton, Westfield and Radstock, together  
with a rural hinterland containing  
the principal villages of Peasedown  
St John and Paulton. The area houses around 25% of the population of Bath and North East Somerset and is located 12 miles south west of Bath and 16 miles south east of Bristol. Midsomer Norton, Westfield and Radstock together make up the second largest urban area in the district, with a combined population of about 21,000. The Somer Valley was formerly part of the North Somerset coalfield and retains a rich industrial heritage. It has an engineering skills base and is now an important centre for the printing and packaging industry. However a number of recent factory closures have increased the already high level of out-commuting. Rural Areas1.11 Over 90% of the District is rural 
and it has 47 rural parishes. The Government's vision for the countryside is a living, working, protected and vibrant countryside. The character of villages and landscape varies distinctly across  
the District, with almost a third of the District lying within the Cotswolds and Mendip Hills Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONBs). The parish Councils of Combe Hay, Englishcombe and Newton St Loe are discussing proposals with Natural England to extend the Cotswolds AONB so that  
it surrounds the city of Bath. The District's varied geology, topography and soils have given rise to a rich biodiversity, with some wildlife sites such as Chew Valley Lake being of international importance.
Key Strategic Issues
1.12 While B&NES has many strengths, 
its outward image conceals a range of economic and social challenges that, left unchecked, will lead to long-term decline and increased inequalities.  
The particular challenges facing the distinct parts of the District, in Bath, Keynsham, the Somer Valley and the rural areas are described in the Futures Work and summarised in the relevant Place based sections of the Core Strategy. The B&NES Sustainable Community Strategy distils social, economic and environmental challenges into 6 key drivers of change:1b ContinuedClimate Change  
There is a need to tackle the causes 
and effects of climate change through lower carbon lifestyles; limiting our  
use of increasingly scarce resources; reducing our dependency on fossil fuels especially in light of 'peak oil' concerns; making sure that our area  
is resilient to climate change, particularly the potential for flooding. We will need to adopt environmentally friendly practices such as making buildings more energy efficient, increase the use of renewable energy, reduce car use and grow more local food. We will also need to ensure  
that the natural environment is maintained and enhanced to maximise opportunities for mitigation. This  
will enable us to contribute to  
meeting the national, statutory  
carbon reduction target of 45%  
by 2020 from 1990 levels. Demographic Change  
The total population of B&NES is expected to increase by 2029 due  
to increased life expectancy, natural increase and in-migration. We will have an ageing population (the number of over 80 year olds is projected to increase by 16%), the working age population is predicted  
to increase and the number of primary school age children will increase (projected 17% increase in number  
of 4-11 year olds); social trends and lifestyle changes will also affect the way we live. For example, the number of single person households is likely  
to increase; there may be changes in employment and work practices and shifts in work/life balance.
Inequalities  
The population of B&NES is relatively 
prosperous and healthy but there are pockets of deprived communities in the District. This manifests itself in  
a health and life expectancy gap, different levels of educational attainment and employment opportunities. There is a need  
to address these notable socio-economic gaps. 
Locality  
The move toward localism, including 
enabling local communities to have a greater say in their neighbourhoods, providing local accessible services, more local food production and sustainable local energy production. Growth  
The need for growth in housing and employment, due to population and lifestyle changes and an evolving economy, means that the District will change considerably over the coming years. The challenge is to grow in a way that is socially, economically and environmentally sustainable, with the necessary supporting infrastructure in place. Growth must not occur at any cost. B&NES' wealth of natural and cultural assets, including its watercourses, trees and woodland, countryside, parks, exceptional landscapes and historic built environment, make a huge contribution towards the attractiveness and liveability of the District. Development should be inspired by the unique character and design values of existing places. In all areas, it is vital that any development is of a high standard of design that enhances the characteristics that make B&NES such a distinctive District and protects the existing natural and built environment that supports the quality of life enjoyed  
by its community.The Economy  
There is a need to create the conditions for a more environmentally sustainable economy with increased local employment, less overall commuting and a strong low-carbon business sector. The economy needs to be well placed to meet the needs  
of the 21st century and to be more diverse, productive and resilient facilitated by an increase in innovative technology related jobs, indigenous business growth and inward investment through provision of appropriate business space in the  
right locations. Leading education providers need to grow commercially and activities which reflect legislative and social change (for example, low-carbon related activities, such  
as retrofitting for energy efficiency) should be encouraged. All areas of  
the District have a part to play, for example, in the contribution the rural areas could make towards renewable energy and local food growing.Severn 
Estuary
M4M5
M4
M4M5
KeynshamChippenham
FromeSomer Valley
WellsClevedon
Bradford 
on Avon
Trowbridge
WarminsterMelkshamYate
BATHBRISTOL
DIAGRAM 2  
SUB-REGIONAL 
CONTEXT
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
1b ContinuedA4
A37A46
A4
A36
A367A3062A36
A39
A368
A368A37
A367A431SOUTH 
GLOUCES TERSHIRE
BRIS TOL
NORTH
SOMERSET
MENDIPWILTSHIRE
BATH
SOMER 
VALLEYKEYNSHAM
PaultonFarmboro ugh
TimsburyBishopSutton
Temple
Cloud
Farringt on 
GurneyWhit churc h Saltfor dBatheas ton
Bathfo rd
Camert onHigh
Littlet onClutt onChew  MagnaBathhampt on
West 
Harptr eeWellowSouth St oke
Freshfor dCorston
Pensfor d
Compton 
MartinChew  Stoke
Chew 
Valley 
LakeBlagdon 
LakeRiver Avon
Peasedo wn
St John
MidsomerNorto nRadst ock
Westfield
DIAGRAM 3  
BATH & NORTH EAST 
SOMERSET
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)…a strategic 
planning framework 
 
to help guide 
change and development 
 
in the District 
over the next  
20 years and  
beyondSpatial Vision  
& Strategic  
Objectives
1.13 In response to these strategic 
issues, the Core Strategy sets  
out a spatial vision for the District  
along with 7 strategic objectives. 
Sustainable Development is the  
core principle underpinning the  
Core Strategy, expressed through the Spatial Vision and Strategic Objectives.Vision and District-
wide Spatial Strategy 
1c
Bath & North East Somerset will 
continue to be distinctive and become a more competitive area within the West of England sitting between the city of Bristol and market towns in western Wiltshire and northern Somerset. Its economic, cultural and social potential will be realised, providing opportunities for all, whilst maintaining and enhancing the area's environmental attractiveness and unique heritage. New jobs and housing will be supported by necessary infrastructure and provided in ways that mitigate the causes and effects of climate change, adapt to unavoidable climatic changes, are resilient to future fossil fuel scarcity and help the District have a low carbon economy.Over the next 20 years and more the area will mature as a more beautiful and successful place where urban and rural communities flourish, health and well-being is improved, everyone can reach their potential and needs for materials and produce are met locally. The District will be made up of competitive, healthy and attractive urban, town and village centres within a rich and varied  
rural setting. The stunning built and natural environment will continue  
to provide a backdrop for a range  
of distinctive places to live, that can be stimulating and exciting, as well as calm and peaceful.
Bath's natural, historic and cultural 
assets, which combine to create a unique sense of place of international significance, will be secured and enhanced to maintain the city's  
key competitive advantage and unique selling point as a high quality environment, to live, grow a business, visit and invest.The scope to further improve Bath's environmental quality will form the foundation of efforts to boost the city's profile as a more competitive and economic centre. The realisation of a range of development opportunities within the Central Area and Enterprise Area will greatly improve the city aesthetically and also enable Bath to position itself as a more entrepreneurial, innovative, creative and business friendly place. Economic development and productivity will therefore be stimulated and facilitated, whilst simultaneously upgrading inherited townscape.
Where possible the built environment 
will evolve in a more energy and resource efficient manner and renewable and sustainable energy, appropriate to the Bath context, will be will be introduced. Alongside measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change and to pursue a reduced carbon economy, the diversification and growth of a low carbon economy are the key changes that are sought for Bath. 
The Spatial Vision 
What The Spatial Strategy  
Seeks To Achieve1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
16
The delivery of new housing is a vital 
component of the vision and will help to create a sustainable relationship between the city's labour and job markets and support Bath's economic potential. Parallel investment in public transport infrastructure and walking and cycling will keep the city moving  
and enable more sustainable travel choices to be made.
Bath's already strong identity as a 
therapeutic place will be enhanced by boosting its performance as an enjoyable city for leisure, recreation and shopping with a vivacious cultural scene and a highly valued green infrastructure network.Keynsham is a historic town that occupies a strategically important location between Bristol and Bath and is therefore well placed to improve and attract investment.  
It will continue to act as a market town and service centre for the surrounding area. In responding to the loss of a major employer, it will evolve as a more significant business location. Keynsham will expand to accommodate a growing population, ensuring it retains its independence and its separate identity within an attractive rural setting. It will become a more sustainable, desirable and well-connected place in which to  
live and work, with an enhanced town centre inspired by its heritage and cherished rivers, park and  
green spaces.The southern part of the District will become more self-reliant, facilitated by economic-led revitalisation alongside local energy generation. The roles of Midsomer Norton and Radstock Town Centres will be complementary to each other and continue to provide key employment, services and leisure provision for both their communities and those within the Somer Valley. Midsomer Norton town centre will be the principal centre with an improved public realm well related to the new integrated Town Park. Radstock town centre will continue to provide a focal point for the community and realise the potential of tourism based on its mining heritage, green routes including cycle ways and attractive rural hinterland.Villages of the Somer Valley will continue to provide for the needs  
of their local communities.
In the rural areas locally identified 
needs will be met whilst maintaining the individual character of villages. The rural economy will evolve and new types of jobs and ways of working will provide more locally based employment opportunities. The potential for the rural area to  
play an important role in local food production will be promoted. Community involvement will help facilitate improvement in the provision of community facilities  
and public transport.
1c ContinuedStrategic Objectives 
1.14 The vision is the spatial expression of the 
Council's Sustainable Community Strategy. It 
establishes the overall direction subsequently articulated in more specific spatial objectives.  
These strategic objectives form the link between the high level vision and the spatial strategy. 
1.15 The strategic objectives below expand the 
vision into specific issues for the area which need  
to be addressed. The objectives are underpinned  
by a monitoring framework of targets and indicators 
to measure the performance of the Local Plan. 
Its economic,  
cultural and social 
potential will be  
realised, providing  
opportunities for all…Objective 1  
Cross cutting objective: Pursue  
a low carbon and sustainable 
future in a changing climate
• reducing the need to travel by achieving 
closer alignment of homes, jobs, infrastructure and services 
• ensuring the location and layout of new development enables and encourages people to make the fullest possible use of public transport, walking and cycling
• encouraging and supporting the increased generation and use of renewable and low carbon energy, including through the  
delivery of community led schemes 
• promoting sustainable and energy efficient design and construction 
• shaping places so as to minimise vulnerability and provide resilience to impacts arising from climate change including increased flood risk 
• facilitating the prudent use and reduced consumption of key natural resources such  
as undeveloped land, energy, water  
and minerals 
• maintaining and enhancing a network of connected and multifunctional green spaces for people and wildlife serving climate change adaptation and mitigation purposes SCS Driver  
Climate Change
Objective 2  
Protect and enhance the 
District’s natural, built and 
cultural assets and provide green infrastructure
• ensuring that growth and development  
takes place within the environmental  
capacity of the District
• making optimum use of brownfield 
opportunities in meeting housing and economic development needs and  
avoiding greenfield land as far as possible 
• helping to conserve and enhance the quality and character of our built and natural heritage 
• maintaining and enhancing an accessible  
and multifunctional network of well linked green spaces 
• helping to conserve, enhance and restore the diversity and resilience of the District's wildlife
• helping to avoid water, air, light and noise pollution and the contamination of land 
• capitalising on the role our heritage has in promoting local distinctiveness, place-making and supporting regeneration 
• maintaining an outstanding built and  
natural environment by ensuring that new development responds appropriately to the locally distinctive context and meets high standards of design 
• facilitating continuing and wide participation in cultural activities SCS Driver  
Growth1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
18
1c Continued
Objective 3  
Encourage economic  
development,  
diversification  
and prosperity
The Council's Economic 
Development Strategy seeks  
to stimulate a more productive, competitive and diversified economy across the District and promotes a higher value added economy (smart growth) where indigenous companies are retained and able to grow, other knowledge based sectors are attracted to  
the area and the industrial sector continues to contribute to the  
local economy. 
• increasing the availability of 
modern office and unit space in Bath thereby enabling indigenous companies to expand and the  
city to better respond to  
external demand
• maintaining an appropriate supply of land in Bath for industrial processes and services to ensure the city retains a mixed economy• enabling tourism to continue to make an important contribution  
to the economy of Bath and promoting the tourism potential  
of other parts of the District  
e.g. by facilitating the provision  
of visitor accommodation
• capitalising on innovation opportunities arising from higher education institutions, improving educational facilities to help provide the skills that support knowledge based sectors and retaining those skills and talents  
in the city and wider area
• repositioning Keynsham as a  
more significant business location enabling it to attract new employers to compensate for the closure of Cadbury Somerdale 
• ensuring that a sufficient and responsive supply of appropriate land and premises is available and improvement of skills is facilitated at Midsomer Norton and Radstock to help strengthen their roles as employment centres for the southern part of the District 
• enabling small scale local employment development, including those related to innovation opportunities,  
in the rural areas SCS Driver  
Economy Inequalities Locality
Objective 4  
Invest in our city, town  
and local centres 
• Bath city centre and Keynsham, Midsomer Norton and Radstock town centres need to be  
improved as centres for social  
and economic activity and as places for entertainment, culture and shopping. The local and neighbourhood centres across  
the urban and rural parts of the District need to be sustained, so they continue to play an important role in meeting the day to day needs of their local residents. 
• enhancing Bath's central  
shopping area, to maintain its competitiveness, diverse offer  
and reputation for independent and niche retailing 
• introducing more commercial space, suitable for a range of enterprises, as part of new  
mixed use developments on underperforming sites in and  
close to Bath city centre • improving the quality and  
capacity of shops within the core of Keynsham and Midsomer Norton town centres 
• introducing more office and residential floor space into Keynsham, Midsomer Norton  
and Radstock town centres 
• improving the quality of the  
public realm in the city, town  
and local centres 
• providing better pedestrian and cycle routes into and within the city, town and local centres 
• ensuring existing and proposed parks are well integrated into and play a central role in the centres  
of Bath, Keynsham and  
Midsomer Norton 
• enabling appropriate tourism opportunities in the city and  
town centres 
• protecting and enhancing the range of services and facilities provided in local, neighbourhood and village centres, encouraging the provision of efficient, low carbon energy for example from District heating or combined  
heat and power systems. SCS Driver  
Growth Inequalities Demographic ChangeObjective 5  
Meet housing needs 
• enabling the delivery of new 
homes needed to respond to expected demographic and social changes and as far as possible to support the labour supply to meet our economic development objectives
• ensuring that the new homes provided are of high quality design and reflect and cater for  
a range of incomes and types  
of household, including those  
in need of affordable housing
• addressing the accommodation needs of gypsies and travellers
• ensuring the accommodation needs of any increase in the number of students can be  
met sustainably
• ensure that the development  
of new homes is aligned with  
the provision of all the necessary infrastructureSCS Driver  
Economy Inequalities Locality
Objective 6  
Plan for development  
that promotes health  
and well being
• enabling more opportunities  
for people to lead healthier lifestyles and have a greater sense of well-being through facilitating active modes of travel, encouraging social interaction and designing high quality, safe streets and spaces
• promoting and delivering local employment, training and regeneration opportunities that can contribute to a reduction in the health and social inequalities across the District encouraging and facilitating increased local food production
• ensuring the timely provision  
of social and physical infrastructure, including health, welfare, spiritual, recreational, leisure and cultural facilitiesSCS Driver  
Inequalities
Objective 7  
Deliver well connected 
places accessible by 
sustainable means  
of transport
In conjunction with the Joint  
Local Transport Plan, the Local 
Plan will deliver this by:
• locating and designing new 
development in a way that reduces the need and desire to travel by car and encourages the use of public transport, walking and cycling
• ensuring that development is supported by high quality transport infrastructure which helps to increase the attractiveness of public transport, walking and cycling
• promoting improved access to services especially for rural and more remote areasSCS Driver  
Economy & GrowthSpatial Strategy for Bath  
& North East Somerset
1.16 The principal purpose of the Core 
Strategy is to set out clearly the spatial distribution of development within  
the District in order to deliver the vision and strategic objectives outlined above. It provides an overarching spatial strategy for the District as well as specific policy frameworks for  
Bath, Keynsham, the Somer Valley  
and the Rural Areas. Where land is  
to be released from the Green Belt, strategic sites are allocated. The  
Core Strategy also includes generic core policies applicable across the District as set out in section 6. The policy approach takes account of national policy guidance, the results  
of key studies as well as the issues identified through the consultations and public engagement on the  
Core Strategy with stakeholders  
and local communities. 
1.17 Table 3 at the end of this chapter 
sets out how the objectives are 
delivered through national policies, Core Strategy policies or other  
LDF documents.
….ensuring  
the necessary 
infrastructure is  
in place or can  
be secured to  
deliver mixed  
and balanced  
communities1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
20
Vision and District-
wide Spatial Strategy 
1d
Development 
of the Spatial Strategy
The district  
is renowned  
for its  
outstanding 
environmentDevelopment  
of the Spatial Strategy
1.18 Formulation of the policy 
framework for the District has been 
guided by the NPPF and entailed analysis of evidence, formulation  
of options to meet the objectives, engaging with local communities, testing options through the sustainability appraisal and assessing deliverability. Account has been taken of the District's functional relationship with neighbouring authorities. Please note the evidence base supporting  
the Core Strategy is listed and is available on the Council's website at www.bathnes.gov.uk/corestrategy  
or on request.
1.19a Development Needs: The 
Council has undertaken an assessment 
of the needs of development within 
the District during the plan-period. This includes assessing the space needed for economic growth, housing, retail provision and social needs. This takes account of the Council's objective of promotion of a higher value economy rather than only volume growth. The Council has prepared a Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) to help assess  
its full objectively assessed housing needs in the housing market area  
over the plan period up to 2029. 1.19b  In terms of affordable housing 
need, Bath has one of the widest house price to earnings ratios outside of London but affordability varies across the District. The Council has therefore undertaken a viability study to inform a new policy framework on securing affordable housing through the planning system.
1.19c Development land supply:   
A detailed, assessment has been 
undertaken of the capacity of the District's settlements for delivery of new housing in the SHLAA, jobs and community facilities. This has included identifying suitable and deliverable development sites, understanding the environmental constraints including potential flood risk, assessing the appropriate mix of uses and densities and ensuring the necessary 
infrastructure is in place or can be 
secured to deliver mixed and balanced communities. It also looked at the opportunities to re-use empty  
homes and under-used properties. 
1.20 Infrastructure: An underlying 
principle in the preparation of the Core 
Strategy has been the need for new development to be well aligned with the necessary infrastructure, including transport, community facilities and green infrastructure The Infrastructure Delivery Programme provides an assessment of the infrastructure needed to underpin the spatial strategy.1.21 Environmental capacity: The 
District is renowned for its outstanding 
environment. Bath is the only complete city in the UK which is inscribed as a World Heritage Site;  
the high quality of the landscape is recognised by the designation of two Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty; there are over 50 Conservation Areas in the District and Bath has the highest concentration of Listed Buildings outside of Westminster. The District also enjoys a rich and diverse biodiversity resource, including many protected species and habitats and includes or is adjacent to a number of sites of European importance for bats and wetland birds. These European Sites are protected through the Habitat Regulations. In this context bats are a significant issue as the District supports important bat foraging areas, commuting routes and roosts of importance to the integrity of up to three European Sites. For clarity, development likely to have a significant effect on a European site either alone or in combination with other plans or projects, and which cannot be adequately mitigated, would not be in accordance with the Development Plan. The Council has assessed the impact of various policy proposals and alternative options on the Environment through the sustainability appraisal, the Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA) and locational investigations.1.22 Local Communities: National 
policy requires that the results of public engagement exercises  
should be treated as evidence in the development of the Core Strategy. The preparation of the Core Strategy has therefore entailed close working with local groups and communities  
in order to understand local priorities. This has included various economic, environment and community groups in Bath, the Somer Valley partnership, the Keynsham Development  
Advisory Group as well as parish  
and town Councils.
1.25 Sub-regional context: The 
Spatial strategy for B&NES must  
take account of the strategies and 
programmes of neighbouring authorities, especially in the West  
of England.
Summary of the Spatial 
Strategy for B&NES
1.26 Scale and location of growth: 
1.26a Based on the demographic 
projections in the SHMA, there is a 
need for about 9,000 new dwellings over the plan period, of which about one third is for affordable housing  
(See Column B in Table 1A below).
1.26b Table 1A shows that the supply 
of market housing has been increased 
to enable the delivery of the full assessed need for affordable housing. This is necessary because much of  
the supply of market housing (built, committed, and small windfall sites) will not yield affordable housing.
1.26c In addition, the NPPF requires 
that when assessing need, full account 
is taken of market and economic signals. The increase in market housing above the figure derived from the demographic projections is a necessary market adjustment given the character of the housing market in the District and particularly at Bath.1.26d The assessment of housing 
needs is based on two important assumptions. Firstly, the SHMA assumes that the expected modest growth in the student population at Bath’s two universities will be accommodated in the planned growth of mainly on-campus new student accommodation. If the provision of purpose-built student accommodation does not keep up with the growth in the resident student population, more market housing will be needed because of the pressure on the private letting market. Secondly, the SHMA assumes that the contribution to the provision of affordable housing needs from  
private rented accommodation where occupiers are receiving housing benefit will continue at a similar scale in the future. If this contribution were to significantly fall, the need for new affordable housing would increase.
A  
Local Plan Backlog 1996-2011B  
Demographic  
Need 2011-2029Sub – Total  
A+BTotal  
assessed needs
Market housing 757 6,075 6,832 9,646
Affordable housing 410 2,880 3,290 3,290
Total housing 1,167 8,955 10,122 12,956Table 1a  
Objectively assessed need for housing1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
22
1d Continued
1.26e The Council intends to meet in 
full the total assessed need of about 
13,000 dwellings. Thus the housing requirement identified in the Plan which it seeks to deliver is also about 13,000 dwellings. It is against the requirement of 13,000 that the five-year supply of housing will be maintained. The 13,000 is not intended as a cap on housing delivery. For example, additional large windfall sites may come forward for development or the contribution to supply assumed to come from small windfall sites may be exceeded. 
1.26f In order to meet the economic 
growth aspirations, the Plan also 
enables the delivery of around  
10,300 new jobs.1.26g The spatial distribution of 
housing across the District is set out  
in the Key Diagram and summarised  
in Table 1B below. The strategy is to locate new development in the most sustainable locations and the priority  
is to steer growth primarily to brownfield land in urban areas of Bath, Keynsham and the larger settlements in the Somer Valley. However, in order to meet the housing requirement and facilitate economic growth in accordance with the objectives of  
the Core Strategy, some greenfield land is also required, including some sites to be released from the Green Belt because these are the most sustainable locations. The identification of land for development has sought to minimise the impact on the environment and the harm to the Green Belt, as well as taking account of infrastructure requirements. The Council has therefore sought to make provision for the level of development likely to be needed. The broad spatial principles are summarised below and elaborated in the place-based chapters 2-5.1.27 Bath  is the District’s economic 
driver and is the primary focus for  
new development. It is also an important sub-regional economic centre. Significant provision is made within Bath for economic growth, particularly modern employment space to meet the changing needs of the economy and take advantage of Bath's competitive position. The Council's policy of 'smart' growth promotes higher value sectors rather than only volume growth. Key areas  
of change within the city are along  
the riverside, especially, in the Enterprise Area. In order to meet development needs, land is released from the Green Belt at Odd Down  
and allocated for development.Table 1b  
spatial distribution of the  
housing requirement
Actual supply figures in November 
2013 SHLAA trajectory have been rounded to the nearest 10
Total housing
Bath 7,020
Keynsham 2,150
Somer Valley 2,470
Rural Areas 1,120
Whitchurch Green Belt200
Total 12,9601.28 Keynsham currently has a 
balance between numbers of resident 
workers and jobs but experiences significant in and out-commuting in light of the mismatch of resident workforce and types of available jobs. A focus will be to generate a range of jobs more suitable to the resident workforce. The key areas of change in Keynsham will be in the town centre and at Somerdale which has significant implications for the future of the town. In addition land is removed from the Green Belt to the south west and east of the town and allocated for development in order to provide additional employment floor space and housing. However, infrastructure constraints and national Green Belt objectives limit the level  
of development that the Town can accommodate. Land is also removed from the Green Belt at East Keynsham and safeguarded for possible development in the future. Development of this land will be permitted only when allocated for development following a review  
of the plan. These changes do  
not undermine the Core Strategy objective to maintain the town's separate identity.1.29 In the Somer Valley  there is 
significant net out-commuting due  
the size of the employment base but there are also significant residential commitments on both greenfield  
and brownfield sites. The area does not have an operating rail link, there are no direct links to the motorways and there is limited scope to  
provide substantial infrastructure improvements in the Plan period.  
The strategy therefore recognises  
this position, and seeks to facilitate economic-led regeneration enabling job growth in the area. The focus  
for change will be in the town centres and on vacant and under-used sites within the Housing Development Boundary. The Housing Development Boundary will be reviewed in the Placemaking Plan. 1.30 In line with national policy  
and sustainability principles, new development in  rural areas  will be 
restrained in comparison with the urban areas, although provision is made to meet local needs, such as affordable housing, and to benefit  
the rural economy. New development is focussed at those settlements which have a range of local facilities, good public transport access and community support. The strict controls in the Green Belt will continue to apply to large parts of the rural areas and there is restraint on development that would be out of scale or harm the character of the open countryside. 
1.30a  However, in order to meet 
development needs during the Plan 
period, land is released from the  
Green Belt and allocated for development at Whitchurch . Whilst 
not well placed for Bath, the Council’s sustainability appraisal identifies land on the edge of Bristol as being a relatively sustainable location.1.31 The Green Belt  is shown on the 
Key Diagram. The development of the spatial strategy has sought to minimise the impact on the Green Belt as far as possible. However, as described above, four strategic changes are made to the inner Green Belt boundary to release land to meet the need for new development. The new detailed boundary is set out on the Policies Map. 
1.32 Nature of growth: The spatial 
strategy seeks to limit the impact of 
new development as a cause of climate change in terms of design and construction and also takes account  
of the impacts of climate change. Particular emphasis is also placed on the quality of new development and seeking to ensure the different needs of the District's communities, such as housing type and size or workspace needs are addressed. 1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
24
1.33 Delivery:  The scale of new homes 
entails a significant uplift in past rates 
of delivery from around 380 (2001-11) to an annualised average of 700+ (2011-29). Diagram 3a below sets  
out the proposed housing trajectory as at adoption of the Plan.  Completions during 2011-2013 have been below the required annual average so there is already a shortfall in delivery. To recover from this shortfall, the annual rate of delivery required for the first five year period from adoption (2014-19) has been increased to 850 pa (4,250 dwellings over the 5 year period). A 20% buffer will be needed in the calculation of the 5 year housing supply at least for this first Plan period. Subject to delivery performance, this may decrease to  
5% later in the plan period.1.33a  The take up of floorspace for 
economic development and the generation of additional employment is dependent on national economic performance as well as planning policy and local and sub-regional economic strategies. The jobs figure in the Plan is not a cap and additional growth will be enabled, if possible, where development would be sustainable. 1.35 The Infrastructure Delivery 
Programme (IDP) outlines how necessary social, transport and green infrastructure are aligned with new development. It focuses particularly on delivery mechanisms in the first 5 years of the Plan period.  Essential infrastructure required to support the District-wide strategy is outlined in the relevant section of the Core Strategy. 
1d Continued
Diagram 3a  
Housing Trajectory  
as at adoptionNote: completions for 2013/14 are provisional pending the completion of full year monitoring. 
0 11/12 12/13 13/14 14/15 15/16 16/17 17/18 18/19 19/20 20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29100200300400500600700800900100
463
550
510
850
850
850
850
850
722
722
722
722
722
722
722
722
722
722Policy DW1  
District-wide spatial Strategy
The overarching strategy for B&NES  
is to promote sustainable development by:
1 focussing new housing, jobs and community  
facilities in Bath, Keynsham, and the Somer  
Valley particularly ensuring:
a there is the necessary modern office space  
in Bath within or adjoining the city centre to 
enable diversification of the economy whilst 
maintaining the unique heritage of the City
b sufficient space is available in Keynsham   
to reposition the town as a more significant business location whilst retaining its  
separate identity 
c there is deliverable space to enable job growth  
in the towns and principal villages in the Somer 
Valley  to create a thriving and vibrant area which 
is more self-reliant socially and economically 
d development in rural areas is located at 
settlements with a good range of local facilities and with good access to public transport 
2 making provision to accommodate:
a a net increase of 10,300 jobs
b an increase in the supply of housing by  
around 13,000 homes
3 prioritising the use of brownfield opportunities for new development in order to limit the need for development on greenfield sites
4 retaining the general extent of Bristol – Bath Green Belt within B&NES, other than removing land to meet the District’s development needs at the following locations identified on the Key Diagram and allocated on the Policies Map: • Land adjoining Odd Down
 • Land adjoining East Keynsham
 • Land adjoining South West Keynsham
 • Land at Whitchurch
5 requiring development to be designed in a way  
that is resilient to the impacts of climate change
6 protecting, conserving and enhancing the District’s nationally and locally important  
cultural and heritage assets
7 protecting and enhancing the District's biodiversity resource including sites, habitats  
and species of European importance
8 ensuring infrastructure is aligned with new development
9 reviewing the Core Strategy at around five yearly intervals and when necessary, make changes to ensure that both:
a the objectives are being achieved particularly  
the delivery of the housing and work space targets set out in Table 9 to ensure that there remains a flexible supply of deliverable and developable land; and 
b the Core Strategy is planning for the most  
appropriate growth targets, particularly  
housing and work space/jobs
The first review will be timed to co-ordinate with  
the review of the West of England Core Strategies  
in around 2016.Locational Policies  
The Policy Framework for the location of new development is as follows:Core Strategy Policy
Bath Policies B1, B2, B3, B3A, B3C, B4
Keynsham Policies KE1, KE2, KE3A & B, KE4
Midsomer Norton, Westfield & RadstockPolicies SV1, SV2, SV3
Paulton, Peasedown St. John Policy SV1
Timsbury, Camerton, Hallatrow, High Littleton, Farrington GurneyPolicy SV1, and Policy RA1 or RA2
Bathampton, Batheaston, Bathford, Bishop Sutton, Clutton/Temple Cloud, Compton Martin, East Harptree, Farrington Gurney, Farmborough, Hinton Blewett, Saltford, Camerton, Ubley, West Harptree and WhitchurchPolicy RA1  
or RA2
Whitchurch Policy RA5Table 1  
Locational Policy Framework26PaultonFarmboro ugh
TimsburyBishop
Sutton
Temple
CloudWhit churc h
Saltfor dBatheas ton
Bathfo rd
Chew 
Valley 
LakeBlagdon 
LakeRiver AvonBRIS TOL
Peasedo wn
St John
MidsomerNorto nRadst ock
Westfield1d Continued
KEYNSHAM
2,150 homes  
1,600 jobs200 homes
BATH
7,020 homes  
6,950 jobs
SOMER VALLEY
2,470 homes  
900 jobsRURAL AREAS
1,120 homes  
700 jobs
DIAGRAM 4  
BATH & NORTH EAST 
SOMERSET: THE KEY 
DIAGRAM
KEY
 General extent of Green Belt
 AONB
 Strategic locations
  Area of search for location  
of Flood Mitigation Measures
 Showcase Bus Routes
 Strategic Site
 Strategic Green Belt release
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)Infrastructure 
1.37 Delivery of the District wide 
spatial strategy will need to be 
supported by the provision of necessary infrastructure. The  
key district-wide infrastructure requirements identified in the B&NES Infrastructure Delivery Programme is summarised  
below, these are supplemented  
by infrastructure requirements included in each of the place  
based sections. The Infrastructure Delivery Programme also  
contains a number of desirable infrastructure items which are  
not included below, infrastructure planning involves an ongoing process of dialogue and communication with infrastructure providers and as further evidence is developed and future funding  
is secured additional items may  
be added to the Infrastructure Delivery Programme or their  
status may be upgraded or altered.Vision and District-
wide Spatial Strategy 
1eIDP Ref Key infrastructure item Phasing Cost Funding & Delivery
DWI.1 Direct Public Investment  
in Affordable Housing 2010-2015 £10m Homes & Communities Agency 
Funding through the West of England Single Conversation: West of England  
Delivery & Infrastructure Plan
DWI.2 Waste Treatment facilities 2010-2029 Not quantifiedJoint Waste Core Strategy identifies deliverable sites. Development likely to be delivered through public/  
private sector led delivery
DWI.3 Early Years, Primary & Secondary EducationAt key stages throughout the plan periodSchools reorganisation plan to contain the Strategy of the Local Education Authority. Developer contributions to be secured.  
Sites may need to be allocated  
in the Placemaking Plan
DWI.4 Acute Care – Capital Projects associated with maintenance of the estate, to enable the RUH to provide for increasing numbers, anticipated demographic change will increase numbers of young and old who are the main groups accessing acute care 2010-2029 £50m RUH NHS Trust seeking  
funding working with the Department of Health
DWI.5 Power Generation & Distribution 2010-2029 Not quantifiedWestern Power Distribution (South West) Plc. 5 year  
cycles of investment agreed  
with Ofgem.Table 2  
Key District-wide Infrastructurex1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
28
1e Continued
IDP Ref Key infrastructure item Phasing Cost Funding & Delivery
DWI.6 Gas Supply 2010-2029 Not 
quantifiedWales and West Utilities Infrastructure Plan – private sector funded. Specific issues  
in Bath addressed via BWR  
site works
DWI.7 Water Supply 2010-2029 Not quantifiedBristol Water Resource Management Plan 
DWI.8 Waste Water 2010-2029 Not quantifiedWessex Water Business Plan (2010-15) 5 year cycles of investment agreed with Ofwat
DWI.9 Playing Pitches 2010-2029 Not quantifiedPlaying Pitch Strategy  
Evidence Base
Green Space Strategy (2007) 
Delivery via public sector  
asset management and  
private sector investment
DWI.10 Green Space (Formal,  
Informal & Allotments) 2010-2029 Standards 
set and cost of provision quantified  
in the  
Green Space Strategy Green Space Strategy  
Delivery via public sector  
asset management and  
private sector investment
DWI.11 Children’s Play To be complete  
by 2029£2.5m capital funding
Further  
costs not 
quantified.Department for Children,  
Schools and Families
The strategy is to  
locate new development  
in the most sustainable  
locations…IDP Ref Key infrastructure item Phasing Cost Funding & Delivery
DWI.12 Green Infrastructure 2011-2029 Not 
quantified Green Infrastructure Strategy. Delivery via public sector  
asset management, private sector investment, voluntary  
and community sector
DWI.13 Greater Bristol Bus Network Improvements2006-2016 £70m for overall projectWest of England Authorities, First Group, DfT
Table 3  
Policy framework and mechanisms for delivering the strategic objectives.
Strategic Objectives &  
SCS driversPolicy framework and mechanisms  
to support delivery
1 
Pursue a low carbon and sustainable future in a changing climate
Climate change  
GrowthNational Policy
NPPF
Local Policy
Core Strategy:  • Policy DW1 District Wide Spatial Strategy • Policy CP4 District Heating  • Policy CP1 Retrofitting Existing Buildings  • Policy CP2 Sustainable Construction  • Policy CP3 Renewable Energy  • Place based Sections  Local Plan saved policies for: • Minerals, Energy, Utilities, Health & Safety, Waste, Access  • Joint Waste Core Strategy Key Strategies & Plans• Strategy Flood Risk 
Assessments
• Flood Risk Management 
Strategy1 Vision and District-wide spatial strategy
30
Strategic Objectives &  
SCS driversPolicy framework and mechanisms  
to support delivery
2 
Protect and enhance the District's 
natural, built and cultural heritage and provide green infrastructure 
Growth  
LocalityNational Policy
NPPF
Local Policy
Core Strategy: • Policy B4 The World Heritage Site and its Setting • Policy CP6 Environment Quality • Policy CP8 Green Belt • Place-Based Sections
Local Plan saved policies for: 
•   Implementation, Design, Community Facilities & Services, Sport &
   Recreation, Green Belt, Natural Environment, Built and Historic Environment Key Strategies & Plans• Public Realm & Movement   Strategy for Bath City Centre• Cultural Strategy• World Heritage Site   Management Plan • South West Nature Map • Green Infrastructure Strategy • Green Space Strategy• Planning Obligations SPD• Infrastructure Delivery   Programme• WILDthings Biodiversity   Action Plan• Cotswolds and Mendip Hills   AONB Management Plans
3
Encourage economic development, diversification and prosperity
Growth  
EconomyNational Policy
NPPF
Local Policy
Core Strategy: • Policy DW1 District Wide Spatial Strategy • Policy CP12 Centres and Retailing • Place-Based Sections
Local Plan saved policies for: 
• Economy, Tourism & AgricultureKey Strategies & Plans• Economic Development   Strategy • Public Realm and Movement   Strategy for Bath City Centre  
4
Invest in our city,  
town and local centres 
Growth  
Locality  
EconomyNational Policy
NPPF
Local Policy
Core Strategy:• Policy CP12 Centres and Retailing• Place-Based Sections 
Local Plan saved policies for:
• Design, Economy, Tourism & Agriculture, Sport & Recreation, ShoppingKey Strategies & Plans• Destination Management   Plan • Retail Strategy • Economic Development   Strategy • Public Realm and Movement   Strategy for Bath City Centre  1e ContinuedStrategic Objectives &  
SCS driversPolicy framework and mechanisms  
to support delivery
5
Meet housing needs 
Demographic Change  
Growth  
Inequalities  
LocalityNational Policy
NPPF
Local Policy
Core Strategy:• Policy DW1 District Wide Spatial Strategy • Policy CP9 Affordable Housing • Policy CP10 Housing Mix • Policy CP13 Infrastructure Provision • Policy CP11 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople• Policy B5 Strategic Policy for Bath's Universities• Place-Based Sections 
Local Plan saved policies for:
• Housing • Planning Obligations SPD Key Strategies & Plans•    The Key to Independence -
   Housing Strategy for Older    People • Student Accommodation   Strategy • Infrastructure Delivery   Programme • Housing and Wellbeing   Strategy 2010-2015 
6
Plan for development that  
promotes health and well being 
Growth  
Inequalities  
LocalityNational Policy
NPPF
Local Policy
Core Strategy: • Policy CP7 Green Infrastructure • Policy CP13 Infrastructure Provision • Place based sections 
Local Plan saved policies for: 
• Sport & Recreation, AccessKey Strategies & Plans• Green Infrastructure Strategy • Green Spaces Strategy • Planning Obligations SPD • Housing and Wellbeing   Strategy 2010-2015 • Public Realm & Movement   Strategy for Bath City Centre • Air Quality Management   Areas for Bath and Keynsham
7
Deliver well connected places accessible by sustainable  
means of transport
Climate change  
Growth  
InequalitiesNational Policy
NPPF
Local Policy
Core Strategy: • Policy CP13 Infrastructure Provision • Place based sections 
Local Plan saved policies for: 
• Sport & Recreation, AccessKey Strategies & Plans• Infrastructure Delivery   Programme • Joint Local Transport Plan 3 • Public Realm & Movement   Strategy for Bath City Centre • Air Quality Management   Areas for Bath and Keynsham x2 Bath
32
Therapeutic
Entrepreneurial
Innovative
CreativeImaginativeBeautiful2Bath
2a  Setting the Agenda  34
2b  Vision and Spatial Strategy for the City  39
 Diagram 5  Bath Spatial Strategy 40 
 Policy B1 Bath Spatial Strategy   41
2c The Central Area and Western Corridor 44 
 Diagram 6 The Central Area and Enterprise Area 45
 Diagram 7 General Extent of the Central Area  46
 The Central Area  46
 Policy B2 Central Area Strategic Policy  47
 Diagram 8 The Central Area in 2029  51
 Western Riverside   53
 Twerton and Newbridge Riversides  54
 Diagram 9 Twerton and Newbridge Riversides  54
 Policy B3 Strategic Policy for Twerton and Newbridge Riverside  56
2d  Bath's Neighbourhoods  58
 Table 4 District and Local Centres within Bat h  60
 Diagram 10 Bath's Neighbourhoods   61
 Policy B3a Land adjoining Odd Down, Bath Strategic Site Allocation 62
  Concept Diagram for Land adjoining Odd Down,  
Bath Strategic Site Allocation 65
 Policy B3c Extension to MOD Ensleigh  66
2e  The World Heritage Site and its Setting  68
 Policy B4 The World Heritage Site and its Setting 69
2f Bath’s Universities  70
 Policy B5 Strategic Policy for Bath’s Universities  71
2g Infrastructure and Delivery  72
 Table 5 Summary of Key Infrastructure in Bath 75
Harmonious
Picturesque 
Unique
HistoricRomanGeorgian
Busy
VibrantPeaceful
Quiet
GreatTiredNeglected
Congested
2 Bath
34
Bath 
2a
Setting  
the 
Agenda Context  
Historical Context
“ continuous development  
over two millennia”  
WHS Statement of Significance 
(2010)
2.01 From its early history as a  
Celtic place of reverence and as a  
spa during Roman occupation,  
Bath evolved into a Saxon monastic settlement and subsequently a Norman cathedral town. During  
the Middle Ages it developed into  
a regional market and a centre of  
the woollen trade before becoming perhaps the most significant national health resort of Elizabethan and  
Stuart England. Rapid expansion in  
the Georgian era saw Bath become the foremost fashionable resort of  
the 1700s, and created an enduring architectural legacy.2.02 The Victorian city struggled to 
cope with its Georgian legacy. At the beginning of Victoria’s reign Bath was the 9th largest town in England with a population of nearly 50,000. Thereafter Bath lagged behind the national level of industrial urban expansion and instead Bath refined its image as a place of genteel residence and retirement. Many pinned their hopes of a social revival with Brunel's Great Western Railway, but this did little to reignite the popularity of the city. Instead the railways served to crystallize an industrial strip of mills and foundries along the River Avon as far as Twerton. Towards the end of the Victorian period the Corporation sought to revive the city as a spa upon the rediscovery of its Roman origins. However, little came of efforts  
to establish Bath as a leading therapeutic centre.2.03 The pace of growth in Bath was 
slow during the early part of the 20th 
Century, a reflection of the depressed state of the national economy, but the aftermath of WWI resulted in a great deal of inter war house building and a surge in the land coverage of the city. In the inter war period the southern part of the landscape bowl at Southdown and the Odd Down Plateau was colonised. Elsewhere, suburban development took place  
at Weston and Larkhall and new neighbourhoods were connected  
to the centre by the Bath Electric Tramway. After the Second World War Bath was caught up in the process of rapid socio-economic change that was at work in the country as a whole. Change within the city reflected many national trends, including the growth  
of private motoring, modernist reconstruction and the subsequent  
rise of the conservation movement.  
In 1987, in recognition of its unique cultural value the city was inscribed  
as a World Heritage Site. This raised  
its international profile as a tourist destination and has sharpened  
debate about how change and development should be managed  
and what 'sustainability' means for  
the city and its future.
2.04 Bath has exhibited a positive 
genius for reinventing itself and will 
need to do so again in order to emerge from the economic shocks of the early 21st century as a more environmentally sustainable and economically competitive place that stewards well its remarkable cultural inheritance.
2 Bath
36
2a Continued
Strategic Issues
1 The history of Bath has included several changes 
of image, function and fortune but it maintains a strong place in the popular imagination as an elegant Georgian spa town with a remarkable  
Roman legacy. The city retains many of the characteristics which have made it a place of  
high environmental quality and a desirable place to be for previous generations. The approach to planning for 21st century Bath must be driven by these qualities so that the city continues to be  
a distinctive, successful and competitive place.
2 The conservation and enhancement of the World Heritage Site (WHS) and its setting  
and of the Conservation Area must be reconciled with contemporary socio-economic and environmental challenges, including climate change. Bath's WHS status and environmental quality is not an obstacle to economic growth –  
it is part of a strong 'brand', an incentive to  
and enabler of prosperity – however, it does require that contemporary change is  
managed sensitively and that high quality  
design is achieved.
3 The Council's Economic Strategy and research by Business West sets out the current health of the city and considers its future prospects. Bath's prosperity depends on enabling the growth of existing business, attracting high value added employers and moving towards a low carbon economy. It will have to compete with other cities and large towns also wishing to attract growing sectors. This will require a new phase of investment in offices and other workspaces within and adjoining the city centre. It also means optimising the contribution of both universities to the economy as sources of creativity, innovation and labour and enabling the development of related employment and business premises.4 Alongside measures to diversify the economy, industrial enterprise must be allowed to compete in the land market in order to sustain a mixed employment offer for a multi-skilled workforce. 
5 The strategy for the city must sustain the critical contribution of tourism to the economy. This means protecting and enhancing the characteristics that make the city special and ensuring that an appropriate level and range of visitor accommodation is maintained.
6 The housing market is particularly expensive to penetrate and this contributes to a dislocation of workers from workplace and exacerbates the level of in-commuting from lower cost locations. More housing and more affordable housing is needed to support economic growth, increase the co-location of jobs and workers, and address the needs of households on the housing register.
7 There is a significant imbalance between the resident workforce and jobs in the city. The main place of employment for about 30% of the resident workforce is outside Bath and the city imports many workers from beyond its boundaries, particularly from the market towns of West Wiltshire.
8 There are considerable areas of derelict and underperforming land and a number of prominent sites in need of redevelopment in order to enhance the World Heritage Site  
and protect its setting and the Green Belt  
from incursion.
9 The public realm of the city centre is suffering from decades of underinvestment and a much better relationship is needed between the city and its river.10 Congestion on the main radial routes, the city's air quality management areas and climate change require that the spatial strategy  
makes the most of existing public transport infrastructure and planned investment. In this way growth can enable people to travel to and around the city with less environmental impact and greater efficiency. 
11 In order to enable development in the Central Area and Western Corridor significant works  
will be needed to mitigate flood risk together with essential land remediation.
12 Much of the building stock of the city is energy inefficient. Planning policies should enable improvements to the energy performance of Bath's buildings and also the generation of low carbon sources of energy.
13 The development of the University of Bath  
and Bath Spa University requires strategic  
policy direction in order to secure the future  
of each institution, and to ensure that the  
student population does not continue to drive the student lettings market to the detriment  
of the normal private housing stock and  
existing communities.
14 The Bath/Bradford-on-Avon Special Area of Conservation (SAC) is designated because of  
the presence of bats and their foraging areas. Bats are protected under European and UK legislation and care must be taken to avoid impacts to the integrity of the SAC.World Heritage,  
Regeneration and ‘Place’
2.05 In addition to enabling the 
delivery of the Sustainable 
Community Strategy, the Bath spatial strategy seeks to contribute to the actions proposed in the City of Bath World Heritage Site Management Plan (November 2010) that seek to protect the Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) of the site and its setting. The significance of the WHS is set  
out in the Statement of Outstanding Universal Value and derives from  
the city’s Hot Springs, its Roman Archaeology; Georgian town planning; Georgian architecture;  
the green setting of the City within  
a landscape bowl. The Cotswolds AONB Management Plan is also important in this regard as Bath's townscape and landscape combine to form a special composition of town and country. 2.06 In 2006 the Council published 
'The Future for Bath' in which it sought to define the essence of the city –  
its DNA. It articulates a suite of regenerative themes, derived from the aspirations, intentions and activities that have shaped Bath's socio-economic history and character. It proposes that these influences should be reinterpreted and translated into a contemporary context to inspire a distinctive future place brand and identity. The themes are: 2.07 The Bath spatial strategy has 
been prepared against the background of this regeneration agenda so that it contributes to the realisation of a distinctive and authentic development programme for the city. As an international cultural asset, well considered and high quality growth is a key principle guiding the overall level, type and design of new development. The strategy prioritises the creation of enduring developments, places and neighbourhoods over 'planning by numbers' in order to deliver relatively short term targets. It seeks to shape development that will be appreciated and used well into the future and to deflect ill-conceived proposals that might be rejected within a generation.2.08 The Public Realm and Movement 
Strategy for the city centre has already responded to this agenda in order to shape investment in the city centre.  
It sets out a programme to reanimate the city centre by:
• Rebalancing the movement and 
transport systems in favour of pedestrians, cyclists and public transport users.
• Refashioning streets, spaces and  
the riverside including pavements, seating, lighting, etc.
• Revealing the centre through a  
new wayfinding and city  
information system.
Progress on these issues has been made possible through funding secured by the Council from the  
EU CIVITAS programme.
Water &  
WellbeingPleasure  
& CultureKnowledge  
& InventionLiving  
HeritageImagination  
& Design2 Bath
38
2a Continued
Bath's townscape 
and landscape 
combine  to form  
a total composition 
of form and place
Vision  
and  
Spatial 
Strategy  
for the  
City Bath 
2bA Vision and  
Strategy for the City
2.09 The key strategic issues, along 
with other plans and the Future for 
Bath have informed a vision for the city as set out below. The spatial strategy for Bath and strategic  
policies for specific areas set out in  
this chapter seek to deliver this vision.
The Vision  
What the spatial strategy  
is seeking to achieve
Bath's natural, historic and cultural assets, which combine to create a unique sense of place of international significance, will be secured and enhanced to maintain the city's key competitive advantage and unique selling point as a high quality environment, to live, grow a business, visit and invest.
The scope to further improve Bath's environmental 
quality will form the foundation of efforts to boost  
the city's profile as a more competitive and economic centre. The realisation of a range of development opportunities within the Central Area and Enterprise Area will greatly improve the city aesthetically and also enable Bath to position itself as a more entrepreneurial, innovative, creative and business friendly place. Economic development and productivity will therefore be stimulated and facilitated, whilst simultaneously upgrading inherited townscape.Where possible the built environment will evolve in  
a more energy and resource efficient manner and renewable and sustainable energy, appropriate to  
the Bath context will be introduced, alongside measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change and to pursue a reduced carbon economy. 
The delivery of new housing is a vital component  
of the vision and will help to create a sustainable 
relationship between the city's labour and job  
markets and support Bath's economic potential. 
The need for more housing will enable the 
regeneration of many areas within the city. Where development is needed on the edge of Bath it will be positioned, master planned and designed to sustain the ‘significance’ of Bath’s heritage assets and the integrity of its landscape setting. Parallel investment in public transport infrastructure and walking and cycling routes will keep the city moving and enable more sustainable travel choices to be made.
Bath's already strong identity as a therapeutic place 
will be enhanced by boosting its performance as an enjoyable city for leisure, recreation and shopping with a vivacious cultural scene and a highly valued green infrastructure network.Bath Spa 
University
Odd Do wn
Park & Ride
(EXP ANDED )Lansdo wn
Park & Ride
(EXP ANDED )
Newbridge
Park & Ride
(EXP ANDED )Royal Unit ed 
HospitalMoD Ensleigh
MoD W arminst er Rd
University 
of Bath
MoD FoxhillBATH
Newton St Lo eCorston
Englishco mbe
South St oke
Combe Ha yMonkton CoombeBathfo rd
Bathampt onBatheas ton
KelstonLittle Solsury Hill A4
TO CHIPPENHAM
A361
TO BRADFORD 
& TROW BRIDGE
A36A46 - M4TO BRIS TOL 
& SWINDON
OLDFIELD PARK 
STATIONBATH SP A 
STATION
A367
TO SOMER V ALLEYA4
TO KEYNSHAM
& BRIS TOL
Newbridge and  
Twerton Riversides  
Industrial focus north of the 
river. Mixed use to the south.
Western Riverside  
Residential led  
Regeneration 
Central Area  
Protect historic character. 
Broad range of developments to upgrade environmental quality and functional role 
River corridor  
Key GI asset; ‘whole-river’ 
approach to protection, enhancement and flood risk to realise potential as a multifunctional green corridor
Bath's Neighbourhoods  
Redeveloped MoD land 
together with infilling to  
yield about 2,800 homes
DIAGRAM 5  
BATH SPATIAL 
STRATEGY
KEY
  City Centre – Including Primary 
Shopping Area
  Area of search for location of  
Flood Mitigation Measures
  Former Fuller's Earthworks – potential residual waste facility  
(see JWCS)
 Strategic Site
 Strategic Green Belt release
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)2b Continued
The strategy for Bath is to:
1  Natural and Built Environment
Sustain and enhance the significance of the  
city’s heritage assets, including:
a The Outstanding Universal Value of the City  
of Bath World Heritage Site and its setting.
b Listed buildings, the Bath Conservation Area  
and their settings.
c Archaeology, scheduled ancient monuments, 
and historic parks and gardens.
d Non-designated heritage assets of local  
interest and value.
e Giving great weight to conserving landscape and scenic beauty in the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
f The network of green spaces and wildlife corridors including the River Avon and Kennet and Avon Canal, Local Nature Reserves, formal and informal parks and recreational areas, trees and woodlands.
f The biodiversity resource including species  
and habitats of European importance.
All of the following objectives will be considered  
in the context of part 1 of this policy:2  Economic Development
a Plan for an overall net increase in jobs of  
7,000, rising from 60,200 in 2011 to 67,200  
in 2029, with significant gains in business services tempered by losses in defence  
and manufacturing. 
b Plan for the expansion of knowledge intensive and creative employment sectors by enabling the stock of office premises to increase from about 173,000m2 in 2011 to about 213,000m2  
in 2029.
c Achieve the net additional increase to the stock of office premises of 40,000m2 by enabling the development of 50,000m2 of new space, linked to a managed release of 10,000m2 of that which is qualitatively least suitable for continued occupation. 
d Focus new office development within and adjoining the city centre and enable appropriate levels of business space in mixed use out-of-centre development sites.
e Plan for a contraction in the demand of industrial floor space from about 167,000m2 in 2011 to about 127,000m2 in 2029 but sustain a mixed economy to support Bath's multi-skilled workforce and multi-faceted economic base by retaining a presumption of favour of industrial land in the Newbridge Riverside area. 3  Housing
a Enable the development of about 7,000 new homes, increasing the overall stock of housing from about 40,000 to 47,000. The following distribution of housing will be planned for:
 Large sites in the Central Area and Enterprise Area – 3,300.
 Large sites in the outer neighbourhoods, including former MoD land and the extension  
to MoD, Ensleigh – 2,100.
 Small scale intensification distributed throughout the existing urban area 1,150
 Land adjoining Odd Down – 300. Policy B1
Bath Spatial Strategy2 Bath
42
4 The Relationship between 
Population, Labour Supply and 
Employment 
a At the margin of delivery, achieve a better 
balance between the overall number of jobs in the city and the resident workforce. A sufficient increase in housing delivery and the associated growth of the labour force will reduce the need for labour to be imported from neighbouring locations. Economic diversification will reduce the need for a significant minority of resident workers to out-commute to other areas.
b Reduce the proportion of the resident workforce who out commute and enable a  
shift in the level of self-containment from  
70% to nearer 80%. 5  Previously developed land
a Regenerate and repair a number of areas  
within the Central Area and Enterprise Area to create new areas of attractive and productive townscape and a much improved relationship between the city and its river. 
b Transform the Western Riverside area into a contemporary residential neighbourhood.
c Redevelop surplus Ministry of Defence land at Foxhill, Warminster Road and Ensleigh to optimise the contribution that these areas can make to the city's development needs.6  Shopping 
a Ensure that the primary shopping area successfully absorbs Southgate into the trading patterns and character of the city centre by not making provision for a further large scale comparison retail project.
b Enable small to medium sized comparison retail development that improves the shopping offer and enhances the reputation of the city centre.
c Protect and where possible enhance the vitality and viability of District and local centres.
d Focus additional convenience retail floorspace (beyond existing commitments) within and on the edge of existing centres before considering out-of-centre sites that might improve the spatial pattern of provision across the city.
e Enable the provision of neighbourhood retail services at Ensleigh, Warminster Road, Foxhill, and associated with the Strategic Site Allocation adjoining Odd Down.Policy B1
Bath Spatial Strategy2b Continued
7  Higher Education
a Enable the provision for additional on-campus 
student bed spaces at the University of Bath and at Bath Spa University and new off-campus student accommodation subject to policy B5, thereby facilitating growth in the overall number of students whilst avoiding growth of the student lettings market. 
b Enable provision of additional on campus and in-city teaching and research space.
8  Tourism, Culture and Sport
a Manage the provision of 500-750 new hotel bedrooms to widen the accommodation offer of the city, increase overnight stays and the competitiveness of the Bath as a visitor and business destination.
b At the Recreation Ground, and subject to the resolution of any unique legal issues and constraints, enable the development of a sporting, cultural and leisure stadium. 
c Enable the provision of enhanced facilities for interpretation of the World Heritage Site in the Central Area and for the City’s Archives.
d Enable the provision for a new cultural/ performance/arts venue within the  
Central Area.9  Public Realm
a Facilitate enhancement of the public realm of the Central Area and delivery of a Wayfinding and City Information System in line with the Public Ream and Movement Strategy.
10 Infrastructure and Delivery
To enable the delivery of the spatial strategy for Bath it will be necessary to implement the actions presented in Section 2G. In summary this means:
a Implementing improvements to walking, cycling 
and public transport infrastructure, including the ‘Bath Package’, to improve connectivity to and from areas of housing, employment and neighbourhood centres.
b Implementing a new Parking Strategy.
c Implementing the Air Quality Management  
Plan for Bath.
d Implementing flood mitigation measures to ensure development in vulnerable areas of the Central Area and Enterprise Area is safe whilst not increasing risk elsewhere.
e Addressing land remediation within the Central Area and Enterprise Area in relation to industrial and utilities uses. The decommissioning and removal of the Windsor Gas Holder Station must be addressed as part of the redevelopment of Bath Western Riverside  
and its environs.11 Energy conservation and  
sustainable energy generation
a Enable renewable energy generation including the development of district heating networks.
b Improve the energy efficiency of the  
built environment.2 Bath
44
The 
Central Area and Enterprise AreaBath 
2c2.10 The development potential of  
the Central Area and land either side 
of the River Avon lying between the Lower and Upper Bristol Roads  
(A36 and A4) presents the key opportunity for delivering many  
parts of the vision for the city.
2.11 The valley floor is the headline 
development location for Bath; a 
complex area, where both significant change and conservation is needed. This means realising its economic usefulness and property value whilst protecting heritage assets, responding to character, enhancing recreational potential, managing flood risk, addressing land remediation, improving connectivity and sustaining wildlife habitat.2.12 Within this area flood risk is a  
key constraint which is likely to increase as a result of climate change. A sequential, risk-based approach is taken to the strategy for Bath in accordance with the NPPF. The Central Area and Enterprise Area is regarded as the most suitable location within the District for the scope of activities envisaged. A site specific flood risk assessment must demonstrate that the development within this area will be safe throughout its lifetime without increasing flood risk elsewhere in accordance with the NPPF and Policy CP5 (see infrastructure and delivery section).2.13 The Core Strategy identifies 
strategic policy areas within the  
valley bottom of the River Avon.  
It sets out their roles, the scope  
and scale of change to be achieved and placemaking principles to  
shape change. 
The policy areas are:
• The Central Area (comprising the 
City Centre, South Quays and Western Riverside East)
• Western Riverside 
• Twerton and Newbridge Riverside
2.14 The Core Strategy sets out a clear, 
firm and enduring vision of change for 
these areas upon which to base site specific delivery proposals.
2.15 To support the Core Strategy a 
Placemaking Plan will be prepared to 
set out a more detailed planning and design framework for specific sites within the Central Area, the Enterprise Area and elsewhere in the city. This  
will provide a vehicle for resolving contentious planning issues for key areas where the change is envisaged.The Placemaking Plan will:
•  Establish the potential use of 
individual sites and set out sustainable design principles
• Resolve conflicting objectives in areas subject to development pressures
• Protect environmental assets particularly sensitive to change
• Help to stimulate development  
and enable the delivery of planned growth and economic potential
• Act as a focus and a catalyst for  
key agencies and landowners to work together 
 DIAGRAM 6  
THE CENTRAL AREA 
AND ENTERPRISE 
AREA
KEY
  Central Area
 Enterprise Area
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
Bath Spa StationOldfield Park
StationKingsmeadTwertonCombe
ParkWestonPark
The OvalEast Twerto n
South Twerto nLocksbrookLower W estonPrimrose Hill
Sion Hill
Western RiversideRoyal Victoria Park
AlexandraParkHigh Common
Henrietta
ParkSydney
Gardens
WES TERN C ORRIDOR
2 Bath
46
2c Continued
 DIAGRAM 7  
GENERAL EXTENT OF THE CENTRAL AREA
KEY
  City Centre
  Central Area
   Key Development Hotspots
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved (100023334) (2010)
Bath Spa 
StationOldfield Park
StationTwertonCombe
ParkWeston
Park
The OvalEast Twerto n
South Twerto nLocksbrookLower W estonPrimrose Hil l
Sion Hill
Western Riversid eRoyal Victoria Park
Alexandra
ParkHigh Common
HenriettaPark
Recreation 
GroundWES TERN C ORRIDOR
Bath  
City CentreThe Central Area 
2.16 The Central Area of Bath lies at 
the heart of the World Heritage site 
and much of it lies within the Bath Conservation Area. The Central  
Area comprises the city centre and neighbouring locations to the south and east. A key objective of the plan is for the city centre to expand to encompass the entire Central Area. The precise extent of the city centre boundary is identified on the Policies Map. This boundary will be reviewed every 5 years based on observable change.1  The Role of the Central Area
Change within the Central Area should  
improve Bath's profile and performance as:
a An important cultural asset for the world.
b One of the country's most desirable and 
beautiful places in which to live and work.
c A more dynamic place for business, enterprise, creativity and innovation.
d An attractive centre for shopping, leisure and recreation.
e A spa town that inspires, relaxes and entertains.
f A visitor destination of international renown.
g A place that connects people to the natural environment.
h A place to, and in which people increasingly travel by walking, cycling or by using public transport.2  Placemaking Principles
Change within the Central Area should reinforce and contribute to the City's unique character  
and identity.
Assets of the Central Area
The following characteristics combine to provide an exceptional urban environment. Development proposals must demonstrate that they have been inspired and shaped by these characteristics.  
The Placemaking Plan will set out how the redevelopment of specific sites can respond to these characteristics:
a There are many areas of exemplary urban 
design where the relationship between buildings, streets and public spaces presents a high quality environment for people to enjoy.
b The urban landscape of streets, blocks and plots within the core of the city is of a fine and characteristic grain and contains a high proportion of listed buildings.
c There are extensive areas of high quality architecture where individual buildings  
(in terms of height, scale, massing and architectural treatment) combine to form  
a harmonious townscape ensemble.d The limited palette of materials and the quality, detailing, skill of craftsmanship and authenticity of construction presents a coherent and high quality finish to the urban scene.
e Many buildings have a proven track record as being adaptable to a range of uses over time.
f There is a strong visual relationship between the built environment and its landscape setting providing many glimpses and views, out of, within and into the Central Area.
g The Central Area enjoys good proximity and connectivity to high quality urban parks and waterways for recreation. These also make walking and cycling to and from the Central Area an attractive option.
h The River Avon and its banks are of nature conservation value and provide important bat foraging corridors and opportunities to connect people to the natural environment.
i The compactness and continuity of the primary shopping area, high representation of independent, specialist and multiple retailers amongst high incidence of historic shop fronts are key strengths.
j The prevalence of active street frontages contributes to lively streets and public areas.Policy B2
Central Area  
Strategic Policy2 Bath
48
2c Continued
k There are a wide range of uses and activities 
within a walkable distance from each other  
and the bus and rail stations.
l A series of public spaces allow for temporary uses such as festivals, markets and events  
which contribute to the cultural identity and local economy of the city. 
m The city centre maintains a 'lived in' feel due  
to the number of residences both within and adjoining the city centre.Risks to the Central AreaThe following issues are identified as key risks to enhancing the function and appearance of the Central Area. Development proposals must,  
where possible, address these issues:
n There are areas of poor quality post war 
development which have disrupted and fractured the urban grain. A number of these result in underutilised and poorly connected areas of riverside. within or having a  
relationship with, the Central Area.
o There are areas where the river acts as a  
barrier to pedestrian and cycling desire lines and further crossings would be beneficial in enabling sustainable transport choices and  
for the enjoyment of the city.
p The poor quality of much of the public realm  
has a negative impact on the experience of  
the city centre, the World Heritage Site and Bath's external image.
q The volume of traffic harms the environmental quality of a number of streets and spaces and impedes the movement of pedestrian and cyclists. It therefore acts as a barrier to the expansion of a walkable city centre.r Whilst the incidence of independent and  
local retailers remains high compared to  
other centres, there has been a slow decline in their presence.
s There is limited capacity on the highway network to absorb increased motorised travel.
t Congestion reduces the reliability of public transport to and from the Central Area.
u Parts of the Central Area fall within flood zones 2 and 3a (See 'Infrastructure and Delivery') and this affects a number of key development opportunities (see B1.3)
v A lack of flexible modern offices and other workspaces and an over reliance on Georgian office space impedes productivity, economic growth and diversification.
w The building stock of the Central Area is energy inefficient.Policy B2  
Central Area  
Strategic Policy  
Continued3  Key Development Opportunities 
Figure 7 illustrates the general extent of the city 
centre, identifies neighbouring areas with the most capacity for significant change and key regeneration opportunities. The precise extent of the city centre, including that of the primary shopping area is shown on the Policies Map (see Appendix 3). Within the context of the NPPF, economic development led mixed use development proposals at the following locations that accord with parts 1 and 2 of Policy B2 and contribute to the scope and scale of change listed in part '4' of this policy will be welcomed.
City Centre
a North of Pulteney Bridge (Cornmarket, Cattlemarket, Hilton Hotel, and The Podium).
b Manvers Street Car Park, Avon & Somerset Police Station and Royal Mail Depot area.
c Green Park Road (Green Park House).
d Bath Quays North (Avon Street Car and  
Coach Park and City College).
e Kingsmead (Kingsmead House, Telephone Exchange, Plymouth House and land in the vicinity of Kingsmead Square).Neighbouring the City Centref Bath Quays South (Stothert and Pitt to Travis Perkins).
g The Green Park Station area.
h The Homebase area including the Pinesway industrial estate and gyratory.
4  Scope and Scale of Change
The key activities to be accommodated within  
the Central Area are:
a Small to medium sized comparison retail 
development where this retains a compact  
and continuous primary shopping area.
b A net increase of about 40,000 sq.m of  
modern office and creative workspace, to enable the growth of sectors targeted in the Economic Strategy. 
c 2,000 sq.m of convenience shopping space  
to address the overtrading of existing stores.
d Manage the delivery of 500-750 hotel bedrooms to widen the accommodation offer of the city, increase overnight stays and the competitiveness of the city as a popular visitor destination.e About 500 additional dwellings as part of  
mixed use schemes on the key redevelopment opportunities that have been identified.
f A rejuvenated public transport interchange including improvements to Bath Spa  
Rail Station.
g A comprehensive programme for public realm enhancement and implementation of a Wayfinding and City Information System.
h Existing uses within the Central Area that remain compatible with its future role and the scope and scale of change envisaged for it, should, where appropriate, be reincorporated  
as part of redevelopment proposals, unless this is not viable or would significantly reduce the capacity of the Central Area to accommodate jobs or housing development. In such circumstances reasonable efforts should be made to ensure such uses are relocated elsewhere.
i A cultural / performance / arts venue.
j The retention and enhancement of leisure facilities.
k Major riverside access and habitat enhancements.2 Bath
50
2c Continued
The lack of flexible modern  
offices and other workspaces  
and an over reliance on  
Georgian office space  
impedeseconomic growth, 
productivity  
and diversificationThe Central Area in 2029
2.17 The implementation and delivery 
of this strategic policy over the 
lifetime of the Core Strategy will mean that the Central Area will  
have changed by 2029 as set out in Diagram 8. It is anticipated that the extent of the city centre boundary will expand westwards as key development sites within the existing city centre and edge of centre areas are redeveloped to fully optimise their locations and generate more intensive activity.
2.17a  The Central Area is intensified 
and rejuvenated and the extent of the 
city centre uses now stretches across the River Avon. The area is perceived as a total composition. New mixed use schemes complement the 
character and economic function of 
the core, contributing to lively streets, spaces and riverside areas, creating ‘stepping stones’ of activity that serve to connect the Central Area with Western Riverside. The historic core of the city centre is seamlessly connected to new development areas to the south and west.2.17b The city centre is predominantly 
car free and is served by an integrated access, movement and wayfinding system. Bespoke projects have upgraded the public ream and combine with high quality new development to enhance the identity and competitiveness of the city as a whole. A network of urban spaces and an expanded set of pedestrian circuits encourage wider circulation within an expanded city centre. This network supports retail and cultural activity and connects to a wider network of heritage and cultural attractions, parks and gardens, and beyond to surrounding residential neighbourhoods.
2.17c The River Corridor is a key 
element of the experience of the city. 
It offers a continuous pedestrian route 
with frequent access points, a series 
of new and enhanced pedestrian bridge crossings and a variety of well-connected river corridor spaces and character areas which contribute to the green infrastructure and ecology of the city and offer a range of recreational opportunities.
DIAGRAM 8  
THE CENTRAL  
AREA OF 2029  
(ADAPTED FROM THE  
PUBLIC REALM AND  
MOVEMENT STRATEGY)
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
Bath Spa StationOldfield Park
StationKingsmeadTwertonCombe
ParkWestonPark
The OvalEast Twerto n
South Twerto nLocksbrookLower W estonPrimrose Hill
Sion Hill
Western RiversideRoyal Victoria Park
Alexandra
ParkHigh Common
Henrietta
ParkSydney
Gardens
WES TERN C ORRIDOR
2 Bath
52
DIAGRAM 8 
CONTINUED  2c Continued
Bath Spa 
StationOldfield Park
StationKingsmeadTwertonCombe
ParkWestonPark
The OvalEast Twerto n
South Twerto nLocksbrookLower W estonPrimrose Hill
Sion Hill
Western RiversideRoyal Victoria Park
Alexandra
ParkHigh Common
Henrietta
ParkSydney
Gardens
WES TERN C ORRIDOR
Bath Spa StationOldfield Park
StationKingsmeadTwertonCombe
ParkWestonPark
The OvalEast Twerto n
South Twerto nLocksbrookLower W estonPrimrose Hill
Sion Hill
Western RiversideRoyal Victoria Park
Alexandra
ParkHigh Common
Henrietta
ParkSydney
Gardens
WES TERN C ORRIDOR
Western Riverside
2.17d  The area formerly occupied by 
the Stothert and Pitt engineering 
company and adjoining land has been earmarked for a major programme of residential led regeneration for a number of years. Western Riverside is allocated for residential led development in Policy GDS.1/B1 of the Bath and North  
East Somerset Local Plan (October, 2007). This policy is supported  
by a Master Plan Supplementary Planning Document (March, 2008). This is a complex site but significant planning progress has been made with the delivery of phase I commencing in December 2010.
2.17e  In order to fully deliver Bath 
Western Riverside, land remediation 
works to decommission and remove 
the Windsor Gas Holder Station will be needed. Extent of Western Riverside
2.17f The Core Strategy Western 
Riverside policy area is a smaller area than that to which Local Plan Policy GDS.1/B1 and its accompanying SPD applies. It does not include the majority of the area referred to as Western Riverside East aside from the area covered by the approved outline planning permission. Western Riverside East is now conceptualised as forming part of the Central Area because of the commercially led mixed use emphasis being sought for this area.
Western Riverside Policy 
Approach
2.17g  The spatial strategy retains  
the planning principles that have 
been established for this area. Local Plan Policy GDS.1/B1 for Western Riverside continues to apply to the area shown in Diagram 8 and is saved as part of the Development Plan. For Riverside East, Policy GDS.1/B1 and the BWR SPD will apply alongside Policy B2 until  
CIL is adopted to supersede extant planning obligations guidance and the Placemaking Plan is adopted to supersede extant other guidance in the BWR SPD.2 Bath
54
 DIAGRAM 8A  
WESTERN RIVERSIDE
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)2c Continued
Bath Spa 
StationOldfield Park
StationKingsmeadTwertonCombe
ParkWestonPark
The OvalEast Twerto n
South Twerto nLocksbrookLower W estonPrimrose Hil l
Sion Hill
Western RiversideRoyal Victoria Park
Alexandra
ParkHigh Common
Henrietta
ParkSydney
Gardens
Twerton and Newbridge 
Riversides
2.18 These areas are characterised by 
their contribution to Bath's industrial 
history and present day employment structure. The Core Strategy presents a policy framework to shape change in these areas so that they can continue to contribute to the economic vision for the city. DIAGRAM 9  
TWERTON AND 
NEWBRIDGE 
RIVERSIDES
   Key Development Hotspots
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)Bath Spa 
StationOldfield Park
StationKingsmeadTwertonCombe
ParkWeston
Park
The OvalEast Twerto n
South Twerto nLocksbrookLower W estonPrimrose Hill
Sion Hill
Western RiversideRoyal Victoria Park
Alexandra
ParkHigh Common
Henrietta
ParkSydney
Gardens
WES TERN C ORRIDOR
2 Bath
56
2c Continued
1  Role of Newbridge and Twerton 
Riversides (including the Bath Press)
These locations form the western extent of the  
City of Ideas Enterprise Area 
a Newbridge Riverside will functions as Bath's 
primary location for industrial enterprise, providing about 12 ha of land at Locksbrook Road, Brassmill Lane and the Maltings for a range of activities including advanced manufacturing. There is therefore a presumption in favour of retaining land and premises in the B1, B2 and B8 use class where this remains a viable use of land and is supported by market signals that there is demand for continued occupation that cannot reasonably be accommodated elsewhere.
b Twerton Riverside has contracted as an industrial location in recent decades. This area  
is suitable for a broader range of uses and there is scope to redevelop the area to provide new business (B1a, b and c) premises and housing. The area presents an opportunity to host business activities that are displaced as a consequence of the residential led development of Western Riverside and the growth of the intensification of the Central Area into BWR East. Whilst Newbridge Riverside will remain the core industrial location, Twerton Riverside can provide additional flexibility. It will therefore be necessary to maintain an appropriate level of land in this area for B1c uses alongside office uses and housing.2  Placemaking Principles
Assets of Newbridge and  
Twerton Riverside 
Development proposals must be informed and shaped by the following characteristics
a The eastern part of Twerton Riverside lies  
close to Western Riverside which will experience 
a significant uplift in its environmental quality and will act as a catalyst for investment in the wider area.
b There are a number of heritage and non-designated heritage assets in the area pertaining to its industrial past, including Brunel’s Great Western Railway and the  
façade of the Bath Press.
c Views in and out of the area e.g. to Newbridge Hill and Bath City Farm are important.
d The river including its banks and open land at the western section of the area are an important wildlife resource.
e There is good, yet not fully realised connectivity with the city centre via the shared riverside walking and cycling route, which is narrow in places.
f The intensification of Twerton Riverside as an accessible location due to the proximity of Oldfield Park station.Risks to Newbridge and  
Twerton Riverside
The following issues are identified as key risks to the success of these areas that should be addressed in development proposals:
a An excessive loss of industrial space would 
harm Bath's mixed economic profile.
b There are areas of conflict between industrial activity and residential areas – particularly  
with regard to the movement of heavy goods vehicles in the Newbridge Riverside area.
c Much existing development has a poor relationship with the riverside. Pedestrian access is poor, crossing points are limited and open space is fragmented.
d There is a danger that redevelopment will  
fail to connect to the riverside and miss the opportunity to enhance its walking and  
cycling route.
e In places Twerton Riverside presents a poor frontage to the Lower Bristol Road, which is a key approach to the city centre.
f The Upper Bristol Road (A4) and Lower Bristol Road (A36), including the Windsor Bridge Road junctions become congested at peak times.
g Parts of this area are at risk from flooding.Policy B3
Strategic Policy for Twerton  
and Newbridge Riversides 3  Key Development Opportunities
Development proposals in this area that accord 
with the provisions of this policy will be welcomed.
Key regeneration opportunities in the area include :
• The Bath Press
• Roseberry Place
There are  
considerable  
areas of derelict  
or underperforming 
brownfield land  
within the city
2 Bath
58
Bath's 
NeighbourhoodsBath 
2d2.19 While the Central Area and 
Enterprise Area is the headline delivery 
location for Bath, it is the outer neighbourhoods that make up the majority of the physical extent of the city and where the most people live.
2.20 The suburban workings of the 
city are important to the spatial 
strategy. During the 30 years before the First World War, Bath suburbs expanded significantly and incorporated neighbouring rural parishes that have since been progressively infilled. Its Victorian, inter-war, post war and modern neighbourhoods host a sizable population which requires access  
to goods, services and facilities both locally and beyond. Attractive neighbourhoods with successful local centres, good schools, a  
well-managed green infrastructure network, valued heritage and sustainable transport choices are necessary for economic success, quality of life and social and  
cultural vitality.2.21 It is beyond the scope of the Core 
Strategy to consider local aspects of change within outer Bath. This can be achieved through Neighbourhood Planning and by the Placemaking Plan. Core Strategy Policy in relation to a number of generic matters /topics is covered in the Core Policies section. The spatial strategy focuses on key areas or issues requiring strategic guidance. Crucially, suburban Bath is expected to yield about 2,800 new homes on large sites and will account for the majority of the 1,000 units forecast to come forward on small sites throughout the city. Outer Bath will therefore make a significant contribution to the overall target of around 7,000 new homes for the city and contains a district centre and local centres that need to be identified as part of the retail hierarchy.
 
Ministry of Defence Land 
2.22 Within Bath's outer 
neighbourhoods the Ministry of 
Defence have sold and are in the process of vacating, Foxhill (Odd Down), Ensleigh (Lansdown), and Warminster Road (Bathwick). Together the sites amount to some 36ha in area. These have been purchased by housing providers and private developers. In advance of the sale of the sites the Council prepared concept statements setting out its aspirations in respect of what it expected each area to deliver. The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment identifies that these sites can deliver well in excess of 1,000  
new homes. Drawing on this strategic assessment the Placemaking Plan and/or Development Management process will refine the optimum housing capacity of these sites and consider their overall prospects in more detail, including the scope for business space and measures to enable sustainable travel to the city centre and local centres. For the purposes of the Core Strategy it is sufficient to h confirm their suitability and availability of the MoD sites for redevelopment and to observe that delivery within the plan period is an achievable prospect. 
 
District and Local Centres
2.23 The spatial strategy seeks to 
secure and enhance the vital role that Moorland Road (a District centre) and a collection of local centres play as part of Bath's neighbourhoods. Moorland Road and local centres provide proximity to a range of goods and services. As well as providing for everyday shopping needs these centres contribute to economic and cultural diversity and opportunity by hosting small, local and independent shops and businesses. In most cases these can be reached within a relatively short walk or cycle. There  
is however, an uneven pattern of provision across the city and variety in the health and offer of local centres.
2.24 The most characterful of the  
local centres have evolved from the 
centres of outlying villages that became absorbed during the 20th suburban century expansion of the city (e.g. Weston, Larkhall and Twerton) or are embedded within the Georgian city (e.g. Widcombe Parade). Equally vibrant are Chelsea Road and Bear Flat situated within Victorian suburban development. Elsewhere there are more modest post-war centres and standalone units (including supermarkets and petrol stations associated convenience retail) that contribute to the spatial coverage of local facilities. 2.25 Moorland Road district centre 
and the local centres are shown on Diagram 10 and are listed in Table 4. Policy CP12 sets out the strategic approach for managing change within and likely to affect, district  
and local centres. Local Plan policies protect the centres from changes  
of use or out-of centre threats that would harm their vitality and viability. Some centres have potential for significant enhancement; others  
are more constrained or are already trading successfully. The Placemaking Plan will consider the extent to which local centres can further support sustainable neighbourhoods in  
more detail.
 
Royal United Hospital
2.26 Located in Weston the Royal 
United Hospital is a major sub-regional healthcare facility serving 500,000 people within the District and beyond. The Trust has prepared an Estate Strategy that sets out its proposals for future investment in  
the site. The Strategy seeks to secure first class facilities for the delivery of healthcare at the site. 
2.26a  The Council will support 
investment in the development of the 
hospital to meet the needs of health care infrastructure. The Council also observes that part of the site may become surplus to the Trust’s requirements and be available for alternative uses during the Core Strategy period.2.26b  Bath City Football Club, who 
own Twerton Park football stadium, has stated that the site will be available for redevelopment during the Plan period. It intends to leave Twerton Park and sell it or facilitate a land swap elsewhere in B&NES on which it can build a new facility. The site will therefore be available for redevelopment as part of a residential/mixed-use scheme during the Plan period. The details of any such scheme can be determined through the Placemaking Plan. Any scheme should preferably benefit or at least not adversely affect the local centre at Twerton. The Council is endeavouring to assist the Football Club to identify a suitable alternative location and this can be progressed in the Placemaking Plan.
School places
2.27 Housing and population growth 
within and on the edge of the city will create additional demand for primary and secondary education places across the city. In some instances the impact will be particularly significant and localised, e.g. areas with a high capacity to deliver family housing.  
The Council's education service has recently completed reviews of primary and secondary school provision within the city and this has taken account of the spatial strategy. The Infrastructure Delivery Programme provides more information on the relationship between housing development, population growth and school places.2 Bath
60
District and Local Centres
Neighbourhood Local Centres
Weston and Newbridge 1 Chelsea Road
2 Weston High Street
Lansdown and Camden 3 Julian Road
4 St James’ Square
5 Margaret’s Buildings
6 Lansdown Road
Larkhall, Fairfield Park, 
Grosvenor and Walcot7 Camden Road & Fairfield Road 
8 Larkhall
9 London Road
10 Nelson Place East & Cleveland Place
11 Walcot Street
Widcombe and Bathwick 12 Widcombe Parade
13 Bathwick Street 
14 Bathwick Hill
Oldfield Park and Bear Flat 15 Moorland Road (District Centre)
16 Bear Flat (Wellsway)
Odd Down, Foxhill and Combe Down and Moorlands17 The Avenue 
18 Bradford Road
19 Frome Road
20 Upper Bloomfield Road
Twerton, Whiteway, Southdown and Moorlands21 Twerton High Street
22 Mount Road
Twerton, Whiteway, Southdown  
and Moorlands18 Twerton High Street
19 Mount RoadTable 4  
District and Local Centres within Bath2d Continued
A well-managed network of 
open spaces and green corridors
2.28 Green infrastructure assets and 
designations across Bath are shown in 
detail on the Policies Map and will be maintained, protected and enhanced in accordance with relevant core polices and development management policies.
Two Tunnels Route
The Two Tunnels walking and  
cycling route represents a major addition to the Green Infrastructure network and will connect the south  
of the city and beyond to national cycle route (NCN 24).
Nature Conservation
2.29 Nature Conservation 
designations within outer Bath are shown in detail on the Policies Map and will be maintained, protected and enhanced in accordance with relevant core polices and development management policies.
The Bath/Bradford-on-Avon Special 
Area of Conservation (SAC)This European site is designated because of the presence of bat populations. European and UK legislation seek to protect the integrity of the site, bat roosts  
and foraging areas.Sustainable Transport 
Choices
2.30  Improvements to pedestrian, 
cycling and public transport routes will 
be made to enhance links between the neighbourhoods of Bath Oldfield Park Station, the city centre and the Enterprise Area. 
Development on the edge  
of Bath
2.30a  In order to meet the need for 
additional housing within the District during the Plan period development needs to take place at two locations on the edge of Bath: on land adjoining Odd Down and MoD, Ensleigh, Lansdown. At Odd Down, land is removed from the Green Belt. Policy B3A allocates land here for residential led development and a revised detailed Green Belt boundary is defined. Policy B3A also outlines the place-making principles to be met in delivering the development. The place-making principles are illustrated on a concept diagram for the site.
2.30b  National planning policy makes 
it clear that when altering Green Belt 
boundaries a long term view needs to be taken to ensure that boundaries endure beyond the plan period. Where necessary this can include plans identifying areas of safeguarded land to meet longer term development needs. At Odd Down environmental sensitivity and the need to minimise harm means that there is no scope to identify safeguarded land for the longer term.BATH
2
4
3
5
1
7
6
12
10
11
14
18
16
13
19
9
17
15
8
DIAGRAM 10  
BATH'S 
NEIGHBOURHOODS
KEY
 District & Local Centres
   Royal United Hospital
  Ministry of Defence Land
  Special Area of Conservation 
(SAC) Focuss
 Two Tunnels Route
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
Focus of the SAC  
Note that bat 
populations and foraging areas extend beyond  
this area.2 Bath
62
2d Continued
Land is removed from the Green 
Belt as shown on the Key Diagram 
and Policies Map and allocated for 
residential development and associated infrastructure during 
the Plan period. 
The requirements that need to be met to enable 
development are set out in the Placemaking Principles, Core Policies and indicated on the Concept Diagram. The Placemaking Principles, being site specific, take priority over the Core Policies. Placemaking Principles:
1 Residential led mixed use development (to include 40% affordable housing) of around 300 
dwellings , in the plan period. The site should be 
developed at an average density of 35-40dph. The figure of 300 dwellings is not a cap on development if all the placemaking principles can be met 
2 Preparation of a comprehensive Masterplan , 
through public consultation, and to be agreed by the Council, reflecting best practice as embodied in ‘By Design’ (or successor guidance), ensuring that it is well integrated  
with neighbouring areas.
3 Provision of Green infrastructure  including 
multifunctional green space (formal, natural and allotments); well integrated Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems and habitat, pedestrian and cycle connectivity within the site and to the surrounding area.
4 Include new Public Rights of Way  and provide 
enhanced public access within the site and connecting well to the surrounding area.
5 A Landscape and Ecological Mitigation 
Strategy and Management Plan  is required, as 
part of the Masterplan, to ensure satisfactory mitigation and protection to include:Ecological Requirements• Protection of dark skies to the south and east of the location including zones of no artificial light adjacent to the protected tree belt and other ecological features retained or created within  
the site and in adjacent grazing lands. Light spill should be limited to no more than 1 lux (equivalent to a moonlit night) 
• Retention and cultivation of planting features and off-site habitat including the retention of hedgerows and tree belts, as indicated on the Concept Diagram
• Safeguard skylark interest, through adequate mitigation or off-site compensation
• New woodland planting along the southern boundary of the plateau, particularly to the east of Sulis Manor (i) within the site and (ii) off-site within the plateau in order to strengthen bat foraging and flight links with Horsecombe Vale
• A recreational strategy to minimise harm to adjacent grazing regimes and habitats 
Particular attention is to be given to ensure satisfactory mitigation and or compensation as appropriate of protected species and their habitat (including Priority Species). Policy B3a
Land adjoining Odd Down, Bath
Strategic Site AllocationLandscape Requirements
• Retention and protection of existing trees and significant hedgerows by inclusion within public open space and enhance hedgerows by provision of additional planting
• Protect the tree belt on the southern edge of  
the site and enhance with additional planting  
to ensure visual screening of the site from  
views to the south 
• Avoid or minimise detrimental impacts on  
(and provide enhancements to important landscape features and significant views):
 • the Cotswolds AONB
 • South Stoke Conservation area and its setting
 •  The character of the Cam Brook valley and Sulis Manor Plateau
 •  The character of South Stoke and Combe  
Hay Lanes
 •  Midford Road and the Cross Keys junction including maintaining open rural views over  
the plateau
 • The Wansdyke Scheduled Monument
 •  Medium and long distance views such as  
Upper Twinhoe and Baggridge Hill.
6 Seek to conserve the significance of heritage assets. As part of the Masterplan the following should be addressed:World Heritage Site • The Southern boundary of the site should  
remain undeveloped to limit the visibility of development in wider views. An acceptable southerly extent of development and appropriate building heights will need to be established as part of the Masterplan. 
• The Easterly extent of development and appropriate Eastern boundary treatment  
should be established as part of the Masterplan.
• Control light pollution to protect the visual screening of the site from views to the south.
Wansdyke Scheduled Monument• Within the allocation, avoid built development in the field immediately to the south of the Wansdyke. To mitigate impacts, tree planting should be retained as indicated on the   
Concept Diagram.
• A Management Plan setting out a strategy for the long-term and effective management of the monument including detailed measures for its positive enhancement will be developed in consultation with English Heritage and form part of any development proposals. This should include a recreational and movement solution which serves the new community and minimises harm to the Scheduled Monument.• Limit development height and density in  
more prominent areas, such as higher ground and development edges. 
• Limit lighting column heights to that of the development to minimise vertical features  
within the view from the Wansdyke. 2 Bath
64
2d Continued
South Stoke Conservation Area
• Limit the height and/or density of development closest to South Stoke Conservation Area to avoid harm to its setting.
Sulis Manor • Incorporate Sulis Manor and garden into development sensitively, retaining the framework of trees, and considering the conversion/retention of the Manor House  
and/or a low density development
7 In relation to transport , the following apply:
• Provide vehicular access, and junction enhancement, to facilitate access to the site from Combe Hay Lane.
• Provide an additional access for emergency vehicles.
• Provide pedestrian and cycle links with Sulis Meadows Estate and Sulis Manor; limited vehicular access from the estate is acceptable (subject to detailed design and location) but is not a requirement. 
• Links to the National Cycle Route 24 and  
Two Tunnels should be facilitated.• Provide a sensitively designed and improved pedestrian/cycle link, following the desire line to Cranmore Place/Frome Road to allow access to Threeways School and the Supermarket.
• Provide a safe and attractive pedestrian/  
cycle link to the Odd Down Park and Ride  
from the site.
• Ensure sufficient car parking in the vicinity of  
St Gregory’s School to meet the school’s needs
8 Contributions will be required to facilitate  
the expansion of St Martin’s Garden  
Primary School. 
9 The provision of additional local employment will be supported at Manor Farm, through conversion and redevelopment.10 Retain and/or enhance the Odd Down  
Football Club  (Football Pitches, Clubhouse  
and changing facilities, play area, local market and car park) either:
 (i) in its current location; or
 (ii)  by re-providing the Football Club with  
an equivalent facility within the area 
11 Localised areas of land instability  must be 
either avoided or addressed with appropriate remediation.Policy B3a  
Land adjoining Odd Down, Bath
Strategic Site Allocation
KEY
Green Belt
Strategic Site Allocation
Pedestrian and cycle linkPrimary vehicle access
Housing Development 
Boundary
Retained hedgerow  
and treesRetained vegetationAdditional Green 
Infrastructure
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
CONCEPT DIAGRAM 
FOR LAND AT 
ODDDOWN 
STRATEGIC SITE ALLOCATION2 Bath
66
2d Continued
Land adjoining Ensleigh MOD site 
as shown on the Key Diagram is 
identified for the development  
of 120 dwellings during the Plan 
period. The Placemaking Plan will 
allocate a site for comprehensive 
residential led mixed use development comprising the 
Ensleigh MOD site and the land 
adjoining it. The planning requirements relating to the land 
adjoining the Ensleigh MOD site 
are set out below. 
a Residential led mixed use development of 
around 120 dwellings in the plan period.
b Be developed to a comprehensive Masterplan for the wider Ensleigh MOD site and in accordance with the Council’s Concept Statement for the MoD Ensleigh site. The wider site should be more self-contained with its own local facilities. Development should reflect best practice as embodied in ‘By Design’ (or successor guidance) ensuring that it is well integrated with neighbouring areas. 
c Development phasing should start with the current MoD Ensleigh site.d Ensure that the principles and benefits of  
Green Infrastructure contained in the Green Infrastructure Strategy and other guidance  
and best practice are embedded in the design and development process from an early stage. Key requirements include provision of habitat connectivity through the retention and enhancement of the existing high valued habitat; provision of well integrated green space (formal, natural and allotments); provision of well integrated Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems; and provision of cycle and pedestrian links through the site connecting to the existing network particularly towards Bath city centre and Weston and Larkhall local centres.
e Appropriate site assessment and ecological surveys to be undertaken to inform site master planning with particular attention to the SNCI and potential impacts to Bradford-upon-Avon bats SAC.f Identify and assess the landscape character, landscape features and significant view points and the likely effects of development on them. Protect and enhance these aspects and mitigate to avoid or minimise the effects. Significant aspects of landscape include the Cotswold AONB; the World Heritage Site and its setting; Bath Conservation Area and its setting; the character of the Lansdown plateau; trees including ancient woodland, tree belts, hedges and field patterns; Lansdown Road and its open rural character; and tranquillity. Significant viewpoints include local properties; Upper Swainswick; Beckford’s Tower; Lansdown Road; and local Public Rights of Way.
g Assess and evaluate any direct or indirect impacts on designated heritage assets and  
their visual/landscape settings. Prepare and implement management schemes (including avoidance or physical separation) in order to mitigate the impacts of development and ensure the long-term protection and enhancement of the designated heritage assets and their settings. Designated heritage assets potentially affected by development at this location include Beckford’s Tower (Grade I), Ensleigh House and Lansdown Cemetery Gates (Grade II), Bath Conservation Area and Bath World Heritage Site.
Policy B3c
Extension to MOD,  
Ensleighh Assess and evaluate any impacts on non-
designated heritage assets. The degree of harm to or loss of non-designated heritage assets will be balanced against the positive contribution made by the development and the extent to which harm/loss can be mitigated. Non-designated heritage assets of equal significance to designated heritage assets will be subject to the same considerations as designated heritage assets. Non-designated heritage assets potentially affected by development at this location include Bronze Age barrow cemetery, Roman road and roadside burials, and medieval settlement and chapel.
i The assessment and evaluation of the above designated and non-designated heritage assets should also consider their cumulative or collective “group value” and also understand the heritage assets’ relationship to other environmental considerations.
j Ensure good public transport provision. k Development should scope potential for and incorporate renewable energy.
l Educational needs generated by the development must be met; a primary school  
is to be provided on larger site comprising the Ensleigh MOD site and the land adjoining it, unless an alternative solution can be found  
and agreed with the Education Authority.
m Provide integrated waste management infrastructure. 
n Ensure that displaced playing pitches are re-provided at an appropriate and suitable location.
It is the outer 
neighbourhoods  
that make up the majority 
of the physical extent of 
the city and where the 
most people live2 Bath
68
The World 
Heritage Site  
and its SettingBath 
2e2.31 The World Heritage Site status of 
the city is a key material consideration 
when making planning decisions. As a designated heritage asset of the highest significance there is a strong presumption in favour of the conservation of the Outstanding Universal Value of the World Heritage Site. The significance of the WHS is set out in the Statement of Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) (2010) and is summarised in paragraph 2.05. The World Heritage Site Management Plan (2011-16) sets out the objectives and actions needed for the successful conservation and management of the Site. The Local Plan has a key role in the implementation of the Management Plan.
2.32 The setting of the World Heritage 
Site, beyond its designated boundary, 
is important as inappropriate development here could impact upon the Outstanding Universal Value of the site. The setting is the surroundings in which the World Heritage Site is experienced. It includes a range of elements such as views and historical, landscape and cultural relationships The World Heritage Site Setting SPD provides the information needed to assess whether a proposed development falls within the setting, whether it will have a harmful impact and to what extent. The Green Belt, which closely surrounds the city, also plays an important role in protecting the setting of the WHS (see its purposes which are summarised in Table 8). The general extent of the Green Belt is retained by the Core Strategy and its openness is protected from inappropriate development.2.33 Section 6C [Environmental 
Quality] highlights the Council’s wish to enable the appropriate modification of heritage assets, including the World Heritage Site, for development that reduces carbon emissions. It also sets out that a Supplementary Planning Document provides detailed guidance on this matter.
2.33a  The Core Strategy seeks to 
promote and reinforce local 
distinctiveness through high quality design that improves the environmental quality and character of the city and the way that it functions. In addition to normal processes of contextualisation in relation to neighbouring buildings and the wider area more generally, development must be demonstrably informed by  
an understanding of the Outstanding Universal Value of the World Heritage Site, its authenticity and integrity. Design that fails to conserve or take the opportunity to enhance the Outstanding Universal Value World Heritage Site will be rejected. The preparation of other local development documents, including the Placemaking Plan will ensure the achievement of high quality design.
2.34 To contribute to this process, a 
Building Heights Strategy for the area 
of Bath covered by the World Heritage Site designation has been prepared. The strategy provides area-based guidance on the appropriate height  
of new development to ensure the protection of the Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) of the Site. 2.35 The overall purpose of the 
strategy is to provide a framework 
within which decisions can be made about the appropriate height of new buildings in Bath. It will be used to inform the Placemaking Plan and will act as a development management tool in the consideration of planning applications. The Strategy has been compiled in such a way that it can be used as the basis for a Supplementary Planning Document. Policy B4  
The World Heritage Site 
and its setting
There is a strong presumption against 
development that would result in harm to the 
Outstanding Universal Value of the World 
Heritage Site, its authenticity or integrity. This presumption applies equally to development 
within the setting of the World Heritage Site. 
Where development has a demonstrable public benefit, including mitigating and adapting to 
climate change, this benefit will be weighed 
against the level of harm to the Outstanding Universal Value of the World Heritage Site.Bath is a place to which  
the much abused adjective,  
unique, might for once be  
appropriately applied
Patrick Abercrombie, 1945
2 Bath
70
2.36 The Council seeks to enable the 
continued success of The University  
of Bath and Bath Spa University and 
the contribution they make to the city's identity and profile.
2.37 The development of new 
academic space and student 
accommodation are matters that require policy direction in the Core Strategy. The Council is mindful that the growth in student numbers during the last decade has not been accompanied by sufficient on-campus study bedrooms and that the associated expansion of the student lettings market has diminished the 'normal' housing stock of the city.  
This is particularly significant given  
the relatively small size of Bath as a host city for two universities. The proliferation of Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs) in the Oldfield Park/Westmoreland area is the most visible consequence of the mismatch between the growth in students and on-campus development.2.38 The Council also understands 
that each institution needs to invest in its academic estate in order to continue to provide high standards. The approach of the Core Strategy is to enable the realisation of a better balance between the aspirations of each university, the concerns of communities and the overall functioning, performance and environmental quality of the city and its setting. The University of Bath’s  
and Bath Spa University’s work in preparing and consulting on estate and campus masterplans demonstrates the value of proceeding on a strategic basis and provides a framework for future development. The Information Paper on student numbers and accommodation considers the issues in more detail, provides a full assessment of the evidence that has led to the following policy approach and its likely impact.2.39 It is anticipated that this policy 
will enable the delivery of new on-campus study bedrooms to 2020/21 at a rate which broadly matches the growth of the student population. Based on estimated forecasts of growth, it will enable a modest increase in the student population (compared to rates experienced since 1997), enable all  
first years to be offered a place in managed accommodation, and potentially lead to a small contraction of the student lettings market – subject to accommodation preferences. To achieve a more significant contraction in the student lettings market would require significant amounts of valuable land within the city to be developed for student accommodation. In order for the vision for Bath to be realised this land will be needed for 'normal' housing and other commercial uses.
Bath's 
UniversitiesBath 
2f
Water &  
WellbeingPleasure  
& CultureKnowledge  
& InventionLiving  
HeritageImagination  
& Design2.40  It is envisaged that this approach 
could mean that 2012/13 levels of 
HMOs will represent the high watermark within the city. The Council has declared an Article 4 direction in relation to HMOs to manage the student lettings market in the south west part of the city and elsewhere. The Council cannot apply HMO powers retrospectively.
2.41 Growth beyond 2020 will require 
additional on and off campus capacity 
to be identified. No alterations to the Green Belt boundary beyond that previously made in the Local Plan are envisaged during the Core Strategy period. However, the nature of exceptional or very special circumstances is that they cannot be predicted and the Council will need to consider such circumstances, on their merits, at the time they are presented.Policy B5  
Strategic Policy  
for Bath's Universities
University of Bath – 
Claverton Down Campus 
To support the development and 
expansion of the University of Bath the strategy seeks, in accordance with saved Local Plan Policy GDS.1/11, the development of about 2,000 study bedrooms and 45,000 sq.m of academic space at the Claverton Campus. Bath Spa University – 
Newton Park Campus 
Within the context of a strategic 
framework for the University’s entire estate the strategy seeks the redevelopment and intensification of the Newton Park campus to provide additional study bedrooms and academic space. Through the Placemaking Plan the Council will  
be reviewing whether the Campus should continue to be designated  
as a MEDS and, if so, its boundary. Proposals should accord with the NPPF, paragraph 89 and future local planning policy in the Placemaking Plan and seek to optimise opportunities for educational use and student accommodation within the current boundary of the campus or boundary of the MEDS if so defined in the Placemaking Plan before seeking to justify very special circumstances for development beyond them or a change to the development boundaries. In all circumstances regard should be had to the sites environmental capacity, the significance of heritage assets and the optimum development of the campus in this regard. Off-Campus Student 
Accommodation 
Proposals for off-campus student 
accommodation will be refused within the Central Area, the Enterprise Area and on MoD land where this would adversely affect the realisation of other aspects of the vision and spatial strategy for the city in relation to housing and economic development.
2 Bath
72
Infrastructure
2.42 The delivery of the Bath spatial 
strategy will need to be supported  
by the provision of necessary 
infrastructure. The key infrastructure requirements as identified in the B&NES Infrastructure Delivery Programme (IDP) are summarised in table 5. These are supplemented by infrastructure requirements included in the District wide sections. The IDP also includes a number of desirable infrastructure items (see paragraph 2.49) Infrastructure planning involves an ongoing process of dialogue and communication with infrastructure providers and as further evidence is developed and future funding is secured additional items may be added to the IDP or their status may be upgraded or altered.
2.43 In order to successfully realise the 
development potential of the Central 
Area and the Enterprise Area, parallel enabling investment will be needed. Transportation and flooding and land remediation are three key areas requiring specific mention.Transportation
2.44 The Council’s Transport Strategy 
for Bath is one of reducing the use of cars for travelling to and within the city, by progressing improvements to public transport and making walking or cycling within the city the preferred option for short trips. This will be achieved through a variety of measures including:
• Bath Transport Package – 
comprising a range of measures including three extended Park & Ride sites; upgrading nine bus routes to showcase standard including upgrades to bus stop infrastructure and variable message signs on key routes into the city displaying information about car parking availability 
• Improvements to the bus network through the Greater Bristol Bus Network major scheme including key routes from Bristol and Midsomer Norton,
• Rail improvements, such as the electrification of Great Western Railway mainline by 2016; the new  
15 year GWR franchise (including the Greater Bristol Metro Project); and increasing the capacity of local rail services travelling through Bath Spa rail station, improving ease of access to and attractiveness of rail travel to and from BathInfrastructure 
and DeliveryBath 
2g• The West of England authorities 
(including B&NES) have been awarded Local Sustainable Transport Fund key component funding for a number of measures and also been invited by the Department for Transport to submit a major bid to the Local Sustainable Transport Fund for £25.5 million.
• Creating a more pedestrian and cyclist-friendly city centre through the introduction of access changes on a number of streets and expansion and enhancement of pedestrian areas.
• Other improvements to walking  
and cycling infrastructure through the Councils Integrated Transport annual settlement and the implementation of ‘Smarter Choices’ for transport e.g. Proposed Change Reason for change through the development of travel plans for new and existing sites and the expansion of car clubs.
• Seeking to reduce nitrogen dioxide levels in Bath by, for example, reducing the level of heavy goods vehicle (HGV) traffic in the city through:
 i  the continued support & promotion of the Council’s Freight Consolidation Centre for deliveries to central Bath; and 
 ii  by implementing traffic management measures. • Creation of one or more Park & Ride sites on the eastern side of the city to reduce commuter traffic.
• The disused rail line between Brassmill Lane and Windsor Bridge, Bath is safeguarded as a Sustainable Transport route for non-motorised forms of transport (with the exception of mobility scooters).  
It will provide a high quality and  
safe cycling and pedestrian route through to Western Riverside that extends the Bristol to Bath Railway path, the Two Tunnels Greenway, and provides a wider choice of sustainable transport routes for local communities to efficiently connect to the city centre and to Bath's Enterprise Area.
• The provision of this route will be complementary to the current riverside path. It will help to reduce pressure and potential conflict between cyclists and pedestrians, and enable the riverside to be properly enhanced as an environmental asset and an important part of the city's green infrastructure network. This will help to redefine the image and identity of the Western Corridor as an economically prosperous area that complements the offer of the Central Area, is set within a high quality natural environment, and is accessed by a comprehensive sustainable cycling and pedestrian network.2.45 To complement these public transport and cycling/walking improvements the Council will update its Parking Strategy for Bath which  
will broadly maintain central area car parking at existing levels in the short term and continue to prioritise management of that parking for  
short and medium stay users. This is necessary in order to discourage car use for commuting and provide sufficient parking to help maintain the vitality and viability of the city centre as a shopping and visitor destination.  
It will also result in a relative reduction in the amount of central area parking that is available as the economy grows, jobs are created and demand increases.
2.46 The proposals set out above will 
help to enable the programme of 
development set out in the spatial strategy to be delivered in a way that minimises travel related environmental and air quality harm whilst providing convenient and sustainable access within the city.
Flood Risk Management for 
the Central Area and the Enterprise Area  
2.47 A number of potential 
development locations fall within 
Flood Zone 3a and 2. A Flood Risk Management Strategy has concluded that there is no comprehensive strategic solution  
 for reducing peak flow through  
Bath which is both technically and economically viable. Measures assessed included the raising of defences along the river channel  
and deepening of the river channel.
2.48 Following the Flood Risk 
Management Strategy, the Hydraulic 
Modelling (Bath Flood Risk Management Project Feb 2013 by Black & Veatch) was prepared. The 
impact of raising the key development 
sites in the Central Area and the Enterprise Area in Bath is a loss of conveyance, rather than a loss of flood storage. It recommends, where necessary, to raise all the development sites and the access/egress routes (or raise defence walls) and implement conveyance mitigation measures.2 Bath
74
Land Remediation in the 
Central Area and Western Corridor
2.48a  Addressing land remediation 
within the Central Area and Western 
Corridor in relation to industrial and utilities uses, including the decommissioning and removal of  
the Windsor Gas Holder Station is an essential prerequisite to the redevelopment of Bath Western Riverside and its environs.
2.49 The desirable infrastructure items 
of importance to the city include:
• Green infrastructure: river corridor, 
formal and informal green spaces and allotments.
• Safer and improved routes for pedestrians and cyclists.
• Smarter Choices Measures, including measures such as:
 –  Travel Plans – new development  
to be required to contribute to 
improvements identified by  
School Travel Plans
 – Community Transport
 –  Encouraging car sharing  
e.g. via car clubs
 – Working from Home• Re-provision of any sports pitches  
or other facilities where triggered  
by development.
• District heating infrastructure
• Delivery
2.50  The Council working in 
conjunction with West of England 
partners, the Homes & Communities Agency, and other agencies, has developed a Delivery & Infrastructure Investment Framework for the subregion covering the period 2010-2020. A Delivery & Infrastructure Investment Plan for 2010/11 has been agreed. This process has been known as the "Single Conversation".2.51 The Central Area plus Western 
Riverside (referred to as Bath City Riverside) is identified as an important location for delivering the aspirations for the West of England. Investment needs to be made into a number of key infrastructure schemes including flood alleviation, land assembly, remediation and affordable housing.  
In total £27.6m of public investment will be needed to ensure that these matters are addressed.2.52 Delivery of the strategy and 
infrastructure required to support  
it will be facilitated by the planning framework summarised below:
• Planning Obligations SPD
• Placemaking Plan
• Community Infrastructure Levy
2g ContinuedIDP Ref Key Infrastructure Phasing Cost Funding & Delivery
BI.1 Transport Proposals for Bath:
• New showcase bus corridors• Extended park and ride sites
•  Upgraded bus stop infrastructure 
on 9 service routes 
•  Safe routes for pedestrians and cyclists
•  Other essential transport links and improvements2011-16 £31.85m Bath Transport Package accepted into ‘development pool’ of schemes by DfT. Final bid to be submitted for funding to DfT in September 2011. DfT decision anticipated in December 2011.
BI.2 Improvements to Flood Defences of Bath City Centre and Riverside2010- Not quantified
BI.3 Public Investment into Bath Western Riverside2010-15 £27.6m Homes and Communities Agency Funding through the West of England Single Conversation: West of England Delivery and Infrastructure Plan.
BI.4 Improvements to Bath Train Station and Enhanced Service Frequency from Bath and Oldfield Park to Bristol2017-2020 £19.7m for Greater Bristol Metro Rail ProjectNetwork Rail with Bath & North East Somerset Council. Evidence included in the Great Western Mainline Route Utilisation Strategy (2010). The Council Will continue to press for this urgently needed investment through its Memorandum of Understanding with the Rail industry.Table 5  
Summary of Key Infrastructure in Bathx3  Keynsham
76
Market Town
HistoricSomerdaleFair Trade TownRiver Avon River ChewTrajectusRoman 3Keynsham
3a  Setting the Agenda  78
 Diagram 11  21st Century Keynsham  79
3b  Vision and Spatial Strategy  81
 Policy KE1 Keynsham Spatial Strategy  83
 Diagram 12  Keynsham Spatial Strategy 85
 Diagram 13  Keynsham Town Centre/Somerdale  86
3c  Town Centre and Somerdale 87
 Policy KE2  Town Centre/Somerdale Strategic Policy  88
  Policy KE3a  Land adjoining East Keynsham Strategic  
Site Allocation 92
 Policy KE3b  Safeguarded Land at East Keynsham  94
  Concept Diagram for Land adjoining East Keynsham  
Strategic Site Allocation 95
  Policy KE4  Land adjoining South West Keynsham  
Strategic Site Allocation 96
  Concept Diagram for Land adjoining South West Keynsham  
Strategic Site Allocation 97
3d  Infrastructure and Delivery 98
 Table 6  Summary of Key Infrastructure in Keynsham 99
Market Town
HistoricSomerdaleFair Trade TownRiver Avon River ChewTrajectusRoman 
Potential
RegenerationHigh StreetManufacturingCongestedAgeing PopulationGreen BeltCoastingOut-CommutingProudIndependentEmbrace The FutureCommunityConservation Areas1960’SRural SettingTiredOpportunity
x3  Keynsham
78
Setting the 
AgendaKeynsham 
3aContext
3.01 The market town of Keynsham 
occupies a strategic location between 
Bath and Bristol in the extreme north of the District with a population of around 15,500 and is linked to the  
two cities by the A4 and the mainline railway. The physical geography is influenced by the two rivers that traverse the area, the Avon and the Chew, which converge to the north  
of the town at Somerdale.
3.02 Keynsham has a rich history.  
In Roman times the settlement was 
known as Trajectus, and by the medieval period had evolved into a successful town, dominated by the Abbey and with a Market granted by King Edward I. Up until the 18th century Keynsham remained a 
relatively small place, focused around 
the linear High Street (Diagram 11), but over the last century has expanded rapidly. A large proportion of the growth occurred in the 1950s and 1960s when the town greatly increased in size, which was the last major expansion of the town. Keynsham remains a comparable size to this day. The role and function of the town has been remarkably consistent over its history, being a trading, political, administrative and manufacturing centre (for example Somerdale) serving the town and its surrounding rural hinterland.Strategic Issues
3.03 Previous consultation on the Core 
Strategy Spatial Options document (November 2009) has highlighted a number of key issues facing the town:
• Recent and future job losses
• Desire for town centre regeneration
• Affordable housing shortage
• Ageing population
• Traffic congestion
• Limited public transport
• Lack of allotments
• Insufficient emphasis given to 
protecting Keynsham's heritage
• Sewage and storm water  
capacity issues
• Ongoing threat of development  
in the Green Belt
3.04 In 2006 the Council published 
the 'Future for Keynsham' which described the town as having been 'coasting' since the 1970s, implying that Keynsham has received minimal attention in terms of development.  
In the meantime, improvements in nearby competing centres, especially in Bristol, have resulted in Keynsham losing ground economically, an example of which can be seen  
with 41% of Keynsham residents undertaking their grocery shopping  
at Longwell Green.KEYNSHAMKEYNSHAM
STATION
Queen Charlton
Chewton KeynshamHicks Gate
Ashmead Industrial 
EstateSomerdale
Stockwood Vale
Queens Road
Chandag 
Road
SALTFORD
 DIAGRAM 11  
21ST CENTURY 
KEYNSHAM
KEY
 Keynsham  size in 1930
© Crown  copyright.  All rights  reserved   
(100023334)  (2010)3.05 At present the overall image of 
the town is poor, as described in the 
Wider B&NES Business Plan, mainly due to the declining town centre which is in need of revitalisation. The range and quality of accommodation for retailers and businesses should be improved, as should the public realm.3.06  The form of development has 
been influenced by both natural and man-made barriers, including the flood plain of the River Avon, the railway line, Keynsham by-pass, the valley of the River Chew and the Green Belt. As development has spread the residential neighbourhoods have become increasingly segregated and disconnected from each other and from the High Street, with those on the periphery poorly served by local services as a consequence. Growth has also brought the settlement boundary closer to the neighbouring settlement of Saltford and the urban fringe of Bristol.  
In places the latter is little more  
than a mile away. The Local  
Economic Assessment shows that there is currently a strong element  
of out commuting, significantly  
in professional workers,  
managers, senior officials and administrative workers.
Regeneration and Place
3.07 In addition to delivering the 
Sustainable Community Strategy  
the spatial strategy is informed by  
the 'Futures' work, which identifies a number of key priorities for Keynsham:
• Enhance the town with physical 
development
• Improve the economy through 
development
• Make Keynsham ready for the future
• Help Keynsham to capitalise on its 
location
• Help Keynsham to remain proud  
and independent3  Keynsham
80
3a Continued
3.08 The spatial strategy is also 
informed by the current Town Plan, 
which aims to build on the town’s positive characteristics and embrace the future, developing Keynsham  
into a thriving, sustainable and safe market town by:
• Enhancing the towns already 
considerable assets and unique identity
• Promoting a sense of well-being  
and community for all, generating pride in the town
• Ensuring all necessary services  
and infrastructure are maintained and enhanced
• Regenerating the town centre
In 2012 the Town Plan was refreshed. Building on the bullet points above, the Plan incorporates the three priorities identified in the Sustainable Community Strategy which are:
• Improving the Shopping Experience
• Creating New Jobs
• Improving the Park
3.09 The spatial strategy recognises 
and responds to these key issues, 
ensuring that it contributes to the delivery of development, supporting both the regeneration agenda and  
the local consensus of how the town should move forward into the future.3.10 The Joint Waste Core Strategy 
seeks to deliver, by 2020, diversion from landfill of at least 85% of municipal and commercial & industrial wastes through recycling, composting and residual waste treatment. A minimum of 50% of this total recovery target is intended to be achieved through recycling and composting, leaving 35% to be delivered through residual treatment capacity. To ensure delivery of the Spatial Strategy, a number of strategic sites have been identified as appropriate for development for the management  
of residual waste. The land at Broadmead Lane in Keynsham is identified as one of these strategic residual waste facilities sites.  
(http://www.westofengland.org/waste-planning)
3.11Community engagement and 
partnership working has also shaped 
the vision and spatial strategy for Keynsham. There is widespread support for the proposed vision, spatial strategy, and the principle of new development at Keynsham, to begin to overcome the identified issues.
3.12 The spatial strategy will ensure 
that Keynsham continues to fulfil its 
traditional role as a market town and service centre for the surrounding  
area and remain an independent settlement. However the spatial strategy also enables Keynsham to evolve into a market town fit for the 21st century, becoming a more significant location for business and  
a more sustainable, desirable and well-connected place to live and work.
Keynsham is a physically 
separate and distinct community 
that is 
encouraged to preserve 
its separate identity
Patrick Abercrombie, 1930Vision  
and 
Spatial 
StrategyKeynsham 
3bThe Vision  
What the spatial strategy  
seeks to achieve
Keynsham is a historic town that 
occupies a strategically important location between Bristol and Bath and is therefore well placed to improve and attract investment. It will continue to act as a market town and service centre for the surrounding area. In responding to the loss of a major employer, it will evolve as a more significant business location. Keynsham will expand to accommodate a growing population, ensuring it retains its independence and its separate identity within an attractive rural setting. It will become a more sustainable, desirable and well-connected place in which to live and work, with an enhanced town centre inspired by its heritage, cherished rivers, park and green spaces.3  Keynsham
82
3b Continued
3.13 The spatial strategy set out in 
Policy KE1 seeks to deliver the vision 
for Keynsham and the strategic objectives for the District (set out in Chapter 1). The strategy allows changes to be made to the Green  
Belt boundary surrounding Keynsham to accommodate both employment floorspace and housing, but maintains the key Green Belt purposes of preventing the town  
from merging with Bristol and Saltford, and helping to preserve its individual character, identity and setting. The Green Belt will continue to provide opportunities for residents of Keynsham to access outdoor sport, recreation and the open countryside. Access to the Green Belt will be enhanced with an improved green infrastructure network running through and surrounding the town, principally using the valleys of the Rivers Chew and Avon.3.14 Around 2,150 new homes will  
be built between 2011 and 2029 to support economic growth of the town and accommodate a growing population. Approximately 700 homes are already accounted for, having either already been built since 2011, have planning permission, or are allocated in the Local Plan. The Local Plan allocations include the 500+ dwelling development in South West Keynsham known as 'K2'. Development requirements are outlined in the Local Plan, including the need for satisfactory vehicular accesses. 700 dwellings are directed towards the town centre/Somerdale policy area (Policy KE2) which will serve as the focus of future development within Keynsham. Green Belt releases will be made  
to the east of Keynsham to accommodate 250 dwellings and employment floorspace, and to the south west of Keynsham to accommodate around 200 dwellings.3.15 1,600 new jobs will be created 
between 2011 and 2029 primarily by increasing the stock of office floorspace in the town, complemented by an extension to the Broadmead/Ashmead/Pixash Industrial Estate.  
The job growth figure of 1,600 and  
the related employment floorspace figures set out in Policy KE1 represent the minimum growth that it is considered will be delivered during the Plan period. However, the physical capacity for additional floorspace provided through the extension of the Broadmead/Ashmead/Pixash Industrial Estate is significantly greater (see Policy KE3). Provision for this employment floorspace is made in order to enable flexibility for economic development across the whole District. Therefore, there is uncertainty as to whether this will be delivered in its entirety during the Plan period. The planned job growth and additional employment floorspace provision supports the vision in establishing Keynsham as a more significant business location and enabling the town to recover from recent job losses. Attracting more Higher Value Added jobs will help  
to reduce the current pattern of outcommuting by groups such as professional workers, managers, senior officials and administrative workers, allowing better opportunities to live and work in  
the town. This will help to counteract the closure of Somerdale. The role of the town centre and Somerdale as  
the main focus for business activity will be complemented by the Broadmead/Ashmead/Pixash Industrial Estate area.1  Natural and Built Environment
a  Maintain the Green Belt surrounding Keynsham, 
allowing releases of Green Belt land to the east and south west of Keynsham to accommodate employment and housing growth.
b  Make better use of the existing green and blue infrastructure (for example parks and rivers) running through and surrounding the town which will be enhanced, made more accessible and linked up.
2  Housing
a  Make provision for around 2,150 new homes (net) between 2011 and 2029. This will include affordable housing, and an appropriate housing mix giving more choice of housing to meet the needs of the local community.
b  Allow for residential development if it is within the housing development boundary defined on the Policies Map or it forms an element of Policies KE2, KE3 and KE4.3  Economic Development
a  Plan for about 1,600 net additional jobs  
between 2011 and 2029.
b  Make provision for the changes in employment floorspace set out below:
•  Office floorspace: from about 13,000m2 in  
2011 to about 20,200m2 in 2029.
•  Industrial/Warehouse floorspace: from about 52,000m2 in 2011 to 60,300m2 in 2029 to address future requirements arising in Keynsham and Bath.
c  Enable development which supports the town to continue to function as an independent market town. The scale and mix of development will increase self-containment and help develop the town as a more significant business location.
d  Retain and extend the Broadmead/Ashmead/Pixash Industrial Estate as an area for business activity (including use classes B1, B2 and B8) complementing the role of the town centre and enable its intensification through higher density business development.4 Shopping
a  Provide larger retail units in the town centre  
to attract a more varied mix of retailers.
b  Retain and encourage enhancement of Queen Road and Chandag Road as local centres to complement the town centre because they provide an important range of essential day-today goods and services for their local neighbourhoods.
5  Transport, cycling and walking
a  Provide for improvements to public transport and enhance connectivity between walking, cycling and public transport routes. (Transport infrastructure measures are set out in the 'Infrastructure and Delivery' section)
b Implement a reviewed Parking Strategy.
6  Energy conservation and 
sustainable energy generation
a  Enable renewable energy generation 
opportunities including a new district heating network within Keynsham, potentially anchored by the Centre/Town Hall redevelopment.Policy KE1  
Keynsham Spatial Strategy
The Strategy for Keynsham is to:3  Keynsham
84
3b Continued
Keynsham is a great 
place to live and 
work, with its 
attractive setting, 
good transport links, 
traditional High 
Street and numerous active groups
Keynsham Town Plan, 2004
KEYNSHAMKEYNSHAM
STATION
Queen Charlton
Chewton KeynshamHicks Gate
Ashmead Industrial 
EstateSomerdale
Stockwood Vale
Queens Road
Chandag 
Road
SALTFORD
3
4
2
1
6
5
River Corridor  
Key GI Asset
DIAGRAM 12  
KEYNSHAM SPATIAL 
STRATEGY
KEY
		Town 	Centre/ 	Somerdale 		
Policy 	Area
	Core 	Business 	Area
		New	Neighbourhood 	at		
South	 West	 Keynsham 		
(Local	 Plan	Policy	 K2)	 	 	
	Cycle 	&	Walking 	Links
1	Regional 	Cycle 	Route 	10
2	2	Rivers 	Walking 	Route
3	National 	Cycle 	Route 	3
4	National 	Cycle 	Route 	4
5	River 	Avon 	Trail	Walking 	Route
6	Monarch’s 	Way 	Walking 	Route
	Green 	Infrastucture 	Link
	Proposed 	Waste 	Facility
		Local 	Centre
		Strategic	 Site
		Strategic	 Green	 Belt	release
©	Crown 	copyright. 	All	rights 	reserved 		
(100023334) 	(2010)3  Keynsham
86
3b Continued
 DIAGRAM 13  
KEYNSHAM  
TOWN CENTRE / 
SOMERDALE
KEY
  Enhanced Retail Quality  
and Public Realm
 Green Infrastructure Link
  Enhanced Pedestrian  
Connections
 Mixed Use
 Enhanced Memorial Park
  Train Station
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
KEYNSHAMKEYNSHAM
STATION
Queen Charlton
Chewton KeynshamHicks Gate
Ashmead Industrial 
EstateSomerdale
Stockwood Vale
Town 
Centre and SomerdaleKeynsham 
3cRole
3.16 The town centre has historically 
been the hub of activity within 
Keynsham and, along with Somerdale, will continue to be the focus of the majority of future development and regeneration. The policy area encompasses the historic core of the town centred on the High Street, the Memorial Park, the Centre/Town Hall site, Riverside, the train station, and Somerdale.
3.17 Change within the policy area will 
be managed to improve Keynsham's 
performance and profile as:
a An important and attractive retail 
centre, market town and service centre for the surrounding area, inspired by its character and heritage;
b A more significant business location, encouraging enterprise, creativity and innovation; and
c  A more sustainable, desirable and well-connected place in which to live and work.Assets
3.18 The Spatial Strategy for the Town 
Centre and Somerdale area responds to the following assets :
a Its underlying historic character 
which is recognised in the designation of the two Conservation Areas.
b The High Street includes a good 
mix of retail uses with independent 
traders. There are few vacancies.  
It is compact and walkable from many parts of the town.
c Facilities within and adjacent to the town that provide opportunities for leisure and recreation, such as the Memorial Park, a leisure centre and Fry Club.
d Rivers, parks and green spaces 
such as the Memorial Park, the 
Hams and the Rivers Avon and Chew which reinforce the character of the town, provide a recreational resource and a natural habitat.
e The proximity of the railway station to the High Street and Somerdale.
f Heritage and archaeological assets, for example the medieval Abbey site which is a Scheduled Ancient Monument.
g The presence of the Local Authority in the town centre offers valuable local services and employment opportunities.h Keynsham can provide employers with a distinctive location, well connected to the national motorway network, at a lower rent than many areas of Bristol and Bath and with a resident population which is currently forced to out-
commute for many jobs.
Risks
3.19 The Spatial Strategy responds  
to the following issues which are identified as key risks to achieving  
the vision for Keynsham:
a The historic characteristics of the 
town centre Conservation Area are currently undermined by unsympathetic post-war development, resulting in damage to the historic grain and character, loss of traditional shop fronts and loss of small building frontages and therefore it is on the national Heritage at Risk Register. Also at risk is the Dapps Hill Conservation Area, which is described on the Register as being in a poor condition and deteriorating.
b Some buildings are historic and add positively to the character of the area, whilst others are poor quality and fail to enclose the street, leading to a lack of variety and interest.
c The small sizes of the shops make it difficult to attract high quality, national retailers, and Keynsham leaks expenditure to Longwell Green and Bristol as a result. Some are also not easily accessible for disabled people.3  Keynsham
88
3c Continued
d There is a notable lack of 'evening 
economy' uses, for example restaurants, cafes and bars.
e The quality of the public realm  
in the town centre is poor.
f Traffic on the High Street has a significant effect on the quality  
of the shopping environment and contributes to poor air quality.  
The High Street was designated  
 as an Air Quality Management  
Area in July 2010.
g The High Street has poor connections to Ashton Way car park and the Memorial Park.
h The Centre and Riverside offices are underutilised and are not delivering their full potential;  
they are also unattractive buildings which have a major impact on the perception of the town.
i The A4 and the railway line form a partial barrier to pedestrian and cycling movement between the Town Centre and Somerdale.
j Limited car parking capacity serving the town centre.
k The important green spaces are perceived as individual areas  
rather than a connected green infrastructure network.
l The loss of a major employer  
during 2011 – Cadburys.m The public sector employs a  
large number of people within Keynsham, but is expected to contract in the future.
n There is a limited rail service between Keynsham and  
Bristol/Bath.
o The northern part of the Somerdale site is within flood  
zone 2.
Policy KE2  
Town Centre/ 
Somerdale  
Strategic Policy
The Strategy for  
the Town Centre /  
Somerdale area is to:
1  Key Opportunities
Establish an integrated and sustainable town  
centre (boundary is defined on the Policies Map).  
There are major development opportunities on  
the High Street and on the edge of the town centre  
which can attract new jobs, shops and more visitors.  
These include:
a Somerdale
b The Centre/Town Hall and Riverside2  Scope and Scale of Change
Make provision for:
a Up to 700 dwellings.
b A new high quality, exemplar, mixed-use 
quarter at Somerdale, providing significant employment floorspace, new homes, leisure, open space, sport and recreational uses. The sequential and exception tests for flood risk would have to be met to justify any dwellings  
in higher risk parts of the site.
c New office development at the Centre/Town Hall site including a new library, retail units at street level, leisure facilities and residential dwellings.
d Some larger retail units to provide space for high quality, national retailers which complement the existing successful independent retailers.
e Diversification of the employment base in order to offer greater opportunities for the resident population.
f A District Heating Network, with potential identified at Somerdale and the town centre.
3  Placemaking Principles
a Reinforce and enhance the historic character and qualities of the Conservation Area ensuring local character is strengthened by change.  
The linear pattern and fine grain of the High Street should be maintained and enhanced.
b Improve the quality of the public realm including provision of a new civic space.
c Improve the connections between Ashton Way car park, the High Street and the Memorial Park.
d Retain the avenue of trees in Somerdale Road and consider the potential for converting and reusing some or all of the factory buildings at Somerdale.e Improve the links between the town centre and Somerdale, ensuring that the new mixed-use quarter is integrated with the rest of Keynsham.
f Enhance the town centre to make it a more vibrant and attractive area, enabling all members of the community to enjoy it over a longer period of the day.
g Retain and enhance the leisure, open space, sport and recreation function of the town centre and Somerdale.
h Enhance the rivers, park and green spaces and link them together to form an improved green infrastructure network (linking the town internally and to its environs).
i Protect the character and recreational value of the Memorial Park and the Hams.
j Provide new employment opportunities that help establish Keynsham as a more significant business location, diversifying the economy, and providing jobs, especially in the Higher Value Added sectors.
k Improve the management of traffic through  
the town centre and enhance public transport provision.
l Create / enhance links from Keynsham to the surrounding national and regional cycle networks.
m Improve air quality in the town centre as part  
of the Air Quality Management Area.
At present the 
overall image of the town is poor
Wider B&NES Business Plan  
Ernst & Young 20073  Keynsham
90
3c Continued
Development on the  
edge of Keynsham
3.19a  In order to meet the need for 
additional development within the 
District during the Plan period, land  
is removed from the Green Belt to provide for housing and employment floor space in two locations on the edge of Keynsham on the eastern edge and to the south west of the town. Through Policies KE3A and  
KE4 respectively land is allocated  
for residential and employment development adjoining east and south west Keynsham and a revised detailed Green Belt boundary is defined. Policies KE3A and KE4 also outline the place-making principles  
to be met in delivering development on these sites. The place-making principles are also indicated on concept diagrams for each site. National planning policy makes it  
clear that when altering Green Belt boundaries consideration should be given as to whether land needs to be safeguarded to meet longer term development needs. At south west Keynsham it is not considered there is any scope to identify safeguarded land. Policy KE3B safeguards land at East of Keynsham for development beyond the end of the plan period.
The spatial strategy 
enables Keynsham to 
evolve into a market 
town fit for the 21st 
century, becoming  
a more significant 
location for  
business and  
a more sustainable, 
desirable and  
well-connected  
place to live and work3  Keynsham
92
3c Continued
Land is removed from the  
Green Belt as shown on the  
Key Diagram and Policies Map  
in order to provide for residential 
and employment development 
with associated infrastructure.  
The requirements that  
need to be met to enable development are set out in  
the Placemaking Principles,  
Core Policies and indicated  
on the Concept Diagram.  
The Placemaking Principles, 
being site specific, take  
priority over the Core Policies.Placemaking Principles:
1 Residential development (to include 30% 
affordable housing) of around 220 – 250 dwellings in the plan period south of the A4  
as shown on the concept diagram. Density should vary across the site with the higher densities closest to the A4. 
2 Around 30,000sqm of employment floorspace within Use Classes B1 (b) & (c), B2 and any employment use not falling within the NPPF definition of a main town centre use, north of the A4 as shown on the concept diagram.
3 Preparation of a comprehensive Masterplan, through public consultation, and agreed by the Council, reflecting best practice as embodied in ‘By Design’ (or successor guidance), ensuring that development is well integrated with neighbouring areas.
4 Dwellings should front onto the A4 and have a positive relationship with all publically accessible routes. Development should face outwards towards the open countryside, adopting a perimeter block layout, with a  
clear distinction between the fronts and  
backs of properties. 
5 Employment / industrial buildings should have a positive frontage onto the A4 and all publically accessible routes, and seek to avoid creating a corridor of parking and yards along the roadside.6 Development should incorporate an element  
of traditional materials, including natural lias limestone, in key locations to be determined through the masterplan. 
7 Incorporation of green infrastructure, including: (a) on-site provision of well integrated allotments and play provision; (b) on or off-site ecological enhancements and (c) on or off-site new planting, to provide an appropriate edge  
to development. New planting should maximise native species woodland edge habitat and provide for public access.
8 Existing hedgerows and hedgerow specimen trees should be retained and strengthened where shown on the concept diagram to provide a strong landscape and green infrastructure framework. Sufficient setback  
of development should allow for growth of trees, including within gardens and open spaces, which will eventually break up the rooflines and frame development. 
9 Utilise the green corridors through the development to provide new shared pedestrian and cycle routes. The general alignment of existing public rights of way should be retained, enhanced and connected with these new routes. Public space and footpaths should incorporate species-rich verges and grassland habitat. Policy KE3a
Land adjoining East Keynsham  
Strategic Site Allocation10 The Roman road alignment and any surviving 
remains should be preserved by incorporating it into the development layout, preferably as open space or public footpath as part of the green infrastructure strategy.
11 Development to fully incorporate SuDS as part of the green infrastructure strategy. Streams and watercourses that cross the site should remain open, improved, and incorporated into the development as an attractive landscape and SuDS feature, with wetland habitat provided at in the North West part of the residential site.
12 Direct highway access from the residential site to be formed to the A4. Pedestrian and cycle access to be formed to the Chandag estate and to other points as shown on the concept diagram. The layout should be pedestrian and cycle dominant. A ‘shared space’ ethos for streets and spaces should prevail throughout the site. Connections to existing bus stops should be enhanced, with new stops provided.
13 Direct highway access from the employment site to be formed to Pixash Lane. 
14 The layout of the employment site should be designed to enable a future vehicular bridge over the railway line. 15 Off-site highway capacity improvements required, including the A4 and Broadmead roundabout, and Wellsway / Bath Road /  
Bath Hill junction.
16 Improve crossing facilities on the A4. 
17 Improve pedestrian and cycle access to Wellsway School.
18 Development should be designed to allow future highway, pedestrian and cycle connections to the safeguarded land. 
19 Provide land for a new Primary School on site and financial contributions for primary school accommodation proportionate to the expected pupil yield generated by the development.  
The new school should be designed to facilitate future expansion, should have direct pedestrian and cycle access from the residential site and existing residential areas, and incorporate new junior playing pitches to be available for wider community use. 
20 Downstream sewer improvements.3  Keynsham
94
3c Continued
Policy KE3b
Safeguarded 
Land at East 
Keynsham
Land shown on the Key 
Diagram and Policies Map  
is removed from the Green Belt and safeguarded for possible development.  
The safeguarded land is not allocated for development at 
the present time and Policy 
CP8 will apply. Planning permission for development of the safeguarded land will 
be granted only when it is 
proposed for development following a review of the 
Local Plan.CONCEPT  
DIAGRAM FOR LAND 
ADJOINING EAST 
KEYNSHAM STRATEGIC SITE 
ALLOCATION
KEY
Green Belt
Strategic Site Allocation
Safeguarded Land
Housing Development 
Boundary
Pedestrian and cycle link
Primary vehicle access
Potential vehicle accessFlood zone / Wetland 
Habitat
Additional Green 
Infrastructure
Playground area 
enhancement
Retained trees or ponds
Retained hedgerow  
and trees
Retained vegetation
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
3  Keynsham
96
3c Continued
Land is removed from the  
Green Belt as shown on the  
Key Diagram and Policies Map  
and allocated for residential  
development and associated  
infrastructure during the  
Plan period. 
The requirements that need to be met to  
enable development are set out in the 
Placemaking Principles, Core Policies and indicated on the Concept Diagram. The Placemaking Principles, being site specific,  
take priority over the Core Policies.
Placemaking Principles:
1 Residential development (to include 30% affordable housing) of around 180-200 dwellings in the plan period at South West Keynsham as shown on the concept diagram. 
2 Preparation of a comprehensive Masterplan, through public consultation, and to be agreed by the Council, reflecting best practice as embodied in ‘By Design’ (or successor guidance), ensuring that development is  
well integrated with neighbouring areas.3 Dwellings should front onto Charlton Road  
and have a positive relationship with all  
publicly accessible routes. Development should face outwards towards the open countryside, adopting a perimeter block layout, with a clear distinction between the fronts and backs of properties.
4 Building heights to be generally limited to 2/2.5 storeys, ensuring development does not break the skyline in views from Queen Charlton Conservation Area. 
5 Development should incorporate an element  
of traditional materials, including natural lias limestone, in key locations to be determined through the masterplan,. 
6 Incorporation of green infrastructure, including on-site provision of well integrated formal and natural green space and play provision, and off-site enhancements to allotments. A key  
part of the on-site requirement should be the provision of woodland and copse planting  
along Parkhouse Lane as shown on the Concept Diagram, to provide a landscape buffer from views from the south and east, and strengthen the sylvan character of the area. New planting should maximise native species woodland edge habitat and provide for public access. 7 Retain and strengthen the existing hedgerows and tree screening surrounding the site, with new screening along unplanted boundaries. 
8 Retention and enhancement of internal hedgerows including hedgerow specimen  
trees, enabling the subdivision of the site into a number of development areas, and providing a strong landscape and green infrastructure framework. Sufficient setback of development should allow for growth of trees.
9 Utilise the green corridors through the development to provide shared pedestrian and cycle routes. Public space and footpaths should incorporate species-rich verges and grassland habitat. 
10 Development to fully incorporate SuDS as part of the green infrastructure strategy to provide betterment to the existing surface water flood issues.
11 Direct highway access to be formed to Charlton Road with a through link to K2a sufficient to enable bus service provision to pass through the sites without turning.
12 The layout should be pedestrian and cycle dominant. A ‘shared space’ ethos for streets  
and spaces should prevail throughout the site.
13 Off-site highway capacity improvements to  
be determined by the Transport Impact Assessment at the application stage. Policy KE4  
Land adjoining South West Keynsham  
Strategic Site Allocation 14 Financial contributions for primary school 
places and contribution in lieu of land will be required for primary school provision within  
the Keynsham primary school planning area.
15 The solar energy potential of sites should be facilitated by design and orientation. Development will be expected to provide sufficient renewable energy generation to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from expected energy use in the buildings by at  
least 20%. Third party delivery options will  
be expected to have been considered and  
in exceptional circumstances Allowable Solutions may be utilised.
16 Downstream sewer upsizing works and pumping station upgrade.
CONCEPT DIAGRAM 
FOR LAND 
ADJOINING WEST 
KEYNSHAM STRATEGIC SITE 
ALLOCATION
KEY
Green Belt
Strategic Site Allocation
Housing Development 
Boundary
Pedestrian and cycle linkPrimary vehicle access
Potential vehicle access
Green Infrastructure link
Parish boundary 
enhancement
Retained trees or ponds
Retained hedgerow  
and trees
Retained vegetation
Additional Green 
Infrastructure
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
3  Keynsham
98
Infrastructure 
and DeliveryKeynsham 
3dInfrastructure
3.20  The key infrastructure 
requirements for Keynsham as 
identified in the B&NES Infrastructure Delivery Programme (IDP) are summarised in table 6. These are supplemented by District-wide infrastructure requirements. These are in addition to infrastructure provision arising from committed proposals such as the Local Plan allocated 'K2' site at South West Keynsham. The IDP also contains a number of desirable infrastructure items (see paragraph 3.21). Infrastructure planning involves an ongoing process of dialogue and communication with infrastructure providers and as further evidence is developed and future funding is secured additional items may be added to the IDP or their status may be upgraded or altered.3.21 The desirable infrastructure 
items, of importance to the town include:
• Green infrastructure: river/canal 
corridor, formal and informal green spaces and allotments.
• Improvements to Keynsham Train Station and Enhanced Service Frequency to Bath and Bristol.
• Pedestrian/cycling bridge over A4 Keynsham by-pass linking the railway station to the Memorial Park.
• Cycle links to Bristol, Bath,  
National Routes 3 and 4, and Regional Route 10.
• Safer routes for pedestrians  
and other cycle links.
• Smarter Choices Measures, 
including measures such as:
 –  Travel Plans – new development  
to be required to contribute to 
improvements identified by School Travel Plans
 –  Community Transport 
 –  Encouraging car sharing  
e.g. via car clubs
 –  Working from Home• Re-provision of any sports pitches  
or other facilities where triggered  
by development.
• Town centre public realm 
improvements.
• Transport improvements to determine the most appropriate design for the town centre highway network aimed at minimising the effect of existing and future traffic.
• Town centre/Somerdale district heating infrastructure.
Delivery
3.23 Delivery of the strategy and 
infrastructure required to support it will be facilitated by the planning framework summarised below:
• Planning Obligations Supplementary 
Planning Document (SPD)
• Placemaking Plan
• Community Infrastructure Levy
• Redevelop the Town Hall / Centre site by B&NES Council.
• Keynsham Town Centre Regeneration Delivery Plan which will be a basis for bids to national  
and sub-regional funds (for example the West of England Revolving Infrastructure Fund) that may become available to support development and enable the  
Council to maximise the potential  
of its physical assets.
3.25 In addition to the above the 
review of town centre car parking capacity will be an important part  
of the delivery strategy.
IDP Ref Key infrastructure item Phasing Cost Funding & Delivery
K1.1 Flood Protection Measures for 
Cadbury’s Somerdale SiteNecessary enabling works  
to precede development at SomerdaleNot quantified On site works necessary to obtain planning permission 
K1.2 Improvements to sewerage capacityNecessary enabling works to precede development in the Green Belt east of Keynsham and south west of KeynshamDependent on scheme designWessex Water (improvements to critical sewer capacity and Keynsham STW); on-site mains and sewers to be provided by the developer; off-site connecting works delivered through requisition arrangements
K1.3 Enhance Keynsham Hams as wetland habitatNecessary enabling works  
to precede development at SomerdaleNot quantified On site works required as part of development requirements
K1.4 Secondary road access to the Somerdale SiteNecessary enabling works  
to precede development at SomerdaleNot quantified On site works necessary to obtain planning permission
K1.5 Improvements to Keynsham Train Station and Enhanced Service Frequency to Bath and Bristol2017-2020 £19.7m (at 2012 prices) for Greater Bristol Metro Rail ProjectNetwork Rail with Bath and North East Somerset Council. Evidence included in the Great Western Mainline Route Utilisation Strategy (2010). The Council will continue to press for this urgently needed investment through its Memorandum  
of Understanding with the Rail Industry
K1.6 New early years facility and primary school at SomerdaleNecessary enabling works  
to precede development at Somerdalec.£5,000,000 On site works necessary to obtain planning permission
K1.7 Additional early years, primary and secondary education capacity in Keynsham2011-2029 Dependent on delivery strategy and phasingS106 capital; potential for CIL capitalTable 6  
Summary of Key Infrastructure in Keynshamx4 Somer Valley
100
Biodiversity
Disused railwaysCharacterfulHeritagePotential
Ambitious4Somer 
Valley
4a  Setting the Agenda 100
 Diagram 14  Somer Valley Location  103
4b  Vision and Spatial Strategy 102
 Diagram 15  Somer Valley Strategy 106
 Policy SV1 Somer Valley Spatial Strategy 108
4c  Midsomer Norton Town Centre 110
 Diagram 16  Midsomer Norton Town Centre  110
 Policy SV2  Midsomer Norton Town Centre Strategic Policy 111
4d  Radstock Town Centre 112
 Diagram 17  Radstock Town Centre 112
 Policy SV3  Radstock Town Centre Strategic Policy 114
4e  Infrastructure and Delivery 116
 Table 7  Summary of Key Infrastructure in the Somer Valley 117
Wildlife
CyclingEnergyBatchSelf Reliant
Enthusiastic
LocalityEcologyEntrepreneursTown ParkGreen Links
x4 Somer Valley
102
Setting 
the AgendaSomer Valley 
4aContext
4.01 The Southern part of the  
District, with its range of distinctive 
characteristics, identities, communities and history makes a strong contribution to the overall character  
of the District.
4.02  From Medieval Market town 
roots, the area was transformed 
during the industrial revolution to 
exploit its mineral resources. Once 
known as the 'powerhouse' for Bath, life in the area was dominated by coal mining, leading to a proud heritage of energy production. This relatively short lived but intense period of local history has passed, with formerly industrial landscapes having long returned to beautiful countryside with some distinctive landscape features. 
The strength of community and 
identity borne out of this heritage remains, as do the towns and villages which developed in this period.
4.03 The Somerset and Dorset 
Railway route now forms part of the 
National Cycle Network (Colliers Way) connecting Bath to the South Coast. The loss of the railways, whilst providing green infrastructure, means that strategic links now rely entirely on the road network.4.04  Manufacturing industries 
including printing, binding and packaging continue to provide important local employment opportunities. Despite closures  
and relocations of some large scale manufacturing business, the area presents positive opportunities to increase economic competitiveness particularly with small and medium scale local business and highly skilled entrepreneurs.
4.05  The Somer Valley Area includes 
Midsomer Norton, Westfield, 
Radstock, Peasedown St John, Paulton, Shoscombe, Camerton, Timsbury, High Littleton and Farrington Gurney.
4.06  Midsomer Norton is a market 
town dating back to medieval times.  
It became an important coal-mining 
town in the nineteenth century and continues to cater for key services, employment, shopping and leisure facilities to the wider communities.  
Its historic core runs along the River Somer which remains an attractive feature in the High Street.4.07 Radstock is located on the 
northern edge of the Mendip Hills in the Wellow Brook Valley. The town lies at the confluence of five steep-sided valleys and the tributaries of the Wellow Brook. Radstock has been settled since the Iron Age and is one of the best preserved former coal-mining towns in England, the basis of its Conservation Area status. The Great Western Railway, and the Somerset and Dorset Railway established stations and marshalling yards in the town. Radstock was at the heart of the Somerset Coalfield and became a central point for railway development. Radstock comprises distinctive communities of Coombend, Clandown, Writhlington and Radstock.
4.07a Paulton and Peasedown St. 
John are the two largest villages in the 
Somer Valley. Following the closure of 
the Somerset Coalfield, there have been periods of substantial housing development in Peasedown during the 1960s and 70s, and more recently in the late 1990s. A sizeable Business Park is also located on the south eastern edge of the village which is home to a number of major employers including the CircleBath Hospital. Paulton was originally an agricultural village which grew significantly as a result of coal mining. Following closure of the mines its economic base became industrial, including printing. In the last twenty years a number of the larger local employers including Polestar have closed resulting in reduced local employment opportunities, increased out-commuting, but also a number of 
redevelopment opportunities.A4
A37
A361A37A46
A4
A36A36
A367A3062A36
A39
A368
A368A37
A367A431
A39A362A4
A37A46
A4
A36
A367A3062A36
A39
A368
A368A37
A367A431SOUTH 
GLOUCES TERSHIRE
BRIS TOL
NORTHSOMERSET
MENDIPWILTSHIRE
BATH
SOMER VALLEYKEYNSHAM
PaultonFarmboro ugh
TimsburyBishopSutton
Temple
CloudWhit churc h Saltfor dBatheas ton
Camert onHighLittlet onClutt onChew  Magna
West 
Harptr eeFreshfor dCorston
Pensfor d
Chew  Stoke
Chew 
Valley 
LakeBlagdon 
LakeRiver Avon
Chilc ompt on
Stratton-on-the-Fo sse
Holcombe
Colefor dFarringt on 
Gurney
KilmersdonShosc ombeSouth St okeNewton St Lo e
Stanto n Drew
Hinton
Chart erhouseEnglishco mbe
Peasedo wn
St John
MidsomerNorto nRadst ock
Westfield
Wells
Shept on
MalletFrome
DIAGRAM 14  
SOMER VALLEY 
LOCATION 
KEY
 Green  Belt
 Somer  Valley
© Crown  copyright.  All rights  reserved   
(100023334)  (2010)4 Somer Valley
104
4a Continued
Strategic issues
4.08  Recent incremental housing 
development and a decline in the 
manufacturing sector has led to an imbalance between jobs and homes. The area provides a high quality environment to live with good accessibility to services, particularly highly successful schools and open countryside. However in order for the Somer Valley to continue to thrive, it is necessary to create a more sustainable balance by enhancing economic activities and wealth creation. Tourism opportunities to build upon a mining and industrial heritage and rich natural environment are not yet realised.
4.09  The Somer Valley has a number 
of strengths and challenges which  
the Core Strategy seeks to address in 
order to realise the area's potential.
Challenges
• Vulnerable local economy dependent on a narrow range of industries and a few large employers.
• A number of large vacant, underused or ageing factory sites. 
• High levels of out-commuting due  
to lack of local employment opportunities. 
• Perceived difficulty in attracting economic investment in the area. 
• Limited broadband infrastructure capacity. 
• Transport congestion and limited opportunities for large scale transport intervention. • Poor public transport in rural areas leading to isolation for those without private transport. 
• Competition with neighbouring towns in Somerset – mixed quality  
of Midsomer Norton town centre, dominance of road network in Radstock centre. 
• Access to community facilities – maintaining and enhancing local village centres. 
• High level of existing housing commitments of about 2,470 dwellings, exacerbating imbalance  
of housing over jobs.
• Lack of formal open space. 
• Poor town centre environments  
and insufficient retail offer. 
Strengths• High quality natural environment within and surrounding the towns.
• Mining heritage – basis for recreation (disused rail lines) and tourism (especially Radstock). 
• Critical mass of a combined Somer Valley area offers greater potential than towns and villages individually. 
• Active local communities and existing community networks. 
• Good schools and a local hospital. 
• Existing engineering skills and expertise. 
• Potential for local small to medium size companies to grow further. 
• Relative lower cost of housing compared to elsewhere in the District.  
• Basis of a good cycle network. Regeneration, Place and 
Communities
4.10 The B&NES Economic  
Strategy seeks to improve the 
prosperity and well-being of  
Bath and North East Somerset residents through a more productive, competitive and expanded economy. It includes priority actions to bring forward new employment space in Midsomer Norton and Radstock centres and identifies a new  
strategic employment location in  
the Somer Valley.4.11 Engagement with local 
communities has revealed an ambition to take advantage of the critical mass of the various communities in the area and to become more self-reliant socially and economically.
4.12 The Core Strategy sets out a 
planning framework to guide new 
development to achieve community aspirations expressed through the Brighter Futures Community Plan  
and the 'Future' for the Somer Valley.
 
The Brighter Futures Community Plan  
By the Somer Valley Partnership 
The 'Brighter Futures' Community Plan covers  
the Somer Valley area, comprising the towns of 
Midsomer Norton and Radstock and the North East Somerset communities of Camerton, 
Farrington Gurney, High Littleton, Paulton, 
Peasedown St John, Shoscombe and Timsbury. Key themes cover businesses and the local 
economy, the town centres, transport, the 
environment, public services and housing. The Plan's ambition is to create a thriving and vibrant 
area with a sense of wellbeing, its own identity and 
promoted as a whole, with Midsomer Norton and Radstock as the focus. Facilities in Midsomer 
Norton and Radstock will be available and 
accessible for the communities in the surrounding villages. Village communities will have the support 
and resources necessary to develop solutions to 
their particular needs.Vision  
and 
Spatial 
StrategySomer Valley 
4bThe Vision  
What the spatial strategy  
seeks to achieve
The southern part of the District will  
become more self-reliant, facilitated by 
economic-led revitalisation alongside  
local energy generation, building on its 
industrial expertise and improving skill levels. 
Transport connections to other centres, as 
well as connections between settlements within the Somer Valley area will continue  
to be improved.
The roles of Midsomer Norton and Radstock 
Town Centres will be complementary, providing key employment opportunities, 
services and leisure provision to the 
communities in the Somer Valley area. Midsomer Norton town centre will continue  
to be the principal centre with an improved public realm and enhanced townscape and a Town Park. Radstock will continue to provide  
a focal point for local communities and realise its potential for tourism based on its green infrastructure, mining heritage, cycle ways  
and attractive rural hinterland.
Villages of the Somer Valley will continue  
to provide for the needs of their local 
communities.4 Somer Valley
106
SOUTH 
GLOUCES TERSHIRE
BRIS TOL
NORTHSOMERSET
MENDIPWILTSHIRE
BATH
SOMER 
VALLEYKEYNSHAM
PaultonFarmboro ugh
TimsburyBishop
Sutton
Temple
CloudWhit churc h Saltfor dBatheas ton
Bathfo rd
Camert onHigh
Littlet onClutt onChew  MagnaBathhampt on
West 
Harptr eeWellowFreshfor dCorston
Pensfor d
Compton MartinChew  Stoke
Shosco mbeChew 
Valley 
LakeBlagdon 
LakeRiver Avon
Peasedo wn
St John
Midsomer
Norto nWestfield
E
E
E
E
ERadstock4b Continued
DIAGRAM 15  
SOMER VALLEY 
STRATEGY
KEY
	 Green 	Belt
	 Built 	Up	Areas
		Local 	Centres
	Significant 	Change
E	New	 Employment
	 Green 	Infrastructure 	Link
	Showcase 	Bus	Routes
©	Crown 	copyright. 	All	rights 	reserved 		
(100023334) 	(2010)Vision and spatial strategy
4.13 The strategy seeks to deliver the 
vision for the Somer Valley and the 
strategic objectives for the District  
(set out in Chapter 1). In addition to  
the strategy and policies outlined in this chapter, the policies in Chapter 5 on the rural areas apply specifically to the villages in the Somer Valley. The strategy for the Somer Valley is to make provision for the development of the economic and community facilities needed to increase self-reliance and economic revitalisation. There are particular opportunities to facilitate local energy generation. Provision of sufficient space in the Somer Valley will contribute to economic diversification, enable local firms to expand and provide space for new businesses to locate in the area thereby providing an improved range of local employment opportunities to target workers with different skills to replace jobs lost in traditional manufacturing industries. This approach will be underpinned by  
the Council's Economic Strategy to attract new business to the area and improved education and training linking local businesses with key training providers such as Norton Radstock College and the secondary schools and building on existing academic and vocational courses.4.14 Whilst there is land available with 
capacity within the Somer Valley to provide more than 2,000 jobs, it is unlikely that any more than around 900 of these jobs will come forward in the Plan period. Their delivery will require strong partnership with public and private sectors. With limited resources available, targeted efforts will be required as set out in the Economic Strategy.
4.15 There is already a significant 
number of housing commitments  
in the Somer Valley and a limited 
capacity to generate new jobs.  
New housing in the Somer Valley  
will therefore be restrained in the interest of sustainability but some additional housing is likely to come forward on brownfield sites. The Housing Development Boundary will 
be reviewed in the Placemaking Plan 
to facilitate this and to reflect recent planning permissions on greenfield sites. However in light of the objective of economic led revitalisation, it is important that the additional housing does not significantly worsen the balance between homes and jobs  
and the out-commuting problems  
and the Council may therefore seek  
to ensure an economic benefit from new housing.4.15a  Local designations such as 
Housing Development Boundaries and Core Business Areas shown on the Policies Map (saved from the existing Bath & North East Somerset Local Plan) will be reviewed as part of the Placemaking Plan.
4.16 The distinctive character of the 
countryside surrounding the towns 
and villages will be protected and the urban environments, especially in the town centres will be improved to make them more appealing for residents, businesses and visitors.4.17 The area does not benefit from 
direct trunk road links to the motorway network, but does connect to Bath via the A367 and A39, Bristol via the A37 and south via the A37 and A367 to Somerset towns. Apart from the funding for Greater Bristol Bus Network, there is no immediate prospect of new large scale funding  
or any major development to trigger substantial road infrastructure improvements within the plan period. Therefore, improvements to public transport, cycling infrastructure and the implementation of 'Smarter Choices for transport' should be pursued in this area in support of the spatial strategy. The Joint Local Transport Plan which was adopted in March 2011 includes reference to further rail enhancements by 2026,  
for example re-opening the Radstock to Frome line as part of ‘Plans and Aspirations for other Significant Transport Schemes’.
4 Somer Valley
108
4b Continued
1  Natural & Built Environment
a Protect and enhance the distinctive character 
of the area including the landscape and built and historic environment.
b Strengthen the green links between the two town centres via a cycle and walking link along the route of the former railway as part of the Town Park and Five Arches route proposals.
2  Previously Developed Land
a Prioritise development on brownfield sites focussing on Midsomer Norton and Radstock Centres (See Policies SV2 and SV3) and the redevelopment of vacant and underused industrial land and factories.3  Economic Development
a Enable the delivery of around 900 net additional jobs between 2011 and 2029 and facilitate further jobs if economic circumstances allow.
b Encourage the retention and expansion of local companies and the growth of new businesses by making provision for the changes in employment floorspace set out below:
Office floorspace: from about 31,000m2 in 2011 to about 33,700m2 in 2029 Industrial/Warehouse floorspace: from about 126,400m2 in 2011 to about 112,000m2 in 2029. New employment floorspace will be focussed at:
• the Westfield Industrial Estates, Midsomer 
Norton Enterprise Park and Bath Business Park in Peasedown St John
• Old Mills in Paulton (Local Plan Policy GDS.1 V4)
• Midsomer Norton and Radstock Town Centres
c Protect land in existing business use and, consider alternative use where there is no reasonable prospect of a site being used for that purpose and it does not lead to an unacceptable loss of employment land.4  Housing
Enable around 2,470 new homes to be built at Midsomer Norton, Radstock, Westfield, Paulton and Peasedown St John, by amending the housing development boundary as necessary and to reflect existing commitments. This will include affordable housing, providing more choices of housing to meet the needs of the local communities. (Policies RA1 and RA2 are applicable to the other settlements in Somer Valley.) 
5  Shopping
a Strengthen the shopping offer in Midsomer Norton town centre to serve the Somer Valley by facilitating redevelopment and improving the public realm.
b Enable Radstock centre to continue to provide local needs and support specialist shops.
c Protect and enhance the local centres at Westfield, Paulton, Peasedown St John and Timsbury.Policy SV1
Somer Valley Spatial Strategy
The Strategy for the Somer Valley is to:Provision of sufficient space in 
the Somer Valley will contribute 
to economic diversification, 
enable local firms to expand  
and provide space for new 
businesses to locate in the area6  Transport
a Implement necessary transport infrastructure 
to improve public transport links to major settlements and links within the Somer Valley and safeguard and extend sustainable transport routes.
b Encourage Smarter Choices to facilitate increased movement by sustainable modes of transport. (Transport infrastructure and Smarter Choices measures are set out in the Infrastructure and Delivery section.)
7  Energy conservation and sustainable 
energy generation
a Encourage renewable and low-carbon energy 
generation schemes, particularly those led by local communities.
b Facilitate district heating system in the centres of Midsomer Norton and Radstock.8  Leisure
a Increase and enhance access to local heritage, woodlands and green spaces including implementation of the proposed Town Park in Midsomer Norton.
b Facilitate the provision of the proposed Town Park in Midsomer Norton as a recreational facility serving the Somer Valley.
c Increase allotment provision where deficiencies have been identified.4 Somer Valley
110
 DIAGRAM 16  
MIDSOMER NORTON  
TOWN CENTRE
KEY
	Town 	Centre
	 High 	Street 	Core
	Gateway 	Improvement	Leisure 	&	Community 	Area
	Town 	Park
		Key	Community 	Landmarks
		Sustainable 	Transport/ 	Green 	
Infrastructure 	Corridors
©	Crown 	copyright. 	All	rights 	reserved 		
(100023334) 	(2010)Midsomer 
Norton Town CentreSomer Valley 
4c
WestfieldCoombendTyning 
Hill
CollegeWells RoadBath 
Road
HaydonWrithlington
MIDSOMER
NORT ONRADSTOCK
Role of the Centre
4.18 Midsomer Norton Town Centre 
will continue to play the role of the 
market town serving a wider catchment population from surrounding villages. It forms a key link in the strong network of settlements that make the area more self-reliant in terms of access to key services, leisure, jobs and shops.Assets
4.19 Midsomer Norton Town Centre has 
significant potential to inspire and 
influence new development such as the:
• Distinctive and appealing townscape 
with historic buildings, the River Somer flowing through the High Street and the Conservation Area.
• Distinctive views from the town to 
green skylines.
• Enhanced leisure facilities on the 
edge of the centre including a skate board park.
• Accessible parking. 
• Improvement of the existing cycle network and use of the sustainable transport links. 
• Strong community support that  
will benefit implementation. 
Risks
4.20  The following issues are 
identified as key risks to achieving  
the ambitions for Midsomer Norton.
• Increasingly strong competition 
from nearby market towns in surrounding districts.
• Lack of medium and large sized shopping units.
• The dominance of parking in the street scene, poor pedestrian links, busy roads and a lack of public space. 
• Lack of evening economy to contribute to a sense of vibrancy  
and community. 
• Perceived fear of crime in some parts of the town centre. 1  Key Opportunities/Priorities
a Unlock redevelopment sites in the town  
centre (boundary defined on the Policies  
Map) to avoid the need for out of centre  
retail development, particularly in respect of  
vacant/underused buildings such as the former Palladium cinema and former brewery.
b Enhance the public realm.
c Enhance leisure provision including the  
Town Park.
d Focus on the southern end of the High  
Street as the retail core.
2  Scope and Scale of Change
Make provision for:
a Residential development as part of mixed  
use schemes
b Some larger retail units in the core areas  
of the High Street.
c Modern office space to offset the loss of 
manufacturing jobs.
d A district heating network.3  Placemaking Principles
a Strengthen the shopping offer in the southern end of the High Street and provide better pedestrian connections from the main car parks to the core retail area, creating a stronger frontage to South Road.
b Enable more intensive use of the South Road car park providing the opportunity to accommodate a modern food store. Any development here should retain public car parking for the town centre.
c Conserve the town centre's heritage and unique townscape character.
d Enhance the positive feature of the River Somer.
e Reduce the amount of traffic using the retail core of the High Street and improve the environment for pedestrians.
f Improve routes and major entrances into  
the centre.
g Improve access to green infrastructure including the proposed Town Park.
h Improve linkage to Sustainable  
Transport Routes.
i Improve the range of leisure and visitor attractions as part of the total town  
centre offer.Policy SV2
Midsomer Norton  
Town Centre Strategic Policy
The Strategy for the Somer Valley is to:4 Somer Valley
112
Radstock 
Town CentreSomer Valley 
4d
WestfieldCoombendTyning 
Hill
CollegeWells RoadBath 
Road
HaydonWrithlington
MIDSOMER
NORT ONRADSTOCK
Role of the Centre
4.21 Radstock Town Centre provides a 
focus for the surrounding communities 
and villages with its local retail offer, job provision and community facilities. It is also an attractive place to visit with a unique mining heritage and rich rural environment sitting directly on National Cycle Route 24.Assets
4.22 Particular strengths of the centre 
include:
• Rich heritage: The most significant 
element is the Radstock Conservation Area and its well preserved mining past. The Conservation Area is relatively extensive in order to incorporate the main coal-mining areas, buildings 
and associated features as well as 
areas of open landscape since they have a direct visual relationship with the core areas of historical interest and influence the character of the area. Particular assets include; the museum, historic buildings such as the Brunel Shed and other former railway routes. Victoria Hall, the key municipal building, reflects the 
height of Radstock's industrial past 
and continues in community use to this day.• An outstanding natural environment within and around the town, boasting prominent hills and valleys, woodlands, rivers and streams, and important biodiversity. Surrounded by hillsides and sited at the confluence of the Wellow Brook and its tributaries, the town has a distinct landscape backdrop with the countryside encroaching close to the centre of the town.
• Linkages with the National and  
local cycle network.
• Diverse range of services and a varied retail offer.
• A strong, high quality education sector across the age ranges including Norton Radstock College.
• Existing and potential allotments provision which mirrors the traditional miner's cottage long-gardens and self-sufficient tradition. 
• Strong network of established community groups. 
Risks
4.23 The following issues are identified 
as key risks to achieving the ambitions for Radstock.
• The highway network whereby  
the town is situated at the meeting 
point of a number of busy roads, compromising pedestrian environment and severely compromising the creation of a 
strong sense of place in the centre.
• Potential flood risk.
• Limited development opportunity 
sites to achieve overall ambitions for the town.
DIAGRAM 17  
RADSTOCK CENTRE
KEY
	 The 	Policy 	Area
	 Potential 	Areas 	for	Change
		Key	Community 	Landmarks
		Radstock 	Railway 	Land 	
(Local	 Plan	 Allocation)
		Sustainable 	Transport/ 	
Green 	Infrastructure
©	Crown 	copyright. 	All	rights 	reserved 		
(100023334) 	(2010)
4 Somer Valley
114
4d Continued
1  Key Regeneration Opportunities
a Bring into use the under-used and vacant  
sites within the town centre (boundary defined 
on the Policies Map).
b Enhance the public realm.
2  Scope and Scale of Change
Make provision for:
a Residential development as part of mixed  
use schemes
b Modern office space and community facilities.
c A district heating network.
3  Placemaking Principles
a Protect and enhance heritage assets: The 
built form should retain its historical and architectural value and development should attempt to integrate these features and carefully consider materials appropriate to the locality and building style.
b Ensure that linkages to green spaces and sustainable transport routes are prioritised.
c Protect and enhance areas of visual significance and views to open landscape, in light of their close relationship with the history of the town.d Protect and enhance the green infrastructure of the town centre associated with the river, particularly to help counterbalance the negative effect of traffic.
e Establish greater provision for pedestrians and cyclists in the town centre including secured cycle parking facilities.
f Secure a high quality of building design, townscape and public realm.
g Improve connectivity between the core shopping area, community amenity areas including the library, Victoria Hall, Radstock Museum and key car parks.
h Secure a more balanced mix of retail by supporting independent retailers (including those supporting cultural activities such as arts and crafts), leisure, tourist and commercial uses.Policy SV3
Radstock Town  
Centre Strategic Policy
The Strategy for the Somer Valley is to:
An outstanding natural 
environment within and 
around the town, boasting 
prominent hills and valleys, woodlands, rivers and streamsSomer Valley 
4e
Infrastructure 
and DeliveryInfrastructure
4.24 The key infrastructure requirements for the 
Somer Valley as identified in the B&NES 
Infrastructure Delivery Programme (IDP) are 
summarised in Table 7, these are supplemented by District-wide infrastructure requirements. The IDP 
also contains a number of desirable infrastructure 
items (see paragraph 4.25). Infrastructure planning involves an ongoing process of dialogue and 
communication with infrastructure providers and as 
further evidence is developed and future funding is secured additional items may be added to the IDP  
or their status may be upgraded or altered.4 Somer Valley
116
4e Continued
4.25  In addition to the key 
infrastructure requirements, 
desirable infrastructure items  
that the Council will seek include:
• Smarter Choices Measures,  
which could include:
 -  Travel Plans – new development 
to be required to contribute to improvements identified by School Travel Plans 
 -  Community Transport  
e.g. Ring and Ride services 
 -  Encouraging car sharing  
e.g. via car clubs 
 -  Working from Home 
• Highway network improvements  
to Midsomer Norton & Radstock. 
• Town centre public realm 
improvements in Midsomer  
Norton and Radstock. 
• Improved Cycle links and  
Green Infrastructure. 
• Proposed Town Park in  
Midsomer Norton. Delivery
4.26 The main sources of public 
sector funding to help support the delivery of infrastructure and the strategy itself are as follows:
4.27
• West of England Partnership Single Conversation: West of England Delivery and infrastructure investment plan. Some £7.7 m of 
public investment by 2015 is 
included in the plan to enable the regeneration of brownfield sites in the town centres and to bring forward employment land in the Somer Valley area.
• The 'place based' public investment priority through the West of England Delivery and Infrastructure Plan is intended to 
offer benefits in terms of 
'Improving local communities' in the Somer Valley area. 
• 'Big Local Trust' Lottery fund for Radstock and Westfield: The local funding schemes will enable people to make their communities better places to live in, now and in the future. 
• HCA Rural Masterplan Fund. 4.28  Delivery of the strategy and 
infrastructure required to support it will be facilitated by the planning framework summarised below:
• Planning Obligations SPD
• Placemaking Plan
• Community Infrastructure Levy 
• Midsomer Norton Town Centre 
Economic Regeneration Delivery Plan which will form a basis for bids to national and sub-regional funds (for example the West of England Local Investment Plan) that may become available to support development and enable the  
Council to maximise the potential  
of its physical assets. 
• Radstock and Westfield  
Economic Plan4.29 The Council will work in 
partnership with adjoining authorities and the different landowners to ensure that the regeneration of the town centre is comprehensive and conforms to the future Masterplan to avoid further piecemeal development.
IDP Ref Key infrastructure item Phasing Cost Funding & Delivery 
MNRI.1 Public Investment for 
Site preparation and planning including site specific infrastructure. 2010-2015 £7.7m Homes & Communities Agency Funding through the West of England Single Conversation: West of England Delivery & Infrastructure Plan
MNRI.2 Part of Greater Bristol Bus Network Major Scheme A37 Bristol to Midsomer Norton and Bath and Bath to Midsomer Norton and Radstock2006-2011/12 £70m (at 2006 prices) for overall projectWest of England Authorities, First Group, DfT.
MNRI.3 Site Base infrastructure requirements for Old Mills II2010 onwards Under investigation HCA Rural Masterplanning fund – Investigative site infrastructure work being undertakenTable 7  
Summary of Key Infrastructure in the Somer Valley
x5 Rural Areas
118
Picturesque
CherishedSensitiveDisparateDiverseRural  
Areas
5a  Setting the Agenda 120
5b  Vision and Policy Framework 122
 Diagram 18  Rural Villages  123
 Policy RA1  Development in the Villages meeting the listed criteria 125
  Policy RA2  Development in Villages outside the Green Belt not 
meeting Policy RA1 Criteria  125
 Policy RA3 Community Facilities and Shops  126
 Policy RA4  Rural Exceptions Sites   127
 Policy RA5 Land at Whitchurch Strategic Site Allocation  129
  Concept Diagram for Land at Whitchurch Strategic  
Site Allocation   131
5c  Infrastructure and Delivery 132
Relaxing
TranquilGreenCharacterCommunityEnlivened NetworksRuralAgriculturalLocal need
5 Rural Areas
120
Setting the 
AgendaRural Areas 
5aContext
5.01 Set amongst high quality natural 
environments, the villages and hamlets 
of the rural areas of the District provide a peaceful environment in which to live and work. The economic character of the area is grounded in agriculture, which now works alongside other small rural businesses. The high quality landscape contributes to the quality of life of the District's residents, as well as attracting visitors and as a place for leisure and relaxation.
5.02 Large parts of the rural areas are 
designated as Green Belt, and much 
are within the Cotswolds or Mendip Hills AONBs. The rural areas complement the more urban parts of the District, and many rural residents 
look to these urban areas for a wider 
range of facilities and employment. The Management Plans for these AONBs also set out policies relating to the management of land within them.
5.03 The distinctiveness of different 
parts of the rural areas and the villages 
within them fall within broad character areas identified in Rural Landscapes of B&NES that reflect underlying geology and landscape form.5.04 To the North and East of Bath is 
the Cotswolds Plateau and Valleys character area which includes part of the Cotswolds AONB and is within the Green Belt. The settlement pattern has evolved based on the form of the land and villages run along the valley sides. Included within this area are the villages of Bathampton and Batheaston, which are characterised by their strong relationship to Bath. Neighbouring Limpley Stoke Valley has similar characteristics and is also an important communication corridor with the railway, river, Kennet and Avon canal, the A4 and A36 and a number of public footpaths. This area includes the villages of Bathford and Freshford.
5.05 The four character areas to the 
North West of the District (the largest 
of which is the Dundry Plateau) are 
more isolated in character. Whitchurch is the largest village and lies close to the southern suburbs of Bristol.
5.06  The Avon Valley retains its 
historical role as a transport corridor. 
Formerly a transport corridor based on the river, it now contains the principal vehicular route (the A4) from Bristol to Bath, the Great Western main rail line and the country's first National Cycle route. Saltford is the main village in this character area and is visible from much of the surrounding area. Due to its position on the A4, Saltford has good vehicular access to Keynsham, Bath and Bristol. The area lies within the Green Belt, in which the village of Saltford is inset.5.07 The Cam and Wellow Brook 
Valley area, located towards the South 
of the District, has a peaceful, tranquil quality. The villages in this area follow the valley floors, and the urban areas of Midsomer Norton and Radstock form an important element of this character area.
5.08 Surrounded by the Cam and 
Wellow Brook Valley area, the coal 
mining legacy is characteristic of  
the Paulton and Peasedown St John ridge. Key villages are Peasedown  
St John and Paulton which have received and been earmarked for large development in recent years. The A367 is a major feature in the landscape of this area and provides connectivity from Peasedown  
St John to Bath and to Midsomer Norton and Radstock.
5.09 In the central part of the  
District, the extensive plateau from 
Hinton Blewett to Newton St Loe includes the key villages of Clutton, Temple Cloud, High Littleton, Timsbury and Farmborough. The form of the villages in this area tends to be either centred around a village core (such as Clutton) or in linear form (such as Temple Cloud). Edge of settlement development during the post war period lacked the well-integrated characteristic of the original villages and has had a significant impact on views.5.10 The Chew Valley is to the West of 
the District, and has strong links to Bristol. Key villages are Chew Magna, Chew Stoke and Pensford which are washed over by the Green Belt. These Green Belt villages are at the junctions to several routes providing good access to Bristol in particular. Chew Magna acts as a local service hub to the surrounding villages and hosts a range of facilities. The village of Bishop Sutton is not within the Green Belt and is less constrained than the other key villages in this character area.
5.11 The remaining six character areas 
towards the South West and South 
East boundaries of the District are characterised by small settlements, including farms, hamlets and small villages, dotted throughout the countryside. The landscape is primarily open and is dominated by agriculture.
Strategic Issues
5.12 Although rural Bath & North East 
Somerset is made up of a wide variety of settlements with locally distinctive character, there are a number of strategic issues (both challenges and opportunities) that are common across most of the rural area:
• Lack of affordable housing to meet 
local needs may impact on the social 
sustainability of the rural areas and 
exacerbate difficulties for an ageing population.
• For much of the rural area poor access to public transport affects the functionality of the rural economy and leads to isolation for those without access to private transport.
• Access to facilities, services and shops.
• Reliance of the rural economy based on farming, the self employed and small businesses that require support to flourish. 
• The urgent need to provide reliable broadband, with adequately fast access speed, to every home and business.
• Potential opportunities to diversify the rural economy e.g. centred around local food production or renewable energy.a peaceful 
environment in which to live and work5 Rural Areas
122
The Vision for the Rural Areas
The District's rich and diverse 
countryside will be maintained. Locally identified needs will be met whilst maintaining the individual character of villages. The rural economy will evolve and new types of jobs and ways of working will provide more locally based employment opportunities. The potential for the rural area to play an important role in local food production will be encouraged. Community involvement will help facilitate improvement in the provision of community facilities and public transport.Policy Framework
5.13 In line with a national policy of 
restraint there will only be limited 
development in the rural areas to address the issues identified above. The Core Strategy directs appropriate levels of housing and employment development to the most sustainable villages where there is development capacity. Outside these villages development is more restricted. However, the need for local affordable housing and employment can also be met mainly through the exceptions policy and Local Plan rural diversification Policy ET.8. Community facilities and shops are generally acceptable within villages. This approach provides for the development of around 1,120 homes and 500 jobs in the rural areas, including an additional 250 dwellings over existing commitments during the plan period.
5.14 This strategy is complemented  
by additional locally supported 
development under the Community 'Right to Build' initiative.
5.15 Any development should be 
appropriate in scale and character to 
its location and in accordance with national policy, best practice guidance and the core policies set out in section 6. The Council will support measures and interventions which will improve the levels of access within, and to and from the rural areas.
5.16 The Core Strategy policy 
framework for some of the villages in 
the south of the District includes policies in both the Somer Valley section and the Rural Areas section.Vision  
and Policy  
FrameworkRural Areas 
5bSOUTH 
GLOUCES TERSHIRE
BRIS TOL
NORTHSOMERSET
MENDIPWILTSHIRE
BATH
SOMER VALLEYKEYNSHAM
PaultonSaltfor d Bathfo rd
Camert onHigh
Littlet onClutt onChew  MagnaBathampt on
West 
Harptr eeWellowFreshfor dCorston
Pensfor d
Compton MartinChew  Stoke
Chew 
Valley 
Lake Blagdon 
LakeRiver Avon
Farringt on 
GurneyShosc ombeSouth St okeNewton St Lo eKelstonUpper Sw ainswick
ClavertonMarksbury
Ubley
East
Harptr eeHinton BlewettStanto n Drew
Hinton
Chart erhouseCombe Ha yEnglishco mbe
Priston
Peasedo wn
St John
MidsomerNorto nRadst ock
Westfield
Wells
Shept on
MalletFromeWhitchurch
Farmborough
Timsbury
Temple 
CloudBishop 
SuttonBatheaston
DIAGRAM 18  
RURAL VILLAGES 
KEY
 Green  Belt
 Built Up Areas
© Crown  copyright.  All rights  reserved   
(100023334)  (2010)5 Rural Areas
124
5b Continued
Meeting local need for 
housing and employment
5.17 There are a number of villages 
where:
• access to facilities and public 
transport is best
• there is capacity for development
These villages are to be the focus for new small scale development under 
Policy RA1.
Housing
5.19 In accordance with the Spatial 
Strategy for the Somer Valley  
(Policy SV1) Paulton and Peasedown St John are not considered under the rural areas strategy but within the Somer Valley. 
5.20  Policy RA1 should be considered 
alongside Core Policy CP8 Green Belt. 
Given the overall level of housing required during the plan period and the spatial strategy for meeting this requirement it is not considered that exceptional circumstances exist to warrant changing the inset boundaries at the villages excluded from the Green Belt that meet the criteria of Policy RA1. However, there may be opportunities to deliver some housing within the housing development boundary in these villages excluded from the Green Belt (insets). Therefore, in accordance with the NPPF proposals for development in the Green Belt will not be acceptable unless very special circumstances for development can be demonstrated.5.21 The strategy for the rural areas 
therefore is to enable housing developments of around 50 dwellings at each of the villages which meet the criteria of Policy RA1. The allocation of sites will be considered in more detail through the Placemaking Plan in conjunction with Parish Councils as the locally elected representatives of their communities. The Housing Development Boundaries shown on the Policies Map (saved from the existing Local Plan) will be reviewed  
as part of the Placemaking Plan to incorporate the sites identified and  
/or enable new sites to come forward. Sites identified in adopted Neighbourhood Plans that adjoin the housing development boundary of villages meeting the criteria of Policy RA1 will also be appropriate and these may come forward for inclusion as a part of the Placemaking Plan or subsequent to it.
5.22 To complement this approach, 
some limited residential development 
of around 10-15 dwellings will be allowed in those villages not meeting the criteria and located outside the Green Belt. Such development will only be permitted within the housing development boundary defined on the Policies Map (see Policy RA2).  
In those villages washed over by the Green Belt development proposals  
will be considered in the context of national policy set out in the NPPF.  
In addition the rural exceptions site Policy RA4 will provide the opportunity for affordable housing based on local needs.5.23 A range of different types and 
sizes of housing is needed across the rural area. In many villages smaller dwellings are required in order to meet the needs of young people and older people wishing to down size. Core Policy CP9 seeks to ensure that housing development proposals meet needs arising from local demographic circumstances.
Employment
5.24 Where local need is identified, 
small scale employment developments will be appropriate at the identified villages (see Policy RA1). The section on rural economic development expands on appropriate development of employment uses beyond identified villages.
5.25 In villages washed over by the 
Green Belt with a housing 
development boundary as defined  
on the Policies Map proposals for residential and employment development will be determined in accordance with national policy set out in the NPPF.
Some small scale  
housing and employment 
development  for the  
most sustainable villagesPolicy RA2
Development  
in villages outside the Green Belt  
not meeting Policy 
RA1 criteria
In villages outside the Green Belt with a housing 
development boundary defined on the Policies Map and not meeting the criteria of Policy RA1 proposals for some limited residential development and employment development will be acceptable where:
a they are of a scale, character and appearance appropriate 
to the village
b in the case of residential development they lie within the housing development boundary
c in the case of employment development they lie within  
or adjoining the housing development boundary
At the villages which meet the above criteria, residential development sites may also need to be identified in the Placemaking Plan and the housing development boundary reviewed accordingly to enable delivery of 1,120 dwellings identified on the Key Diagram. Limited residential development on sites adjoining the housing development boundary at these villages will be acceptable if identified in an adopted Neighbourhood Plan.Policy RA1
Development in  
the villages meeting the listed criteria
At the villages located outside the Green Belt or excluded 
from the Green Belt, proposals for residential development of a scale, character and appearance appropriate to the village and its setting will be acceptable within the housing development boundary provided the proposal is in accordance with the spatial strategy for the District set out under Policy DW1 and the village has:
a at least 3 of the following key facilities within the village: 
post office, school, community meeting place and convenience shop, and
b at least a daily Monday-Saturday public transport service to main centres,
At the villages outside the Green Belt which meet these criteria, development sites will also be identified in the Placemaking Plan and the housing development boundary will be reviewed accordingly to enable delivery during the Plan period of the 1,120 dwellings identified on the Key Diagram. Residential development on sites outside the Green Belt adjoining the housing development boundary at these villages will be acceptable if identified in an adopted Neighbourhood Plan.
Proposals at villages located outside the Green Belt or 
excluded from the Green Belt for employment development of a scale, character and appearance appropriate to the village and its setting will be acceptable within and adjoining the housing development boundary on land outside the Green Belt.5 Rural Areas
126
Community facilities
5.26  Rural shops and community 
services are critical to the sustainable 
functioning of the rural areas and should be supported. This is the case across all villages and not just those identified as currently meeting the criteria of Policy RA1. There are a number of villages that play an important role in providing services and facilities for their residents  
and sometimes surrounding communities. It is vital that these facilities are maintained and enhanced wherever possible. Existing village shops will be supported with a presumption  
for retaining them in community  
use. Proposals for new shops and facilities that benefit the community will be supported through partnership working.5.27 Main centres both within and 
adjoining the District will continue to fulfil needs for comparison retail, a wider range of facilities, community leisure and cultural activities.
5b Continued
Policy RA3
Community 
Facilities and shops 
Proposals for the development of 
community facilities or shops will be 
acceptable within and adjoining all 
villages, provided that they are of a scale and character appropriate to the village 
and meet the needs of the parish and 
adjoining parishes.Rural affordable housing
Meeting local needs for  
affordable housing locally 
5.28 The core policy on affordable 
housing outlines the percentage the Council is aiming for on affordable housing and the site thresholds to which they apply across the District.
5.29 This policy will apply to all 
market housing developments across 
the District. Villages which meet the 
criteria of Policy RA1 will benefit from this policy and sites will be allocated through the Placemaking Plan. Beyond this, local need for affordable housing across the rural areas will be primarily met through the rural exceptions policy. If there are rural buildings which are no longer required for local food production, 
there may also be opportunities to 
convert them to affordable housing under the Government’s emerging proposals for the ‘home on the farm’ scheme. Any development proposals coming forward under the Community Right to Build are to be considered separately from the rural exceptions policy.
Rural Exceptions Sites
5.30  The rural exceptions policy 
allows the release of land that would not normally be used for housing for development of 100% affordable housing, on small sites and where there is a demonstrated local need. Robust housing needs surveys will  
be required to demonstrate this  
local need.5.31 Sites should be identified 
through a sequential approach which includes assessment of the economic, social and environmental impacts. Development should be appropriate in scale and character to its surroundings.
5.32 It is the expectation that Parish 
Councils will lead this process with 
support from the Council and its partners.
5.33 Occupancy of the development 
should remain for people with local 
connections to the parish in perpetuity. This includes residents of the parish or group of parishes, individuals with strong local links such as those having family in the parish or parishes, or who have lived there for a significant period or are employed in the area. Prioritisation of local connections will be agreed within individual S106 agreements and in accordance with housing letting guidance.
5.34 In cases where the site identified 
through the sequential approach is 
financially unviable, a small proportion of market housing will be appropriate only where it can be demonstrated that the market housing is required to subsidise the affordable element. It is imperative that the majority of the scheme is affordable and that the market units are only justifiable if they facilitate the delivery of the affordable units. Developers will be required to provide a simple viability study which the Council can assess in order to establish if and how much market housing is needed.
Policy RA4
Rural Exceptions 
Sites 
As an exception to other policies of the Development Plan, 
residential development of 100% affordable housing will be permitted provided that:
a it meets a demonstrated local need for affordable 
housing
b the housing remains affordable in perpetuity
c occupancy of the affordable housing would remain,  
as a first priority, for those with demonstrated local connections
d the development is in scale and keeping with the form  
and character of its location
e the development is well related to community services and facilities
A small proportion of market housing will be appropriate only where it can be demonstrated that the market housing is essential to cross-subsidise the affordable housing and that the site would be unviable without this cross-subsidy.5 Rural Areas
128
Rural economy
5.35 The rural areas are economically 
productive and make an important 
contribution to the overall economy  
of the District. The rural economy must be enhanced and sustained. Agriculture remains important and a variety of small business including the self-employed are also vital to the rural areas economic future. Rural tourism also provides significant economic benefits and, where appropriate, both visitor accommodation and new visitor facilities should be encouraged.
5.36 With regard to agriculture it is 
predicted that agricultural production 
for local markets will become increasingly important as energy prices rise and globalised food supplies are disrupted by changing 
weather patterns. Farming in the rural 
areas will have an important role to play in supporting food security and as such, local farm shops, local food production and small scale farm developments will be supported. Therefore, conversion or replacement of currently underused agricultural buildings should only take place if it can be demonstrated that these buildings are not required for local food production purposes. There  
are also likely to be increasing employment opportunities arising through the growing renewable energy sector such as biomass,  
wind and hydro.5.37 Whilst economic development 
that supports the sustainability of the rural areas will be encouraged it is also important that the right balance is struck between protecting the high quality environment and allowing flexibility for some growth to allow  
for small businesses to develop.
5.38 In the villages which meet the 
Policy RA1 criteria small scale 
employment development may  
be appropriate and potential site allocations will be considered through the Placemaking Plan. In order to ensure the on-going economic sustainability of the rural areas as a whole, creation of new and retention of existing small businesses will be encouraged. This can be assisted through the re-use and conversion of redundant or underused agricultural 
buildings (where they are not needed 
for agriculture) and such uses will therefore, be considered in the first instance. There may also be opportunities to convert such buildings to tourism uses that will boost the local economy. Improvements to broadband provision will be key in helping small businesses and the self-employed (including many that work from home) to flourish.5.39 In some circumstances,  
where business use of a redundant agricultural building is unviable conversion to a residential use may  
be appropriate if the building is well connected to a village, services or public transport networks.
5.40  In considering the conversion  
or re-use of redundant agricultural 
buildings care must be taken to ensure that such development does not harm bats or their roosts, as required under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010. In the case of the re-use of historic agricultural buildings the proposal should not threaten the historic asset.5.41 Proposals for the re-use of rural 
buildings will be considered against the provisions of national policy and Local Plan Policy ET.9.
5.42 Within the Green Belt, the major 
existing developed sites as identified in 
the Local Plan will continue to be considered appropriate for infill or redevelopment for business uses in line with the existing Local Plan policy (see also para 6.64A).
5b ContinuedDevelopment at  
Whitchurch 
5.42a  Whitchurch meets the criteria 
of Policy RA1. In accordance with 
Policy RA1 development of around 50 dwellings can come forward on land at Sleep Lane already removed from the Green Belt in the Adopted Bath & North East Somerset Local Plan and safeguarded for development beyond 2011. In order  
to meet the need for additional development within the District during the Plan period and given  
the village’s close proximity and accessibility by sustainable means  
of transport to the employment, services and facilities in Bristol, land  
is removed from the Green Belt to provide for further housing at Whitchurch. Through Policy RA5 land is allocated for development of around 200 dwellings and a revised detailed Green Belt boundary is defined. Policy RA5 also outlines the place-making principles to be met in delivering development. The place-making principles are also indicated on a concept diagram. National planning policy makes it clear that when altering Green Belt boundaries consideration should be given as to whether land needs to be safeguarded land to meet longer term development needs. Given the close relationship of the village with Bristol the need for and scope to identify safeguarded land will be considered as part of the Core Strategy review. Land is removed from the Green  
Belt as shown on the Key Diagram 
and Policies Map  and allocated for 
residential development and 
associated infrastructure during  
the Plan period. 
The requirements that need to be met to enable 
development are set out in the Placemaking Principles, Core Policies and indicated on the Concept Diagram.  
The Placemaking Principles, being site specific, take priority over the Core Policies. 
Placemaking Principles:
1   Residential led development (to include 40% affordable housing) of around 200 dwellings , in the 
plan period. The site should be developed at an average density of 35-40dph. 
2  Preparation of a comprehensive Masterplan , through 
public consultation, and to be agreed by the Council, reflecting best practice as embodied in ‘By Design’  
(or successor guidance), ensuring that it is well integrated with the existing village and provides  
links to south Bristol. 3  Provision of Green infrastructure  including 
multifunctional green space (formal, natural and allotments); well integrated Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems and habitat, pedestrian and  
cycle connectivity within the site and to the surrounding area. To include a multi-functional  
Green Infrastructure corridor as indicated on the Concept Diagram .
4  New Public Rights of Way  should be provided to 
enhance public access within the site and to the surrounding area. This should include a new north-south access across the site to enable a connection between the north of the site (Priests path) and Queen Charlton Lane.
5  A Landscape and Ecological Mitigation Strategy  
and Management Scheme  is required to ensure 
satisfactory compensation, mitigation and protection and to inform site master planning, to include:
•  Provision for bat foraging/ecological corridor enhancement 
•  Retention, enhancement and management of linear planting features 
•   Retention and protection of existing trees and significant hedgerows by inclusion within public open space, as shown on the Concept Diagram other than as required for access across the site in accordance with the agreed Masterplan
•  Provision of additional planting to provide visual screening and to maintain the wooded appearance  
of the site Policy RA5  
Land at Whitchurch  
Strategic Site Allocation5 Rural Areas
130
5b Continued
Rural shops and community 
services are critical to the 
sustainable functioning of 
the rural areasPolicy RA5  
Land at Whitchurch  
Strategic Site Allocation Continued
•  Retention of existing ponds, as indicated on the 
Concept Diagram
•  Use of new tree planting as a framework throughout the proposed development, with sufficient set back  
to allow growth of trees 
•  Retention of species rich grassland, as shown on the Concept Diagram
•  Minimise harm and provide enhancements to important landscape features and significant views, including:
 –  Queen Charlton Conservation Area and its setting
 –  Maes Knoll Scheduled Monument and its setting
 –  the character of the open plateau landscape leading 
towards the Chew Valley
6  Development should ensure the conservation of the significance of affected heritage assets. As part of the Masterplan, the following should be addressed:
•  Limit the height and density of development to  
avoid and minimise harm to Queen Charlton Conservation Area 
•  Limit development height and density in more prominent areas, such as higher ground and development edges, in order to avoid the development breaking the skyline in wider views  
from the east
•  Detailed archaeological assessment should inform  
the Masterplan7 Transport  requirements are to:
•  Provide vehicular access, and junction enhancement, to facilitate principal access to the site from Staunton Lane and Sleep Lane (linking to the new roundabout).
•  Ensure the integration of this area into neighbouring developments, to provide more direct access to local facilities and services, and to encourage walking and cycling. The Masterplan will need to ensure development interconnects with Whitchurch village including enhanced safe and attractive pedestrian and cycle routes to the Local Centre and bus stops on the A37. A connection from the new site to National Cycle Route 3 should be facilitated.
•  Provide links to existing bus routes and contribute towards improved local bus services and other local highway improvements (in both B&NES and Bristol), including Queen Charlton Lane.
8  Contributions will be required to facilitate the expansion of Whitchurch Primary School to accommodate the additional pupils generated from the development and to fund enlargement of the school site or the provision of a new playing field in a suitable location close to the school, to accommodate the additional building. A new Early Years facility will also need to be provided on site or nearby.CONCEPT DIAGRAM 
FOR LAND AT 
WHITCHURCH 
STRATEGIC SITE ALLOCATION
KEY
Green Belt
Strategic Site AllocationHousing Development 
Boundary
Pedestrian and cycle link
Primary vehicle accessAdditional Green 
Infrastructure
Retained trees or ponds
Retained hedgerow  
and trees
Retained buildingsRetained vegetation
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
5 Rural Areas
132
Rural Areas 
5c
Infrastructure 
and Delivery5.44  Land identified in the Local  
Plan at Whitchurch and Temple 
Cloud/Clutton for the purposes  
of potential village bypasses will remain safeguarded. These  
schemes will be reviewed through the Placemaking Plan.
5.45 Whilst information on broadband 
infrastructure is currently limited, this is a recognised knowledge gap. Work is underway in the Council to assess existing broadband network capacity however delivery of improvements is reliant upon service providers. 
Delivery
5.46  Parish Councils will have a  
key role in identifying sites for development through the Placemaking Plan. Parish Planning  
will also continue to contribute to  
the evidence base to demonstrate community priorities, as well as to mechanisms for delivery. This will allow the community to influence  
the benefits of new development in their locality.5.47 The rural exceptions policy will 
function through partnership working between the Parish Councils, the Council's housing department and Registered Social Landlords.
5.48 Partnership working between  
the Council, parishes, other agencies 
and the voluntary sector will continue to assist with managing issues of accessibility between home, work and leisure, and with issues of access to rural services in particular. Examples include schemes such as Dial-a-Ride, 'the Galleries' shop and café in Freshford and the rural outreach hub in Chew Magna.
5.49 Private developers will play an 
important role in bringing forward  
and developing small scale housing 
developments in villages which meet the RA1 criteria and to the delivery of employment sites. Infrastructure
5.43 Key transport infrastructure improvements 
that support delivery of the strategy include the 
Greater Bristol Bus Network major scheme 
which has improved two of the bus routes serving the rural areas.x6 Core Policies
134
Climate Change
ConstructionHistoricLandscapes
Movement
EfficiencyCore 
Policies
6a  Introduction 136
  Policy SD1  Presumption in favour of  
sustainable development  137
6b  Responding to Climate Change 138
 Policy CP1 Retrofitting Existing Buildings  139
 Policy CP2  Sustainable Construction  140
 Policy CP3  Renewable Energy  141
 Policy CP4  District Heating  143
 Diagram 19  District Heating Priority Areas,  
 District Heating Priority, Areas (Keynsham)  
 District Heating Priority Areas (Somer Valley)  144
 Policy CP5 Flood Risk Management  147
6c  Environmental Quality 148
 Policy CP6  Environmental Quality  150
 Policy CP7  Green Infrastructure  152
  Diagram 20  Illustrative Green  
Infrastructure Network 153
  Policy CP8 Green Belt Table 8 Bristol/  
Bath Green Belt within Bath and North East 
Somerset  154
  Table 8  Bristol/Bath Green Belt within  
Bath and North East Somerset 155 Policy CP8a  Minerals  157
  Diagram 20a  General extent of the surface  
coal Mineral Safeguarding Area 158
6d   Affordable Housing, Mix of Housing,  
Gypsies and Travellers 160
 Table 8a Geographic split for  
 Affordable Housing  161
 Policy CP9  Affordable Housing  162
  Diagram 20b  Geographic two-way split for 
affordable housing (indicative)  163
 P olicy CP10  Housing Mix  164
  Policy CP11 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  166
6e  A Prosperous Economy 168
 Diagram 21  The Economy in 2029  169
 Policy CP12  Centres and Retailing  171
6f  Well Connected 172
6g Infrastructure  174
 Policy CP13  Infrastructure Provision  175Homes
InfrastructureHabitatsEnhance
Design
CharacterArchitectureEnergyPublic RealmShoppingBiodiversity
Employmentx6 Core Policies
136
6.02 The core policies and the place 
specific policies are complementary 
so it is important that the policy framework is read as a whole. The core policies set out below do not replicate existing national policy.
Sustainability Principles
6.02a  Central to national planning 
policy is the presumption in favour of sustainable development. The Council is committed to help achieve sustainable development and will give favourable consideration to proposals which will contribute towards delivering a strong, flexible and sustainable economy; the protection and enhancement of our natural, built and historic environment, the prudent use of natural resources and which mitigate and adapt to climate change; and which support strong, vibrant and healthy communities. This approach is embodied in Policy SD1 and is reflected in all policies in the Core Strategy and planning decisions made by the Council.Core Policies 
6aIntroduction
6.01 The spatial strategies set out in 
the place based sections cover the 
different areas of the District. There are also a number of generic issues which need to be addressed through District-wide policies in order to implement the vision and spatial objectives. As well as providing the long term policy framework for the District, they will support the delivery of development and corporate actions, and they will guide the content of other policies in the Local Development Framework such as the Placemaking Plan. After each of the core policies the main planning mechanisms by which the Council will seek to deliver the policy are set out. The delivery section is not part of the relevant core policy. The retrofitting of existing buildings…  
will also make a significant contribution 
to carbon emission reduction targetsPolicy SD1
Presumption in favour  
of sustainable development
When considering development 
proposals the Council will take a 
positive approach that reflects the 
presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the 
National Planning Policy Framework. 
It will always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions 
which mean that proposals can be 
approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves 
the economic, social and 
environmental conditions in the area.
Planning applications that accord  
with the policies in this Core Strategy 
(and, where relevant, with policies in neighbourhood plans) will be 
approved without delay, unless 
material considerations indicate otherwise.Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant policies 
are out of date at the time of making 
the decision then the Council will grant permission unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise – 
taking into account whether:
•  Any adverse impacts of granting 
permission would significantly  
and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the 
policies in the National Planning 
Policy Framework taken as a whole; or
•  Specific policies in that Framework 
indicate that development should 
be restricted.x6 Core Policies
138
6.04  The CO2 reductions should be 
achieved by application of the 
following energy hierarchy:
• Reduce use of energy and use 
energy more efficiently
• Promote energy from renewable  
and low carbon sources 
Retrofitting Existing 
Buildings
6.05  Retrofitting involves 
incorporating measures in existing 
buildings to reduce the demand for energy and resources. For example  
by reducing the amount of heat lost through the roof, walls and windows and introducing technologies to generate renewable energy on site. Some measures are permitted development but others require planning permission, listed building or other consents. Policy CP1 sets out the approach to retrofitting for all existing buildings, including historic buildings. Historic buildings include those of solid wall or traditional construction. 
6.06 The UK has agreed to make an 
80% carbon emission reduction by 
2050 (based on 1990 levels). As 41% of Bath & North East Somerset's carbon emissions come from domestic properties and 34% from commercial premises (DEFRA, 2007) improving the energy efficiency of existing buildings is a priority particularly for those vulnerable households in, or at risk of, fuel poverty.Core Policies 
6bResponding  
to Climate 
Change 
Reducing the area's CO2 emissions
6.03 Bath and North East Somerset's 
Sustainable Community Strategy 
(SCS) identifies climate change as the first of its six key themes. Climate change is also a cross cutting objective of the Core Strategy. In the context of national targets the SCS commits the Council to providing leadership for a reduction of the area's CO2 emissions by 45% by 2029 from 1990 levels.6.07 The retrofitting of existing 
buildings could create local jobs in  
the low carbon economy, ensure  
our existing building stock remains 
affordable in terms of energy use  
and will also make a significant contribution to carbon emission reduction targets included within the Sustainable Community Strategy.
6.08  Given the quality of the historic 
environment in the District and the 
high number of listed buildings, Conservation Areas and the World Heritage Site designation for Bath a SPD on sustainable construction and retrofitting is being prepared to provide guidance on sensitively retrofitting our historic building stock. Proposals for retrofitting historic buildings should also ensure that the integrity of European wildlife sites and species is not compromised.Delivery
1  Retrofitting will be encouraged through a range of mechanisms under the influence of the Council and its partners, including via Planning Services, information and advice services, community enabling and support projects and Housing Services
2  This policy will provide a basis  
for Development Management and will be supported by the Sustainable Construction and Retrofitting Supplementary Planning Document. The Sustainable Construction Checklist will be updated to include a section on sustainable refurbishment to raise awareness of the measures recommended in retrofitting existing buildings 
3  Specific opportunities and principles that should be considered at the masterplanning stage will be identified in the Placemaking Plan and potentially in the any future site specific SPD where existing buildings are present.
4  Signposting of retrofitting information including Government financial initiatives and schemes, public awareness and demonstration events will also be provided by the Council.Policy CP1  
Retrofitting 
existing buildings
Retrofitting measures to existing buildings to improve their 
energy efficiency and adaptability to climate change and the appropriate incorporation of micro-renewables will be encouraged.
Priority will be given to facilitating carbon reduction through 
retrofitting at whole street or neighbourhood scales to reduce costs, improve viability and support coordinated programmes of improvement.
Masterplanning and 'major development' (as defined in the Town 
& Country Planning (Development Management Procedure (England) Order 2010) in the District should demonstrate that opportunities for the retention and retrofitting of existing buildings within the site have been included within the scheme.  
All schemes should consider retrofitting opportunities as part of their design brief and measures to support this will be introduced.
Retrofitting Historic Buildings
The Council will seek to encourage and enable the sensitive retrofitting of energy efficiency measures and the appropriate use of micro-renewables in historic buildings (including listed buildings and buildings of solid wall or traditional construction) and in conservation areas, whilst safeguarding the special characteristics of these heritage assets for the future. Proposals will be considered against national planning policy.
The policy will be supported by the Council’s Sustainable 
Construction and Retrofitting Supplementary Planning Document.6 Core Policies
140
6b Continued
Sustainable Construction
6.10 The UK Government has set a 
timetable for tightening carbon 
standards in building regulations to achieve zero carbon residential buildings by 2016 and it is the intention for non-residential buildings to be zero carbon by 2019.
Core Strategy Policy: 
Renewable Energy Targets
6.16 The UK Renewable Energy 
Strategy sets out to achieve 15% of 
energy to be generated from renewable sources by 2020, comprising 30% of electricity and  
12% of heat. In 2007, the District's electricity supply from renewable sources was only approximately  
0.06 MWe (Regen SW, 2010), which  
is less than 0.1%.
6.17 In order to assist identifying the 
potential for supply and demand for 
renewable and low carbon energy  
and the impacts this might have on environmental and heritage assets in Bath and North East Somerset, the Council commissioned 'Renewable Energy Research and Planning'  
(June 2009) and a Research Update (Nov 2010). This Renewable Energy Research is available as a snapshot  
to assist in considering possible proposals and may be updated by  
the Council as technologies develop.Delivery
1  This policy will provide a basis for Development Management.
2  The Sustainable Construction Checklist and Sustainability Statements will be used to assess the approach taken to sustainable construction in planning applications.
3    The Council will need to establish potential for flexible mechanisms such as "allowable solutions" for zero carbon development once the parameters are clarified,  
which will facilitate the use of the Community Energy Fund (or similar) and developer contributions.Policy CP2  
Sustainable 
construction
Sustainable design and construction will be integral to new 
development in Bath & North East Somerset. All planning applications should include evidence that the standards below will be addressed:
• Maximising energy efficiency and integrating the use of 
renewable and low-carbon energy (i.e. in the form of an energy strategy with reference to Policy CP4 as necessary);
• Minimisation of waste and maximising of recycling of any waste generated during construction and in operation;
• Conserving water resources and minimising vulnerability  
to flooding;
• Efficiency in materials use, including the type, life cycle  
and source of materials to be used;
• Flexibility and adaptability, allowing future modification  
of use or layout, facilitating future refurbishment and retrofitting;
• Consideration of climate change adaptation. 
Applications for all development will need to be accompanied by a B&NES Sustainable Construction Checklist.6.18 Policy CP3 of the Core Strategy 
seeks to achieve an increase in the 
level of renewable energy generation in the District. These will be monitored and adjusted as technologies and initiatives improve. Whilst these targets are challenging, recent national commitments such as expansion of permitted development rights and financial incentives such as 'Feed in Tariff' and 'the Green Deal', should accelerate energy provision from renewable low carbon sources.  
These standards may be revised and updated through the Core Strategy review as sustainability methodologies, technologies and initiatives develop.Delivery
1  Renewable Energy schemes will be encouraged through a range of mechanisms under the influence of the Council and its partners, including via Planning Services, information and advice services, community enabling and support projects.
2  Delivery will be through the 
Development Management 
process. The Sustainable Construction Checklist and Design & Access Statements will be used to assess the approach taken to renewable energy in planning applications. 
 3  Also crucial to effective delivery will be working in partnership with key stakeholders such as local communities, businesses, Parish Councils and amenity groups.
4  Signposting of renewable energy information including public awareness events can also be provided on the website with links to relevant service areas.
5  The Council may establish "allowable solutions" for zero carbon development to facilitate the use of the Community Energy Fund and developer contributions once the parameters are clarified by national government.Policy CP3  
Renewable 
energy
Development should contribute to achieving the following 
minimum level of Renewable Electricity and Heat generation by 2029.
Proposals for low carbon and renewable energy infrastructure, 
including large-scale freestanding installations, will be assessed under the national policies and against the following:
a potential social and economic benefits including local job 
creation opportunities
b contribution to significant community benefits
c the need for secure and reliable energy generation capacity
d environmental impact (see Policy CP6)Capacity (Megawatt)
Electricity 110MWe (Megawatt Electricity)
Heat 165MWth (Megawatt Thermal)6 Core Policies
142
6b Continued
District Heating
6.19 District heating schemes deliver 
heating and hot water to multiple 
buildings from a local plant. A heat network of insulated pipes buried underground is required to distribute the heat generated; these can often  
be installed at the same time as the other services when a site is being developed and can also be retrofitted to existing buildings.
6.20  District heating can be combined 
with electricity production in 
combined heat and power (CHP) or in combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP). This is an efficient form of decentralised energy supply providing heat and electricity at the same time. Currently the overall fuel efficiency of CHP was around 70-90% of the fuel 
input, depending on heat load; much 
better than most power stations which are only around 40-50% efficient.
6.21 It is possible to vary the energy 
source to fuel district heating 
depending on cost and availability so the energy source can be changed over time; potential fuel sources include conventional fuels, biomass, and waste and other renewables. The West of England Joint Waste Core Strategy provides a policy framework for energy recovery from waste.6.22 The B&NES Renewable Energy 
Research and Planning (June 2009) and a Research Update (Nov 2010) assessed the potential for CHP in the District (utilising biomass and energy from waste). Biomass CHP is identified as a key contributor towards meeting the electricity and heat demand from development. The Council's District Heat Feasibility Study (2010) has provided more detailed local evidence to support this policy approach. In the District heat priority areas shown in Diagram 19 and identified through the Heat Feasibility Study development will be expected to incorporate and connect to district heating infrastructure.
6.23 District Heating (including CHP/ 
CCHP) is currently one of the most low 
cost ways to meet zero carbon, 
particularly on brownfield sites where 
the efficiency/appropriateness of other technologies may be constrained.
6.24 Consideration of issues such as 
below ground archaeology and vaults 
particularly within central Bath have been a key consideration in considering this approach and in the research undertaken and the implementation of District Heating would need to mitigate any negative impacts. Any impact of this policy on the viability of schemes will be given careful consideration.
Sustainable design  
and construction  
will be integral  
to new developmentDelivery
1  This policy will provide a basis for 
Development Management to support the principle of CHP, CCHP and District Heating included in planning applications 
2  Planning Applications within the DHPAs will need to demonstrate how they are incorporating district heating and to justify any 
alternative approach.
3  Planning Obligations or a 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) may be able to be used to contribute towards the delivery  
of the delivery of strategic district heating infrastructure.
4  Further opportunities for interventions that will increase commercial viability of district heating are identified in the B&NES District Heating Feasibility Study and will include actions that the Council and the Private Sector can initiate.Policy CP4  
District heating
The use of combined heat and power (CHP), and/or combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP) and district heating will be encouraged. Within the three identified “district heating priority areas”, shown on Diagram 19  
(Bath Central, Bath Riverside and Keynsham High Street), development will be expected to incorporate infrastructure for district heating, and will be expected to connect to existing systems where and when this is available, unless demonstrated that this would render development unviable.
Within the remaining 12 “district heating opportunity areas” 
shown on Diagram 19, (Radstock, Midsomer Norton, Paulton, Bath Spa University, Twerton, Kingsway, Bathwick, Moorfields, Odd Down, Lansdown, RUH & Keynsham Somerdale), development will be encouraged to incorporate infrastructure for district heating, and will be expected to connect to any existing suitable systems (including systems that will be in place at the time of construction), unless it is demonstrated that this would render development unviable.
Masterplanning and major development in the District should 
demonstrate a thermal masterplanning approach considering efficiency/opportunity issues such as mix of uses, anchor loads, density and heat load profiles to maximise opportunities for the use of district heating. 
Where a district heating scheme is proposed as part of a 
major development the Council will expect the scheme to demonstrate that the proposed heating and cooling systems (CHP/CCHP) have been selected considering the heat hierarchy in line with the following order of preference: 
1 Connection with existing CHP/CCHP distribution networks 
2 Site wide CHP/CCHP fed by renewables 
3 Communal CHP/CCHP fuelled by renewable energy 
sources 
4 Gas fired CHP/CCHP  6 Core Policies
144
6b Continued
BATH
Bath Spa  
UniversityRUH
Twerton
Kingsway
Odd DownMoorfieldsLansdown Bathwick
DIAGRAM 19  
DISTRICT HEATING 
PRIORITY AREAS 
KEY
 District  Heating  Priority  Areas
  District  Heating   
Opportunity  Areas
© Crown  copyright.  All rights  reserved   
(100023334)  (2010)
Riverside
CentralKEYNSHAMKEYNSHAM
STATION
Queen Charlton
Chewton KeynshamHicks Gate
Ashmead Industrial 
EstateStockwood Vale
Queens Road
Chandag 
Road
SALTFORD
High  
StreetSomerdale
WestfieldCoombendTyning 
Hill
CollegeWells RoadBath 
Road
HaydonWrithlington
MIDSOMER
NORTO NPAULTON
RADSTOCK
Radstock  
College6 Core Policies
146
6b Continued
Flood Risk Management
6.25 The dominant flood risk affecting 
the District is flooding from Main 
Rivers. The principal rivers being the Lower Avon, River Chew, Cam Brook and Wellow Brook. The District also contains areas that are prone to flooding from a range of other local sources including, ordinary watercourses, surface water, and groundwater, as well as risks from artificial sources such as sewers, canals and reservoirs. Climate change impacts may increase the severity and frequency of storms and therefore contribute to more frequent flooding throughout the District in the future.
6.26 NPPF requires that new 
development is located in sustainable 
locations, at the least risk of flooding, 
taking into account vulnerability to 
flooding. Appropriate mitigation should be provided where necessary to ensure that development remains safe, resilient to the impacts of flooding, and does not increase flooding elsewhere.6.27 The NPPF and its associated 
Technical Guidance provides the national requirements in terms of the Sequential and Exception Test, the need for planning applications to be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment, and the priority given to utilising sustainable drainage techniques in new development. The Council has published Strategic Flood Risk Assessments (SFRAs), providing detailed information on all sources of flooding across the District. Furthermore a subsequent Flood Risk Management Strategy (FRMS June 2010) tested various flood risk management options for the District and provided recommendations in terms of both on-site and strategic flood risk management solutions.  
The FRMS will be reviewed as new evidence become available. The requirements and guidance offered in these documents should be followed applying flood risk policy principles, deciding on appropriate mitigation, and managing surface water by applicants when considering new development across the District.6.28 The Core Strategy sets out the 
broad locations for new housing, employment and other strategic development in Bath, Keynsham, Midsomer Norton and Radstock (Policies B1, B2, B3, B3A, B3C, B4, KE1, KE2, KE3A, KE4, SV1, SV2, SV3, and RA5). In some instances, development in flood risk areas has been unavoidable. 
6.28a  The Flood Risk Management 
Strategy (June 2010) has identified 
and assessed a range of flood risk management options to enable development in vulnerable areas without increasing the flood risk elsewhere. The Strategy has concluded that there is no strategic solution to reducing peak flow through Bath which is either technically or economically viable. Following the 
Flood Risk Management Strategy, the 
Hydraulic Modelling (Bath Flood Risk Management Project Feb 2013 by Black & Veatch) was prepared. The impact of raising the key development sites in the Central Area and the Enterprise Area in Bath is a loss of conveyance, rather than a loss of flood storage. It recommends, where necessary, to raise all the development sites and the access/egress routes (or raise defence walls) and implement conveyance mitigation measures. New development should be safe and not increase risk elsewhere.6.28b  A sequential risk based 
approach was taken to formulate these policies and the high level Sequential / Exception Test report was prepared and agreed in partnership with the Environment Agency. However, flood risk should be taken into account at all stages in the planning process and the sequential approach should still be taken within these policy areas to minimise risk by directing the most vulnerable development to areas of lowest flood risk, matching vulnerability of land use to flood risk at a site level. (Table 1 Flood zones and 2 Flood Risk Vulnerability Classification of the Technical Guidance to the NPPF). Therefore site specific Sequential/Exception Test reports should be undertaken when determining future site allocations in the Placemaking Plan or a planning application where necessary.
6.29 New developments can also 
increase pressure on sewer systems 
and urban drainage. It is therefore important to manage the impact of developments in a sustainable manner. The NPPF and its associated Technical Guidance provides an opportunity for all those with responsibility for the drainage of new development to contribute to managing flood risk, improving amenity and biodiversity, and improving water quality. As a minimum the negative impacts of development on surface water runoff should be mitigated.Delivery
Delivery will be through the 
Development Management process. Also crucial to effective delivery will be working in partnership with key stakeholders such as the Environment Agency.Policy CP5  
Flood Risk 
Management
Development in the District will follow a sequential approach 
to flood risk management, avoiding inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding and directing development away from areas at highest risk in line with Government policy (NPPF). Any development in areas at risk of flooding will be expected to be made safe throughout its lifetime, by incorporating mitigation measures, which may take the form of on-site flood defence works and / or a contribution towards or a commitment to undertake such off-site measures as may be necessary. All development will be expected to incorporate sustainable drainage systems to reduce surface water run-off and minimise its contribution to flood risks elsewhere. All development should be informed by the information and recommendations of the B&NES Strategic Flood Risk Assessments and Flood Risk Management Strategy.6.30  In addition to the concerns over 
flood risk, there is increasing pressure for efficient and sustainable use of water resources. This can be helped by incorporating Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SuDS) and grey water reuse systems into new developments (as per the NPPF and the Building Regulations, Part H).
6.31 SuDS aim to control surface 
water runoff as close to its origin as 
possible, before it is discharged to a watercourse or sewer. This involves moving away from traditional piped drainage systems towards softer engineering solutions seek aiming to mimic natural drainage regimes. SuDS have many benefits such as reducing flood risk, improving water quality, encouraging groundwater recharge and providing amenity and wildlife benefits.
6.32 Under the Flood and Water 
Management Act 2010 the Council is 
established as a Lead Local Flood Authority and is currently developing Local Flood Risk Management Strategy. The Council will also be established as the SuDS Approving Body (SAB) with responsibility for the approval, adoption and maintenance of SuDS. In order to be approved, the proposed drainage system will have to be designed and constructed in accordance with the new national standards for sustainable drainage and WoE Regional and local guidance. Where both planning permission and SDS approval are required, the application processes will run in parallel. No construction works can 
start on site until drainage approval is 
granted by SAB.6 Core Policies
148
6.36 High quality design is crucial if 
the settlements throughout the 
District are to maintain and enhance their valued local distinctiveness, and emerge as more sustainable and higher quality environments that thrive economically, socially and culturally. The Council will support contemporary and innovative responses to local distinctiveness, ensuring that new development reinforces a sense a place. This priority will be achieved by ensuring that existing assets such as buildings, streets and spaces, green infrastructure, and community facilities are managed imaginatively and that new developments are designed intelligently.
6.37 All development schemes with  
a residential component will be 
assessed using the Building for Life  
12 methodology (or equivalent, as identified by the Council, should these be superseded within the strategy period). 
6.38 The Place based sections of the 
Core Strategy have each highlighted 
Placemaking Principles that are relevant to their specific locations. These provide the fundamentals of design policy in these areas that will then be developed into more detail in the Placemaking Plan.
Historic Environment
6.39 Bath & North East Somerset's 
outstanding historic built, cultural, landscape and archaeological heritage assets and their settings are well documented and will continue to be preserved or enhanced.High Quality Design
6.34  High quality design is 
fundamental to the creation of high quality places by both enhancing appearance and functionality. It is the means by which corporate priorities such as an improved public realm and better quality housing can be delivered. Government guidance in  
the NPPF, as well as best practice including the Manual for Streets, By Design, the Lifetime Homes Standard and CABE's Building for Life 12 (BfL12) programme provide guidance on the approaches to be taken as well as providing advice on the assessment  
of schemes.
6.35 High quality design (including 
architecture, urban design and 
landscape architecture), has a 
significant impact on quality of life.  
It influences safety and security, 
encourages economic investment as well as fostering community cohesion and inclusion. It can encourage greater levels of walking and cycling to address health and wellbeing, as well as addressing the causes and effects of our changing climate. Environmental 
Quality
6.33 B&NES’ high quality  
environment is fundamental to  
its local distinctiveness. It is a key 
contributor to the quality of life  
of residents, attracting visitors, businesses and inward investment, contributing to the prosperity of  
the area in terms of tourism and delivering a wide range of tangible and intangible benefits to people including health and general well-being.Core Policies 
6c6.40  Our heritage assets are central to 
local distinctiveness and sense of 
place. As well as ensuring our historic environment is understood, sensitively managed and promoted in its own right, our heritage assets should be used as an integral part of regeneration wherever possible, and used to expect the highest standards of new design and architecture.
6.41 Proposals for the ruse of 
redundant and underused historic 
buildings and areas will be encouraged where the proposed use does not compromise or threaten the historic asset or the integrity of a European wildlife site and species. Bath stone and other local traditional building materials should be used either on site or re-used elsewhere in favour of newly won mineral products. 
6.41a  The Core Strategy seeks to 
enable the appropriate modification of 
heritage assets, including the World Heritage Site in order to reduce carbon emissions. The Energy efficiency and Renewable Energy Guidance for Listed Buildings and Undesignated Historic Buildings (September 2013) identifies the opportunities for heritage assets to mitigate, and adapt to, the effects of climate change. These include enhancing energy efficiency and allowing greater use of renewable energy. This will give applicants clear guidance on the acceptability of a range of potential modifications, the guidance having weighed the benefit of a number of modifications to mitigating the effects of climate change against any harm to the significance of heritage assets.6.42 National policies in the NPPF 
complemented by Core Strategy Policy CP6 together with more detailed saved policies in the Local Plan will provide the context for considering development proposals until reviewed through the Placemaking Plan.
6.43 The Council will continue to keep 
under review Conservation Areas in 
the District and where appropriate, designate new areas. Appraisals of Conservation Areas will define the boundaries and analyse the special architectural and historic interest of the area. In highlighting the key features that both contribute to or detract from the character of the Conservation Areas, they provide a framework for considering development proposals.
Landscape
6.44 Landscape policy in Bath & North 
East Somerset will seek to follow principles contained in the European Landscape Convention (ELC) which came into effect in the UK in March 2007. This includes the protection, management and planning of landscapes. The ELC defines landscape as 'An area, as perceived  
by people, whose character is the result of the action and interaction  
of natural and/or human factors'.
6.45 Bath & North East Somerset has a 
rich and diverse range of landscapes which are described in 'Rural Landscapes of Bath & North East Somerset: A Landscape Character Assessment' and the 'Bath Citywide Character Appraisal'.6.46 Some landscapes in the District, 
like the Cotswolds and Mendip Hills, are recognised as being of national importance and are granted the status of Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). Bath is a World Heritage Site and there are a number of Historic Parks and Gardens within the District. Others, though they lack this status and protection, are no less important to their local communities. Each landscape is closely related to the evolution of agriculture, communications, industry and settlement. Although some landscapes are defined by physical appearance and activities occurring within them, others are valued for their levels of tranquillity. All are living working landscapes and as such they change and develop according to the demands placed upon them. Some of the more pressing demands are meeting the need for locally produced food and renewable energy in order to help respond to our changing climate.
6.47 Landscape is important for 
cultural, ecological, environmental and 
social reasons. It allows for local food production, climate change mitigation and adaptation and supports the economy and opportunities for tourism and recreation. The policy seeks to conserve or enhance landscape character including opportunities to reinforce distinctiveness.
Nature Conservation
6.48  Bath & North East Somerset 
benefits from a rich diversity of natural habitats and features including many internationally, nationally and locally protected sites. These range from ancient woodlands, veteran and notable trees, hedgerows, to flower-rich grasslands and important bat foraging corridors.
6.49  The requirements and practice of 
site and species protection is now well 
established and is clearly defined by existing legislation and by both national and local policy (B&NES Local Plan). Development proposals will be required to assess potential impacts on protected sites and species and the adequacy of proposed mitigation measures, and where they potentially 
impact on European protected 
species especially rigorous examination is required. However, there is increasing recognition of the need to move beyond individual site and species protection in order to adequately protect and sustain the natural environment and to achieve national and international biodiversity targets. 6 Core Policies
150
6c Continued
6.50  Many sites and valued habitats 
are limited in size and are often 
isolated from each other. This can compromise their wildlife value, and their benefit to people, particularly  
in the face of climate change.
6.51 There is a need to create a 
coherent network of more robust  
and resilient natural habitats, including 
bigger protected sites and both a greater extent and greater connectivity of natural habitats (Lawton 2010). The Lawton report specifies a "need to embrace a new, restorative approach which rebuilds nature and creates a more resilient natural environment for the benefit  
of wildlife and ourselves".
6.52 The Council also recognises the 
importance of maintaining, restoring 
and re-creating priority habitats within the Strategic Nature Areas identified on the South West Nature Map.
6.53 The Core Strategy therefore 
provides additional nature 
conservation policy to address these issues and to complement national policy and existing development management policies set out in the Local Plan which will be reviewed through the Placemaking Plan.
6.54  Policy CP6 seeks to ensure  
Bath & North East Somerset's 
environmental quality is fostered both for existing and future generations.Policy CP6  
Environmental quality
1 High Quality Design  
The distinctive quality, character and diversity of Bath and North East Somerset's environmental assets will be promoted, protected, conserved or enhanced through:
a  high quality and inclusive design of schemes, 
including transport infrastructure, which reinforces and contributes to its specific local context, creating attractive, inspiring and safe place. 
b  assessing all major development schemes with a residential component using the Building for Life 12 design assessment tool (or equivalent methodology). As a guide development should seek to achieve a score of no ‘reds’, design out all ‘ambers’ and achieve a majority of ‘greens’.
2 Historic Environment  
The sensitive management of Bath & North East Somerset’s outstanding cultural and historic environment is a key component in the delivery of sustainable development. The Council will protect, conserve and seek opportunities to enhance the historic environment including the character and setting of designated and other heritage assets. 
The sensitive reuse and adaptation of historic buildings 
and spaces will be supported, and in areas where regeneration is required the imaginative integration of new development with the historic environment will be promoted. 
Where development has a demonstrable public benefit, 
including mitigating and adapting to climate change, this benefit will be weighed against any harm to the significance of the heritage asset.The Council will continue to develop strategies and guidance which ensure the historic environment and its significance is understood, recorded, promoted and enjoyed, and is sensitively and proactively managed, including those heritage assets most under threat.  
A positive and proactive conservation strategy will  
be promoted through the Placemaking Plan.
3 Landscape  
The distinctive character and quality of Bath and North 
East Somerset's landscapes will be conserved or enhanced.
4 Nature Conservation  
The quality, extent and robustness of protected sites and 
valued habitats will be enhanced, and networks of valued habitat will be restored or created, by measures which:
a  Improve the quality and/or increase the size of 
current sites and valued habitat.
b  Enhance connections between, or join up, sites  
and valued habitats.
c Create new sites and valued habitats.
d  Reduce the pressures on wildlife by improving  
the wider environment.
New Development will protect and enhance international, national and local sites and existing networks of valued habitats; facilitate migration and dispersal though the natural and built environment; and seek to reduce fragmentation of existing habitats.
The Council will promote the management, conservation, 
enhancement or restoration of environmental assets. Sustainable opportunities for improved access to and enjoyment of these assets will be promoted where it does not compromise the integrity of the asset.Delivery
High Quality Design  
Delivery will be principally through 
the Development Management process. This will include working in partnership with property owners, landlords and agents, tenants and occupiers, Parish Councils, Residents, amenity groups and through awareness raising events, community forum for ideas to improve their neighbourhoods and the facilitation of neighbourhood scale projects such as whole street public realm refurbishment. The Council is committed to the comprehensive integration of its strategies and programmes, partnership working and effective community involvement. Pre-application planning discussions  
and review of Building for Life assessments can be facilitated through the development management process, as they are currently. Also important will be the implementation of the Placemaking Plan that will provide detail for specific site allocations, development management policies and local designations.Historic Environment  
Delivery will be through the Development Management 
process. And Conservation  
Area Appraisals and other 
supplementary planning documents and guidance will  
be prepared and used to guide decisions on development proposals that affect the historic environment. Working in partnership with bodies such as English Heritage, Mendip Hills and Cotswolds AONB Services and local groups; and with conservation, archaeology and landscape experts will also be necessary to ensure effective delivery of the policy. The preparation of management plans and other positive and proactive strategies will be developed to support policy delivery. The strategy for the historic environment will include:
•  maintaining and applying an 
up-to-date and available Historic Environment Record and  
evidence base
•  producing and promoting guidance that will encourage good practice such as the World Heritage Site Setting SPD, Retrofitting & Sustainable Construction SPD and Bath Building Heights Strategy
•  working with partners to resolve long standing high profile heritage assets at risk (including The Wansdyke and Cleveland Pool  
in Bath)•  reducing the volume of traffic using historic streets and spaces (see para 6.103) by implementing the Bath Public Realm and Movement Strategy
•  seeking to ensure that Conservation Area Appraisals and management plans are kept up-to-date 
•  implementing the World Heritage Site Management Plan
•  ensure the Bath Urban Archaeological Assessment is used to inform management strategies and SPDs
•  conserving significance of heritage features via the Green Infrastructure Strategy
•  consideration of the preparation of a ‘local list’ to ensure non-
designated assets are sustained 
and conserved 
•  consideration of use of Article 4 Directions as one measure for resolving conservation issues when appropriate
•  seek contributions from development, where appropriate, to support the delivery of the above.Landscape  
Delivery will be principally through the Development Management 
process. Working in partnership with 
bodies such as Natural England, English Heritage, Mendip Hills and Cotswold AONB Services, and with conservation, archaeology and landscape experts and the community will also be necessary to ensure effective delivery of the policy. The preparation of landscape management plans, action plans and other strategies will be encouraged to support policy delivery.
Nature Conservation  
Delivery will be principally through 
the Development Management process. This will include working through partnership initiatives and in close liaison with bodies such as Natural England and ecology experts through which opportunities for enhancement and restoration of ecological and geological assets can be maximised. The Green Infrastructure Strategy will have an important role in the delivery of biodiversity restoration targets for the Strategic Nature Areas within the District.6 Core Policies
152
6c Continued
Green Infrastructure
6.55 Green Infrastructure (GI) is a 
'network of multi-functional green 
space, rural and urban, which is capable of delivering a wide range  
of environmental and quality of life benefits for local communities' (NPPF). The wider benefits of GI  
for B&NES will be set out in the Council's Green Infrastructure Strategy (see below).
6.56  A well-designed, managed and 
integrated network of GI provides a 
wide range of direct and indirect benefits to people and wildlife.  
This includes a greater sense of community, improved health and well-being and also local solutions to mitigate and adapt to climate change. GI can also help local responses to 
sustainable travel, wildlife habitats, 
local food production, sustainable water management including use of sustainable drainage and conserving or enhancing landscape character, historical and cultural features.  
It is a positive factor in eco-tourism, business location and investment decisions.
6.57 B&NES already has a wealth of 
existing green assets including open 
green spaces, street trees and woodland, other natural habitats, recreational routes, historic landscape, allotments and waterways such as the Kennet and Avon canal. However, the concept of GI looks beyond existing designations, seeking opportunities to enhance the physical and functional connectivity of assets, and extend the benefits for the community.Delivery
The Council has a central role in the provision, delivery and planning of GI through its role as local planning authority and direct provider of significant areas of open spaces.  
It will also work in partnership with key public and private bodies, local communities and the voluntary sector to protect and enhance the  
GI network and ensure a strategic approach is taken.
The impact of new development on 
GI will be assessed through the Development Management process. The Council’s adopted GI Strategy sets out further guidance as to how GI principles should be applied to development proposals including provision of major infrastructure 
improvements. Deliver will also be 
through the planning process by integrating green infrastructure principles into the Placemaking Plan and other Local Plan documents. Policy CP7  
Green 
infrastructure
The integrity, multi-functionality, quality and connectivity of the 
strategic Green Infrastructure (GI) network will be maintained, protected and enhanced. Opportunities will be taken to connect with, improve and extend the network. Existing and new GI must be planned, delivered and managed as an integral part of creating sustainable communities.6.58 B&NES Strategic GI network 
diagram (see Diagram 20) is illustrative 
and shows a strategic overview of existing GI assets and some of the key opportunities. In the rural areas the network is based around the key recreational routes, river corridors, existing networks of wildlife sites and Strategic Nature Areas (SNAs). SNAs represent the most important areas for the conservation, expansion and restoration of important habitats. The Strategic GI corridors indicate functioning networks for recreation and biodiversity.
6.59 In urban areas the network is 
influenced by the existing urban form 
and function, but GI links through and within urban areas are an integral part of creating sustainable communities. Existing GI assets need to be protected and enhanced to achieve their full value at local and District levels. The River corridor through  
Bath and beyond is a key GI asset  
that requires a "whole river" approach to realise its full potential as a multifunctional green corridor. The Placemaking Plan will set out how  
new developments can contribute effectively to green infrastructure.
6.60  The Council’s adopted Green 
Infrastructure Strategy was developed 
within the sub-regional context to ensure that cross-boundary GI issues are addressed. As well as identifying the existing network, assets and opportunities for the improvement and creation of new GI, the Green Infrastructure Strategy will ensure that GI is delivered, maintained and managed sustainably and creatively well into the future.
PaultonFarmboro ugh
TimsburyBishop
Sutton
Temple
CloudWhit churc h Saltfor dBatheas ton
Bathfo rd
Camert onHighLittlet onClutt onChew  MagnaBathhampt on
West 
Harptr eeWellowFreshfor dCorston
Pensfor d
Compton 
MartinChew  Stoke
Farringt on 
GurneyChew 
Valley 
LakeBlagdon 
LakeRiver Avon
South St okeNewton St Lo eKelstonUpper Sw ainswick
ClavertonMarksbury
Ubley
East
Harptr eeHinton BlewettStanto n Drew
Hinton
Chart erhouseCombe Ha yEnglishco mbe
Priston
Peasedo wn
St John
Midsomer
Norto nRadst ock
Westfield
DIAGRAM 20  
ILLUSTRATIVE GREEN 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
NETWORK 
KEY
	Built 	Up	Areas
  Strategic Green 
Infrastructure Corridors through Rural Areas
  Strategic Green Infrastructure Corridors through Urban Areas
 Strategic Nature Areas
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)6 Core Policies
154
6c Continued
Green Belt
6.61 Green Belts are designated 
primarily in order to prevent urban 
sprawl by keeping land permanently open. As such they help to shape patterns of urban development, protect the countryside and provide opportunities for outdoor sport  
and recreation. Within B&NES the Green Belt also plays a vital role in maintaining the setting of the  
World Heritage Site of Bath and  
the surrounding villages. It is also important in preventing the coalescence of these villages  
with the city.
6.62 The purposes and objectives of 
Green Belt within B&NES are summarised below and generally reflect advice set out in national policy.
6.63 Core Policy CP8 conforms with 
national policy which also states that 
the general extent and detailed boundaries of the Green Belt should be altered only exceptionally. The Core Strategy retains the general extent of the Green Belt in B&NES other than the removal of land from the Green Belt for development on the edge of Bath and Keynsham and at Whitchurch as set out in Policy DW1 and Policies B3A, KE3A, KE3B, KE4 and RA5. The Placemaking Plan provides the opportunity for a review of the inner detailed boundary, such as to address anomalies. In accordance with the NPPF Green Belt boundaries will only be altered in exceptional circumstances.Delivery
Delivery will be through the Development Management process. The Existing Buildings in the Green Belt SPD will continue to guide decisions on proposals within the Green Belt. Policy CP8  
Green Belt
The general extent of the Green Belt is set out on the Core Strategy Key Diagram. The detailed boundaries and inset villages are defined on the Policies Map. The openness of the Green Belt will be protected from inappropriate development in accordance with national planning policy.6.63a  In altering the Green Belt  
and allocating strategic sites for 
development and in response to the NPPF paragraph 85, the need to identify safeguarded land to meet longer term development requirements has been considered.  
At Odd Down on the edge of Bath environmental sensitivity means  
that there is no scope to identify safeguarded land. It is also considered there is no scope to identify safeguarded land at south west Keynsham. However, land is safeguarded for development East of Keynsham. At Whitchurch the need for and scope to identify safeguarded land will be considered as part of the Core Strategy review.
6.64  In light of the opportunities for 
development in the plan period, most 
of the urban area of Keynsham continues to be excluded from the Green Belt and a revised inner boundary is defined on the Policies Map. There are a number of villages which meet the requirements of national policy in the NPPF and continue to be excluded from the Green Belt as established in the Bath & North East Somerset Local Plan. Given the overall level of housing required during the plan period and the spatial strategy for meeting this requirement it is not considered that exceptional circumstances exist to warrant changing the Inset boundaries for these villages. Some sites may come forward in the Green Belt under the Government’s proposals for Community Right to Build.6.64a  Within the Green Belt a number 
of Major Existing Developed Sites (MEDS) are defined on the Policies Map. Within the B&NES Local Plan Policy GB.3 allows for limited redevelopment or infill which does not harm the openness of the Green Belt or affect the purposes of including land within it. Within the context of national policy the Council will, through the Placemaking Plan, be reviewing whether MEDS should continue to be designated and, if so, the sites to be designated and their boundaries.
Bristol/Bath Green Belt  
within Bath and North East Somerset
Purposes of including  
land in the Green Belt:
1  To check the unrestricted sprawl 
of Bath and Bristol.
2  To prevent the merging of Bristol, Keynsham, Saltford and Bath.
3  To assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment.
4  To preserve the setting and special character of Bath.
5  To assist in urban regeneration of Bath and Bristol by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban land.
6  To preserve the individual character, identity and setting of Keynsham and the villages and hamlets within the Green Belt.Objectives for the use of  
land in the Green Belt:1  To provide opportunities for access to the open countryside  
for the urban populations of Bath, Bristol, Keynsham and Norton Radstock.
2  To provide opportunities for outdoor sport and outdoor recreation near Bath, Bristol  
and Keynsham.
3  To retain attractive landscapes and enhance landscapes.
4  To improve damaged or  
derelict land.
5  To secure nature conservation interests.
6  To retain land in agricultural, forestry and related uses.Table 8  
Bristol/Bath Green Belt within Bath and North East Somerset6 Core Policies
156
6c Continued
Minerals
6.65 Minerals are a finite and important 
resource both nationally and locally. 
Unlike most other forms of development mineral extraction can take place only where the mineral is found. Therefore it is important to protect areas where is it known, or suspected, that commercially valuable minerals exist.
6.66 Limestone is the principal 
commercial mineral worked in the 
District. There are currently two active sites – one surface workings and one underground mine. Upper Lawn Quarry at Combe Down in Bath and Hayes Wood mine near Limpley Stoke both produce high quality Bath Stone building and renovation projects. Bath & North East Somerset also has a 
legacy of coal mining and there are still 
coal resources which are capable of extraction by surface mining techniques. Although no longer worked, there are potential public safety and land stability issues associated with these areas. The general extent of the surface coal Mineral Safeguarding Area within the District is illustrated in Diagram 20a. 6.67 Historically Bath & North East 
Somerset has never made any significant contribution to regional aggregates supply and because of  
the scale and nature of the mineral operations in the District and the geology of the area it is considered  
that this situation will continue. Bristol  
is also in no position to make a contribution to regional aggregates supply, other than the provision of wharf facilities. However North Somerset and South Gloucestershire have extensive permitted reserves of aggregates and have historically always met the sub regional apportionment for the West of England. This approach is consistent with national planning policy advice for minerals.
6.68 The West of England Joint Waste 
Core Strategy (JWCS) seeks to 
encourage the prudent use of 
resources with specific reference to minerals and includes policy guidance on the recycling, storage and transfer of construction, demolition and excavation waste at mineral sites.6.69 Policy CP8a, which sets out the 
strategic approach to minerals in the District, will ensure that mineral resources within the District continue to be safeguarded. Minerals Safeguarding Areas will be designated in a separate Development Plan document following the methodology set out in the British Geological Survey document and defined on the Policies Map. Although there is no presumption that the resources will be worked this will ensure that known mineral resources are not needlessly sterilised by non-mineral development. 
6.69a  It is proposed that more detailed 
guidance on minerals related issues will 
be developed in the relevant Development Plan Document as will issues of land instability, which it is recognised is wider than just minerals, 
and restoration proposals to accord 
with national minerals planning policy advice. This will take place alongside the review of existing minerals allocations and designations. Delivery
Delivery will be through the 
Development Management process. Minerals Safeguarding Areas will be identified in a separate Development Plan Document and other current designations and allocations will be reviewed to ensure adequate resources are safeguarded.Policy CP8a  
Minerals 
Mineral sites and allocated resources within Bath & North  
East Somerset will be safeguarded to ensure that existing  
and future needs for building stone can be met. 
The production of recycled and secondary aggregates  
will be supported by safeguarding existing sites and  
identifying new sites. 
Minerals Safeguarding Areas will be designated to ensure  
that minerals resources which have a potential for future 
exploitation are safeguarded and not needlessly sterilised  
by non-mineral developments. Where it is necessary for non-mineral development to take place within a Minerals Safeguarding Area the prior extraction of minerals will be supported.
Potential ground instability issues, including those associated 
with the historical mining legacy, and the need for related remedial measures should be addressed as part of the proposal in the interests of public safety.
Mineral extraction that has an unacceptable impact on the 
environment, climate change, local communities, transport routes or the integrity of European wildlife sites which cannot be mitigated will not be permitted. The scale of operations should be appropriate to the character of the area and the roads that serve it. 
Reclamation and restoration of a high quality should be carried 
out as soon as reasonably possible and proposals will be expected to improve the local environment.
…the district is served by a 
diverse network of town, district and local centres…6 Core Policies
158
SOUTH
GLOUCESTERSHIR E
BRISTOL
NORTH
SOMERSE T
MENDIPWILTSHIRE
BATH
SOMER
VALLEYKEYNSHAMNSHAM
Chew 
Valley 
LakeBlagdon 
LakeRiver Avoniver AvonRiveRiveRiver Avon
DIAGRAM 20A  
GENERAL EXTENT  
OF THE SURFACE 
COAL MINERAL SAFEGUARDING  
AREA (BASED ON DATA SUPPLIED  
BY THE COAL 
AUTHORITY, 2009)
KEY
 Coal Resource Areas
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)6c ContinuedWaste
6.70 The JWCS Development Plan 
Document (March 2011) sets out the 
planning strategy for the provision of waste management infrastructure within the West of England. The Strategy is being prepared by the four West of England unitary authorities of B&NES, Bristol, North Somerset and South Gloucestershire Councils.
6.71 The JWCS applies to all waste, 
with the exception of radioactive waste, 
which is dealt with at a national level and sets out the authorities' aspirations for all levels of waste management until 2029: prevention; recycling; recovery; and disposal. When adopted, the JWCS policies will supersede the Local Plan waste policies. Details can be found at www.westofengland.org/
waste/planning
6.72 The West of England's Joint 
Residual Municipal Waste Management 
Strategy (June 2008) sets a framework for managing municipal residual waste generated in the West of England. The B&NES Waste Strategy 'Towards Zero Waste 2020' provides the steps we need to take now and over the next few years to reduce the amount of waste that we produce, to recycle as much as possible and to develop new ways of treating the remaining waste.
The approach of the Local 
Development Framework is 
to continue the longstanding theme of reducing car 
dependency….6 Core Policies
160
Affordable 
Housing,  
Mix of Housing, Gypsies and TravellersCore Policies 
6dAffordable Housing
6.73 This policy sets out when 
affordable housing provision will be 
required and indicates the proportions which will be sought. It is the responsibility of each local authority  
to establish the right level of housing provision in their area and to identify  
a long term supply of housing. This includes defining the level of affordable housing that is appropriate taking account of evidence in relation to local housing need and viability.  
The requirements of this policy will replace Local Plan Policy HG.8
6.75 In order to understand the local 
housing market and assess current 
and future housing requirements and need for Bath & North East Somerset the Council commissioned a SHMA 
which was published in 2013. The 
SHMA shows that the need for affordable housing in B&NES is high and that the affordability gap between local incomes and market house prices is very wide. 
6.76 The SHMA shows that an 
increasing proportion of the total 
dwelling stock is accounted for by  
the private rented sector. The SHMA estimates that around 36% of the requirement for overall housing between 2011 and 2031 is for affordable homes. The SHMA assumes that the contribution to  
the provision of housing needs from private rented accommodation where occupiers are receiving housing benefit will continue at a similar scale in the future. If this contribution were to significantly  
fall, the need for affordable housing would increase. 6.77 In making provision for affordable 
housing further guidance on the tenure split between social and affordable rent and intermediate housing that will be sought by the Council and the circumstances in which different tenures will be acceptable will be set out in the Planning Obligations SPD.
6.78 To understand the capacity of 
private development to deliver affordable housing the Council commissioned a viability study. The B&NES Viability Study (Three Dragons, July 2010) and the B&NES Viability Update (Dec 2012) have taken account of market prospects and a range of cost implications including other Section 106 obligations in order to create a baseline level of affordable housing that will be viable in the majority of schemes without recourse for public subsidy.
6.79 The study has identified some 
geographical variance in viability 
across the District. This supports geographical variation in the proportion of affordable housing that should be sought (as outlined in the table below). Targets Sub-markets Postcode
AH Area 1 
40 %Prime Bath BA1 2, BA1 1, BA2 4
Bath North and East BA1 5, BA1 6, BA2 6, BA1 7, SN14 8 and SN13 8
Bath Rural Hinterland BA1 9, BA1 8, BA2 7, BA2 9, BA2 0, BA152 and BS30 6
AH Area 2 30 %Bath North and West BA1 4 and BA1 3
Bath South BA2 3, BA2 2, BA2 1, BA2 5
Keynsham and Saltford BS31 1, BS31 2, BS31 3, BS15 3, BS4 4 and BS14 8
Midsomer Norton, Westfield, Radstock, Peasedown St John, PaultonBS39 7, BA3 2, BA3 3, 
BA2 8, BA3 4 and BA3 5 
Chew Valley BS40 6, BS40 8, BS39 4, BS39 5, BS39 6 and BS14 0Table 8a  
Geographic split for Affordable Housing6 Core Policies
162
6d Continued
Delivery
Affordable housing will be delivered 
in accordance with the Council's Housing Strategy or equivalent.
The quantity, tenure balance and 
type/size mix of the affordable housing will be agreed with the Council's Housing Enabling Team,  
or equivalent, through the development management process. 
Applicants are recommended to 
hold early conversations with Housing Enabling Team in order  
to agree the affordable housing provision and in particular the likely availability of public subsidy.
In exceptional circumstances, where 
the applicant has demonstrated a scheme is not viable and this has been independently validated, the Council may consider the use of alternative mechanisms to achieve the full affordable housing requirement.
Financial contributions towards 
affordable housing secured from development will be used to meet the housing objectives set out in the Housing Strategy. Any such contribution will contribute to a fund to assist in the delivery of additional affordable housing by supporting a scheme that would otherwise not be viable, increasing the amount of affordable housing in a scheme beyond the grant free position (up to a maximum of 45%), increasing the proportion of larger family units, assisting in the funding of older persons or supported housing or to improve the quality of the affordable housing product on offer.Policy CP9  
Affordable housing 
Large sites  
Affordable housing will be required as on-site provision in developments of 10 dwellings or 0.5 hectare and above (the lower threshold applies). The following percentage targets will be sought: 
•  40% in Prime Bath, Bath North and East, Bath Rural 
Hinterland;
•  30% in Bath North and West, Bath South, Keynsham 
and Saltford, Midsomer Norton, Westfield, Radstock, Peasedown St John, Paulton and Chew Valley.
This is on a grant free basis with the presumption that  
on site provision is expected. 
Small sites  
Residential developments on small sites from 5 to 9 
dwellings or from 0.25 up to 0.49 hectare (the lower threshold applies) should provide either on site provision or an appropriate financial contribution towards the provision of affordable housing with commuted sum calculations. The target level of affordable housing for these small sites will be 20% for AH area 1 and 15% for AH area 2 half that of large sites, in order to encourage delivery.
In terms of the affordable housing on small sites, the 
Council will first consider if on site provision is appropriate. In some instances the Council will accept a commuted sum in lieu of on site provision. This should be agreed with housing and planning officers at an early stage.
Viability  
For both large and small sites the viability of the proposed 
development should be taken into account, including:
•  Whether grant or other public subsidy is available•  Whether there are exceptional build or other 
development costs
•  The achievement of other planning objectives
•  The tenure and size mix of the affordable housing to be provided.
Sub-division and phasing  
Where it is proposed to phase development or sub-divide sites, or where only part of a site is subject to a planning application, the Council will take account of the whole of the site when determining whether it falls above or below the thresholds set out above.
Property Size and Mix  
Residential developments delivering on-site affordable 
housing should provide a mix of affordable housing units and contribute to the creation of mixed, balanced and inclusive communities. The size and type of affordable units will be determined by the Council to reflect the identified housing needs and site suitability.
The type and size profile of the affordable housing will be 
guided by the Strategic Housing Market Assessment and other local housing requirements but the Council will aim for at least 60% of the affordable housing to be family accommodation including some large 4/5 bed dwellings.
Other  
All affordable housing delivered through this policy 
should remain at an affordable price for future eligible households, in the event of any sales or staircasing affecting affordable housing unit(s) delivered through Policy CP9 then an arrangement will be made to recycle the receipts/subsidy for the provision of new alternative affordable housing located elsewhere within Bath and North East Somerset. Affordable Housing should be integrated within a development and should not be distinguishable from market housing.DIAGRAM 20B  
GEOGRAPHIC TWO-
WAY SPLIT FOR 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
(INDICATIVE)
KEY
30% Target
40% Target
District Boundary
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
6 Core Policies
164
6d Continued
Housing Mix
6.80  This policy is aimed at ensuring 
that new residential development 
provides for a range of housing types and needs, to help support mixed and inclusive communities and to respond to demographic change.Delivery
This policy will be implemented by the development management process, and delivered by private developers and affordable housing providers.
The affordable housing policy will 
also ensure that the Council can have an active role in negotiating  
the mix of housing provided, and 
seeks to have a flexible approach 
particularly to ensure the delivery  
of family housing.Policy CP10  
Housing mix
New housing development, both market and affordable  
must provide for a variety of housing types and size to accommodate a range of different households, including families, single people and low income households as evidenced by local needs assessments (e.g. B&NES Residential Review, 2007) and the Strategic Housing Market Assessments or future evidence.
The mix of housing should contribute to providing choice in 
tenure and housing type, having regard to the existing mix of dwellings in the locality and the character and accessibility of the location.
Housing developments will also need to contribute to the 
provision of homes that are suitable for the needs of older people, disabled people and those with other special needs (including supported housing projects), in a way that  
integrates all households into the community.
The specific accommodation needs of older people will be 
addressed through the Placemaking Plan, including considering the allocation of appropriate sites.Gypsies, Travellers & 
Travelling Showpeople
6.81a  In March 2012 the Government 
published ‘Planning Policy for Traveller 
Sites’, alongside the NPPF, which seeks to align planning policy for Travellers with housing. This requires the Council to demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable sites and a further five and where possible, ten year supply of developable sites. The Council has undertaken a refreshed assessment  
of need which updates the West of England Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) undertaken in 2007 for the Bath & North East Somerset area. This establishes the level of need for five, ten and fifteen year supply of sites in accordance with Planning Policy for Traveller Sites. Most of the need is from households on unauthorised sites and is therefore an immediate need. From the evidence in the GTAA, there is an immediate need for 24 pitches for Gypsies and Travellers and a further 4 pitches between 2017 and 2027 and 5 transit pitches, and an immediate need for 40 Travelling Showmen’s plots. The Council will identify sites to meet these needs in the Gypsy and Traveller Development Plan Document. Planning Policy for Traveller Sites clarifies that for a site to be considered deliverable it must be available now and offer a suitable location for development now, and be achievable and viable with a realistic prospect it can be delivered within five years.6.81b Planning Policy for Traveller Sites 
states that Traveller sites should be guided towards making effective use of previously developed, untidy or derelict land. It also states that development in the open countryside away from existing settlements or outside areas allocated in the development plan should be strictly limited. It does recognise, however, that some rural areas may be suitable for traveller’s sites providing the scale of these sites does not dominate the nearest settled community and avoid placing an undue pressure on local infrastructure. Any proposed sites inside settlement boundaries would be considered against policies applying generally to residential development. Provision is more likely to be made outside such boundaries and will be guided by Policy CP11.6.82 The NPPF establishes a 
presumption against inappropriate development in the Green Belt unless very special circumstances can be demonstrated and the harm caused can be outweighed by other considerations. Planning Policy for Traveller Sites reiterates that sites in the Green Belt are inappropriate development. However, if exceptional circumstances exist, an allocation can be made in a DPD by removing land from the Green Belt. The criteria in Policy CP11 will be used to guide the identification of suitable sites for allocation in the relevant DPD and to identify sites to respond to future accommodation needs when assessed. These criteria will also be used when considering planning applications that may happen before the DPDs are prepared or in addition to sites being allocated.6 Core Policies
166
6d Continued
Delivery
Delivery will be through the 
Development Management process. Sites will be identified through the Gypsies and Travellers DPD to meet identified accommodation needs for the Plan period.Policy CP11  
Gypsies, travellers  
& travelling showpeople
The following criteria will be used to guide the identification and allocation of suitable, available and deliverable or developable sites in a Development Plan Document to respond to the established accommodation needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople for the Plan period. Sites for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople accommodation will be allocated and planning applications permitted taking into account the following factors:
a  the site is suitably located to allow access to local 
community services and facilities, including shops, schools and health facilities, and employment opportunities 
b  satisfactory means of access can be provided and  
the existing highway network is adequate to service the site
c the site is large enough to allow for adequate space for on-site facilities and amenities including play provision, parking and manoeuvring, as well as any live/work pitches if required to enable traditional lifestyles
d  the site is well-designed and well-landscaped and has no unacceptable adverse impact on the character and appearance of the surrounding area e  adequate services including utilities, foul and surface water and waste disposal can be provided as well as any necessary pollution control measures
f  there is no unacceptable impact on the amenities, health and well-being of occupiers of the site or on neighbouring occupiers as a result of the development 
g  the site should avoid areas at high risk of flooding  
and have no adverse impact on protected habitats and species, nationally recognised designations, landscape designations and heritage assets and  
their settings and natural resources
h the scale of the development does not dominate the nearest settled community nor place undue pressure on the local infrastructure
i the site does not lie within the Green Belt unless there are exceptional circumstances to justify making an allocation by removing land from the Green Belt or, for a planning application on unallocated land, that very special circumstances exist. A well-designed, 
managed and 
integrated 
network of GI 
provides a wide 
range of direct 
and indirect 
benefits to people 
and wildlife6 Core Policies
168
6.86  B&NES will aim to build on its 
considerable strengths and pursue a 
smart growth agenda, i.e. promotion of a higher value added economy rather than relying only on volume growth. This will focus on several  
key areas as put forward by the Economic Strategy:
• Business support and development:
• Employability and skills
• Business premises and infrastructure
• Promoting Investment
6.87 By 2029, the District will have a 
more environmentally sustainable 
economy with increased local employment, less overall commuting, a reduction in the contribution made by commerce and industry to the carbon footprint of the area, and a strong low carbon business sector.  
It will have a more socially inclusive economy with continuing high levels of economic participation, a focus on lifelong learning, and increased and relevant workforce skills. It will have a more diverse, productive and resilient economy due to the increase in the availability of knowledge-based jobs, where knowledge-based workers can find jobs and where local innovation can grow commercially.6.84  A scarcity of resources – both 
natural and financial – an aging population, competition from overseas, and the loss of jobs in the traditionally strong local sectors, are  
all factors driving the need for change. The District's economy has a predominance of public sector related, retail, leisure and tourism employment and has the lowest weekly workplace wages and productivity in the West of England. These activities are extremely important to the District, but in recent times, lower-value activities such as some types of manufacturing, have lost ground, suffering job losses. It is therefore critical that the economy looks to offer more opportunities to  
its resident population.
6.85 The District's economy is also 
dominated by micro and small 
businesses, which reflect an entrepreneurial spirit. Particularly productive activities include engineering, technology-related activities, and some creative industry activities, such as publishing and sound recording. The area is also home to critical business networks which can support and guide new businesses. The District, having more residents educated to degree level than the national average, is therefore well equipped to take up job opportunities locally, should they be created. The District is also well placed to build on its international reputation in order to promote investment.
A Prosperous 
Economy
Economic Development  
6.83 The recent recession has served to remind 
us that it is in everyone's interest to support the 
development and growth of a prosperous economy across B&NES. The Sustainable Community Strategy recognises that we must act at a local level to create prosperity through economic growth, whilst working towards a low carbon economy. The Core Strategy will support and deliver elements of the B&NES Economic Strategy, which aims to create the conditions for jobs growth throughout the District, leading to a more diverse, productive and resilient economy which provides better opportunities for all.Core Policies 
6eDelivery
Sites will be identified and allocated in 
the Placemaking Plan to meet the identified employment space requirements. Delivery of economic development will also be facilitated by the B&NES Economic Strategy, the Regeneration Delivery Plans and the Development Management process. Working alongside local communities and partners will be essential to deliver the ambitions of the Economic Strategy and developers may be asked to support the objectives of  
the Strategy through a Targeted Recruitment, Training and Supply-chain Protocol.
2
3
4
5678910111213141516
11
456789101112131415
16
2026 2010
Diagram 21  
The Economy in 2026The pie charts demonstrate how we might 
expect the economy of the District to have changed between 2010 and 2026, in terms of Gross Value Added (GVA) per broad industry. The economy has expanded, thanks largely to more activity in ‘knowledge-based’ activities. What will our economy  
look like in 2026?
Estimated GVA contribution 
to Bath and North East Somerset economy by  
broad industry1 Professional, Scientific, Technical
2 Wholesale and Retail
3 Info and Comms
4 Construction
5 Manufacturing
6 Financial and Insurance
7 Public Admin and Defence
8 Admin and Related
9 Water, Sewage, Waste
10  Real Estate Activities
11 Accommodation and Food
12 Human Health and Social Work
13 Transportation and Storage
14 Other Service Activities
15 Education
16 Arts, Ents, Recreation6 Core Policies
170
6e Continued
6.90  London Road has been identified 
as a declining centre, and is also 
identified in equalities mapping as an area of deprivation. Through work on the Placemaking Plan, the Council will consider its policy options for this centre, including the scope for consolidating and strengthening its retailing role, enabling its regeneration, supporting business development, and improving its appearance as a key route into the central area.
6.91 Protection of shops within the 
centres defined in the hierarchy is 
covered by Local Plan Policies S.5 and S.8.
6.92 In 2008 the Council undertook 
work on a retail strategy that included 
an assessment of the amount and type of new retail floorspace required during the plan period. Since that time circumstances have changed e.g. economic recession and the Southgate development in Bath has opened. A re-assessment of the need for new retail floorspace is therefore, being undertaken. Policy CP12 along with policies in the place based sections, sets the framework for new retail development that will be taken forward in the Placemaking Plan, but does not propose specific levels of retail development.Centres and Retailing
6.88 Along with Bath City Centre, the 
District is served by a diverse network of town, District and local centres of varying size. In addition to providing facilities like shops, cafés, pubs, post offices and banks, centres also include varying levels of community facilities, work places and leisure facilities. Many centres are a focus for public transport services and most offer a chance to access essential facilities close to people's homes. Policy CP12 therefore aims to support this network of accessible centres as key focuses for development and as the principal locations for shopping and community facilities as well as offices, local entertainment, art and cultural facilities. Many centres contain a range of independent specialist shops which are important to retain as they contribute to the uniqueness of each centre. Centres are also well placed to be a focus for some higher density residential development which can both benefit from the services provided and help to sustain the viability of those services. This approach is reflected in the place based sections of the Core Strategy.
6.89 Walcot Street, Margaret's 
Buildings and Lansdown Road are 
included as local centres for the purposes of this policy, but it is recognised rather than primarily serving local day to day needs they play a more specialist retail role, supplementing the city centre retail offer, supporting small businesses and serving a wider catchment area.
The approach of the 
Local Development Framework isto continue the 
longstanding theme of 
reducing car dependency….Delivery
The place-based sections for Bath, 
Keynsham, Midsomer Norton and Radstock will set out more detail on the approach to the centres contained in those settlements.
The boundaries for all of the  
centres listed within the hierarchy 
are defined on the Policies Map. Other than the Bath city centre 
boundary these boundaries reflect 
those established in the Bath & North East Somerset Local Plan.  
The Placemaking Plan will review these boundaries and identify sites for development. It will also review and define, where appropriate, the primary shopping areas and retail frontages in the larger centres. These designations will be 
supported by development 
management policies in the Placemaking Plan to guide decisions on individual planning applications.
An updated retail study will be 
undertaken to support future planning decisions and guide the Placemaking Plan.
Main town centre uses will be 
subject to the sequential and impact tests set out in the NPPF.Policy CP12  
Centres and retailing
The centres within the hierarchy of shopping centres set out below and as defined on the Policies Map will be maintained and enhanced:
City Centre  
Bath City Centre
Town Centres  
Keynsham Town Centre, Midsomer Norton  
Town Centre, Radstock Town Centre
District Centres  
Moorland Road, BathLocal Centres (urban)  
In Bath: (1) Chelsea Road, (2) Weston High Street, 
(3) Julian Road, (4) St James Square (5) Margaret’s Buildings, (6) Lansdown Road, (7) Camden Road & Fairfield Road, (8) Larkhall High Street (9) London Road, (10) Nelson Place East & Cleveland Place, (11) Walcot Street, (12) Widcombe Parade, (13) Bathwick Street, (14) Bathwick Hill, (16) Bear Flat, (17) The Avenue, Combe Down, (18) Bradford Road), (19) Frome Road, (20) Upper Bloomfield Road, (21) Twerton High Street, (22) Mount Road.
In Keynsham: Queen's Road and Chandag Road
In the Somer Valley: Westfield Paulton, Peasedown 
St. John and TimsburyLocal Centres (rest of the District)
Bathampton, Batheaston, Chew Magna, Saltford, 
and Whitchurch
Retail development, offices, leisure and 
entertainment uses, markets, community facilities, arts, culture and tourism uses will be primarily located within, or where appropriate, adjoining the centres in the identified hierarchy of centres. Centres will also be the focus for higher density forms of residential development provided the centre is suitable for such development and has a high level of accessibility by public transport, cycling and walking.
Uses which contribute to maintaining the vitality, 
viability and diversity of centres within the hierarchy will be encouraged.
Retail development within the centres listed within 
the hierarchy and defined on the Policies Map will be permitted where it is:
a  Of a scale and type consistent with the existing 
retail function and character of the centre and
b  Well integrated into the existing pattern of the centre.6 Core Policies
172
Well ConnectedCore Policies 
6fTransport and Movement
6.93 The approach of the Local 
Development Framework is to continue 
the longstanding theme of reducing car dependency and working towards making walking, cycling and use of public transport, the more attractive options for travel. This approach is embodied in the strategic objectives of the Core Strategy, and the place based sections in seeking to enhance the walking, cycling and public transport network from existing communities to jobs, local services, facilities and attractions. The Council will continue to work with neighbouring authorities to address these issues.
6.94  The B&NES highway network 
remains heavily trafficked highlighting 
the need to undertake transport and 
access improvements and major 
capital infrastructure projects to facilitate growth in housing numbers and jobs, to minimise the adverse effect of traffic, and to enable environmental improvement to be made to existing centres. The Council will continue to safeguard routes for the Whitchurch bypass and Temple Cloud/Clutton bypass and recognises the need for studies to assess the Saltford bypass and an A46/A36 link.6.95 This approach is in line with 
national objectives and the Council's Sustainable Community Strategy. The approach also follows on from the five key goals of the emerging Joint Local Transport Plan (JLTP3), which are:
• Reduce carbon emissions;
• Support economic growth;
• Promote accessibility;
• Contribute to better safety,  
security and health;
• Improve quality of life and a  
healthy natural environment.
Creating Better Places
6.96 This approach brings with it a 
wide range of benefits. The most 
significant, long term benefit to B&NES is that this approach creates more economically successful, more sociable, healthier, more accessible and more inviting places in which to live, work and visit.6.97 Whilst good accessibility is of 
absolute importance for places to function effectively, better and more sociable places are created where people dominate, rather than vehicular traffic. Streets are not just for movement; they form the shared public space between buildings, where city, town or village life takes place. This is particularly the case in our historic settlements that have not been designed to accommodate the current levels of vehicular traffic that they often have to endure. There is a strong correlation between an enhanced public realm and better places; the experience of numerous cities around the world is testament to this approach.
6.98 Measures that support the shift to 
more sustainable modes of transport 
and that improve levels of accessibility to and within Bath, Keynsham, Somer Valley and the Rural Areas will be supported and promoted.
6.99  Other critical benefits to 
undertaking this approach include 
meeting our reduction in CO2 emission targets, addressing rising obesity levels and general health risks arising through a lack of physical activity, and enabling improvements to be made to our historic environment and public realm.Climate Change and  
Air Quality
6.100  JLTP3 states 'In 2008, road 
transport represented 32% of West of 
England CO2 emissions. This amounts to some 2.16 tonnes per head of population, similar to the national average of 2.13 tonnes. In reducing road transport carbon emissions JLTP3 focuses on:
• Promotion of lower carbon choices
• Providing alternatives to the car
• Influencing travel behaviour and 
managing travel demand
• Workplace and school travel plans
• Personalised travel planning
• Improvements to walking and cycling infrastructure
• Public transport enhancements
• Integration of travel modes
• Better information
• Demand management and reducing the need to travel through technology and spatial planning
• Introduction of an appraisal of the impact of scheme/programme/policy options to inform their selection or otherwise for inclusion in JLTP3 delivery plans
• Robust understanding of the contribution to carbon reduction  
(or carbon increase) that each scheme, programme, policy is expected to deliver6.101  The reduction of the adverse 
effects of transport on climate change and air quality, particularly in Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) in Bath and Keynsham and in future AQMAs, will be managed in accordance with the NPPF.
Health, Obesity and  
Well Being
6.102  Continuing with the shift to more 
active travel is a key way of helping to tackle the pressing issues associated with poor health, rising obesity and general well-being. It is estimated that by 2050 almost 60% of the UK population could be obese with the economic cost reaching £49.9 billion at today's prices (Government Office of Science, Foresight Tackling Obesities: Future Choices, 2007). Increased levels of walking and cycling in particular will help to achieve the strategic objective of promoting health and well-being.Historic Environment and 
Public Realm
6.103  Improvements to parts of the 
District's historic settlements will 
become possible by reducing the volume of traffic using historic streets and spaces. The management of the highway network, particularly in local centres, residential areas, places of higher pedestrian footfall and/or areas of historic significance, to support the development of stronger communities and the creation of high quality public realm and better places is supported by the Local Development Framework. This approach is reflected in the Council's Public Realm and Movement Strategy for Bath City Centre.
Delivery
The delivery of transport and movement initiatives will be achieved through a wide range of channels. Many of those that require significant levels of capital funding though central government are being reviewed via the Comprehensive Spending Review 2010 and are likely, to be delivered at a later date than anticipated. Transport Assessments will be a requirement for major planning applications.
Other transportation improvements 
could be delivered through other initiatives coming from different disciplines, for example to fulfil the aspirations of the health agenda, or through carbon reduction programmes. Key areas of delivery will be as follows:
• Joint Local Transport Plan 3 
(including transport proposals for Bath & the Greater Bristol Metro Major Scheme)
• Bath's Public Realm and Movement Programme
• The development and implementation of new Parking Strategies for urban centres
• Smarter Choices Initiatives
• European CIVITAS projects
• Other Capital projects
• Community Infrastructure Levy
• S106 contributions
• Planning Obligations SPD
• Major development projects
• Community led initiatives
• Initiatives by the health sector
• Climate Change awareness raising
• Enhancement of local centres and other facilities within close walking or cycling distance from where people live6 Core Policies
174
6.107  Details of the infrastructure 
needed for new developments and to 
reduce gaps in existing infrastructure have been highlighted in the relevant sections of the Core Strategy (see strategic requirements identified in  
the District-wide chapter, and the place-based chapters for more detailed place specific requirements).
6.108  Policy CP13 will ensure that all 
new developments are supported by 
the necessary infrastructure, including forms of energy supply that help to reduce carbon emissions and existing infrastructure is retained and improved. Proposals for housing developments should consider the potential for cumulative effects on social infrastructure. Key Infrastructure requirements set out in the Core Strategy will be supported by an up-to-date IDP with a robust monitoring system to track each element of the delivery. 6.105  The Council has prepared an 
Infrastructure Delivery Programme (IDP) which will present this evidence and will make sure that the planned infrastructure can meet the needs of new development and also close the gaps in existing infrastructure. The IDP includes a high level assessment undertaken by West of England partners as well as some more specific work carried out within the District. The programme covers issues such as the viability of a development, funding and its timing. It will also outline how and when key infrastructure will be provided. It will look at the need for: transport, open and green space, energy provision and secondary education as well as flooding, water supply, sewerage and drainage and healthcare provision.
6.106  The Council will also work with 
partners and in partnership with local 
communities to ensure that adequate and accessible provision is made for the health, welfare, faith, recreational, leisure and cultural needs of existing and future communities and neighbourhoods in B&NES. Successful community facilities and services will be integral to the vibrancy of communities across the District. Good community facilities provide opportunities for interaction between people, to get involved in activities and to have increased accessibility to basic services. This benefits the social prosperity of communities across the District, whilst providing knock on benefits for sustainability and the economy. 
Infrastructure
6.104  The Core Strategy must be supported by 
evidence of what physical, social and green 
infrastructure is needed to support the developments proposed in the spatial strategy. This evidence will include the costs of infrastructure, who will be responsible for providing it and when it will be provided. It will be funded in various ways. Some funding will be provided by the Council, some through national funding streams, and some from developer contributions or through the investment programmes of other service providers.Core Policies 
6gDelivery
The Core Strategy will be 
supported by an Infrastructure Delivery Programme which will set out Infrastructure requirements and estimated costs, and suggested delivery mechanisms and phasing schedules for infrastructure delivery. Delivery of the policy will be through the Development Management process. Developer contributions will be sought through the use of planning obligations, as set out in Section 106 of the 1990 Town & Country Planning Act and based on the Planning Obligations SPD and its successors. The preparation of a Community Infrastructure Levy charging schedule (or similar  
local tariff) may be considered. Delivery will also require working  
in partnership with public and private bodies.Policy CP13  
Infrastructure 
provision
New developments must be supported by the timely delivery 
of the required infrastructure to provide balanced and more self-contained communities.
The Council will work in partnership with adjoining authorities, 
local communities and relevant agencies and providers to ensure that social, physical and green infrastructure is retained and improved for communities.
Developer contributions will be based on the Planning 
Obligations SPD and its successors.
Infrastructure proposals should not cause harm to the integrity 
of European wildlife sites which cannot be mitigated.
Our historic assets  
are central to local 
distinctiveness and  
sense of place.x7 Monitoring & Review
176
Monitoring  
& Review7.03 Monitoring of other indicators 
related to policies in the Local Plan also 
takes place. These indicators are not included here as the schedule below is the Core Strategy monitoring framework. The monitoring framework will be added to in the future as the range and number of indicators will increase as additional policies are prepared and adopted in other Local Development Documents.
7.04 Progress against many 
objectives/policies can be measured 
quantitatively and this is reflected in the targets set out in the framework below. Where appropriate quantification of the objective is set out in a way that will help to inform review of the Core Strategy in accordance with the programme set out in paragraph 7.05 below. However, other objectives/policies do not lend themselves to quantification and where appropriate a qualitative target is included in order to enable performance to be measured Monitoring performance against the indicators set out is principally undertaken through the Authority’s Monitoring Report (AMR). Requisite parts of the AMR are published on an annual basis and in addition to setting out monitoring information include analysis of whether and how the policies are being delivered. In so doing it will inform the process of Core Strategy policy review and provides evidence to inform formulation of policies in other Local Development Documents.7.01 The strategic objectives for the 
Local Development Framework are set out in chapter 1.
These objectives will be delivered 
through:
• The spatial strategy set out in  
the Core Strategy
• Core policies and place specific 
policies
• Other Local Development Documents
7.02 In order to ensure the strategic 
objectives are being delivered progress needs to be monitored.  
Set out below is a monitoring framework which comprises a range of indicators against which performance in delivering the strategic objectives and the associated policies can be monitored. These indicators are grouped by objective and relate to the policies in the Core Strategy which are charged with enabling the delivery of that objective. Setting out the framework in this way enables a clear path to be established from the objective, to the policies and the indicators. Only the main policies that deliver an objective are identified in the framework and this is therefore a simplification of complex relationships between policies and delivery of an objective.
Appendix 1: Replaced Local Plan Policies 183 
Appendix 2: Saved Local Plan Policies  184
Appendix 3: Policies Map Revisions 188Review of growth targets
7.05b  The Council will also monitor 
economic growth rates, to assess 
whether planned targets for workspace continue to be appropriate. If required the Council will agree revised targets, taking account of the West of England Strategic Economic Plan and make any necessary changes to the spatial strategy to meet the new targets if necessary. 
Duty to Co-operate
7.05c  Plan reviews will be undertaken 
in co-operation with neighbouring authorities, particularly in the West  
of England in accordance with the Duty to Co-operate to ensure that cross-boundary issues are addressed. This will include a review of the plan period. The timetable for the review of Local Development Documents is set out in the Council’s Local Development Scheme.7.05f  If the SHMA review indicates that 
B&NES is part of the West of England HMA, and additional strategic housing provision is required, its delivery will be determined on a West of England-wide basis through the duty to cooperate.
7.06 In line with the principles of 
spatial planning the vision and 
objectives of the Local Development Framework will not be implemented solely via planning policies alone. Delivery will be dependent upon the actions of other parts of the Council and other agencies. Table 9 identifies the key strategies and plans that will help to deliver the Core Strategy objectives and for the core policies  
the primary means of delivery is highlighted in Chapter 6.7.05 The Core Strategy is 
programmed to be reviewed about every 5 years to enable flexibility in response to changing circumstances. The review will be informed by regular monitoring as set out in Table 9 as well as ensuring that the Core Strategy evidence base remains up-to-date. The review process will commence in advance of the review date in order to enable the timely and considered preparation and adoption of revised policies. In light of the Duty to Co-operate, the first review will be timed to enable co-ordination with the review of the Core Strategies  
of adjoining Authorities in the West  
of England. 
Delivery  
7.05a  If monitoring demonstrates  
that the planned housing provision, including affordable housing, is not being delivered at the levels being planned for and there would be no reasonable prospect of the planned delivery of around 13,000 homes to 2029, then changes will be made to Core Strategy to rectify the housing shortfall taking account of the impact of the performance of the economy on the need for and delivery of housing. This may include changes to the spatial strategy.7.05d Arrangements are already 
underway to review the West of England SHMA in preparation for a review of West of England Core Strategies in around 2016. This will entail a co-ordinated response to  
the outputs of the updated SHMA.  
The SHMA review includes a review  
of the Housing Market Area. 
7.05e  If the SHMA review 
demonstrates the continued existence 
of separate housing market areas for Bath and Bristol, then under the duty to co-operate, B&NES will continue to work closely with the adjoining West of England authorities to consider the most appropriate proposals for accommodating housing needs that could not otherwise be met within the Bristol Housing Market Area.7 Monitoring & Review
178
Strategic Objective Policy Indicator Quantification of objective
1 
Pursue a low carbon and sustainable future in a changing climateCP3 
Renewable Energy•  Proportion and number of renewable energy schemes granted planning permission annually
•  Amount of renewable energy generated by installed capacity, for electricity (MWe) and heat (MWth)
•  Amount of renewable energy generated from renewable energy sources annually (measured via ‘Feed in Tariff data).By 2029  
110MWe (Electricity)  
165 MWth (Heat)
CP4  
District Heating•  Location of heat priority areas where policy district heating schemes have started to be implemented
•  Proportion and number of Combined Heat and Power  
schemes granted planning permission annually
CP5  
Flood Risk 
Management•  Number of planning permissions granted contrary to Environment Agency advice 
2 Protect and enhance the District’s natural, built and cultural assets and provide green infrastructureCP6  
Environmental Quality•  Change in priority habitats (in hectares)
•  Number of nature conservation sites that are enhanced annually
•  Number and proportion of housing schemes achieving Building for Life 12 (BfL12) score of no ‘reds’ annually (post-construction monitoring) 
•  Number of principal listed buildings recorded as ‘at risk’ on the Council’s Buildings at Risk Register
•  Number of up to date Conservation Area Appraisals and Management Plans in place
•  Adoption of Historic Environment related SPDs
•  A range of indicators to monitor implementation of the actions identified in the World Heritage Site Management Plan are also identified in the Management Plan.
Protection of Greenfield land through prioritising development of previously developed sites relates also to regeneration and housing delivery objective – see indicator and quantification below•  Maintain or increase the area of priority habitats by 2029 
•  Annual increase in the proportion  
of assessed housing schemes that 
meet the Building for Life 12 (BfL12) scoring no ‘reds’
•  Reduce the number of principal listed buildings recorded as ‘at risk’ on the Council’s Buildings at Risk Register 
•  Increase the number of up to date Conservation Area Appraisals and Management Plans in placeTable 9  
Monitoring of Strategic ObjectivesStrategic Objective Policy Indicator Quantification of objective
2 
Protect and enhance the District’s natural, built and cultural assets and provide green infrastructure  
(continued)CP7  
Green InfrastructureA range of indicators to monitor the provision and enhancement of green infrastructure are being developed through of the Green Infrastructure Strategy
3 Encourage economic development, diversification and prosperityDW1  
District-wide  
spatial strategy and Place based spatial strategies:
B1 
KE1 
SV1 
RA1 & 2•  Amount of floor space developed type (office/industrial)  
in sqm, by place annually and total since 2011. Gains, losses  
and net.
•  Amount of floor space on previously developed land by type 
(office/industrial) in sqm, by place annually and total since 2011. Gains, losses and net.
•  Employment land available by type
•  Change in work place jobs by sub-area 
•  Number of planning consents for business premises in  
rural areas 
•  Economic growth forecasts from the Office of Budget 
Responsibility (OBR) as well as from bodies such as Oxford Economics, Cambridge Econometrics, NIESR  Deliver space to provide 10,300 net additional jobs between 2011 & 2029 as set out in the places below 
Bath: 2011-2029   
•  Office floor space – net gain of 
about 40,000m2 
•  Industrial floor space – net loss of about 40,000m2
•  Net increase of 7,000 jobs 
Keynsham: 2011 –2029  
•  Office floor space – net gain of about 7,200 m2 
•  Industrial floor space –net gain of about 8,300m2
•  Net increase of about 1,600 jobs 
Somer Valley: 2011- 2029  
•  Office floor space – net gain of about 2,700m2 
•  Industrial floor space – net loss of about 14,400m2 
•  Net increase of about 900 jobs7 Monitoring & Review
180
Strategic Objective Policy Indicator Quantification of objective
4 
Invest in our city, town and local centresCP12  
Centres and retailing•  Proportion of new retail floor space provided within the centres listed in the hierarchy annually in total since 2006
•  Health of the centres as indicated by retail floor space losses, vacancy rates and land use mix changes in each of the centres listed in the hierarchy (city/town centres – annually and district/local centres – periodically)
•  Market share of comparison goods spending in 
Bath city centre and the town centres•  Health of each centre as measured by the indicators specified is maintained or enhanced
•  The market share of comparison goods spending 
as measured by household surveys undertaken about every 5 years is maintained or enhanced
5 Meet housing needsDW1  
District-wide spatial strategy•  total housing stock by tenure and type
•  housing permissions granted by tenure and type
•  housing permissions developed by tenure  
and type
•  housing delivery trajectory showing completions 
and forecast completions
•  % affordable housing secured on qualifying sites
•  Change in resident student numbers
•  Change in purpose-built student accommodation•  Around 13,000 homes, comprising 9710 market 
homes and 3290 affordable homes 2011-2029.
•  40% or 30% affordable housing secured on  
large sites depending on geographic location
•  20% or 10% affordable housing secured on small sites depending on geographic location
•  Growth in student numbers matches growth  
in purpose-built accommodation at each  
plan review.
Place based spatial strategies 
B1 
KE1 
SV1 
RA1& RA2•  As above but broken down for (Bath, Keynsham, 
Somer Valley &rural areas)
•  Percentage of new homes provided on previously 
developed land annually and since 2006 in B&NESAround 80% of new housing provided  
between 2011 and 2029 should be on previously developed landStrategic Objective Policy Indicator Quantification of objective
5 
Meet housing needs (continued)CP10   
Housing mix•  Annual residential dwelling completions broken 
down by size of property (number of bedrooms) and tenure
CP11  
Gypsies, travellers & travelling showpeople•  Net additional gypsy and traveller pitches provided 
annually and since 2011Delivery indicators to be identified in the Gypsy  
and Traveller DPD.
6 Plan for development that promotes health and well beingCP13  
Infrastructure Provision
Place based 
strategies (AQMAs)  
B1  
KE1Annual progress on the delivery of infrastructure will be reported via the Infrastructure Delivery Programme. Including:
•  Progress on scheme delivery and funding
•  Status and risk of infrastructure planned
•  Annual Progress Report on Air Quality 
management Areas as submitted to DEFRA  
(by Environmental Health)By 2016 within the Bath AQMA and Keynsham AQMA annual average concentrations of Nitrogen Dioxide (NO
2) not to exceed 40μg/m3
7  Deliver well connected 
places accessible by sustainable means of transport•  11 transport related indicators are monitored as part of JLTP3.
http://www.travelplus.org.uk/Appendices and Glossary
182
Appendices 
and GlossaryAppendix 1:  
Replaced Local Plan Policies
The following policies from the Bath & North East Somerset Local Plan 2007  
(column 1) will be replaced by policies in the Core Strategy’ (column 3).
B&NES  
Local Plan PolicyTopic Replaced by  
Core Strategy Policy
ET.1 Employment Plan Overview DW1  District Wide Spatial Strategy
B1 Bath Spatial Strategy 
KE1 Keynsham Spatial Strategy  
SV1 Somer Valley Spatial Strategy
ET.4 Employment development at rural settlements RA1 Development in the Villages Meeting the Listed Criteria 
RA2 Development in Villages Outside the Green Belt not Meeting 
Policy RA1 Criteria  
ES.1 Renewable energy proposals CP3 Renewable Energy
HG.1 Overall housing requirement and mix DW1 District Wide Spatial Strategy
CP10 Housing Mix
HG.4* Residential development in Bath, Keynsham, Norton 
Radstock and R.1 and R.2 settlements B1 Bath Spatial Strategy KE1 Keynsham Spatial Strategy 
SV1 Somer Valley Spatial Strategy *excluding Midsomer Norton, 
Radstock, Westfield, Peasedown St. John and Paulton for which Policy HG.4 still applies  
RA1 Development in the Villages Meeting the Listed Criteria
RA2 Development in Villages Outside the Green Belt not Meeting 
Policy RA1 Criteria 
HG.8 Affordable housing on allocated and large windfall sites CP9 Affordable Housing
HG.9 Affordable housing on rural exception sites RA4 Rural Exceptions SitesAppendices and Glossary
184
B&NES  
Local Plan PolicyTopic Replaced by  
Core Strategy Policy
HG.16 Gypsy and traveller sites CP11 Gypsies, Travellers & Travelling Showpeople
HG.17 Purpose built student accommodation B5 Strategic Policy for Bath's Universities 
GB.1 Control of development in the Green Belt CP8 Green Belt 
GB.4 Safeguarded land (Farmborough & Whitchurch) KE3B  Safeguarded Land at East Keynsham
BH.1 Impact of development on World Heritage Site of Bath 
or its settingB4 The World Heritage Site and its Setting
S.1 Hierarchy of shopping centres CP12  Centres and Retailing 
S.2 Retail development within shopping centres CP12 Centres and RetailingAppendix 1:  
Replaced Local Plan Policies
ContinuedIMP.1  
Planning obligations
D.2  
General design & public 
realm considerations
D.4 
Townscape 
considerations
SC.1 
Settlement classificationET.2 
Bath City Centre Core 
Office Employment Area
ET.3 
Core Business AreasET.5 
Employment 
development in the 'countryside'
ET.6 
Agricultural 
development
ET.7 
Use of agricultural landET.8 
Farm diversificationET.9 
Re-use of rural buildingsET.13  
Change of use of 
existing dwelling to hotel or guesthouse
CF.1 
Protection of land and 
buildings used for community purposes
CF.2  
New / replacement 
community facilities
CF.3  
Contributions from  
new development to 
community facilities
CF.4  
Allocation of land for 
new community uses
CF.5  
Allocation of land for 
primary schools
CF.6  
Residential and day care 
facilities
CF.7 
Loss of public housesCF.8  
AllotmentsCF.9  
Allocation of land for 
cemeteriesSR.1A  
Protection of playing fields & recreational open space
SR.2  
Allocation of land for 
recreational use
SR.3  
Provision of recreational 
facilities to meet the needs of new development
SR.4  
New sports & 
recreational facilities within or adjoining settlements
SR.5  
New sports & 
recreational facilities elsewhere
SR.7  
Commercial leisure usesSR.9  
Protection of 
recreational routes
SR.10  
Recreational 
development within Waterside Recreational Activity AreasSR.11  
Recreational development outside Waterside Recreational Activity Areas
SR.12  
Commercial riding 
establishments
S.3 
Land allocated for retail 
development
S.4 
Retail development 
proposals outside the identified shopping centres (sequential approach)
S.5 
Primary shopping 
frontages for Bath, Keynsham and Midsomer Norton
S.6 
A3 uses in Bath City 
centre
S.7 
Siting of tables & chairs 
outside A3 uses in Bath City centre
S.8 
Retention of shops in 
district, local and village centresS.9 
Retention of local needs shops outside the identified centres & development of new small scale local shops
ES.2  
Energy conservation 
and protection of environmental resources
ES.3  
Development involving 
gas and electricity services
ES.4  
Adequacy of water 
supply
ES.5  
Foul and surface water 
drainage
ES.7 
Telecommunications 
development
ES.9  
Pollution and nuisanceES.10  
Air qualityES.12  
Noise and vibrationES.13  
Safety hazardsES.14  
Unstable landES.15  
Contaminated landHG.4  
Residential 
Development in the urban areas and R.1 settlements – this 
applies to Midsomer Norton, Radstock, Westfield, Peasedown St. John and Paulton (see Appendix 1)
HG.6  
Residential 
development in R.3 settlements
HG.7  
Minimum residential 
density
HG.10  
Housing outside 
settlements (agricultural and other essential dwellings)
HG.11  
Extending existing 
residential curtilages
Appendix 2:  
Saved Local Plan Policies
The following saved policies from the Bath & North East Somerset Local Plan 2007 will continue to be used in conjunction with policies in the Core Strategy and the Joint Waste Core Strategy until replaced through the Local Development Framework.Appendices and Glossary
186
HG.12  
Dwelling subdivision, 
conversion of non-residential buildings, re-use of buildings for multiple occupation & re-use of empty dwellings
HG.13  
Retention of existing 
housing stock
HG.14  
Replacement dwellingsHG.14A  
Residential mooringsHG.15  
Dwelling extensions in 
the Green Belt
WM.4  
Waste recovery and 
recycling in new development
WM.9  
Community 
composting facilities
GDS.1  
Site allocations and 
development requirements
BATH  
Site B1  
Bath Western RiversideSite B2  
MoD FoxhillSite B7  
89 to 123 Englishcombe 
Lane
Site B11  
University of BathSite B12   
Lower Bristol RoadSite B14  
St Mary's SchoolSite B16  
The Podium/
Cattlemarket
Site B18  
Hayesfield School 
Playing Field, Odd Down
KEYNSHAM  
Site K1  
SomerdaleSite K2  
South West KeynshamSite K3  
Broadmead LaneSite K4  
St Johns CourtNORTON-RADSTOCK  
Site NR2  
Radstock Railway LandSite NR3  
Former Sewage worksSite NR12  
Midsomer Norton 
Enterprise Park
Site NR13  
Coomb End, RadstockSite NR14  
Welton Bag Factory, 
Midsomer Norton
Site NR15  
Land at Cautletts CloseVILLAGES  
Site V3  
Paulton Printing FactorySite V4  
Old MillsSite V8  
Former Radford Retail 
System's Site, Chew Stoke
Site V10  
Land between Wellow 
Lane and the Bypass, Peasedown St John
GB.2  
Visual Amenities of the 
Green Belt
GB.3  
Major Existing 
Developed SitesNE.1 
Landscape Character
NE.2  
Areas of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty
NE.3  
Important hillsides 
(Bath and Radstock)
NE.4  
Trees & woodland 
conservation
NE.5  
Forest of AvonNE.8  
Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest
NE.9  
Locally important 
wildlife sites
NE.10  
Nationally important 
species and habitats
NE.11  
Locally important 
species & habitats
NE.12  
Natural features: 
retention, new provision and management
NE.13  
Water source protection 
areasNE.13A  
Bath Hot Springs
NE.15  
Character, amenity and 
wildlife value of water courses
BH.2  
Listed buildings and 
their settings
BH.3  
Demolition of a listed 
building
BH.4  
Change of use of a listed 
building
BH.5  
Locally Important 
Buildings
BH.6  
Development within/ 
affecting Conservation Areas
BH.7  
Demolition in 
Conservation Areas
BH.8  
Improvement work in 
Conservation Areas
BH.9  
Parks and Gardens of 
Special Historic InterestBH.11  
Scheduled Ancient Monuments & other sites of national importance
BH.12  
Important 
archaeological remains
BH.13  
Significant 
archaeological remains in Bath
BH.14  
Historic battlefieldsBH.15  
Visually important open 
spaces
BH.16  
Village buffersBH.17  
Advertisement consentBH.18  
Advertisement 
hoardings, panels and posters
BH.19  
Shopfronts: new or 
replacement or alterations to existing
BH.20  
Traditional shopfronts: 
alteration or replacement
Appendix 2:  
Saved Local Plan Policies
ContinuedBH.21  
Security fittings to retail 
and commercial premises
BH.22  
External lightingM.1 
General policy on 
minerals development
M.2 
Non-mineral development in minerals consultation areas
M.4 
Secondary and recycled 
aggregates
M.6 
Primary aggregatesM.7 
Mineral development 
outside Preferred Areas of Search
M.8 
Minerals development and protection of the environment and amenities
M.9 
Minerals development 
and impact on traffic and highwaysM.10  
Reclamation, restoration and aftercare
M.11 
Allocation of preferred 
areas for mineral extraction and area of search
M.12 
Minerals restoration siteT.1 
Overarching access 
policy
T.3 
Promotion of walking 
and use of public transport
T.5 
Cycling Strategy: 
improved facilities
T.6 
Cycling Strategy:  
cycle parkingT.7 
Cycling Strategy: 
strategic cycling network
T.8 
Bus strategy: facilities & 
traffic management to improve efficiency & reliability of bus operationsT.9 
Railways: safeguarding of existing network  
and use of former railway land
T.10 
Railways: new station 
and retention of freight facilities
T.11 
Rapid Transport SystemT.12 
Public transport 
interchange
T.13 
Traffic management 
proposals for City and Town Centres
T.14 
Introduction of traffic 
management schemes in residential areas
T.15 
Introduction of traffic 
management schemes in Rural Areas
T.16 
Development of 
transport infrastructure
T.17 
Land safeguarded for 
major road improvement schemesT.18 
Public off-street car parking in Bath City Centre
T.19 
On-street parking in 
and close to central Bath
T.20 
Loss and provision of 
off-street parking and servicing
T.22 
Additional Park & Ride 
facilities
T.23 
Airport/Aerodrome 
Safeguarding Areas
T.24 
General development 
control and access policy
T.25 
Transport assessments 
and travel plans
T.26 
On-site parking and 
servicing provisionThe following Local Plan policies have been superseded by the Joint Waste Core Strategy adopted in March 2011:  
WM.1  
Development of waste management facilities 
WM.3  
Waste reduction and 
the reuse in development proposals
WM.5  
Waste transfer stations 
and material recovery facilities
WM.6  
Recovery of materials 
from waste brought to landfill
WM.7  
Household waste 
recycling centres 
WM.8  
Composting facilitiesWM.10  
Thermal treatment with 
energy recovery
WM.12  
LandfillWM.13  
Landraising WM.14  
Agricultural land 
improvement schemes 
WM.15  
Time extensions for 
landfill, landscaping or agricultural land improvement schemesAppendices and Glossary
188
Appendix 3:  
Policies Map Revisions  
Bath City Centre BoundaryAppendix 3:  
Policies Map Revisions  
Bath Central Area
Appendix 3:  
Policies Map Revisions  
Enterprise Area
Appendices and Glossary
190
Appendix 3:  
Policies Map Revisions  
Geographic two-way Split for Affordable Housing
(shown at a reduced scale for the purposes of  
inclusion in this document)Appendix 3:  
Policies Map Revisions  
Strategic Site Allocation for Land adjoining  
Odd Down, Bath and the revised detailed  
Green Belt boundary
KEY
30% Target
40% Target
District Boundary
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
KEY
Green Belt
Strategic Site Allocation
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
Appendix 3:  
Policies Map Revisions  
Strategic Site Allocation for Land adjoining 
East Keynsham and the revised detailed Green Belt boundary and safeguarded land
KEY
Green Belt
Strategic Site Allocation
   Safeguarded Land
Housing Development 
Boundary
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved  
(100023334) (2010)
Appendices and Glossary
192
Appendix 3:  
Policies Map Revisions  
Strategic Site Allocation for Land adjoining  
South West Keynsham and the revised detailed 
Green Belt boundary
KEY
Green Belt
Strategic Site AllocationHousing Development Boundary
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved (100023334) (2010)
Appendix 3:  
Policies Map Revisions  
Strategic Site Allocation for Land at Whitchurch 
and the revised detailed Green Belt boundary
KEY
Green Belt
Strategic Site AllocationHousing Development Boundary
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved (100023334) (2010)
Appendices and Glossary
194
Affordable Housing (AH) 
Housing that meets the needs of households whose income does not allow them to rent or buy at prevailing local market prices. It can include social rented housing i.e. rented housing owned and managed by local authorities or Registered Social landlords for which guideline target rents are determined through the national rent regime or intermediate housing where housing prices and rents are above social rent but below market prices or rents.
Aggregates
Sand, gravel, crushed rock and other bulk materials which are suitable for use in the construction industry as concrete, mortar, finishes or roadstone or for use as a constructional fill or railway ballast.
‘Anchor Loads’
A relatively large heat load that requires heat more or less continuously. It particularly helps  
to run the district heating  
system efficiently.
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR)
Part of the Local Development Framework, the Annual Monitoring Report will assess the implementation of the Local Development Scheme and the extent to which policies in Local Development documents are being successfully implemented.Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)An area of countryside considered  
to have significant landscape value. The primary purpose of the AONB designation is to conserve and enhance the natural beauty of the landscape, with two secondary aims: meeting the need for quiet enjoyment of the country side and have regard for the interest of those who live and work there. AONBs are created under the same legislation as National Parks and the Government has recently stated that AONBs and National Parks have equal status when it comes to planning consent and  
other sensitive issues.
Accessibility
The ease with which a building, place or facility can be reached by people and/or goods and services.Allowable SolutionsTo comply with the 2016 Building Regulations new zero carbon homes will need to account for the carbon emissions that are not expected to be achieved on site. This can be achieved through ‘Allowable Solutions’ where the developer will make a payment  
to an Allowable Solutions provider, who will take the responsibility and liability for ensuring that Allowable Solutions, which may be small, medium or large scale carbon-saving projects, deliver the required emissions reductions. Some local authority areas have Allowable Solutions policies attached to local energy requirements, which is an approach being considered by Bath and North East Somerset Council. 
Biodiversity
Biodiversity includes all species of 
plants and animals, their genetic variation and the ecosystems of  
which they are a part.
Biomass
Material that is derived from living or recently living biological organisms.  
In the energy context it is often used to refer to plant material, however, by-products and waste from livestock farming, food processing and preparation and domestic organic waste, can all form sources of biomass. With such a wide range of material potentially described as biomass, the range of methods to process it must be equally broad.Brownfield land or siteBrownfield land/site or previously developed land is that which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of the developed land and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. 
The definition includes defence 
buildings, but excludes: 
• Land that is or has been occupied  
by agricultural or forestry buildings. 
• Land that has been developed for 
minerals extraction or waste disposal by landfill purposes where provision for restoration has been made through development control procedures 
• Land in built-up areas such as private residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments, which, although it may feature paths, pavilions and other buildings, has  
not been previously developed. 
• Land that was previously-developed but where the remains of the permanent structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the landscape in the process of time (to the extent that it can reasonably be considered as part of the natural surroundings).
There is no presumption that land that is previously-developed is necessarily suitable for housing development nor that the whole of the curtilage should be developed. 
GlossaryPreviously-developed land may  
occur in both built-up and rural 
settings. In the sequential approach this is preferable to greenfield land.
Code for Sustainable Homes (CSH)
The Code for Sustainable Homes (CSH) aims to achieve a step-change in environmental performance of new UK homes. The code is targeted at architects, homes designers and builders of new homes. It covers water use, waste generation, and the use of low-polluting materials and processes.
Combined Heat and Power (CHP)
A system in which the heat associated with electricity generation is also used for space heating or process heat. In this way the overall efficiency of the process in terms of the proportion of the energy in the biomass fuel that is made use of is increased considerably. Also known as co-generation.
Community Strategy
Prepared by a Local Strategic Partnership to co-ordinate the actions of local organisations within the public, private, voluntary and community sectors with the aim of improving the social, environmental and economic well-being of its area.
Conservation Area
An area of special architectural and/or historical interest, the character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance.Cordon SanitaireA zone where no development will take place.
Core Strategy
The long-term spatial vision and 
strategy for the area, including the  
key strategic policies and proposals  
to deliver that vision.
Decentralised energy
Producing energy on a local scale away from the conventional large scale power plant production process.
Demographic
The study of the characteristics of human populations, such as size, growth, density, distribution, and  
vital statistics.
Developer Contributions
Contributions from development proposals towards the provision of infrastructure or services necessary  
to serve the development. This is  
now commonly a standard planning requirement which is typically secured by legal agreements. Contributions may be either financial or by direct provision of works or land by the developer towards facilities such as schools, affordable housing and transport improvement etc. Often referred to as Planning Obligations  
or Section 106 Agreements.Development Plan Document (DPD)Spatial planning documents that are subject to independent examination, and together with the relevant Regional Spatial Strategy, will form the development plan for a local authority area for the purposes of the Act. They can include a Core Strategy, Site Specific Allocations of land, and Area Action Plans (where needed) and other Development Plan Documents. They will all be shown geographically on an adopted Policies Map. Each authority must set out the programme for preparing its Development Plan Documents in the Local Development Scheme.
District-wide
A term applying to the whole of Bath & 
North East Somerset.
Flood Plains
Flood plains are generally flat-lying areas adjacent to a watercourse, tidal lengths of a river or the sea where water flows in times of flood or would flow but for the presence of flood defences where they exist.
Geodiversity
Incorporates all the variety of rocks, minerals and landforms and the processes that have formed these features throughout geological time.Geothermal heatGeothermal energy is that produced naturally by the earth. In the form of steam or of water, this energy can be harnessed to warm up buildings or as a power supply and, since such heat is produced on a continual basis, it is considered a type of renewable energy. Greenfield land or site Land which has not been developed before or land where evidence of previous development has gone. Applies to most sites outside built-up area boundaries.
Green Belt
Areas of land where development is particularly tightly controlled. The purposes of Green Belt are to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas; to prevent neighbouring towns from merging into one another; to assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment; to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns; and to assist in urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban land.Appendices and Glossary
196
Glossary
Continued
Green Infrastructure
The network of protected sites, nature reserves, greenspaces and greenway linkages. The linkages include river corridors, waterways and flood plains, migration routes and features of the landscape which are important as wildlife corridors. Green infrastructure should provide for multi-functional uses i.e. wildlife, recreational and cultural experience, as well as delivering ecological services such  
as flood protection and microclimate control. It should also operate at all scales from urban centres through to open countryside.
Heritage Asset 
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape positively identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in planning 
decisions. Heritage assets are the 
valued components of the historic environment. They include designated heritage assets and assets identified by the local planning authority during the process of decision-making or through the plan-making process (including local listing).Higher Value AddedMore productive businesses, sometimes called "high value" businesses, demonstrate more competitive advantage. They normally tend to use specialist knowledge, efficient processes and less materials which produce more value. These types of businesses can compete not only on a local scale, but on a national and international scale. That is, generally speaking they can bring in income from outside any area, and are not dependent on indigenous trade alone. A healthy economy therefore relies on having the right amount of higher-value, competitive activities in it.
Historic environment
The historic environment is all designated and non-designated 
features of historic, architectural, 
archaeological or artistic interest. This includes World Heritage Sites, listed buildings, conservation areas, historic parks and gardens, and scheduled monuments. It also includes their settings; the wider urban and rural landscape and the potential for unrecorded archaeology.
HMOs
Houses in Multiple Occupation – dwelling occupied by three or more people who form two or more households.InfillingThe filling of small gaps within existing development e.g. the building of one or two houses on a small vacant plot  
in an otherwise extensively built up frontage. The plot will generally be surrounded on at least three sides  
by developed sites or roads.
Infrastructure
A collective term for services such  
as roads, electricity, sewerage, water, children's services, health facilities  
and recycling and refuse facilities.
Intermediate housing  
Intermediate housing is submarket 
housing which is above target rents but below open market levels. This includes various forms of shared ownership housing, key worker housing and submarket rent provision.
Local Development Framework 
(LDF)The name for the portfolio of Local Development Documents that provides the framework for delivering the spatial strategy of the area. It consists of the Development Plan documents, a Statement of Community Involvement, the Local Development Scheme, and the Annual Monitoring Report.
Local Development Document (LDD)
Collective term for Development Plan Documents, Supplementary Planning Documents and the Statement of Community Involvement.Local Development Scheme (LDS)Sets out the programme for preparing Local Development Documents.
Local Strategic Partnership (LSP)
A local partnership of businesses, voluntary organisations, community groups and public organisations charged by central Government with the statutory duty to prepare a community strategy for a particular locality. Underpinning and supporting the LSP are various thematic partnerships such as the Crime and Disorder Reduction Partnership and children's trust, which are responsible for tackling specific agendas and delivering service improvements.
Local Transport Plan (LTP)
5 year strategy prepared by each  
local authority for the development of local, integrated transport, supported by a programme of transport improvements. It is used to bid to Government for funding transport improvements.
Low carbon economy
A concept that refers to an economy which has a minimal output of Greenhouse Gas emissions into the biosphere, but specifically refers to the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide.Masterplan
A document outlining the use of land and the overall approach to the design and layout of a development scheme in order to provide detailed guidance for subsequent planning applications.
Mitigation
Measures which are put in place to reduce or minimise the impact of a proposed action.
Mixed use developments
Developments that include a mixture of more than one of the following: housing, employment, leisure, shopping and community facilities.
Natura 2000 (NK2)
An ecological network of marine and terrestrial areas of international importance designed to conserve natural habitats and species of plants and animals that are rare, endangered or vulnerable in the context of the European Community designated under the Birds Directive (Special Protection Areas, SPAs) and the Habitats Directive (Sites of Community Importance, SCIs, and Special Areas of Conservation, SACs).
National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF)Document which set out the government's planning policies for England and how they are expected  
to be applied.Previously developed landSee brownfield land or site.
Primary Frontages (or Primary 
Shopping Frontages)Primary frontages include a high proportion of retail uses. They are defined on the Policies Map. 
Primary shopping area 
An area where retailing and the number of shops in a town centre  
is most concentrated.
Priority Species  
Priority species are those which  
are rare, threatened or declining in 
distribution and/or number.
Policies Map
The Policies Map (formerly the Proposals Map) illustrates geographically the policies and proposals in the Development Plan Documents (DPD) on an Ordnance Survey map. Inset Maps show policies and proposals for specific parts of the District. It will need to be revised each time a new DPD is adopted.
Public Realm
All space to which the public has  
ready physical and visual access.
Regeneration
The process of upgrading an area through social, economic and infrastructure investment and improvement.Renewable energyEnergy generated from the sun,  
the wind, hydro power and plant material (biomass).
Rural Exception Site
Sites solely for the development of affordable housing on land within or adjoining existing small rural communities, which would not otherwise be released for general market housing.
Safeguarded Land
A greenfield site not allocated for development but excluded from the Green Belt to provide for development needs beyond the Plan period.
Scheduled Ancient Monument
A nationally important archaeological site or historic building, given protection against unauthorised change, as defined in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological  
Areas Act 1979. 
Sequential Test 
The NPPF advocates that planners  
use a sequential test when considering land allocations for development to avoid flood risk where possible. The risk of flooding to the site should be assessed and the land should be classified into the appropriate flood zone (1 Flood zones and 2 Flood Risk Vulnerability Classification of the Technical Guidance to the NPPF).Secondary Frontages (or Secondary Shopping Frontages)A shopping area, secondary to the primary shopping frontage that provides greater opportunities for  
a diversity of uses.
Settlement
Collective term for towns, villages  
and hamlets.
Site Allocations
Allocation of sites for specific or mixed uses or development to be contained in Development Plan Documents. Policies will identify any specific requirements for individual proposals.
Site Size Threshold (Affordable 
Housing)The minimum number of affordable 
homes that can be provided on a site 
provided there is robust evidence justifying both the need for affordable housing and the threshold. Whether  
or not affordable housing should be provided, and if so how much,  
will depend on the particular circumstances of each case, taking into account for instance viability.
Smart Growth
Growth that promotes a higher value added economy rather than relying on volume growth.Appendices and Glossary
198
Glossary
Continued
Social rented housing
Housing which is available to rent at below market levels. Lower rents are possible because the Government subsidises local authorities and registered social landlords in order to meet local affordable housing needs.
Spatial
Relating to changes in the distribution of activities in space and the linkages between them in terms of the use and development of land.
Spatial Vision
A description of how the area will be changed by future planning through the Core Strategy.
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA)The SFRA is a high-level assessment of the flood risk and provides essential information for the allocation of land for development and the control of development in order to limit flood risk to people and property where possible and manage it elsewhere. It provides the information needed to apply the sequential risk-based approach required in the NPPF.
Strategic Housing Land Availability 
Assessment (SHLAA)A study intended to assess overall potential for housing development in an area, including the identification of specific housing sites with development potential over a 15 year time span.Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)A study intended to review the existing housing market in an area, consider the nature of future need for market and affordable housing and to inform policy development.
Strategic Objectives
Spatial Objectives describe the outcome to be achieved through the Core Strategy in order to realise the Spatial Vision.
Spatial Planning
Spatial planning goes beyond traditional land use planning to bring together and integrate policies for the development and use of land with other policies and programmes which influence the nature of places and how they function. This will include policies which can impact on land use, for example, by influencing the demands on or needs for development, but which are not capable of being delivered solely or mainly through the granting of planning permission and may be delivered through other means.
Stakeholders
Groups, individuals or organisations which may be affected by or have a key interest in a development proposal or planning policy. They may often be experts in their field or represent the views of many people.Statement of Community Involvement (SCI)The Statement of Community Involvement (SCI) sets out the approach of the authority to involving local communities in the preparation, alteration and review of Local Development Documents and in the consideration of planning applications.
Supplementary Planning Document 
(SPD)Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) provide additional detail to show how policies in Development Plan documents should be implemented. This may include Design Guides, Development Briefs and topic based papers. SPDs are not subject to independent examination; however, community involvement in their preparation will be important. These documents will also be taken into account in planning decisions.
Surface Water Run-off
When rain water lands on a surface, depending on how porous the surface is, will result in the amount of surface water run-off. Minimal surface water run-off helps reduce flooding and strains on existing drainage systems. Reduce surface water run off can be reduced through methods such Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) and Green Roofs.Sustainable communities'Sustainable communities meet the diverse needs of existing and future residents, their children and other users, contribute to a high quality of life and provide opportunity and choice. They achieve this in ways that make effective use of natural resources, enhance the environment, promote social cohesion and inclusion and strengthen economic prosperity.' (Source: The Egan Review, ODPM, 2004)
Sustainable construction
Sustainable construction is the name given to building in an energy efficient way. The incorporation of many new technologies and energy saving techniques into a building can dramatically reduce the CO2 emissions and carbon foot print of a 
building. Initiatives include grey water 
recycling systems, solar panels, home recycling, wind turbines and ground water heating systems.Sustainability Appraisal (SA)/
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)A systematic and iterative appraisal process, incorporating the requirements of the Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive. The purpose of sustainability appraisal is to appraise the social, environmental and economic effects of the strategies and policies in a local development document from the outset of the preparation process. This will ensure that decisions are made that accord with sustainable development.
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems 
(SUDS)Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) are concerned primarily with the drainage of rainwater from developed or urban areas, often involving rainwater re-use.
Urban Design
The art of making places. It involves the design of buildings, groups of buildings, frameworks and processes, which facilitate successful development. Valued HabitatsValued habitats are defined as habitats of principle importance (defined by Section 74(2) of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000), ancient woodland (woodland that has been in continuous existence since at least 1600 AD [DEFRA, 2005]) and aged or veteran trees  
(a tree that is of interest biologically, culturally or aesthetically because of its age, size or condition [Veteran Tree Initiative, 2000]). 
Viability Study (affordable housing)  
Up-to-date assessment of the financial 
implications of the level of affordable housing that can be delivered without having an adverse impact on scheme.
World Heritage Site
A cultural or natural site of outstanding value inscribed on the UNESCO (United National Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation) List. The City of Bath was inscribed on the List in 1987.