 
 
  
 
LOCAL PLAN 2040  
PLAN FOR SUBMISSION  
April 2022  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
1 Contents   
 
1.0 Introduction  
 2 
2.0 Vision and objectives  
 11 
3.0 Climate Change  
 17 
4.0 Spatial strategy and Site allocations  
 22 
5.0 Town centre and retail policies  
 84 
6.0 Development management policies  
 95 
  
  
  
Appendices  
APPENDIX 1  Status of Development P lan policies     116 
APPENDIX 2  Monitoring and review       128 
APPENDIX 3  Opportunity sites       129 
APPENDIX 4   Affordable housing commuted sum     131 
APPENDIX 5   Non-designated heritage assets     133 
APPENDIX 6   Glossary        137 
 
   
2 1.0 Introduction  
 
Background  
1.1 Bedford Borough Council (the Council) has an up to date local plan that makes provision for growth to 2030. Normally local 
plans are reviewed eve ry five years but this update was  required sooner with the intention that it would  reflect emerging 
national policies for the Oxford to Cambridge Arc  (the Arc) .  
 
1.2 Policy 1  of the Local Plan 2030 required that the review was  progressed swiftly, with the submission of the plan to 
government  for examination by January 20 23 to avoid local plan policies being  deemed to be ‘out of date’  in the same way 
as they would be if the Cou ncil was  unable to show a five year supply of housing land . In those circumstances  local con trol 
over where development happens would be much reduced.  
 
1.3 The timetable set for the Council’s plan review was challenging before the Covid -19 pandemic began, but the change in 
working practices and limitations placed on the Council’s staff, partner organisations and the Council’s consultants over the  
past two years has meant that keeping on -track has been extremely difficult. Progress has been slowed as a result of  the 
switch to remote working, restrictions on site visits (especially during the first half of 2020) and depleted staff resources  
across the Council and within other agencies.  
 
1.4 Nevertheless,  two consultations have taken place as scheduled; a first ‘Issues and Options ’ cons ultation  during summer 
2020  and a ‘Draft Plan: Strategy options and draft policies ’ consultation  during summer 2021 . The responses to th ose 
consultation s have informed the policies in this plan .  
 
National context  and plan period  
1.5 National Policy requires that strategic policies in local plans should look ahead over a minimum of 15 years from adoption1. 
With adoption planned for late 2023, the shortest end -date for this plan would be 2038. A longer timescale would have the 
advantage o f giving ce rtainty for a longer period but  as is explained in the paragraphs below, many important strategic 
decisions that will affect the scale and form of growth in and close to Bedford Borough  in the medium and longer term are 
                                                           
1 NPPF 2021 Para 22. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1005759/NPPF_July_2021. pdf  
3 likely to be made in the next few years. As a result, and having considered the Issues and Options consultation responses, 
the Council’s view is that 2020 – 2040 is an appropriate time period for this plan.  With a requirement now for five -yearly 
local pla n reviews there will be sufficient opportunity to plan beyond 2040 once the regional planning context is clearer.  
 
1.6 The government ’s ambition for the Arc is well -reported. In the document ‘The Oxford -Cambridge Arc Government ambition 
and joint declaration between Government and local partners’ (2019)2 lead Ministers recognise d the existing qualities of the 
location and its potential to attract additional higher quality jobs for existing and new communities. They promote d a long 
term view to 2050 and beyond, and commit ted to embedding ‘natural capital’ thinking throughout the government ’s approach 
to growth  across the Arc.  
 
1.7 The declaration itself is silent on housing numbers. It recognises that the Arc is first and foremost an area of significant 
economic strength and opportunity, and through the joint declaration the partners (including the then 43 local authorities 
across the Arc) set out to meet the Arc’s full economic potential for the benefit of existing and future local communities an d 
busine sses, and in the national interest. There was acknowledgement that to achieve this would  demand collective 
determination over the long -term to deliver homes across the Arc  of the right quality and in the right places to meet its needs ; 
also, that this might include the expansion of existing as well as the development of new settlements.  
 
1.8 It will require long -term commitments to provide the necessary enabling infrastructure  ahead of the arrival of new 
communities, and to meet economic and hou sing ambitions whil st overall improving rather than degrading the environment 
in the Arc, in line with commitments in the government’s 25 Year Environment Plan3. 
 
1.9 In February 2021 the g overnment published a policy paper entitled ‘Planning  for sustainable growth in the Oxford  – 
Cambridge Arc: an introduction to the spatial f ramework’4. It explains why the g overnment is committed to developing a 
spatial framework for the Arc; what it will mean for growth, spatial planning and infrastructure provision in the area,  and how 
government will work with communities and local partners to develop it. The intention is to ‘…develop a long -term Spatial 
Framework for the Arc that will support better spatial planning, provide a blueprint for better -targete d public investment, give 
investors and businesses greater long -term certainty over growth plans, and allow communities to shape the long -term 
                                                           
2 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/799993/OxCam _Arc_Ambition.pdf  
3 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_da ta/file/693158/25 -year -environment -plan.pdf  
 
4 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/planning -for-sustainable -grow th-in-the-oxford -cambridge -arc-spatial -framework   
4 future of places across the region. The nature and content of the Spatial Framework will be subject to the outcom e of both 
detailed consultation and sustainability appraisal’ (para 2.1).  
 
1.10 A first consultation paper ‘Creating a vision for the Oxford – Cambridge Arc’ was published in July 20215. Government 
invited views to help create a vision for the spatial framework, and in doing so guide the future growth of the area to 2050.  
Views were also sought on the initial work done to scope the sustainability appraisal. Confirmation is given in the 
consultation p aper that the spatial framework will form national planning and transport policy for the Arc area and local 
planning and transport authoritie s will need to have regard to it  when preparing local development plans and local transport 
plans. In addition, the  spatial framework will be capable of being a material consideration in the determination of planning 
applications.  
 
1.11 Along with  the Central Bedfordshire, Luton  Borough , Milton Keynes , West North amptonshire and North Northamptonshire  
councils , Bedford Bor ough Council is a member of the  Arc’s Central Area Growth Board. The Board was set up to 
demonst rate to government that together the authorities are committed to working more closely to deliver a step change in 
sub-regional collaboration. The Growth Board allows the area to speak with one voice to government on cross -boundary 
issues and matters of sub -regional importance in order to achieve the best outcomes for the people served by those 
councils.  
 
1.12 Figure 1 below shows the geography of the Arc.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
5 https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/creating -a-vision -for-the-oxford -cambridge -arc  
5 Figure 1: The Oxford – Cambridge Arc  
6 
 
1.13 The timetable for the  production of the Arc Spatial F ramework has changed over recent years. In 2019 when the 
examination of the Local Plan 2030 was taking place, the government’s intention was to  progress an engagement exercise 
in Summer 2019  to kick start the p rocess. It was on the  understanding  that swift progress would be made with this 
                                                           
6 Diagr am taken from the document Planning for sustainable growth in the Oxford Cambridge Arc -an introduction to the spatial framework , and CAGB added.  
 
6 framework that the Inspectors recommended , and the Council agreed to , the new Policy 1 and the timetabl e for the local 
plan review. A quickly update d local plan would provide detailed policies to deliver the principles set out in the overarching 
strategy.  
 
1.14 No engagement  took place in  2019 and inevitably the onset  of the Covid 19 pandemic led to further timetable delays.   
 
1.15 In response to this , and in order to create a more joined up and legible process , some local authorities in the Arc have 
adjusted their local plan review  timetables so that local plan  activity fol lows the completion of the spatial f ramework .  
Government , however , has urged Councils in the Arc to carry on with plan -making and , in Bedfo rd Borough ’s case, the 
consequences of not doing so could be significant for the reasons relating to policies becoming “out of date” described 
above ; so local plan  work in Bedford Borough  continued.   
 
1.16 Whilst this local plan has emerged  alongside  rather than after  the development of the Arc Spatial Framework , it shares many 
of the overarching principles relating to a focus on climate change, economic growth and the natural environment.  
 
1.17 A review of business space has informed the allocation of ne w employment land in order to support the expansion of existing 
businesses and to attract inward investment. Where housing growth is concerned, as a result of existing commitments 
(including those made and to be made in neighbourhood plans) and new allocat ions made in this plan, the Council will make 
provision for significantly more homes as described in the Arc joint declaration. It will do this as a result of government’s  new 
standard method for calculating housing need , which it will deliver in full , and which results in  an uplift of 40% when 
compared to the locally -calculated housing growth planned for in the Local Plan 2030 , and by allocating sites that will 
continue to build out beyond the 2040 plan end date.    
 
1.18 The natural environment and the need to deliver on climate change are high on the agenda when it comes to ambitions for 
the Arc. The Arc Environment Working Group was set up to take forward the environmental pillar outlined in the joint 
declaration .  
 
1.19 To do this, the Arc authorities have develop ed a set of environmental principles which each authority has endorsed7. The 
Council considered and endorsed the principles in June 2021, alongside a report on the draft Local Plan 2040. The five 
overarching principles are:  
                                                           
7 Shared regional principles for protecting, restoring and enhancing the environment in the Oxford -Cambridge Arc   
7  to target net zero carbon at a p an-Arc level by 2040;  
 to protect, restore, enhance and create new nature areas and natural capital assets, including nationally and locally 
designated wildlife sites and priority habitats through the implementation of the spatial planning mitigation hierar chy of 
“avoid, mitigate, compensate and gain”;  
 to be an exemplar for environmentally sustainable development, in line with the ambitions set out in the government’s 25 
Year Plan. This will incorporate a systems -based and integrated assessment and implement ation approach. We will aim 
to go beyond the minimum legislated requirements for development;  
 to ensure that existing and new communities see real benefits from living in the Arc;  
 to use natural resources wisely.  
 
1.20 The next step for the group is to put in place an Arc Environment Strategy, and both the principles and the strategy when it is 
in place will help to support the strengthening of policies in local plans.  
 
1.21 For the Local Plan 2040 this work has underpinned a new policy seeking to achieve environmental net gain as well as 
biodiversity net gain, in order to help deliver the ambitions in the government’s 25 Year Environment Plan8.  
 
1.22 Similarly , important is the need  to tie this agenda to the economic vision for the Arc .  This linkage is  set out within the Oxford 
– Cambridge Arc Economic Prospectus 20209: 
 
“By 2050, the Arc will be a world leading place for high -value growth, innovation and productivity. A global hub where ideas 
and companies are generated and thrive, home to exemplary models of 21st Century development, with a high -quality 
environment and outstanding quality of life, and with a strong economic focus that drives inclusive clean growth.”  
1.23 Delivery of other national projects also ha s a bearing on t his plan  and its success . Foremost amongst these is East West 
Rail (EWR) , a new railway connection between Oxford , Bedford  and Cambridge. This is a major infrastructure project to 
deliver much needed connecti ons between these communities and places further  afield , linking people with job opportunities, 
new homes and economic hubs both locally and across the UK.  
 
1.24 It is being introduced in three stages.  
 Stage One is from Oxford to Bletchley / Milton Keynes.  
                                                           
8 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/25 -year -environment -plan  
9 https://www.semlep.com/oxford -cambridge -arc/  
8  Stage Two will extend that service to Bedford  
 Stage Three will connect Oxford all the way to Cambridge.   
 
1.25 The track between Oxford and Bicester is already complete and the next part from Bicester to Bletchley is underway.  The 
section to Bedford involves refurbishing existing lines and is expected to follow on from Stage One .  
 
1.26 The last stage from Bedford to Cambridge is more challenging because it will involve the construction of a completely new 
stretch of track from  Bedford north towards Sandy / St Neots and Cambourne, then on to Cambridge. As this local plan is 
being prepared, no detailed route alignment between Bedford and St Neots has been chosen, though consultation has taken 
place  and t he feedback is being reviewed by the East West Rail Company before a decision is made  by central government .  
 
1.27 A brand new rail station will be provided in the area between Sandy and  St Neots where the EWR route crosses the East 
Coast Main  Line, and a new station will be provided on the Marston Vale Line between Stewartby and Kempston Hardwick .  
Bedford Midland Sta tion will also be refurbished, supporting regeneration in the centre of Bedford.   
 
1.28 The full route to Cambridge is expected to be operational b y 2030.  
 
1.29 Another significant infrastructure project is the upgrade of the road route between the Black Cat Rounda bout (A421  / A1 
junction) and the Caxton Gibbet roundabout on the A428. This will involve the building of a new 10 mile dual carriageway 
and a number of junction improvements, including the Black Cat  on the A1 . National Highways explain that ‘the scheme wi ll 
improve journeys between Milton Keynes and Cambridge, bringing communities together and supporting long term growth in 
the region’10. These works will be complete by 2026 . 
 
 
Neighbourhood planning  
1.30 Several of the borough’s parish councils have already played a signif icant role in progressing  commi tments for housing 
growth in  the first part of the period  covered by this plan . Given the opportunity back in 2017, ten local communities  chose to 
prepare neighbourhood plans and make their own allocations for development in accordance with requirements in the Local 
Plan 2030. Despite the challenges presented by Covid -19, all have  submitted their neighbourhood plans to the Council  and 
                                                           
10 https://nationalhighways.co.uk/our -work/a428 -black -cat-to-caxton -gibbet/   
9 as of  April 2022 nine of the ten are now formally ‘made’ . A number of other villages have also taken the opportunity to 
prepare neighbourhood plans, even though they had not been given an allocation.  
 
1.31 In total , the ‘made ’ neighbourhood plans will deliver around 2,381  dwellings  during the 2020 -2040 period . This contribution is 
acknowledged and taken into account as the local pla n strategy is rolled on to 2040. The following table shows the estimated 
number of dwellings allocated in ‘made’ and emerging neigh bourhood plans at the time the plan was prepared (April 2022).  
 
Table 1  
Parish  Dwellings allocated  
Carlton and Chellington  32 
Oakley  40 
Bromham  500 
Thurleigh  30 
Bletsoe  11 
Stevington  None  
Clapham  500 
Great Barford  500 
Sharnbrook  500 
Harrold  25 
Milton Ernest  25 
Turvey  50 
Willington  50 
Wootton  105 
Felmersham and Radwell  13 
Odell  None  
Wilshamstead  None  
 
1.32 As has already been the case, in future , communities may decide to make neighbourhood plans and allocate development 
sites even though the local plan strategy doesn’t require growth to be located there. Should this continue to happen, it will  
add choice and flexibility on top of allocations made in the development plan . 
  
10 1.33 We will continue to encourage groups to prepare neighbourhood plans and to support and work with local councils in a 
joined -up way to make sure that local and neighbourhood plans work together to support planning at the local leve l. 
 
Summary  
1.34 Whilst there remain many uncertainties about planning for our borough area as a result of the emerging Oxford to 
Cambridge Arc Spatial Fr amework, the selection of a detailed route  for  EWR and indeed the timing of the introduction of a 
new national planning sy stem following consultation by g overnment on the ‘Planning for the Future ’ White Paper11, this local 
plan has been progressed so that  the Council and local communities can  maintain control through their planning policies 
over where and w hen new development takes place.   
 
 
  
                                                           
11 https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/planning -for-the-future  
  
11 2.0 Vision and o bjectives   
 
2.1 The purpose of the vision is to demonstrate the focus and direction of the local plan.  
 
 
By the end of the plan period:  
 
The borough will have become a greener, more sustainable, more attractive and prosperous place to live  and work . Tackling climate 
change and ad apting to and mitigating  its effects will be at the heart of new development throughout the borough . 
 
Well-planned growth supported by appropriate infrastructure and avoiding a reas of high flood risk will enable the creation of strong, 
safe and resilient local communities in environments that facilitate healthy and independent living for all. Sustainable deve lopment 
and transport, the use of sustainable and renewable energy tech nology, green infrastructure and new green spaces will all contribute 
to reducing the borough’s carbon footprint and securing a net -gain in  both biodiversity  and environmental quality.  
 
The development of new settlements at Little Barford and Kempston Hard wick will play a primary role in delivering much needed 
housing to 2040 and beyond.  The development at Stewartby Brickworks will be complete, forming a new community on the old 
brickmaking site,  celebrating its heritage.  
 
The development of East West Rail  through Bedford will be complete. Bedford will benefit from a new town centre railway hub with 
direct links to Oxford and Cambridge, increasing connectivity, investment and growth. As a requirement of the planning proces s, 
local development will be well s erved up -front transport links and s peedy internet access. D evelopment of high quality commercial 
and office spaces , greater connectivity  and the completion of significant infrastructure projects  will have a positive impact on the local 
economy attracting high tech employment sectors, creative industries and supporting existing retail centres.  
 
In Bedford town centre a wide range of uses will provide greater variety and a broader visitor experienc e that will make the town 
centre more diverse and sustainable. Improvements to the High Street will make it a more enjoyable place , where local independent 
retailers thrive and people choose to linger. Previously planned vibrant new town neighbourhoods wil l be complete, widening 
housing choices in and close to the town centre, and transforming brownfield sites on the western side of the town and south of the 
river. Additional  town centre living will encourage sustainable methods of travel, enhance the vital ity and viability of the town centre  
12 and support for local businesses.  A regenerated Mayes Yard will bring vacant spaces back into use.  The town centre will be used 
increasingly as a community space, accessible to residents in the town, the borough and bey ond. 
 
Good design will help to improve quality of life and to create safer, vibrant and more sustainable places, both in the urban area of 
Bedford and Kempston and in the surrounding village communities. More walkable neighbourhoods that can include school s, health 
facilities, community halls, green spaces  including allotments  and other services will be in place. The borough’s built heritage and 
wider historic environment will continue to be r espected, protected and enhanced.  
 
Development will be sensitively planned to complement the borough’s natural environment. The borough’s countryside, its intrinsic 
character and beauty including areas of tranquil retreat will be recognised. Rural communities will embrace appropriate 
development, in many insta nces through their own neighbourhood plans. This development will reflect each area’s unique local 
character whilst providing and supporting much needed housing and employment, rural facilities and services, including high s peed 
broadband and public transp ort. Locally important green spaces and valued local landscapes will b e protected and enjoyed by all.  
 
The Embankment and formal Victorian parks in Bedford, along with the River Great Ouse valley and its riverside villages, will  
continue to form the backbo ne of the borough’s rich green and blue infrastructure. There will be new multi -functional green spaces to 
complement and expand the existing network of paths and green corridors. Country parks north of Brickhill, west of Bedford an d in 
the new town centre  neighbourhoods will have matured and along with the Bedford to Milton Keynes Waterway Park will encourage 
healthy lifestyles, tourism and a diverse ecology.  
 
The Forest of Marston Vale will continue to grow and mature, transforming the landscape. Together  with the completed Bedford 
River Valley Park this part of the borough will be transformed through new leisure opportunities, encouraging increased visit or 
numbers.  
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 The following  themes reflect the vision . 
 
   
13 Theme 1 : Greener  – Working towards 
making Bedford  a net zero carbon emissions  
borough whilst improving , enhancing and 
creating green infrastructure and spaces  
Objectives:  
Work towards making Bedford a carbon neutral 
borough   
Deliver high quality growth that  integrates closely 
with the surrounding landscape , facilitating  more 
sustainable and inclusive local communities, which can 
respond  better  to the impacts of climate and economic 
change and offer the opportunity to live healthier  
lifestyles . 
Develop a strong and multi -functional urban and 
rural green infrastructure network  through 
protecting, enhancing, extending and linking 
landscapes, woodland, biodiversity sites, heritage sites, 
green spaces and paths.  
Improve access to green a nd blue infrastructure for the 
enjoyment and health of all.  
Protect and enhance our natural resources  including 
air, soil , minerals and water to minimise the impacts of 
flooding, climate change and pollution.  
Move towards a greener town centre  with enhanced 
connections to the river.  Theme 2 : More accessible  – Encouraging 
sustainable travel as well as taking the opportunities 
offered by strategic infrastructure for greater regional 
and national connectivity  
Objectives:  
Reduce congestion  in the borough , particularly into and 
around the town centre , including  making journeys by public 
transport, walking and cycling more attractive  to encourage an 
increase in more sustainable and healthy modes of transport.   
Improve East -West connectivity and enhance multi -modal 
travel through the construction of the East West Rail line  
routed through Bedford Midland station . Re-introduce faster 
north -south travel.  
Improve “first mile / last mile” local connections to 
strategic infrastructure , allowing for easi er access and 
greater integration  
 
 
 
 
 
  
14 Theme 3 : More prosperous  – Supporting 
new innovative business es, educational and 
employment opportunities  
Objectives:  
Support a stronger local economy by building on the 
strengths of the emerging higher value clusters, to 
become a location for innovative businesses, with a 
strategically important employment site as a local 
innovation hub .   
Allocate land to provide locations for the  delivery of 
high value jobs.  
Create a distinctive, attractive and multi -functio nal 
town  centre for the future , with a focus on leisure, 
culture and visitor economy activities , and high quality 
urban living . 
Deliver the necessary health and social 
infrastructure to increase well -being  in both the 
urban and rural areas of the borough . 
Improve the borough’s transport infrastructure  in 
time to support growth in the local economy and to 
make the borough more attractive as a place to live and 
do business.  
 
 
 Theme 4 : Better places  – Developing high 
quality, well -design ed and beautiful places for all to 
use and enjoy  
Objectives:  
Deliver the level of housing growth required by the 
Government’s standard methodology calculation.  
Support and create a high quality, inclusive and safe built 
environment which promotes healthy living, values and 
enhances local landscape s and settlement character , and 
which conserves and enhances the historic environment to be  
enjoyed by all.  
Encourage the re -use of land that has been previously 
developed  where it is viable and sustainable to do so . 
Provide appropriate amounts and types of housing  to 
meet the needs of the borough’s urban and rural communities 
over the lifetime of the Plan making  the housing stock more 
adaptable and resilient . 
Achieve a borough where everybody has appropriate access 
to high quality health and social care , as well as everyday 
essential services and community facilities , where social 
and cultural wellbeing are supported, enabling all residents to 
lead healthy and independent live s. 
 
  
15 2.3 The interaction between themes and objectives is illustrated below.  
  
 
 
16 The scope of the plan  
2.4 The Local Plan 2030 was adopted  in January 2020 and the vast majority of its policies are up to date and do not need to change. 
Remaining policies in the earlier Allocations and Designations Local Plan have also been reviewed  and, in the majority of cases , 
they remain fit for purpose and similarly do not need to change at this time.  Existing development plan policies that are to be  
replaced are identified in brackets, and more information about this is given in Appendix 1.  
 
2.5 The development strategy to 2030 is already  set and it is important that it is allowed to deliver. For that reason , the policies in this 
local pl an build on it , and in doing so, to put in place a robust strategy for growth to 2040.  
 
2.6 Taking account of responses received to the Issues and Options (2020) and Draft Plan Strategy (2021) consultations, the plan 
focus es on the following key policy areas:  
 Climate change  
 The Development Strateg y to 2040 , and site allocations  in order to meet national policy requirements  
 Town centre and retail policies in order to support a more f lexible future for our centres  
 New and u pdated development management policies (those used to h elp make decisions on planning applications) to do with : 
o A refreshed housing chapter including:  
- Affordable housing (replaces LP2030 Policy 58S12) 
- Review mechanisms  (new policy)  
- Housing mix (replaces LP2030 Policy 59S)  
- First homes exception policy  (new policy)  
- Self-build and custom house building  (new policy)  
o Residential space standards (new policy)  
o Environmental net gain (replaces LP2030 Policy 43)  
o New employment development in the countryside (replaces LP2030 Policy 75)  
o Horse and Equestrian Activities (new policy)  
o Non-designated  heritage assets (new policy)  
o Outdoor sports space in association with new development (partially replaces ADLP policy AD28)  
o Tall buildings (new policy)  
 
 
                                                           
12 Policies with t he suffix ‘S’ are strategic policies   
17 3.0 Climate change  
 
3.1 Climate change is a strategic priority for national policy across all areas of the UK and is central to policy formation. It has been 
established that changes to the global climate are happening at an ever -increasing rate. Increasing average temperatures, changes 
to weather patterns, rising sea levels and greater risk of flooding are all potential consequences of a ‘change -nothing’ approach to 
the way we develop our communities going forward.  
 
3.2 The g overnment has recognised the increasing risks to the count ry that climate change poses and, through the Climate Change Act 
2008 and the subsequent Amendment Order (Climate Change Act 2008 (2050 Target Amendment) Order 2019) has committed the 
UK to reaching net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.  
 
3.3 The Paris Agr eement in December 2015 resulted in international agreement to keep global temperature increases “well below” 
2.0C and “endeavour to limit” the  rise to 1.5C. More recently , in 2021 COP26 took place in Glasgow where all agreed to revisit and 
strengthen thei r current emissions targets to 2030.The Glasgow Pact increased requirements for long term strategies and the need 
to keep them up to date and it keeps the 1.5C limit in sight but only if countries take concerted and immediate action.  
 
3.4 The Climate Change Committee has published The Sixth Carbon Budget13 which provides ministers with advice on the volume of 
greenhouse gases the UK can emit during the period 2033 -2037.  The Budget can be met through four key steps:  
- Take up of low carbon sol utions  
- Expansion of low -carbon energy suppliers  
- Reducing demand for carbon -intensive activities  
- Land and greenhouse gas removals  
 
3.5 Climate is impacted by all services, not just planning, and mitigating and adapting to climate change is the responsibility of  
everyone in the community, not just the council and government. However , planning is an important part of the solution . Policies 
can affect buildings and changes to the landscape , the way places grow and change  and the demand and reliance places have on 
using fossil fuels .   
 
3.6 The Planning and Compulsory  Purchase  Act 2004 requires local planning authorities to include in their local plans policies to 
ensure development, and use of land contribute to the mitigatio n of and adaptation to climate change.  Our policies set requirements 
for buildings that use less energy and that will survive future climate change.    
                                                           
13 https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sixth -carbon -budget/   
18  
National Planning Policy  
3.7 The Government sets national planning policy, Building Regulations and other le gislation that must be taken into consideration. The 
government’s national planning policy guidance sets out examples of how local plan s might address climate change.  
 
3.8 To achieve sustainable development, the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) states as part of its environmental objective 
of sustainable development that the planning system should “contribute to protecting and enhancing our natural, built and his toric 
environment; including making effective use of land, helping to improve biodive rsity, using natural resources prudently, minimising 
waste and pollution, and mitigating and adapting to climate change, including moving to a low carbon economy. ” 
 
3.9 It requires plans to “take a proactive approach to mitigating and adapting to climate chang e, taking into account the long -term 
implications for flood risk, coastal change, water supply, biodiversity and landscapes, and the risk of overheating from risi ng 
temperatures”.  
 
Bedford Borough Council Approach  
3.10 The Council declared a climate emergency in March 2019 and pledged to make its own operations carbon neutral by 2030. It has 
developed a Carbon Reduction Delivery Strategy setting out how it will achieve this aim. As part of this strategy the Council  has 
pledge d to incorporate the carbon neutral ambition into all Council strategies, including the Local Plan 2040. The Mayor  set up a 
climate change fund  in 2009 , which offers grants to community groups to help with the cost of carbon r eduction projects, and a 
Clima te Change Committee  in 2019 to monitor best practice and track the progress towards the aim of achieving carbon neutrality 
by 2030.  
 
3.11 The Council’s new Corporate Plan ‘Together Bedford Borough’ 2022 – 202614 embraces climate change as a cross cutting theme. 
It recognises that there are measurable  activities  that indicate whether the local environment is being well managed and maintained 
and on track in delivering a local response to climate change.  
 
3.12 Similarly , climate change is a cross cutting theme through the Local Plan because it is influenced by most policy areas. Future 
development will need to incorporate different features to not only minimise  their carbon emissions but also to be resilient to the 
clima te change already happening. They  will need to mitigate  any remaining  impacts through  more efficient building, flood 
resilience, the incorporation of renewable energy sources , and by allow ing the means for communities to shift their methods of 
travel. The role of the local plan in affecting climate change is one of facilitating the right environment for measures to be included i n 
                                                           
14 https://bbcdevwebfiles.blob.core.windows.net/webfiles/Your%20Council/About%20the%20Council/corporate -plan -2022 -2026.pdf  
  
19 existing and future development  to adapt  as necessary . It will take the combined efforts of communities, residents, businesses an d 
the development industry in the borough to embrace those measures.  
 
3.13 The spatial strategy for growth to 2040 (to be) adopted by the Council sets out  a pattern of development which encourages fewer  
greenhouse gas emissions , by focussing development in the urban area and at locations with great accessibility to rail stations and 
where walking neighbourhoods will be created – more detail is provided in section 4.0 Spatial Strategy and Site Allocations.  
 
3.14 The Local Plan 2030 in corporate s methods of both adaptation and mitigation in response to the climate change emergency.  It 
includes a chapter on resources and climate change which contains policies requiring the effective use and re -use of land, 
consideration of water quality a nd supply and energy efficiency.  Policy DS1 brings together all of the different policy areas from the 
suite of development plan documents into a comprehensive overarching policy.  
 
3.15 Consultants were commissioned  to prepare a new Strategic Flood Risk Assess ment (SFRA). The SFRA is an essential piece of the 
evidence base as it  models the flood zones for the borough. Since the Local Plan 2030 was adopted , new gui dance has been 
released by the g overnment on how to take into acco unt climate change allowances whe n modelling the flood zones. The climate 
change allowances are a percentage increa se on the current flood zone 3a, and t his allows the Council to see what the extent of 
flooding might l ook like in different scenarios . The per centage increase applied  depend s on the circumstances , for instance the type 
of development (residential, commercial, etc.) and the likely lifetime of the development (usually forecast as 60 years for 
commercial development and 100 years for residential).  The SFRA has informed the selec tion of de velopment sites for allocation 
and where relevant, an excepti ons test has been carried out.  
 
3.16 The C ouncil continues to work with the Environment Agency, Anglian Water and the Bedfordshire and River Ivel Internal Drainage 
Board to ensure flood risk , surface water management, water supply and waste water management issues resulting from planned 
development are fully considered.  
 
3.17 Through the lifet ime of the Local Plan 2040 the C ouncil will continue to gather evidence to inform and develop further guidance and 
policy to reflect changes in technologies in areas such as renewable energy and sustainable construction.    
   
20 Policy DS1(S) Resources and climate change  
 
Development must  support a move to carbon neutral ity in the following ways : 
 
A) Minimising carbon emissions, including by:  
i. Being located so as to minimise the need to travel and where there are opportunities to maximise the ability to make trips by 
sustainable modes of transport (in  accordance with policies AD36, AD39, 53, 87, 88 and 89 ); 
ii. Delivering a density of development that makes the most of accessible sites (in acc ordance with policies 30, 31, 32 and 53 ); 
iii. Contributing to more walkable and cycl e-able neighbourhoods that reduce demand for car use (in accordance with policies 
AD36, AD39, 31 and 53)  and i ncorporating electric vehicle charging points (in accordance with Policy 89) ; 
iv. Protecting and taking opportunities for the more sustainable movement of freight (in accordance with Policy 88) ; 
v. Adopting the principles of the energy hierarchy and seeking energy efficient buildings (in accordance with Policy 54) ;  
vi. Taking opportunities to generate, incorporate and connect to renewable and low carbon energy infrastructure wherever 
feasible  (in acco rdance with Policies 54 - 57); 
vii. In the case of existing buildings, retrofitting them with measures to reduce energy consumption, in a manner consistent with 
their heritage interest (in acco rdance with policies 28 S, 29, 30 and 41S ). 
 
B) Maximising carbon storage and sequestration, including by:  
i. Protecting, and where appropriate supporting the provision or restoration of  habitats that provide a carbon storage function  
(Policy DM7 ); 
ii. Incorporating green infrastructure, such as trees and  woodland, that helps to sequester carbon from the atmosphere (in 
acco rdance with policies 35S , 36S, 38, 39, 40 and Policy DM7 ); 
iii. Minimising degradation and erosion of soil (in accordance with policies 40 and 47S) . 
 
C) Mitigating and adapting to the impacts  of climate change, including by:  
i. Managing flood risk associated with higher peak river flows and more extreme weather events, and relocating vulnerable uses 
where appropriate (in accor dance with policies 92 and 93 ); 
ii. Providing shade and green infrastructur e to reduce overheating of urban areas during warmer summers (in accordance with 
policies 28S, 29,30, 35S, 36S  and 53 ); 
iii. Creating a place that promotes social interaction, since people who are isolated can be more vulnerable and less able to cope  
with the i mpacts of climate chan ge (in accordance with policies 28S and 29 ); 
iv. Delivering a n environmental net gain that enables animals and plants to adjust to a changing climate (in accordance with 
Policy DM 7);  
21 v. Incorporating appropriate water efficiency and water re cycling measures, to help minimise the potential for drought (in 
accordance with policies 50S and  52); 
vi. Minimising and mitigating air pollutio n (in accordance with policies 32 and 47S ). 
 
D) Responding to the economic and policy changes that are likely to accompany climate change, including by:  
i. Reducing the reliance on the private car and road freight (in accordance with policies AD36, AD39, 53, 87, 88 and 89 ); 
ii. Protecting high grade agricultural land (in accordance with Policy 46S). 
 
E) New development will  be required to demonstrate through Sustainability and Energy Statements  how it will take account of 
embedded carbon and contribute to mitigating and adapting to climate change and to meeting targets to reduce carbon dioxide 
emissions having regard to the above.  
 
  
 
   
22 4.0 Spatial strategy and site allocations  
 
4.1  The spatial strategy is an important part of the local plan as it explains where homes and jobs will be delivered through new  
allocations.  It also provides the framework for the determination of planning applications which come forward on unallocated sites.  
Certain strategic policies and allocations from Local Plan 2030 ( listed in Appendix 1 ) are not being replaced by this local plan and 
therefore are taken into account  as the  spatial strategy  is rolled on to 2040 .  Other policies and allocations are being replaced in 
response to the Council’s updated vision and objectives.  
 
4.2 The spatial strategy provides for the completion of strategic gro wth previously allocated in  local plans and also in neighbo urhood 
plans produced by Parish Councils.  This previously allocated growth is located on a number of sites in and around the Bedford / 
Kempston urban area, in the rural area as extensions to certain key and rural service centres, and at the former Stewart by 
brickworks brownfield site.   
 
4.3 In addition  to this , the spatial strategy directs the further growth required to meet assessed needs to 2040 to locations that are 
currently accessible , or will become accessible during the period covered by the local plan .  This means that new development will 
be focussed firstly on brownfield sites within the urban area and town centre regeneration  opportunities.  In addition, sites beyond , 
but close to , the urban area will give the opportunity for gains in green infrastructure.   The completion of EWR will result in the 
creation of highly accessible locations around new rail stations.  By concentrating on accessible locations, the spatial stra tegy aims 
to minimise the n eed to travel by car and therefore reduce the emission of carbon dioxide in line with the objectives of the plan.  
The growth locations are as follows:  
A. Within the urban area  
B. At strategic locations adjacent to the urban area which contribute  to the deliver y of key green infrastructure projects  
C. At new growth locations focussed on the EWR / A421 transport corridor with the potential for rail based growth, particularly in 
the south of Bedford area and at a new settlement at Little Barford.  
 
4.4 Policy DS2 sets out a spatial strategy for  the local plan that ensures the delivery of sufficient new development in sustainable 
locations to meet identified needs.  
Policy DS2(S) Spatial strategy  
To deliver sustainable development and work towards making Bedford a net zero c arbon emissions borough at the heart of the 
Oxford – Cambridge Arc, development will be focussed within the urban area, at specifi ed strategic locations adjacent to  the urban 
area and at growth locations within the A421  / East West Rail  corridor. All new development will be required to contribute towards 
achieving the stated objectives and policies of this plan, in line with the Infrastructure Development Plan, through:   
23  
Within the urban area   
i. Maintaining and enhancing Bedford town centr e as a vibrant and resilient location and multifunctional destination. 
Regenerating vacant spaces and including the establishment of an expanded residential and cultural quarter at Mayes 
Yard and t own centre living at Greyfriars;  
ii. Establishing a new station  quarter and Midland Road gateway, including the redevelopment and regeneration of the 
area around Bedford Midland station to provide an academic and skills quarter and vibrant corridor between t he town 
centre and rail station;  
iii. Establishing vibrant new are as for urban living in Bedford’s urban core at sites on Ampthill Road and on sites allocated 
in Local Plan 2030 including land south of  the river and at Ford End Road;  
iv. Making best use of brownfield and other available land within the urban area .  
 
Strategi c locations adjacent to  the urban area which c ontribute to delivering  the Bedford – Milton Keynes Waterway Park 
and the Bedford River Valley Park  
v. Residential -led development focussed at Gibraltar Corner and the Bedford River Valley Park north of the A603  which 
enhances and expands areas of green infrastructure  and, in doing so, prevent s coalescence between the urban area 
and existing settlements to protect their separate character and identity ; 
vi. Employment -led development a t land south of Goldington Road.  
 
Growth locations on the East West Rail / A421 transport corridor and with the potential for rail based growth   
South of Bedford policy area 
vii. Establishing an Arc -leading new settlement south of Bedford for innovation and an exemplar for landscape -led 
develo pment and community building, based around the opportunity that the Stewartby Hardwick  station on East -West 
Rail and the new Wixams station on the Midland Main  Line presents ; 
viii. The completion of Wixams new settlement, incorporating eastern  and southern  extension s, and the development of a 
strategic village expansion utilising brownfield land at Kempston Hardwick identified in Local P lan 2030;  
ix. An expansion of Shortstown  to the west  with active travel links to the rail network . 
 
Little Barford area  
x. A new settlement and related employment provision at Little Barford well connected  to the new East -West Rail station 
at its intersection with the East Coast Main  Line. 
 
Other employment sites   
24 xi. Locations well -related to the strategic road and rail network that wil l deliver employment growth, making Bedford an 
attractive place to do business.  
 
Rural area  
xii. The completion of strategic Key Service Centre and more limited Rural Service Centre residential development 
identified in Local Plan 2030 on sites which are allocated in neighbourhood plans and the completion of Local Plan 
2030 Policy 27 Land north of School Lane, Roxton ; 
xiii. Safeguarding the intrinsic character of the countryside and the environment and biodiversity within it through the careful 
management of dev elopment to meet local needs whilst supporting the rural economy.  
 
4.5 Further guidance on development in the rural area is provided by saved policies  4S-7S of Local Plan 2030 . 
 
The amount and timing of development  
4.6 The development strategy has been informed by the need to meet the requirements for additional jobs and housing over the plan  
period.   
 
Housing  
4.7 Government guidance sets out a standard method for calculat ing future housing requirements  which the Council mu st follow.  As a 
result of the government’s recent revisions to the standard method, the figure for Bedford borough currently is 1,355  dwellings per 
year, giving a total of 2 7,100  dwellings for the 20 year period from 2020 to 2040.  This is the current sta rting point for the local plan 
housing requirement.  Taking account of existing commitments , completions and an allowance for windfall , which  amounts in total 
to 14,824  dwellings, this leaves 12,276  dwellings to be allocated in this plan.  
 
4.8 The standard method approach to setting housing requirements uses inputs taken from population and affordability data.  The 
Council’s Local Housing Need Assessment (LHNA) and addendum demonstrate how these inputs are used to generate both the 
number of houses required and a dwelling -led population forecast which illustrates how the borough’s population would change as 
new dwellings are delivered .  It forecasts that an increase in population of around 50,000 people  and in -migration of more than  
22,000  people over and ab ove existing trends will need to take place if dwellings are to be populated at the standard method rate of 
1,355 dwellings per year.  This represents  a 40% increase on the housing requirement of 970 dwellings per year set in Local Plan 
2030.  
  
25 Gypsies, Travell ers and Travelling Show People  
4.9 The Gypsy & Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA ) for Bedford borough was published in November 2021.  The 
Assessment  provide s a robust analysis  of the current and future need  for Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Show People ’s 
accom modation in the borough in the years up to 2040.   Full details are set out in the evidence base document GTAA . 
 
4.10 In relation to Gypsies, T ravellers  and Travelling Show People,  national policy draws a distinction between those who travel an d 
those who do not  and those who do travel have historically been referred to as meeting the ‘planning definition’. However , the 
planning system must now make provision for those who travel  and those who do not.  
 
4.11 The additional needs of those members of the G ypsy and T raveller community who do not meet the planning definition are set out 
in the Local Housing Needs Assessment.  However , the way that these needs are accommodated are in practice the same.  
Recent case law says that it is inappropriate to req uire any of the travelling community to live in bricks and mortar dwellings, and 
instead their needs should be met through the provision of plots and pitches.  
 
4.12 In the plan period there is an identified need for an additional 46 Gypsy and Traveller pitches  and 13 Travelling S how People plots  
which form part of the borough’s overall housing need ( they are not additional to it) , as follows:  
 
Table 2  
Plan years  0-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 
Total   2020 -
2025 2026 -
2030  2031 -
2035  2036 -
2040  
Gypsies & T ravellers (meeting definition)  0 2 0 1 3 
Gypsies & Travellers (not meeting definition)  22 6 7 8 43 
Total pitches  22 8 7 9 46 
      
Travelling Show  People (all meet the definition)  8 3 2 0 13 
 
4.13 The Council is planning to meet th is identified need and is progressing planning applications . Proposals will be assessed against  
Policy 64 Design of Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Show  People Sites. In addition , the new settlements at Kempston Hardwick 
(Policy  HOU14) and Little Barford (Policy HOU17) and will include an allocation for gypsy and traveller pitches.   
 
  
26 Transport Strategy   
4.14 Bedford is part of the England’s Economic Heartlands (EEH) Sub -National Transport Body.  The EEH Transport Strategy provides 
an overall  framework for transport policies and delivery across the region. It is drafted so that planning and highway authorities can 
develop their own suite of policies and plans which reflect their individual local issues.  
 
4.15 However, the over -riding ambition set out in the Strategy is to shape the transport  future and deliver change  given the once in a 
lifetime opportunity presented . The basic premise for transport investment is that business as usual will not get us to where we 
need and want to be and will not enable the area to fulfil its economic and sustainable growth potential.  
 
4.16 What this means is that in order to deliver sustainable growth; transport investment, travel behaviour  and the way we think about 
moving around will need to change. The impact of continuing with current travel behaviour will have a detrimental impact on the 
very things that make the area successful, including the attractive environment and the network of small and medium sized tow ns 
and cities acro ss the Arc.  
 
4.17 Increased economic activity and growing populations, if left to continue in traditional patterns of movement and behaviour, w ill mean 
people spend  longer on congested transport networks, the environment will be degraded, and quality of life e xpectations will not be 
met. 
 
4.18 The EEH Strategy  includes a five -point plan of action which is supported by the Council. The five actions are:  
 Focus on decarbonisation  of the transport system by harnessing innovation and supporting solutions which create gre en 
economic opportunities  
 Promote investment in digital infrastructure as a means of improving connectivity, in order to reduce the need to travel  
 Use delivery of EWR and mass rapid transit systems as the catalyst for the  transformation of our strategic public transport 
networks  
 Champion increased investment in active travel and shared transport solutions to improve local connectivity  to ensure that 
everyone has the opportunity to realise their potential  
 Ensure that our freight and logistics needs continue to be met  whilst lowering the environmental impact  of their delivery  
 
4.19 Within Bedford, sustainable growth provides the context to deliver transport improvements for existing and new communities wh ich 
reflect the ambitions  of the EEH Transport Strategy  which has four overarching principles:  
 Principle 1 - Support the delivery of low carbon transport by working towards reduced congestion, digital connectivity, and a net 
zero carbon system by 2040   
27  Principle 2 – Promote connectivity and accessibility in new development, and link new and existing communities  
 Principle 3 – Support opportunities for active travel and green infrastructure  
 Principle 4 – Promote and support infrastructure development whi ch reflects the ambitions of the three preceding principles.  
 
4.20 National Highways has been commissioned by co -project sponsors the Department for Transport (DfT ) and England’s Economic 
Heartland (EEH), to undertake a study of the Oxford to Cambridge Arc Road connectivity. The purpose of the study is to identi fy 
where investment in key parts of the region’s strategic road network is required in order to support ex isting identified locally planned 
growth in the area and alleviate existing issues and constraints on the network.  
 
Infrastructure  
4.21 An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) has been prepared to support the Local Plan 2040. It identifies the infrastructure req uired to 
meet the level of growth anticipated in the borough in a sustainable manner. The document covers all types of infrastructure from 
transport and mobility hubs to waste water and supply, energy to schools, health to police and fire  services. The IDP  identifies the 
infrastructure projects that will be required to meet the needs arising over the local plan period.  
 
4.22 The borough faces a number of challenges which will impact on the timing of growth.   These include the timing of the delivery of 
necessary infrastructure and the creation of economic drivers to act as a catalyst for growth and improve development viability in 
some parts of the borough , such as the town centre.  
 
4.23 The potential of EWR to off er improve d connectivity and create economic growth will be a critical catalyst for delivery and pivotal to 
achieving the plan ’s vision.  The new links and station s however will not be operational until 2030 and other essential infrastructure 
(principally improvements to the A421) are expected to be d elivered on similar timescales.  
 
4.24 The Council’s ambition is to establish Bedford as a  place for innovation with an enhanced academic presence and new business /  
science parks linked to the attractiveness of loca tions served by the new rail stations , which will be essential in giving impetus to 
the housing market and housing delivery.  These economic drivers, linked as they ar e to the delivery of  EWR , will also take time to 
impact on in -migration and housing deman d. 
 
Stepped Trajectory  
4.25 The significant increase in the housing requirement alongside  the focus on new settlements and  the infrastructure delivery 
challenges described above mean that housing provision across the plan period will need to be “stepped ”; continuing at the same 
rate as it is for Local Plan 2030 for the first five years , with more significant gro wth post -2030 once critical infrastructure is delivered  
28 and the benefits for the local economy start to be felt.  
 
4.26 Taking account of the infrastruct ure delivery challenges a stepped trajectory is proposed.  The following policies set out the amount 
and timing of the delivery of growth to meet identified needs.  
 
4.27 In the years up to  2030 housing supply is provided by sites allocated in Local Plan 2030 an d early delivery on additional sites 
allocated  in Local Plan 2040.   After 2030, once EWR and highway improvements have been completed,  the strategic growth sites  
allocated in this plan  will be able to deliver substantial growth .  Furthermore,  development on some other urban sites  also becomes 
increasingly viable . Given that the higher development rates in the second half of the plan period are primarily related to the 
provision of major infrastructure and strategic sites from 2030 onwards  which is required  to deliver them , there will be limited scope 
to bring forward sites to address any shortfall which may arise in the early years of the plan.  
 
4.28 The Council will monitor  the provision and delivery of infrastructure and, if necessary, bring forward a review  of the local plan.  
Policy DS3 (S) Amount and timing of housing growth  
 
Provision of a minimum of 27,1 00 new dwellings will be stepped as follows:  
 
 
 2020/21 - 
2024/25  
 2025/26 - 
2029/30  2030/31 -
2039/40  Total  
Dwellings (total)  
 4,850 4,850 17,000  27,100 
Dwellings (per annum)  
 970 1,050  1,700  
 
Five-year land supply will be measured against the stepped requirement which is applicable at the time of the assessment.  
When undertaking the five -year supply calculation, should any shortfall arise it will be distributed across the remaining years of the 
plan period.  
 
 
 
 
  
29 Employment  
4.29 In determining the number of jobs to be planned for the Council has taken account of two key forecasts; one produced by the E ast 
of England Economic Forecasting Model (EEFM) and one based on the figures for economic activity taken from the dwelling led 
forecast derived from the standard method. There is a substantial difference between these two forecasts, indicative of the f act that 
the EEFM work does not reflect the substantial change in labour supply inherent in the standard method projection. The predicted 
number of jobs in the standard method forecast is included as a target reflective of the Council’s commitment to providing a balance 
of homes and jobs in the borough and in t he context of the plan vision and strategy creating  a high -value, highly skilled, economy, 
expanding its current strengths, and developing into a location where innovative businesses can thrive.  
 
4.30 The number of jobs is however a forecast and not a target. A s explained in the Council’s Economic Growth Ambitions paper the 
focus is on creating the right kind of jobs which will strengthen the local economy and create a prosperous future for the Bo rough 
and its residents. The jobs created will span a range of sec tors and the jobs related to office, industrial and warehousing 
development (about 39% of the new jobs likely to be needed) will require the allocation of additional land. The Employment La nd 
Study topic paper sets out that it is appropriate for the plan t o identify between 118 and 142 ha of employment land. Policies HOU 
12, HOU 19 and EMP 1 - EMP8, identify sufficient land to meet the upper end of this forecast.  The number of hectares of land 
allocated is sensitive to the employment types being planned fo r as different land uses have different space requirements.  
Policy DS4(S) Amount of employment growth  
 
Provision of up to 26,700 additional jobs to support the Council’s ambition to create  a high -value, highly skilled, economy, expanding 
its current strengths, and developing into a location where innovative businesses can thrive.  
 
 
4.31 Policy DS5S sets out where growth will be located.  It takes into account existing commitments together with the additional growth 
required to meet needs to 2040.  There will continue to be growth in villages as a result of policies in the Local Plan 2030 which 
allocate growth to some Key Service Centres and Rural Service Centres. No new allocations are made in these villages in the 
Local Plan 2040, although  some Parish C ouncils  may choose to allocate further sites for development  in their neighbourhood plans  
to meet particular local needs.  
Policy DS5 (S) Distribution of growth  
 
In accordance with Polic ies DS3 (S) and DS4 (S), growth will be distributed as follows:  
  
30 Location  Dwellings  Employment land 
(ha) 
Within the urban area  1,200 5* 
Strategic locations adjacent to  the urban area which 
contribute to delivering the Forest of Marston Vale 
incorporating the Bedford Milton Keynes Waterway Park and 
the Bedford River Valley Park  1,500 7 
Growth locations on the A421 transport corridor and with the 
potential for rail based  growth    
 South of Bedford including  new settlement  7,050 70 
 Little Barford new settlement  3,800  4 
 Other employment sites  
 - 50 
Some development will take place beyond the plan period  400  
Remaining r ural area  / villages  Completion of sites previously  
allocated in local plans and 
neighbourhood plans  
 
 
*Does not include 20.4ha at Pear Tree Farm which is land allocated in ADLP Policy A D11 and counted as a commitment  
 
4.32 The Council is also producing a Design G uide which will provide an overarching assessment  of residential building design across 
the borough and  contain design principles that  will support the application of several design -related policies already in the 
development plan (28 S, 29 and 30 LP2030).  This will replace existing guidance which was prepared in 1997 and is in need of 
updating.  
 
4.33 The Design Guide is also necessary in light of a new national emphasis on place -making, design and the creation of beautiful 
places. The NPPF was revised in July 2021, with references to the recently adopted National Design Guide and National Model 
Design Code included within it. Chapter 12 of the NPPF is titled ‘Achieving well -designed places’ and sets out the Government’s 
policy priorities relating to good design and place making. Site allocations fo r the spatial areas are set out below . As specified in the 
site specific policies, f or more complex sites the council will lead on the preparation of masterplans and design codes to be 
prepared in partnership with landowners. In other cases , there is a req uirement  for master plan s and design co des to be prepared 
by the applicant and completed and approved by the C ouncil before planning applications are submitted.  The Council will produce  
31 a protocol which will inform  the scope, content and process to be followed when preparing the masterplan and design coding 
documents.  
 
Town centre  
4.34 The Vision for the central Bedford town area is to create a number of key sites / quarters linked by the public realm improvements 
that are to be implemented through the Bedford Town Deal programme of works providing accessibility to the two EWR stations.  
 
Bedford Midland Station and Bedford Academic Quarter   
 
4.35 Bedford Midland  station will be redeveloped as part of the EWR project but the precise location and configuration of the station is as 
yet unknown. The Council’s Town Deal programme includes proposals to improve the public realm in the area , once the location is 
finalised . The vision is to create a gateway to the town linking the station to the town centre, including establishing a new Station 
Square as well as improving lin ks for pedestrians and cyclists  and the provision of a mobility hub with secure cycle parking and 
electric vehicle charging points, together with  provision for public transport to integrate with the railway  
 
4.36 Given its location at a key transport interchange and the nearby urban amenities that the centre of Bedford has to offer incl uding 
workforce, retail, cultural and l eisure assets set within the Bedford Conservation Area, this is also an excellent site on which to 
develop a knowledge hub. Set between the world -class academic centres of Oxford and Cambridge and with a new direct link to 
both, this is an exciting opportu nity for the town.  
 
4.37 As proposals for the station become clearer , there may be the potential for land at , and in proximity to , the current station to be 
configured to enable the creation of an academic quarter co-located with an innovation centre, and busin ess incubator / spin -out 
space which would help increase educational attainment, retain local skills, upskill residents and create a knowledge -base from 
which start -up companies can grow and prosper .  
 
4.38 Until such time as the EWR proposals are confirmed the  impact on the Jowett sidings and Royal Mail land to the south of Midland 
road are unknown. For this reason , the Jowett sidings and Royal Mail sites are included as an opportunity site in accordance with 
Policy DS6.  
 
Policy EMP1 Land at Bedford Station , Bedford  
 
The station area will be developed for a mix of uses  including transport interchange  residential, office , academic and retail uses. Key 
principles of development:   
32 i. As part of the town deal programme the Council will lead on the preparation of a  masterplan and design code prior to the 
submission of any pla nning application for the site;  
ii. The creation of a new mixed use academic quarter with offices, retail, residential and transport interchange  and 
educational space to support the growth of spin-out companies linked to high -tech businesses based in the Ox ford to 
Cam bridge  Arc benefiting from access to East West Rail;  
iii. A new station entrance and public square and the creation of im proved linkages to Midland Road;  
iv. Re-provision of car and cycle p arking including the potential for multi storey parkin g; 
v. Improvements to pedestrian access a nd public realm in Midland Road;  
vi. Provision of revised station access arrangements via Ashburnham Road with a mobility hub  and appropriate provision 
for bus, taxi  / private hire vehicles, cycle and pedestrian access and drop -off / pick-up points;  
vii. Contributions to town centre wide highway infrastructure improvements  where required ; 
viii. Development should preserve and where opportunities arise enhance the setting of Bedford  Conservation Area.  
 
 
Ford End Road  
 
4.39 The former industrial land and railway sidings located between the railway line and Marston’s Eagle Brewery are already identified 
as a regeneration site and allocated within Local Plan 2030 (Policy 12).   
 
4.40 The site’s close proximity to Bedford Midland station provides a key residential opportunity.  The land at Ford End Road has the 
potential to create a new residential quarter for circa 700 homes adjacent to the station, providing a combination of flats a nd houses 
with a public park and enhanced public access to the river corridor, designed to provide a range of unit types but with a foc us on 
family homes.  The location of the quarter, which would have a western pedestrian access to the new station would pro vide 
opportunities to create both build to rent and build for sale developments.  
 
Greyfriars / Midland Road  
 
4.41 The former Bedfordshire Police Station site and the adjacent mixed -use block at Greyfriars are already allocated for residential and 
town centre us es in Local Plan 2030  (Policy 11). The Policy 11 includes a requirement to replace the existing roundabout with 
traffic signals , which is being taken forward through the Town Deal . 
 
4.42 The adjacent sites including the BPHA estate to the north, the Allhallows multi -storey car park , Greyfriars  ground level  car park  and 
Saffron Close are allocated for redevelopment to provide homes with ground floor active uses.   
  
33 4.43 Greyfriars is linked to the Bedford Midland station via Midland Road.  Midland Road is characterise d by a multi -ethnic collection of 
eating and shopping experiences, including Polish, South Asian and Chinese.  The Bedford Town Deal programme includes 
funding  for public realm works along Midland Road to create a more attractive , pedestrian -friendly environment and improve the 
quality of the shopfronts as the key approach from the station to the town centre.   
 
4.44 A masterplan and design code will be prepared for this site and will be adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) . It is 
expected that  work to inform the SPD (including any technical studies that are required) will be funded by the landowner / 
developer.  
Policy HOU1  Land at Greyfriars North , Bedford  
 
Land at Greyfriars North will be developed for residential and appropriate town centre uses. Key principles of development  include : 
i. A masterplan and design code to be prepared and adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document prior to the 
submission of any planning application for the site. The preparation of the S upplementary Planning Docume nt will be led 
by the Council in partnership with landowners / developers, stakeholders and the local community. It should pay particular 
regard to ensur ing that the development is designed to reflect the site’s important location and to preserve the setting of 
heritage assets, including The Bedford Conservation Area, listed buildings fronting Bromham Road and other taller 
heritage assets in the town centre ;  
ii. Residential development with a mixture of retail and other town centre uses limited to ground floor fronting Hassett Street 
and Greenhill Street  and Greyfriars  to create an active frontage;  
iii. Preparation of an access strategy;  
iv. Provision of dedicated cycle routes  and wide footways to reflect footfall and crossings to achieve pedestrian and cycle 
conne ctivity, whilst maintaining bus acces s; 
v. Provision of a mobility hub;  
vi. Contributions to town centre wide highway infrastructure improvements where required ;  
vii. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation  will be required  for the areas of  the site not already evaluated;  
viii. Archaeological mitigation required ahead of development for those areas already evaluated ; 
ix. Financial contributions tow ards secondary school provision;  
x. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary.  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
xi. Deliver y of a low carbon and enviro nmentally resilient development  that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change ; 
xii. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
  
34 Mayes Yard / St Paul’s Square  
 
4.45 The town centre continues to undergo structural change, which has been accelerated due to the Coronavirus Pandemic with 
greater reliance on online shopping.  This has resulted in a number of major retailers falling into administration or retreat ing from 
the High Street.   
 
4.46 Bedford has recently lost retailers including Beales department store, Debenhams, Marks & Spencer and Argos.  At the Mayes 
Yard block, the closure of the Beales and Debenhams stores, and the presence of Council assets such as the library and the Corn 
Exchange provide an opportunity to redevelop and reconfigure buildings to create smaller units for retail, food and beverage 
occupiers, and residential opportunities at upper floors.   
 
4.47 Plans include consideration of an expanded auditorium (fr om 800 to 1,200 seats) within the Corn Exchange to attract a greater 
range of regional -level shows to Bedford, and the potential for an updated  library facility.  The site could be opened up to create 
pedestrian browsing routes linking St. Paul’s Square , Silver Street , High Street and The Higgins  as well as  delivering  new 
residential dwellings.   
 
4.48 This would complement other potential sites around St Paul’s Square, such as the Court Building and the former Bank site adja cent 
to Town Bridge which are already allocated for development (Local Plan 2030 Policy 8).  In addition, the Town Deal programme 
includes funding  for public realm works at St Paul’s Square.  This will follow on from public realm improvement works at High Street 
and Silver St reet Square which have recently been completed , and the current  High Street Heritage Action Zone project.  The 
Mayes Yard redevelopment would create a focus for this cultural quarter of the town centre  linking to Castle Quay and The Higgins . 
 
4.49 A design code  will be required to assist in achieving an appropriately designed scheme in this important town centre location which 
takes into account sometimes conflicting issues including car parking, waste collection, servicing, and historic environment 
concerns.  
 
4.50 A masterplan and design code will be prepared for this site and will be adopted as SPD. It is expected that work to inform the SPD 
(including any technical studies that are required) will be funded by the landowner / developer.  
   
35 Policy HOU2 Mayes Yard , Hig h Street and Silver Street, Bedford    
  
Land at Mayes Yard and between High Street and Silver Street, Bedford will be developed for a mix of uses  to create an extended 
cultural quarter in this part of the town , including residential, hotel, retail and leisure . Key principles of development  include : 
i. A masterplan and design code to be prepared and adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document prior to the 
submission of any planning application for the site. The preparation of the S upplementary Planning Document  will be led 
by the Council in partnership with landowners / developers, stakeholders and the local community ;  
ii. Provision of residential  and / or hotel on upper floors;  
iii. Scheme to involve conversion, redevelopment and new buildings including the r econf iguration of the site currently 
occupied by Bedford Corn Exchange ; 
iv. Preparation of an access strategy;  
v. Heritage impact assessment  must be submitted to the Council as a first stage of the masterplanning process ; 
vi. Any new development must contribute positively  to local character and distinctiveness and enhance or better reveal the 
significance of the conservation area and setting of any listed buildings ; 
vii. Any new development will need to ensure the preservation of the scheduled monument of the ‘Remains of the George Inn ’ 
and include measures for its conservation and public interpretation, and where opportunities arise, enhancements to its 
setting;  
viii. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation  will be required ; 
ix. Financial contributions towards secondary school provis ion; 
x. Deliver y of a low carbon and environmentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change;  
xi. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
South of the  River / Bedford St Johns Station  
 
4.51 This is currently a large area with low density uses, industrial premises, car parks, and railway land south of the river between 
Cauldwell Street and Elstow Road around Bedford St Johns station.   
 
4.52 The vision is for a residential -led mixed -use quarter around a new  Bedford  St Johns station to be constructed by EWR with the 
railway closer to the Hospital, creating a Station Square and a development area around Melbourne Street with a key thoroughf are 
from the station thro ugh Kingsway to the town centre, and this development area is already allocated for development (Local Plan 
2030 Policy 14 ).   
  
36 4.53 The land has capacity for in the region of 1,000 dwellings, which reflects densities for a high proportion of flats (80 -85%) aro und the 
transport hub with building heights of up to five / six storeys and integrated high quality public open space.  The area prov ides 
opportunities for a mix of residential products including build to rent and retirement living, together with build for  sale.  Active ground 
floor uses are promoted especially on the primary streets for a range of activities within Use Class E.   
 
4.54 The residential quarter to be created around Bedford St Johns station could have an Italian influence to celebrate the town’s r ich 
historical links with Italy.  The land at Britannia Road provides potential for Bedford Hospital to expand to accommodate pla nned 
growth, including a new multi -storey car park and attractive links to  Bedford  St Johns station. A development brief for th e area is 
currently being prepared.  
 
Southern Gateway (Ampthill Road and Kempston Road approaches to the town centre)  
 
4.55 This southern approach to the town centre presents on opportunity to create a further new neighbourhood for urban living  which will 
incorporate  greenspace in the form of  a new urban park .  Between the development site boundary and the Midland Main L ine can 
be found operational  railway sidings and a range of employment uses , including a scrap yard , which will need to be taken into 
consideration. The area would benefit from a comprehensive approach and t here may be potential for additional land / uses 
adjacent to the allocated site to be considered for re -development as part of the master planning of this a rea.    
 
4.56 A masterplan and design code will be prepared for this site and will be adopted as SPD. It is expected that work to inform th e SPD 
(including any technical studies that are required) will be funded by the landowner / developer.  
Policy HOU3  Land at  Ampthill Road , Bedford    
 
Land at the former Camford Works and Technology House on Ampthill Road, Bedford will be developed for a mix of residential  and 
business uses. Key principles of development include:  
i. A masterplan and design code to be prepared and adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document prior to the 
submission of any planning application for the site. The preparation of the S upplementary Planning Document  will be led 
by the Council in partnership with landowners / developers, stakeholders and t he local community.  It will pay particular 
regard to adjacent noise sources;  
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes ; 
iii. Provision of greenspace in the form of a new urban park ; 
iv. Preparation of a n access strategy to include all modes ; 
v. Provision of a vehicular and safe pedestrian connection between the site and Cauldwell School ; 
vi. Provision of a mobility hub;   
37 vii. Provision of a layout which takes full account of the noise environment relative to the railway l ine and neighbouring land 
uses;  
viii. Pre-determination archaeologi cal evaluation will be required ; 
ix. Financial c ontributions tow ards secondary school provision;  
x. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all source s of flood risk where necessary;  
xi. Opportunities  to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
xii. Assessment of the nature and extent of ground contamination and preparation of a remediation strategy for the site 
including methods of disposing of contaminated material , measures to prevent pollution of surface and ground water and 
provisions for future monitoring,  to be approved by the Council;  
xiii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change ; 
xiv. Early e ngagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
   
38 Figure 2: Town Centre sites : Local Plan 2030 allocations and Local Plan 2040 sites  
 
 
 
 
 
39 Other Urban  Sites  
4.57 The site formerly used by Peacocks auction house on Newnham Street Bedford is allocated for residential development. The site is 
well-located just beyond the town centre boundary , close to services  and facilities both in the town centre and along Castle Road. 
Within the conservation area , the site currently contains a mixture of buildings and its development offers the opportunity to 
transform  the site with an attractive residential scheme which is sensitive to the historic setting.  
Policy HOU4  Former Peacocks Auction House, Newnham Stree t, Bedford  
 
Land at the former Peacocks Auction House, Newnham Street, Bedford will be developed for residential use. Key principles of 
development include:  
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code  to be completed prior to and submitted with  any planning 
application , and  to pay particular regard to the site’s relationship with the conservation area and surrounding listed 
buildings at 2 -28 The  Grove and 12 -16 Newnham Street;  
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes to be accessed from Ne wnham Street;  
iii. Development should include two storey frontage development addressing Newnham Street and subservient development 
to the rear ; 
iv. Development should preserv e and, where opportunities arise , enhance h eritage assets and their settings, including:  
 The Bedford Conservation Area   
 Grade II 2-28 The Grove  
 Grade II 12-16 Newnham Street ; 
v. Preparation of an access strategy;  
vi. Reinstatement of the highway fron tage to match surrounding area;   
vii. Financial contributions  towards secondary school provision;  
viii. Assessment of the nature and extent of ground contamination and preparation of a remediation strategy for the site 
including methods of disposing of contaminated material, measures to prevent pollution of surface and gr ound water and  
provisions for future monitoring , to be approved by the Council;  
ix. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation wi ll be required;  
x. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change . 
 
 
Land at Abbey Field, West of Elstow  
 
4.58 The importance of retaining the separate identity of Elstow  is recognised . Development contained within the south western corner 
of the site will facilitate the protection in perpetuity of the area to the north  as strategic green space  which offers views across to  
40 Elstow Abbey as well as opening the area up to public and t he creation of a walk alongside the Elstow Brook .   To be developed 
with an appropriate vernacular architecture that reflects its location within the landscape setting of historic Elstow.  
Policy HOU 5 Abbey Field, West of Elstow  
 
Land at Abbey Field, will be developed for residential use and provide public  access to existing urban open space , linking into the 
Elstow Brook corridor . Key principles of development include:  
i. Preparation  by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application , to pay particular regard to : 
a. ensuring  that the development is designed to reflect the site’s important location and to preserve  the setting of heritage 
assets  where possible , 
b. ensuring development will be contained west of Abbey  Fields and south of the Elstow Broo k, with significant open 
space to the north and east of the development site to open up the Elstow Brook  corridor and the wider area for public 
access from which views of the Abbey and the scheduled monument of Elstow Manor House (remains of) can be 
enjoyed ,  
c. identifying  opportunities to enhance green infrastructure including c onnections to existing networks,  
d. identify ing and mitigat ing noise pollution from adjoining road an d nearby industrial development.  
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes  to be accessed from Abbey Fields;  
iii. Preparation of an access strategy  to include : 
a. Provision of a  pedestrian / cycle bridge across the A421 betw een the site and Pear Tree Farm , 
b. Provision of pedestrian  and cycl e routes through the site and along Abbey Fields and safe crossing points to facilitate 
connections with the wider network  including at Progress Park, West End and Wilstead Roads  facilitating connections 
to / from the South of Bedford Policy area .  
iv. Financial contributions towards se condary school provision;  
v. Pre-determination archaeologi cal evaluation will be required;  
vi. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary.  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
vii. An assessment of the site -specific ecological impacts of the proposal to be undertaken prior to the submission of any 
planning application;  
viii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change ; 
ix. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
  
41  Figure 3: Abbey Field West of Elstow  
 
 
42 The Cloisters, Church Lane, Bedford  
  
4.59 Redevelopment of l and at Bury Court currently containing garage blocks , a church hall and the vicarage provide s the opportunity for 
an additional access north to Elliot Crescent  and also the relocation of the church hall.  Development  of the area is to be influenced 
by and enhance  the adjacent  St. Mary’s Church  and design out existing anti -social behaviour experienced on the site . The site 
offers the opportunity to include  additional pedestrian access routes and areas of public open space and a  community garden  
framing views to the church.  
Policy HOU6  The Cloisters , Church Lane, Bedford  
 
Land at Bury Court, Church Lane, Bedford will be developed for residential use and include the relocation of the church hall with 
access onto Church Lane. Key principles of development include:  
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be complet ed prior to and submitted with any planning  
application  to pay particular regard to the s ite’s important location to preserve the setting of heritage assets  and existing 
veteran trees along the western boundary ; 
ii. Development should where possible preserve, and where opportunities arise, enhance the significance of Grade II* St. 
Mary’s Church and the contribution made by setting to significance;  
iii. Development will be limited to a two storey height and public open spac e provided along the western boundary adjacent to 
the churchyard to preserve a spatial buffer  from views of St Mary’s Church  within the churchyard ;  
iv. Provision of a range of housing types and sizes;   
v. Improvements to transportation networks, including  widening and surface improvements  to existing pavements to 
accommodate  wheelchair users (approx. 10m);  
vi. Retention of connections to existing pedestrian and cycle routes via The Copse / The Spinney / Bury Walk to the east;  
vii. Widening of the existing pedestrian cycleway south across Goldington Green to improve cycle connectivity and north al ong 
Church Lane to Queens Drive;  
viii. Financial contributions tow ards secondary school provision;  
ix. Identif ication of opportunities to enhance green infrastructure including connecti ons to existing networks and increased  
public access routes t o increase natural surveillance;  
x. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation  will be required ;   
xi. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary.  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
xii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change . 
 
  
43 Willia mson Road, Kempston  
4.60 Land to the south west side of Williamson Road is situated next to Kempston Challenger Academy, in the middle of Kempston. It is 
immediately surrounded by residential and educational uses. There is an established the cycleway to the north. The site can deliver 
a well -connected, urban residential development.  
Policy HOU7  Land at Williamson Road, Kempston  
 
Land on the south west side of Williamson Road, Kempston will be development for residential use. Key principles of developme nt: 
i. Provision of a range of housing types and sizes ; 
ii. Submission of noise survey to determine and mitigate the effects of the neighbouring Challenger Academy on development ; 
iii. Suitable access arrangements and appropriate pedestrian and cycle connectivity to existing  infrastructure  required;  
iv. Suitable landscaping to take account of neighbouring Challenger Academy ; 
v. Financial c ontributions tow ards secondary school provision;  
vi. Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
vii. Deliver y of a low carbon and enviro nmentally resilient development  that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change . 
 
 
Land adjacent to Police Headquarters, Woburn Road, Kempston  
 
4.61 The site adjacent to the Police Headquarters offers the opportunity for additional residential development within the urban area.  
Form erly playing fields used by the sports and social club, the site has not been used for recreational purposes for some time and 
has been partly used for car parking since 2011. A n additional access road has recently been built  – initially to serve the new 
custody suite located on the main Po lice HQ site.    
 
4.62 The site is designated as an Urban Open Space . The reasons for designation were that the site provides a green break in the built 
up area and also provides a linkage with the playing fields at KCA  to the north . It will be possible to design the site to retain the 
green break as seen from Woburn Road , through the careful design and location of open space within the site. In addi tion, the 
treed area along the western boundary will be retained and a landscape buffer created between the site and the custody suite on 
the eastern bo undary. These will provide wildlife corridor and green infrastructure connection s to the playing fields to the north as 
required by Policy AD43.   
 
  
44 Policy HOU8  Land west of Police Headquarters, Woburn Road, Kempston  
 
Land to the west of the Police Headq uarters , Kempston  will be developed for residential use  and open space . Key principles of 
development  include : 
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code  to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application  and to pay particular regard to the comprehensive consideration of green space and access to it ; 
ii. Provision of a range of housing types and sizes ; 
iii. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
iv. Suitable siting of development and landscaping to take account of surrounding uses ; 
v. Development should preserve and where opportunities arise , enhance the significance of Grade II Sailors Bridge Cottages ;  
vi. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation will be required ; 
vii. Provision  of a Transport Assessment demonstrating suitable access and detailing assessment of impact on  surrounding 
highways, and identifying miti gations measures where required;  
viii. Provision of pedestrian and cycle links through the site to improve access to surrounding green infrastructure and connection s 
to existing networks to the surrounding residential a reas; 
ix. Provision of i mprovements to  pedestrian and cycle route running along  the B53 1 north to Kempston and south to employment 
areas ; 
x. Financial c ontributions tow ards secondary school provision;  
xi. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary ; 
xii. Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
xiii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and  resilient to climate change . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
45  
Figure 4: Land West of Police Headquarters, Kempston  
 
 
Land at Chantry Avenue  
 
4.63 This site at Chantry Avenue has been derelict for many years .  The development of this previously developed site in the urban area 
offers the opportunity to enhance the local environment . Located between a residential area and an industrial estate , planning 
permission will be permitted for a layout that designs out the likely harm to the amenity of future residents and this is ach ievable 
 
46 with careful design of the site including the orientation of the buildings and their windows and noise attenuation fencing along 
southern and western boundaries.  
Policy HOU9  Land at Chantry Avenue, Kempston  
 
Land at Chantry Avenue, Kempston will be developed for residential use. Key principles of development include:  
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code  to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application  and to pay particular r egard to adjacent noise sources;    
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes to be accessed from Chantry Avenue;  
iii. Submission  of a Transport Assessment to include measures to mitigate impact of the development on the highway 
network and to maximise opportunities for sustainable travel ; 
iv. Financial c ontributions towards second ary school provision;  
v. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all source s of flood risk where necessary;  
Opportunities to reduce surface wa ter run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
vi. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change . 
 
The council would be supportive of an element of live  / work units on this site.  
 
 
Land at Bedford Heights, Manton Lane, Bedford  
 
4.64 The site offers the opportunity to make use of an area of surplus car parking. The housing mix and massing will need to have 
regard to the impact of development in this elevated location.  
Policy HOU1 0 Land at Bedford  Heights , Man ton Lane, Bedford  
 
Part of Bedford Heights car park, Bedford will be developed for residential use. Key principles of development  include : 
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be complete prior t o and submitted with any planning 
application and to pay particular attention to the adjacent noise sources, layout and massing of the site having regard to its 
elevated location;  
ii. Access from Brickhill Drive ; 
iii. Provision of s afe pedestrian and cycle  links to adjacent network s; 
iv. Landscaping on and around the site to soften the inter face with the adjacent car park;  
v. Financial c ontributions tow ards secondary school provision;  
vi. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change ;  
47 vii. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
Former playing field, ARA, Manton Lane, Bedford  
 
4.65 The former playing field of the Aircraft Research Association  provides an opportunity to extend the existing employment area 
around Manton Lane and provide a range of employment uses suited to this urban setting.  As the site lies on the edge of the town, 
its development will allow landscaping and pedestrian access improvements to be delivered.  The height of the development sho uld 
be restricted because of the site’s location on high ground.  
Policy EMP2  Former playing field, ARA Manton Lane, Bedford  
 
Land a t the former playing field, ARA Manton Lane will be developed for industrial, warehousing and distribution uses. Key principl es 
of development include:  
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be completed prior to and submitted with  any planning 
application and to pay particular regard to lan dscape and visual impact issues;   
ii. 1.6 hectares employment site;  
iii. Landscape and visual impact assessment  to be submitted;  
iv. Submission of a Transport A ssessment to assess the impact of the development on Manton Lane / Brickhill Drive signal 
junction, to explore opportunities  to maximise sustainable travel improvements and to  accommodate all parking within the 
site. 
v. Pre-determination archaeologi cal evalua tion will be required;  
vi. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary ; 
vii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change ; 
viii. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
Land south west of Interchange Retail Park  
 
4.66 The land south west of Interchange Retail Park between the A421 and railway i s within the urban area and currently occupied by a 
radio transmission mast.  This is shortly to become non -operational, giving the opportunity to develop this area  for a range of 
employment uses.  
  
48  
Policy EMP3  Land south west of Interchange Retail Park and north of A421, Kempston  
 
Land south west of Interchange Retail Park and north of A421 will be developed for industrial, warehousing and distribution u ses. 
Key principles of development include:  
i. 3.3 hectares e mployment site;  
ii. Submission of a  Transport Assessment to identify the impact of traffic on the B530  / Polo Field Way roundabout  and Cow 
Bridge, and identifying mitigation measures where required  which  ensure access for both pedestrians and cyclists to ensure 
sustainable travel to  / from the development ; 
iii. Access from Interchange Way ; 
iv. Provision of p edestrian and cycle links to the Interchange Retail Park , Woburn Road industrial estate , Cow Bridge and 
Ampthill Road ; 
v. Pre-determination archaeologi cal evaluation will be required;  
vi. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary;  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
vii. Delivery of a low carbon and environmentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change;  
viii. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
Land south of Goldington Road, Bedford  
 
4.67 This site is well -located on the edge  of the urban area and adjoining  the existing Elms Farm industrial estate.  Its position on the 
edge of Bedford means that it has good access to the strategic road network and is suitable for a range of employment uses.  The 
site adjoins the River Great Ouse and there are opportunities f or the site to contribute to achieving the objectives of the Bedford 
River Valley Park  (Policy AD26) . 
Policy EMP4  Land south of Goldington Road, Bedford  
 
Land south of Goldington Road will be developed for  office,  industrial, warehousing and distribution uses. Key principles of 
development include:  
i. Development to be guided by a masterplan and design code to be completed by the applicant prior to and submitted with 
any planning application and to pay particular rega rd to the importance of this l ocation as a gateway to Bedford;   
ii. 7.2 hectares employment site;  
iii. Contribution to achieving the objectives of the Bedford River Valley Park  (Policy AD26) ;  
49 iv. Development should where possible preserve and where opportunities arise  enhance the significance of heritage assets 
associated with the Howbury Hall Estate and the regionally significant Risinghoe Castle  and the contribution made by their 
settings ; 
v. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation  will be required ;  
vi. Submission of a  biodiversity report with appropriate mitigations ; 
vii. Submission of a Transport A ssessment to include the  need for mitigation on the adjacent highway and measures to ensure  
sustainable travel to  / from the development;  
viii. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary;  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
ix. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change ; 
x. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
Residential Opportunity Sites 
 
4.68 In past local plans , the Council has identified ‘Opportunity Sites’. These are sites that are in locations suitable for development, 
usually the urban area, but where specific technical issues prevent positive allocations being made. The reason for identifyi ng them 
has been t o promote their availability and invite the development industry to work with us to find ways of addressing the sites’ 
constraints.  
 
4.69 Through work on the local plans 2030 and 2040 the Council has been able to resolve many of those technical matters and mos t of 
the former opportunity sites are either an allocation in this plan or have planning permission and are counted as commitments . 
However, the Bedford Blues site still ha s outstanding technical issues . If these can be resolved, the site  will provide addi tional 
development capacity in the urban area.  
 
4.70 The inclusion of an additional site current ly occupied by the  Royal Mail delivery office would increase the number of residential units 
that could be delivered within close proximity to the station.  For thi s reason , the Jowett Sidings and Royal Mail sites are included 
as an opportunity site in accordance with Policy DS6  (which replaces Local Plan 2030 Policy 26) . The Town Deal programme, 
includes funding for works around Midland station designed to develop a  gateway to the town and promote sustainable travel. More 
information about opportunity sites is given in Appendix 3. 
 
 
  
50 Policy DS6 Opportunity Sites  
 
Within the urban area a number of opportunity sites have been identified that have redevelopment potential for housing 
development. These are described in Appendix 3. T he Council will work with land owners and other interested parties to investigate 
such o pportunities and bring them forward through the development management process  where possible . 
 
 
Adjacent to the  urban  area  
4.71 Two r esidential allocations adjacent to the urban area are included in the plan  because they provide the opportunity to help deliver 
two of the Council’s strategic green and blue infrastructure  priorities  alongside residential development .   
 
Gibraltar Corner  
 
4.72 An allocation for residential development is made at Gibraltar Corner . As well as being adjacent to the urban area, Gibraltar Corner 
also falls within the S outh of Bedford policy area and the allocation policy is contained in the policies dealing with that area (see 
Policy HOU13 below) . The dual status of the site has no strategic significance.  A new settlement policy area has been defined 
which  maintains  the area’s  separate character and prevents coalescence with other settlement including the  urban area. 
Development here benefits from  good links with Bedford and  the opportunity to access rail stations .   It also deliv ers significant 
green and blue infrastructure improvements including a section of the Bedford to Milton Keynes Waterway Park and  additional 
planting areas contributing  to the Forest of Marston Vale.  
 
Bedford River Valley Park  
 
4.73 Enabling development at Bedford River Valley Park has been allocated in the development plan for a number of years in order t o 
finance the delivery of a watersports  lake and other leisure opportunities  (Allocations & Designations Local Plan Policy AD23) . 
Whilst planning permission for the watersports lake has been granted and development legally commenced, the project has 
progressed no further. The enabling development hasn’t happened, but the Council’s a spiration to deliver the lake and leisure uses  
in sup port of wider growth in the borough remains a priority.  
 
4.74 A new scheme has been drawn up to take the project forward.  Whilst the original enabling development envisaged employment, 
leisure and education uses on the site with the possibility of a continuing  care retirement community, the refreshed scheme  will 
deliver a mixed use development including residential units, an education facility, a care home, and watersports lake set in a well 
landscaped, multi -functional greenspace to serve the recreational need s of Bedford’s expanding population.  Development of the  
51 site will enable the consolidation of a number of piecemeal areas of green infrastructure and will foster biodiversity improv ements 
through habitat creation and sensitive landscaping.   
 
4.75 The development will become a gateway into the eastern side of Bedford providing pedestrian and cycle links connecting into t he 
existing networks. The area has high archaeological significance which will be enhanced and interpreted for the benefit of the w ider 
public. Policy AD26 sets the Bedford River Valley Park Framework.  The watersports lake  will become a multi -activity area for local 
residents , as well as providing a regional facility  for watersports events .  
 
4.76 A masterplan and design code will be prep ared for this site and will be adopted as SPD. It is expected that work to inform the SPD 
(including any technical studies that are required) will be funded by the landowner / developer.  
Policy HOU11  Land at Bedford River Valley Park  
 
Land at Bedford River Valley Park will be developed for a mix of residential, education, open space and recreational uses including 
the delivery of a watersports lake and strategic green infrastructure improvements. Key principles of development include:  
i. A masterplan and design code to be prepared and adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document prior to the 
submission of any planning application for the site. The preparation of the S upplementary Planning Document  will be led 
by the Council in partnership w ith landowners / developers, stake holders and the local community;   
ii. Delivery of a mix of residential units ;  
iii. Submission of a Transport Assessment detailing impact on the surrounding highway network , necessary mitigations and 
opportunities for internal and external connectivity and active a nd low carbon travel;   
iv. Provision of two vehicular access points onto the A603 ; 
v. Provision of pedestrian and cycle routes and links to existing  networks  including NCN51;  
vi. Provision of a mobility hub ; 
vii. Provision of a serviced s ite with a minimum area of 2.4 ha to accommodate a two form entry primary school and to 
include early years ’ provision ; 
viii. Financial contribution s to secondary school provision;  
ix. Delivery of a watersports lake before the completion of the 500th dwelling appropriate for regional standard events and 
associated infrastructure including boat house, club  house and adequate car parking;  
x. Provision of links to existing green infrastructure networks ; 
xi. Masterplan to ensure that development is designed to preserve an d where opportunities arise, enhance the significance 
of heritage assets and the contribution made by setting, including for  
 Grade II Octagon Farmhouse  
 Grade II Dog House  
 Assets within Willington including the Scheduled Stables and Dovecote, and Grade II St Lawrence Church;   
52 xii. The retention and appropriate reuse of Octagon Farmhouse and its outbuildings as part of the overall development ; 
xiii. A buffer should be provided between the scheduled monument, ‘Two Barrows ’ 500m NE of Octagon Farm and the cycle 
path propo sed ensuring that the significance of the asset is not harmed by redevelopment through ph ysical impacts of 
redevelopment;   
xiv. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation in areas not previously subject to quarrying or archaeological investigation ; 
xv. Investigati on into the diversion of Elstow Brook in consultation with the Internal Drainage Board;  
xvi. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary. 
Opportunities to reduce surface water run-off and flood risk on and off site should be  identified;  
xvii. Contribut ion to the Forest of Marston Vale with a minimum of 30% tree cover to be provided on the site ; 
xviii. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
xix. Deliver y of a low carbon and environmentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change;   
xx. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure;  
xxi. Investigation of oppor tunities for a district heating network  associated with the nearby Water Recycling Centre.  
 
 
Growth locations on the EWR / A421 transport corridor and with the potential for rail-based growth  
South of Bedford  
4.77 The South of Bedford Strategic policy area extends from the edge of the urban area to the borough boundary south and west of 
Bedford . It includes locations  where strategic development is already planned or has recently taken place and new opportunities for 
strategic rail -based growth at the core of  the Arc to deliver new jobs and homes.  In addition, the area is within the Forest of Marston 
Vale, where there is an established agenda for landscape improvement  and enhancing green infrastructure.  
 
Overarching Vision  
 
The S outh of Bedford area will be an Arc-leading place of innovation, set against the backdrop of a strong, multi -
functional green infrastructure network structured around a maturing Forest of Marston Vale where distinctive healthy, 
walkable neighbourhoods enab le people to meet their needs locally and travel actively, and where the possibilities for 
lower carbon living are maximised for all.  
 
The Stewartby Hardwick rail station will open up a unique location for the creation of a new settlement set within a Forest 
Park of around 4,000 dwellings incorporating an innovation hub to provide high quality, local employment opportunities. 
The newly opened station at Wixams will support expansion of the established new settlement in proximity to further 
innovation -based employment provision at Pear Tree Farm.   
53  
With its good connections to Bedford, Shortstown will bring additional development opportunities including the re -use of 
brownfield land at the DVSA site. Also close to Bedford, development at Gibra ltar Corner will support the provision of a 
further section of the Bedford to Milton Keynes Waterway Park which is a strategic green infrastructure priority for the 
Council.  
 
Across the policy area, and against the backdrop of the Forest of Marston Vale, existing and new communities will be 
better linked by active travel routes, reducing car use, congestion and emissions.   
 
Policy HOU12  South of Bedford area  
 
Within the South of Bedford  policy area development will take an environment led approach and focus on enhancing natural capital by 
continuing to deliver the Forest of Marston Vale and enhancing the multifunctional green infrastructure network to provide the basis for 
distinctive place making and the setting for : 
 An Arc leading new settlement incorporating a new strategic Forest Park and an innovation hub at Kempston Hardwick served 
by a new station on the East West Rail line at Stewartby Hardwick (Policy HOU14) ; 
 Eastern and southern expansions to Wixams new sett lement and the delivery of new station on the Midland Main Line (Policies 
HOU 15 and 16) ; 
 Development at Shortstown; land at the former D VSA site (Policy HOU18) and at College Farm incorporating a mobility hub 
(Policy HOU17) ; 
 Development focussed at Gibral tar Corner delivering an additional section of the Bedford Waterway Park , wet woodland and 
additional access to nearby green infrastructure (Policy HOU13) ; 
 A high value business park (primarily research and development with elements of manufacturing, warehousing and distribution) 
at Pear Tree Farm, Elstow (Policy EMP5) . 
 
Development will be delivered in tandem with infrastructure and will require  contribution s to the delivery of:  
 The Forest of Marston Vale (LP 2030 Policy 36S) involving a minimum of 30% tree cover to be provided across the policy area 
and connections to the wider network ; 
 The Bedford Waterway Park (Allocations and Designations Plan Policy AD27 ); 
 Strategic transport infrastructure ; 
 An enhanced active travel network including an expanded Green Wheel and connections to National Cycle Network R oute 51 ; 
 Environmental regeneration  including biodiversity net gain , particularly through the remediation of sites associated with the 
brickmaking industry ;  
54  Healthy walking neighbourhoods ; 
 Multi user routes to be provided wherever possible including upgrading existing routes to bridleway status ;    
 Links between Stewartby Hardwick  and Wixams Stations including the provision of a dedicated shuttle bus service which also 
connects Gibraltar Corner and East Wixams.  
 
Development should also explore the potential for :  
 Strategic solution surface water management  issues ; 
 Community heating  (LP 2030 Policy 55) . 
 
The Council will prepare a strategic place making framework  to guide development across the policy area which will be adopted as 
Supplementary Planning Document. This will focus on matters including : 
 Landscape, n atural capital and gr een infrastructure ; 
 Internal and external c onnectivity and active and low carbon travel ;  
 Environmental regeneration and remediation ; 
 Strategic master planning  and place making principles ; 
 Approaches to governance and stewardship  of community assets ; 
 Infrastructure delivery in accordance with the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan . 
 
The allocated residential and employment sites must be well designed  and respond to the vision for the area . To ensure that quality 
will be created and maintained desig n guidance  will be prepared,  having regard to the strategic place making framework and where 
appropriate Garden City Principles, will  be prepared in the form of development briefs, masterplans and design codes depending on 
the size of the individual sites and as specified in policies HOU13 -18 and EMP5.  
 
Elsewhere within the policy area, outside of the settlement limits defined on the policies map the adopted policies of the development 
plan and in particular P olicy 7S will apply . 
 
 
4.78 The key elements of the vision are illustrated  in the strategic concept plan below  
 
 
 
 
 
  
55 Figure 5: South of Bedford area  
 
 
 
 
 
56  
Land at Gibraltar Corner, Kempston  Rural  
 
4.79 Development of land at Gibraltar Corner , Kempston Rural  will contribute to the delivery of key green and blue infrastructure projects 
in the south of Bedford area including a section of the Bedford to Milton Keynes Waterway Park and the Forest of Marston Vale , 
with a particular opportunity to provide areas of wet woodland within the site.  Development will help to  facilitate a new school and 
pedestrian and cycle paths linking Wootton and Kempston. This area also contains good examples of ridge and furrow which can 
be incorporated into the green infrastructure of the site.  
 
4.80  A masterplan and design code will be prep ared for this site and will be adopted as SPD. It is expected that work to inform the SPD 
(including any technical studies that are required) will be funded by the landowner / developer . 
Policy HOU13  Land at Gibraltar Corner, Kempston  Rural  
 
Land at Gibraltar Corner, Kempston Rural will be developed for  a mix of residential uses and open space including the delivery of 
strategic green infrastructure improvements . Key principles of development include:  
i. A masterplan and design code to be prepare d and adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document prior to the 
submission of any planning application for the site. The preparation of the S upplementary Planning Document  will be led 
by the Council in partnership with landowners / developers, stakeholders  and the local community.   This document will 
accord with the South of Bedford strategic framework and will  be prepared in advance of the submission  of a planning 
application  and will  pay particular regard t o ensuring  that the development is designed to preserve the setting of heritage 
assets;  
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes;  
iii. Submission of a Transport Assessment ;  
iv. Measures to facilitate access by bus services across the site including a shuttle bus connecting the site with Kempston 
Hardwick and Wixams  railway stations and the provision of a mobility hub;  
v. Provision of a  pedestrian cycle way between the site, Kempston and surrounding green infrastructure and NCN 51;  
vi. Provision of a 2.4ha serviced site to accommodate a 2FE Primary school to  include early years’ provision;  
vii. Financial contribution towards secondary school provision;  
viii. Delivery of improvements to the green infrastructure network ;  
ix. Masterplan to ensure development is designed to preserve a nd, where opportunities arise, enhance the significance of 
heritage assets and the contribution made by setting including for:  
 Grade II listed The Cottage , 
 Grade II Kempston House,   
57  Grade II Ramsay Cottage,  
 Grade II 157 Bedford Road , and  
 Listed buildings  in and around Keeley Green ; 
x. Include appropriate mitigation measures where necessary for heritage assets listed under  ix; 
xi. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation for the parts of the site to be developed ; 
xii. Areas of ridge and furrow earthworks to be protected during construction ; 
xiii. The developable area shall be located within Flood Zone 1 ; 
xiv. Contribut ion to the Forest of Marston Vale with a minimum of 30% tree cover to be provided on the site with appropriate 
public access  and may include areas of wet woo dland ;  
xv. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
xvi. Provision of land to facilitate the Bedford to Milton Keynes Waterway Park to the east of Gibraltar Corner;   
xvii. Provision of a public car parking area to provide parking for local residents and visitors, including those to the Bedford 
and Milton Keynes Waterway Park , Forest of Marston Vale, walking and cycling routes . The proposed car park shall be 
designed and located to minimise disturbance to the best pr eserved sections of ridge and furrow earthworks in this area ; 
xviii. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where necessary.  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on and of f site should be identified  and could consider the 
ability of the Waterway Park t o assist with flood mitigation;  
xix. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change ; 
xx. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrast ructure.     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
58 Figure 6: Land at Gibraltar Corner  
 
Kempston Hardwick  
 
4.81 Land at Kempston Hardwick is allocated as a new settlement. The site is located at the heart of the South of Bedford Strategic 
policy  area and the core of the Arc.  
 
59  
4.82 The site has unique locational strengths and qualities which, if properly realised and guided by appropriate  design principles, will 
enable it to be an exemplar for low carbon living and innovation.    
 
4.83 Provision of new rail stations giving direct to access to Oxford, Cambridge  and London will make the site an ideal location for a new 
settlement incorporating a highly accessible innovation campus with the potential for linked academic activities, vital for facilitating a 
more skilled and prosperous borough. The size and scale of the Kempston Hardwick site and the new on -site rail provision provides 
the opportunity to create a sustainable innovation campus which is a world class destinat ion for clean growth with high -specification 
business space of offices, labs, manufacturing space and affiliated distribution space within the buildings for knowledge bas ed 
industries including life  sciences, technology and engineering.  
 
4.84 The site has the capacity to deliver at least 4,000 homes and the potential to deliver a distinct new place which will be structured 
around a site wide park which would help create the campus setting needed for high tech innovative employment uses and fulfil  the 
requiremen t to provide at least 30% woodland cover and through the remediation of the lake areas to create attractive waterside 
environments. Within this regenerated landscape the park will have an important role in establishing the character and identi ty of 
the set tlement , providing a landscaped framework to link the settlement centre at the EWR hub providing community, local 
employment and co -working spaces, leisure, health and cultural facilities with walking neighbourhoods providing for residents’ day 
to day needs . The likely timing of key infrastructure provision, particularly EWR and the A421 mean that development will take 
place later in the plan period and deliver around 3,800 homes by 2040.   
 
4.85 The main land uses are indicated on the plan below.  The South o f Bedford Framework will further develop t he vision set out in 
paragraph 4.73  and will include guidance on the scale, character and functions of the settlement.  A masterplan and design code 
will be prepared for this site to show how the new settlement can  be delivered in accordance with the Framework and will be 
adopted as SPD. It is expected that work to inform the SPD (including any technical studies that are required) will be funded  by the 
landowner / developer.  
Policy HOU1 4 Kempston  Hardwick  New Settlement  
 
As identified on the Key Diagram, South of Bedford concept plan and Policies Map, land at Kempston Hardwick is allocated as a 
new settlement to create an Arc leading environment and landscape led, beautiful, healthy and sociable community . It will  deliver  at 
least 4,000 homes set in a new strategic Forest Park , which will also provide the landscaped setting for a n innovation hub and 
business  / science  campus primarily focussed on innovation, research, development and education providing around 70ha  of 
employment land . Development  will be located i n close proximity to the proposed new rail station on the East West Rail Line at 
Stewartby Hardwick  and a new rail station on the Midland Main  Line at Wixams .  
  
60 The new settlement will provide al l the key services and facilities to a ddress its own needs, including health, education, retail, culture 
and community components, and will foster a strong local community based approach to the ownership and long -term stewardship of 
assets.  
 
It will have a  distinct identity based on a landscape led approach which values and enhances the natural environment and responds 
directly to  its context.  It  will be developed to a high design quality achieved through a process of master planning and design coding 
and will be an exemplar for a new urban form and design of  high tech business environment  appropriate to its highly accessible 
location. It  will incorporate a range of homes, employment, an integrated and multi -purpose green infrastructure network fully 
struct ured around a Forest Park achieving at least 30% woodland cover and lending context and character to walking 
neighbourhoods which will enable residents to meet the majority of their day to day needs locally and achieve access to the r ail 
stations by active  travel modes .  
 
A strategic masterplan and design code is to be prepared by the Council in conjunction with the landowners, stakeholders and local 
community and adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document .  This document will need to be produced ahead of  the submission  
of any planning application and will accord with the South of Bedford strategic framework . The document  will demonstrate how the 
new settlement will deliver the policy principles below and will include : 
 A Natural Capital impact assessment a nd biodiversity study with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
 A remediation and environmental regeneration strategy for the areas impacted by previous brickmaking and clay extraction 
activities ; 
 A Green Infrastructure strategy ; 
 A strategy for building healthy communities ; 
 A transport and movement strategy including infrastructure needs and access to both stations for all modes ; 
 A phasing strategy to ensure that  the required  infrastructure investment is provided in tandem with or ahead of the 
development it supports;    
 An infrastructure delivery plan setting out the timing, funding, and provision of green, social, and physical infrastructure, 
including schools, community faci lities and local centres in tandem with housing development ; 
 A strategy for sustainable long -term governance and arrangements for the stewardship of community assets ; 
 A site specific flood risk assessment  including identifying opportunities to reduce surfa ce water run -off and flood risk on and 
off site . 
 
In order to ensure that the new settlement is brought forward in a high quality, strategic and comprehensive manner, planning 
permission will only be granted following the adoption of the strategic masterpl an and design code .   
  
61 Development must demonstrate how it has been holistically planned to accord with  the objectives of the Local plan, the South of 
Bedford framework and the specific principles below:  
 
GREENER  
i. The provision of high quality planning, design and place -making, and management of built and public realm so that the 
Kempston Hardwick new settlement is characterised as a distinctive Arc leading place which embraces the opportunity 
for compact urban f orm that capitalises on local assets and establishes environments tha t promote health, and 
wellbeing;  
ii. The provision of a site wide park providing multifunctional green infrastructure delivering the 30% tree cover required 
as a contribution to the Marston Vale  incorporating and enhancing the site’s ecological and open water assets and 
providing well -integrated green space (formal, natural and allotments); and providing environmental net gains as well 
as connections and contributions to the South of Bedford gree n infrastructure network ;  
iii. As part of the green infrastructure network, cycle and pedestrian links to facilitate active travel within and between the 
neighbourhoods, business and educational areas, connectivity  hubs and surrounding areas;  
iv. An integrated sur face water management solution including the integration of Sustainable Drainage Systems into the 
network of open spaces and lakes, to mitigate potential flood r isk and enhance the environment;  
v. Measures to ensure resilience to climate change including meas ures to ensure the efficient use of energy including the 
exploration of the potential for district heating utilising heat from the Rookery South Energy Recovery Facility, 
Stewartby and sustainable drainage;   
vi. The protection and  / or enhancement of heritage and biodiversity assets within and surrounding the site, to include:  
 Pre-determination archaeological evaluation for the area s of site not already evaluated,  
 Archaeological mitigation ahead of development for those areas already evaluated  and which contain  
archaeological remains ,  
 Masterplan to ensure d evelopment is designed to  preserve and where opportunities arise enhance heritage 
assets and their setting, including the scheduled Moated Manor at Kempston Hardwick , 
 Submission of a biodiversity report with appropriate mitigation and enhancements . 
 
PLACEMAKING  
vii. Place making based on a landscape led approach which draws on the heritage of the area  and achieves environmental 
regeneration , to create an Arc leading place structured around a new Forest Park and characterised by vibrant 
neighbourhoods and places to work and learn , set against the backdrop of its enhanced forest setting ;  
viii. The provision of a range of house types and tenures in accordance with the most up to date assessment of housing 
need, including  affordable housing in accordance with required levels as set out in Policy DM 1(S) to meet the needs of 
the wider community including the ageing population;   
62 ix. The provision of a mix of beautifully and imaginatively designed homes at a range of densities refl ecting the context 
and character of different parts of the site, in particular higher densities and compact urban forms around the  rail hub 
and settlement centre;  
x. The provision for a wide range of construction opportunities, offering prospects for a variet y of house builders and 
developers including small and medium sized enterprises and including the provision of serviced plots for self -build and 
custom homebuildin g in accordance with Policy DM5 ; 
xi. The provision of serviced sites for secondary and primary sc hools including early years facilitates at the heart of the 
local neighbourhoods to serve  the new development : 
 Provision of serviced sites to accommodate primary schools to provide at le ast 8 Forms of Entry with early  years 
provision  (2x 3FE  3 ha and 1 x 2FE 2.4ha), 
 Provision of a serviced site within the settlement centr e providing a minimum area of 10.1 ha to a ccommodate 
8FE secondary s chool with space for sixth form,   
 Financial contribution towards secondary school provision.  
xii. The provision of pitches for Gypsy and Travellers and plots for travelling show people to contribute to the need 
identified in a Gypsy and Traveller  Accommodation Assessment;   
xiii. The provision of leisure and sports facilities at accessible locations in line with current st andards to serve the 
settlement;  
xiv. The provision of multi -functional community space and healthcare facilities within local centres at the heart of walkable 
vibrant sociable neighbourhoods;  
xv. Foster healthy living through access to green space as a key driver of the settlement design and opportunities for local 
food production , including  through the provision of allotments  and orchards ; 
xvi. The establishment at an early stage in the development of the new settlement of appropriate and sustainable long -term 
governan ce and stewardship arrangements for community assets including green space, public realm areas and 
community and other relevant facilities.  Such arrangements are to be funded by the development and include 
community representation to ensure residents have  a stake in the long -term development, stewardship an d 
management of their community;  
xvii. Design of the new settlement should incorporate appropriate mitigation measures in relation to noise sources including 
railway lines and the r emediation of contaminated l and. 
 
ACCESSIBLE  
xviii. In accordance with the transport and movement strategy, the provision of a balanced package of measures to 
encourage smarter transport choices to meet the needs of the new development including the integration of technology 
to deliver ‘on-demand’ travel information and measures to reduce the numbe r of single occupancy car trips;   
63 xix. Measures should maximise the opportunities for active travel through the provision of a network of footpaths, cycle 
ways and bridleways to enhance permeability within the site and to the adjoining area and will include : 
 connections between communities across the East West Rail Line at Stewartby Hardwick , Manor Road and one 
additional location between these two points  to facilitate accessibility , 
 new multi user ro utes to connect with the wider rights of way network and active travel links to Bedford,  
 measures to facilitate access by bus services across the site including a shuttle bus connecting the site w ith 
Gibraltar Corner and Wixams,  
 car clubs  and mobility hubs , 
 appropriate measures to facilitate  autonomous vehicles ,  
xx. A programme of measures to facilitate accessibility and  minimise and mitigate the traffic impacts on the local and 
strategic road network to include :  
 Additional access to the B530  and the conversion of B530 / Manor Road junction to a roundabout as part of 
access to / from Wixams Station ,   
 Addition of flared approaches on the B530 approaches to the Kiln Road Roundabout , 
 Realignment of Manor Road  and connections to Fields Road,  
 Upgr ades to Broadmead Road , 
 Contributions towards the p rovision of a footbridge to Wixams Station (west)  and foot and cycle connections to 
Manor Road,  
 The development is dependent on the delivery of transport improvements which will need to be secured before 
development can take place , in accordance with an agreed Infrastructure Delivery Plan .   
 
PROSPEROUS  
xxi. The delivery of new neighbourhoods  that are sociable, vibrant, and walkable (20 minute s) neighbourhoods  with 
equality of access for all. The new settlement  will provide a range of community services and facilities including health, 
education, retail, cult ure, community meeting, co-working spaces  and local employment opportunities around the 
station and in local neighbourhoods , multifunctional open space an d sports and leisure facilities;  
xxii. An innovation hub with the potential for the incorporation of academic and science park uses with elem ents of high tech 
manufacturing ; 
xxiii. Installation of super -fast broadband for all businesses and community facilities and also for all dwellings to support 
home working, at the outse t of each phase of development.   
 
 
  
64 Figure 7: Kempston Hardwick New S ettlement  
 
 
 
65 Land S outh of Wixams  
4.86 The site adjoins the A6 and is located to the south of the existing Wixams development. Development of the site  will allow for 
connections to Bedford and the Wixams for cyclists and pedestrian s. Development will also include significant green infrastructure 
improvements including tree and hedgerow planting to provide publically accessible green infrastructure providing noise mitigation  
from the A6 and a long term buffer between Wixams and Wilstead.  
Policy HOU1 5 Land South of Wixams  
 
Land at south of Wixams will be developed for residential  uses and open space . Key principles of development include:  
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application  and to accord with the South of Bedford strategic framework ; 
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes;  
iii. Submission of a Transport Assessment to include:  
 Improved pedestrian and cycle access from the site  via the A6 and Bedford Road;  
 An access strategy  for vehicle access to the site  and wider Wixams ; 
 Multi -user routes  to connect to existing networks in Wixams and surrounding areas ; 
 A new bus stop to provide an extension to the existing bus service route in Wixams ; 
iv. Provision of a mobility hub ;  
v. Financial contributions tow ards secondar y school provision;  
vi. A noise report should guide the location and design of dwellings on the site and establish any required mitigation 
measures . 
vii. Contribut ion to the Forest of Marston Vale with a minimum of 30% tree cover to be provided on the site  with appropriate 
public access;  
viii. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
ix. Creation of a strategic green corridor to secure a permanent green buffer between Wixams and Wilstead ; 
x. Development should preserve and where opportunities arise enhance heritage assets and their setting, including assets 
located in Duck End and Wilstead;   
xi. Pre-determination archaeological  evaluation  will be required ; 
xii. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk wher e necessary;  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
xiii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change .  
 
 
  
66 Land E ast of Wixams  
 
4.87 The site is located to the east of the A6 and the existing Wixams development. The proposals will complement the existing 
development at Wixams and provide additional facilities and i nfrastructure including schools and an employment hub to cater for a 
range of flexible employment uses. The site also has the potential to create pedestrian and cycle connecti ons to Shortstown and 
the Wixams . The additional development and new populatio n will allow for an  extensi on of the public transport service to allow for 
more sustainable travel to Bedford . The Meteorological Research Unit at Cardington located to the east of the site will be an 
important consideration in the masterplanning of the site due to the potential impact of new development on its current operations.  
Policy HOU1 6 Land at East Wixams  
 
Land at E ast of Wixams will be developed for res idential, community and open space uses.  
 
Key principles of development include:  
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application  and to accord with the South of Bedford strategic framework . The masterplan and design code should be 
prepared in consultation with the Me t Office to ensure that the limitations created by the proximity of the Meteorological 
Research Unit at Cardingto n Airfield are fully considered;   
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes;  
iii. The development is dependent on the delivery of transport imp rovements which will need to be secured before 
development can take place  in accordance with an agreed Infrastructure Delivery Plan ;   
iv. Provision of a full Transport Assessment to be submitted with any planning application ; 
v. Traffic mitigation for the existing roundabouts off A6 to accommodate the new development ; 
vi. Extension of the bus service from the existing Wixams bus network including the provision of new bus stops to service the 
new development , measures to facilitate  a shuttle bus connecting the s ite with Gibraltar Corner and Kempston Hardwick  
and a mobility hub;  
vii. Provision or upgrading of existing pedestrian and cycle links to bridleway status to allow active travel to Shortstown and 
Wixams  including the crossing of the A6 ; 
viii. Provision of two 2.4ha serviced site s to accommodate  two form entry primary school s to include e arly years ’ provision;  
ix. Provision of a n 11ha serviced site to accommodate a nine form entry  secondary school  to include sixth form provision ; 
x. Financial contribution tow ards secondary school provision;  
xi. Contribut ion to the Forest of Marston Vale with a minimum of 30% tree cover to be provided on the site with appropriate 
pubic access ; 
xii. Development should preserve and, where opportunities arise , enhance heritage assets and their setting, i ncluding assets 
located in Duck End, with appropriate mitigation measures adopted along th e southern boundary of the site;    
67 xiii. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation  will be required ; 
xiv. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all source s of flood risk where necessary;  
xv. Deliver y of low carbon and environmentally  resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change .    
 
 Figure 8: Land South and East of Wixams  
  
 
 
 
68 College Farm, Shortstown  
 
4.88 Land at College Farm, Shortstown offers the opportunity for sustainable residential development which will also contribute to  the 
wider south  of Bedford area allowing sustainable transport and green infrastructure linkages with Wixams to the west and beyon d, 
including to the Wixams and Stewartby Hardwick railway stations.  The proposals will complement the existing development at 
Shortstown  and provide additional facilities including a new Primary School. The Meteorological Research Unit at Cardington , 
located to the east of the site will be an important consideration in the master  planning of the site  due to the potential impact of 
development on its current operations.  
Policy HOU17 Land at College Farm , Shortstown  
 
Land at College Farm, Shortstown wil l be developed for residential use s and open space .  
 
Key principles of development to be addressed include:  
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application  and to accord with the South of Bedford strategic framework . The masterplan and design code should be 
prepared in consultation with the Met Office to ensure that the limitations created by the proximity of the Meteorological 
Research Unit at Cardingto n Airfield are full y considered;  
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes;  
iii. The development is dependent on the delivery of transport improvements which will need to be secured before 
development can take place  in accordance with an agreed Infrastructure Delivery Plan ;   
iv. Submission of a Transport Assessment to include measures to mitigate impact of the development on the local and 
strategic route network and to maximise oppor tunities for sustainable travel;  
v. Provision of a mobility hub ; 
vi. Provision of a 2.4ha serviced site to accommodate a 2FE Primary school to  include early years’ provision;  
vii. Financial contribution towards secondary school provision ;  
viii. Buffer planting and landscaping to assimilate the development  into the surrounding landscape;  
ix. Contribution to the Forest  of Marston Vale with a minimum of 30% tree cover to be provided on the site  with appropriate 
public access ; 
x. Identif ication of opportunities to enhance green infrastructure including c onnections to existing networks;  
xi. Provision of public open space ; 
xii. Development should be designed to preserve and, where opportunities arise , enhance heritage assets and their setting, 
including:  
 Grade II* Cardington Sheds 1 and 2  
 Listed buildings in Harrowden   
69 xiii. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation across part of sit e not already subject to evaluation ; 
xiv. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where neces sary;  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on and off site should be identified.  New development will be 
steere d to areas of lowest flood risk;   
xv. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
xvi. Delivery of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change . 
 
Figure 9: College Farm  and DVSA sites , Shortstown  
 
 
70 Land at Former D river and Vehicle Standards Agency (DVSA) Site, Shortstown  
 
4.89 Following the closure of the DVSA at Shortstown, the site is now available for redevelopment. The site is surrounded by residential 
development to the north and west  and is suitable for residential use . The site is however adjacent to the  Grade II*  listed 
Cardington Airship Sheds and this will need to be taken into consideration.  
Policy HOU18 Land at Former D VSA Site, Shortstown  
 
Land at the former DVSA site, Shortstown will be developed for residential use. Key principles of development include:  
i. Preparati on by the applicant of a masterplan and design code  to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application  and to accord with the South of Bedford strategic framework ; 
ii. Provision of a mix of dwelling types and sizes;  
iii. Submission of a Transport Assessment to include measures to mitigate impact of the development on the local and 
strategic route network and to maximise opportunities for sustainable travel ; 
iv. Provision of a mobility hub;  
v. Provision of a footway and cycleway to link in with the existin g network  and adjacent sites ;  
vi. Development should preserve and, where opportunities arise , enhance heritage assets and their setting, including:  
 Grade II* Cardington Sheds 1 and 2  
 Grade II Cardington Railway Station  
 Cardington Conservation Area  
vii. Pre-determination archaeological  evaluation will be required ; 
viii. Financial contribution s to secondary school provision;  
ix. Contaminated land assessment to be submitted with the planning application ; 
x. Habitat survey required as the site is identified as high risk for Great Crested Newts ; 
xi. Contribut ion to the Forest of Marston Vale with a minimum of 30% tree c over to be provided on the site;  
xii. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all source s of flood risk where necessary;  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on and off site should be identified;  
xiii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environmentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change;   
xiv. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
 
  
71 Land at Pear Tree Farm, Elstow  
 
4.90 The site at Pear Tree Farm , Elstow  is a strategically located site at the junction of the A421 and A6 roads  with pedestrian and cycle 
connections to Wixams and EWR stations .  The design and location of buildings within this site will be important in order to 
minimise landscape impact and avoid coalescence with Wixams and Elstow.  A key design consideration will  be to ensure that 
sufficient separation is provided between the proposed employment development and Elstow village. For this reason, land between 
the development allocation and the village is identified on the Policies Map as Urban Open Space .  This compl ies with criterion (vi) 
of Policy AD43 Urban Open Space.  Proposals for development within the Urban Open Space will be determined in accordance 
with Policy AD43.  
 
4.91 Significant green infrastructure benefits outside the allocated site will be delivered in as sociation with the development, such as 
pedestrian and cycle links, recognising the objectives of the Bedford Green Wheel and Forest of Marston Vale projects.  
Policy EMP5 Land at Pear Tree Farm, Elstow  
 
Land at Pear Tree Farm will be developed for a scien ce park (primarily research and development with elements of manufacturing, 
warehousing and  related distribution) .  Key principles of development include:  
i. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application and to accord with the South of Bedford strategic framework . The masterplan and design code will ensure that 
the site is devel oped as a high value business park providing primarily  research and developmen t space in a landscaped 
setting;  
ii. 20.4 hectares employment site ; 
iii. Design to respect local landscape priorities, with particular regard to views of Elstow Abbey and ensuring separation from 
Elstow village;  
iv. Retention of open land to maintain separation between the  development and Elstow Village;  
v. Contribution to the Forest of Marston Vale with a minimum of 30% tree cover to be provi ded on the site;  
vi. Delivery of Forest of Marston Vale pla nting as a buffer along the boundary with the A421 ; 
vii. Provision of a green corridor incorporating a pedestrian and cycle route south of the A42 1 west  / east from th e A6 to 
Bumpy Lane and the A600;  
viii. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all source s of flood risk where necessary;  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on and off site should be identified  and implemented ; 
ix. Development should  preserve and where opportunities arise enhance he ritage assets and their setting;  
x. Pre-determination archaeological evaluat ion will be required ; 
xi. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ;  
72 xii. Submission of a Transport Assessment to include measures to mitigate impact of the development on the local and 
strategic route network and to maximise opportunities for sustainable travel ; 
xiii. Provision of a pedestrian / cycle bridge across the A421 between the site and Abbey Field or contribution towards 
pedestrian and cycle links required on the west side of the A6 from Wilstead Road roundabout and across the A421  / A6 
junction to Bedford  and Wixams ; 
xiv. Deliver y of a low carbon and environmentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change.  
 
 
Figure 10: Land at Pear tree Farm, Elstow  
 
 
73 Little Barford  
4.92 Land at Little Barford is allocated as a new settlement, contributing to the delivery of the Bedford Local Plan ’s spatial growth 
strategy. The development of Little Barford will make a key contribution towards the additional homes required to be delivere d 
across the boro ugh by 2040, delivering at least 4,000 new homes overall, of which an estimated 3, 800 will be within the current 
plan period.  
 
4.93 The new settlement is located to the north east of Bedford , close to the neighbouring town of St Neots. The East Coast Main  Line 
railway line runs north to south through the site and the proposed A428 Black Cat to Caxton Gibbet  relief road runs through the site 
providing an opportunity for a strategic road junction.  In addition , EWR will be crossing in the vicinity, possibly th rough the site, and 
will include a station offering the opportunity of a highly sustainable site accessible by rail and the strategic road networ k. In 
addition to the allocation site there is further land within the same ownership which is identified as a contingency area, should land 
be required to facilitate the EWR route and  / or station within the site. The allocation site and contingency land are illustrated by the 
plan below.  
 
4.94 The proximity of the site to the existing Little Barford employment area to the north offers the opportunity to locate new employment 
development by way of extension and / or in other areas of the site to benefit the local economy and provide further employment 
opportunities.  
 
4.95 The site has unique locational strengths and qualities which, if properly realised and guided by appropriate design principle s, will 
enable it to be an exemplar for low carbon living and innovation.   
 
4.96 The potential to designate a conservation area at Litt le Barford is being investigated by the Local Planning Authority .  
Policy HOU19  Little  Barford New S ettlement  
 
As identified on the Key Diagram and Policies Map, land at Little Barford  is allocated as a new settlement to create a landscape led 
beautiful, h ealthy and sociable community located in close proximity to the proposal for a new station on the East West Rail line 
delivering at least 4,0 00 new homes and in the region of 4 hectares  employment.   It will provide all the key services and facilities to 
address its own needs, including health, education, retail, culture and community components, and will foster a strong local 
community based approach to the ownership and long -term stewardship of  assets.  
 
The new settlement will have a distinct identity based on a landscape led approach which values and enhances the natural 
environment and responds directly to its context.  The settlement  will be developed to a high design quality  achieved through a 
process of master planning and design coding and will inco rporate a range of homes, employment, an integrated and mu lti-purpose  
74 green infrastructure network lending context and character to walking neighbourhoods which will enable residents to meet the 
majority of their day to day needs  locally and achieve access  to the new East West Rail station by active travel modes.  
 
A strategic masterplan and design code is to be prepared by the Council in conjunction with the landowners, stakeholders and local 
community and adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document .  This document will need to be produced ahead of the submission 
of any planning application and will demonstrate how the new settlement will deliver the policy principles below and will include : 
 A Natural Capital impact assessment and biodiversity study  with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
 A Green Infrastructure strategy ; 
 A transport and movement strategy including infrastructure needs and the relationship to East West Rail ; 
 A phasing strategy to ensure that infrastructure investment is provided in tandem with or ahead  of the development it 
supports;    
 An infrastructure delivery plan setting out the timing, funding, and provision of green, social, and physical infrastructure, 
including schools, community facilities and local centres in tandem with ho using development ; 
 Character assessment and master planning ; 
 Design coding ; 
 A strategy for sustainable long -term governance and arrangements for the stewardship of community assets ;  
 A detailed assessment of the mineral resource within the M ineral Safeguarding Area to examine quantity, quality and 
feasibility of extraction ; 
 A site specific flood risk assessment including identifying opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on and 
off site ; 
 A detailed heritage impact assessment.  
 
In order to ensure that the new settlement is brought forward in a high quality, strategic and comprehensive manner, planning 
permission will only be granted following the adoption of the strategic masterplan and design code .  Development must demonstrate 
how it has been holistically planned to accord with the objectives of the Local plan and the specific principles below:  
 
GREENER  
i. The provision of high quality planning, design and place -making, and management of built and public realm so that the 
Little Bar ford new settlement is characterised as a distinctive place that capitalises on local assets and establishes 
environments tha t promote health, and wellbeing;  
ii. The provision of a multifunctional green infrastructure which: retains, enhances, connects, and in creases accessibility 
to the green infrastructure network including the River Great Ouse and on site woodland areas; provides well -
integrated green space (formal, natural and allotments); and p rovides environmental net gains;   
75 iii. As part of the green infrastru cture network, cycle and pedestrian links to facilitate active travel within the 
neighbourhood s and surrounding areas;  
iv. Integration of Sustainable Drainage Systems into the network of open spaces, to mitigate potential flood risk, and 
measures to ensure res ilience to climate change including measures to ensure the efficient use of energy and water i n 
accordance with Policy 93;   
v. The Council will consider whether any areas of the Little Barford settlement merit designation as a Conservation Area. 
In the event of its designation, development must preserve and where opportunities arise, enhance its special interest.  
vi. The protection and  / or enhancement of heritage and biodiversity assets within and surrounding the site, to include:  
 Any new development should contr ibute positively to local character and distinctiveness and enhance or better 
reveal the significance of any designated heritage assets affected,  
 Pre-determination archaeological evaluation  in all areas which will potentially be impacted by development and  
where the nature and significance of the archaeological resource does not necessitate preserv ation in situ,  
 Development should also seek to sympathetically reuse built heritage and retain those non -designated heritage 
assets of archaeological interest in situ, including above ground settlement and associated earthworks, which 
make a positive contribution to the appearance, understanding, appreciation and interpretation of the historic 
settlement , 
 Submission of a biodiversity report with appropriate mitigat ion and enhancements . 
 
PLACEMAKING  
vii. Place making based on a landscape led approach to creating a vibrant place which is sensitive to local character and 
creates distinctive neighbourhoods ;  
viii. The provision of a range of house types and tenures in accordance with the most up to date assessment of housing 
need, including affordable housing in accordance with required levels as set out in Policy DM1(S)  to meet the needs of 
the wider community i ncluding the ageing population;  
ix. The provision of  a mix of beautifully and imaginatively designed homes  at a range of densities reflecting the context 
and character of different parts of the site, in particular lower densities in accordance with the historic character of the 
western side  of the site and  higher densities in areas with higher accessibility to the East West  Rail station and local 
centres;  
x. The provision for a wide range of construction opportunities, offering prospects for a variety of house  builders and 
developers including small and medium sized enterprises and including the provision of serviced plots for self -build and 
custom homebuilding in accordance with Policy DM5 ; 
xi. The provision of serviced sites for secondary and primary schools including early years facilitates at th e heart of the 
local neighbourhoods to serve the new development, (2 x 5.5ha 4FE primary and 1 x 10.1ha 8FE secondary schools);   
76 Due to the lack of capacity in existing schools , additional capacity will be required to be open prior to the occupation of 
the first dwelling.  Financial contribution tow ards secondary school provision;  
xii. The provision of pitches for Gypsy and Travellers and plots for travelling show people where need is identified in a 
Gypsy and Tra veller Accommodation Assessment;  
xiii. The provision of l eisure and sports facilities at accessible locations in line with current st andards to serve the 
settlement;  
xiv. The provision of multi -functional community space and healthcare facilities within local centres at the heart of walkable 
vibrant sociable neighbourhoods;  
xv. The fostering of healthy living through access to green space as a key driver of the settlement design and opportunities 
for local food production;   
xvi. The establishment at an early stage in the development of the new settlement of appropriate  and sustainable long -term 
governance and stewardship arrangements for community assets including green space, public realm areas and 
community and other relevant facilities.  Such arrangements are to be funded by the development and include 
community repr esentation to ensure residents have a stake in the long -term development, stewardship an d 
management of their community;  
xvii. Layout and d esign of the new settlement should incorporate appropriate mitigation measures in relation to high 
pressure gas pipelines, overhead power lines and noise sources including railway lines.  
 
ACCESSIBLE  
xviii. In accordance with the transport and movement strategy, th e provision of a balanced package of measures to 
encourage smarter transport choices to meet the needs of the new develop ment including the integration of technology 
to deliver ‘on -demand’ travel information and measures to reduce the number of single occupancy car tr ips; 
xix. Measures should maximise the opportunities for active travel through the provision of a network of footp aths, cycle 
ways and bridleways to enhance permeability within the site and to the adjoining area and will include : 
 connections between communities across the East Coast Main Line at a minimum of two locations ,  
 new foot way and cycle routes including the integration of National Cycle Network (NCN)  route 12 through the 
site,  
 links to the E ast West Rail station  including the provision of a dedicated shuttle bus service  from the site ,  
 measures to facilitate access by bus s ervices across the site ,  
 provision of chargin g points for electric vehicles , 
 car clubs  and mobility hubs , 
 appropriate measures to facilitate autonomous vehicles ,  
xx. A programme of measures to facilitate accessibility and  minimise and mitigate the traffic im pacts on the local and 
strategic road network to include :   
77  widening of Barford Road and any necessary new junctions ,  
 widening of the existing footway and conversion to a cycle / pedestrian route on Barford Road up to the A428 
roundabout ,   
 provision of a multi -user route alongside River Great Ouse and potential to cross the river , 
 The development is dependent on the delivery of transport improvements which will need to be secured before 
development can take place  in accordance with an agreed Infrastructure  Delivery Plan .  
 
PROSPEROUS  
xxi. The delivery of new neighbourhoods  that are sociable, vibrant, and walkable (20 minute s) neighbourhoods  with 
equality of access for all. The new settlement  will provide a range of community services and facilities including he alth, 
education, retail, culture, community meeting spaces, multifunctional open space an d sports and leisure facilities;  
xxii. Approximately 3.6 ha of industrial and warehousing employment land , to be located adjacent to and act as an 
expansion of the existing Little Barford employment area ; 
xxiii. Installation of super -fast broadband for all businesses and community facilities and also for all dwellings to support 
home working, at the outse t of each phase of development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
78 Figure 11: Little Barford New Settlement15  
 
                                                           
15 (Figure 11 was replaced on 29/4/22 following approval of the local plan by Executive on 27/4/22. The main c hange being the references to ‘C ontingency land’ and 
‘Other land within ownership’)  
 
79 Other employment sites  
Land at Water End and St Neots Road  
 
4.97 The site at Water End / St Neots Road lies adjacent to a junction on the A421 east of Bedford and has excellent links to the 
strategic road network.  Particular attention should be paid to the impact of additional traffic movements on the junction.  The si te 
provides the opportunity to develop a modern research campus -style development , primarily for research and development with 
elements of manufacturing, warehousing and distribution all within a landscaped setting.  Such a campus -like environment is 
suita ble for higher -end business occupiers to enable them to attract and retain skilled staff.  In developing the site , it will be 
important to ensure that there is adequate separation from the existing residential buildings at Green End.   
80 Policy EMP6  Business Park, Land at Water End and St Neots Road  
 
Land at Water End and St Neots Road will be developed for a campus -style development  (primarily research and development with 
elements of manufacturing, warehousing and distribution). Key principles of development  include:  
i. A research campus of approximately 30 hectares in total on two sites  at Water End and St Neots Road;    
ii. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application. The master plan and design code will ensure that the site is developed as a high value business park 
providing primarily research and developmen t space in a landscaped setting;  
iii. Design to respect local landscape priorities, ensuring separation from Renhold, Green End village and the need for 
sensitive external lighting;  
iv. Provision of high quality  landmark  / gateway buildings at A421 junct ion in a landscaped environment;  
v. Pre-determination archaeological evaluation  will be required;   
vi. Development should be designed where p ossible to preserve and where opportunities arise, enhance the significance of 
heritage assets and the contribution made by setting, including for : 
 Scheduled monument of Howbury ringwork and Medieval Trackway , 
 Grade II listed Great Dairy Farmhouse ,  
 Grade II listed Hill Farmhouse , 
 Grade II listed 52 Green End ,  
 Grade II listed Howbury Hall and associated heritage assets , 
vii.      Include appropriate mitigation measures where necessary for heritage assets listed under vi ; 
viii. Delivery of a low carbon and environmentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change;  
ix. Submission of a Transport Assessment to include : 
a. Improvements to the A421 junction  roundabouts,  
b. Measures to ensure sustainable travel to  / from the development , 
x. Provision of a mobility hub ; 
xi. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
xii. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all sources of flood risk where  necessary . 
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off by on an d off site should be identified;  
xiii. Early engagement with Anglian Water is required in order to identify connection to water network infrastructure.    
 
 
 
 
  
81 Land at College Farm  
 
4.98 Land at College Farm will be accessed from a new Black Cat roundabout at the junction of the A421 and A1.  The junction is being 
redesigned to accommodate the A421 extension eastwards to Caxton Gibbet.  Given the site’s excellent links to the strategic r oad 
networ k it is suitable for a variety of roadside service facilities as well as employment uses.  
Policy EMP7  Land at College Farm, Black Cat roundabout  
 
Land at College Farm, Black Cat roundabout will be developed for roadside services, industrial, warehousing an d distribution uses. 
Key principles of development include:  
i. Roadside service facilities including, service station, hotel, lorry park and associated  roadside service  facilities ; 
ii. 3.0 hectares employment site;  
iii. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all source s of flood risk where necessary;  
iv. A Transport Assessment will be required to identify the impact of traffic on the highway and necessary mitigation s including 
measures to ensure sustainable travel to  / from the d evelopment ; 
v. Archaeological excavation of areas within the proposal site not previously investigated  / excavated ahead of quarrying or in 
connection with the A428 scheme;  
vi. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
vii. Design should consider the need for sensitive external lighting ;  
viii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environ mentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to climate change . 
 
 
Land to South West of Black Cat Roundabout  
 
4.99 To the south -west of the Black Cat roundabout the site of the Roxton Garden Centre is allocated for employment.  Its excellent links 
to the strategic road network make it particularly suited to warehousing and distribution uses. In developing the site , it will be  
important to ensure that there is adequate separation from the existing residential buildings at  Roxton.  
 
Policy EMP8  Land at Roxton, south west of the Black Cat roundabout  
 
Land at Roxton, south west of the Black Cat roundabout will be developed for ware housing and distribution uses. Key principles of 
development include:  
i. 17.0 hectares employment site;   
82 ii. Preparation by the applicant of a masterplan and design code to be completed prior to and submitted with any planning 
application. The masterplan and design code will ensure that the site is developed in a landscaped setting that minimises 
its impact o n nearby residential properties;  
iii. Design to respect local landscape priorities, ensuring separation  from nearby residential properties in  Roxton;  
iv. A site specific flood risk assessment will be needed and mitigation required for all source s of flood risk where necessary;  
Opportunities to reduce surface water run -off and flood risk on an d off site should be identified;  
v. Pre-determination archaeological evalu ation  will be required ; 
vi. Development should  designed to preserve and where opportunities  arise enhance  the significance of  heritage assets and 
the contribution made by their setting  including for: 
 Scheduled monument of Tempsford Bridge ,  
 Roxton Cons ervation  Area and assets within,   
vii. Include appropriate mitigation measures where necessary for heritage assets listed under vi;  
viii. Submission of a wildlife and habitat survey with appropriate mitigation and enhancements ; 
ix. A Transport Assessment will be required to identify the impact of traffic on the highway and necessary mitigation s 
including measures to ensure sustainable travel to / from the development ; 
x. The development is dependent on the delivery of transport improvements which will need to be secured before 
development can take place  in accordance with an agreed Infrastructure Delivery Plan ;   
xi. Design should consider the need for sensitive external lighting;   
xii. Deliver y of a low carbon and environmentally resilient development that is adaptive to and resilient to  climate change.  
 
 
4.100  The Local  Plan 2040 Key Diagram is below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
83 Figure 12: Key Diagram  
 
 
 
84 5.0 Town  centre and  retail p olicies  
 
Recent changes  
5.1 The long -term trends affecting town centres identified in Local Plan 2030 have not changed. Centres are still  challenged by the rise 
in internet shopping, the concentration of national chain retailers in larger retail centres outside of the borough and compe tition from 
out of centre shops. However, these pressures have been intensified by Covid -19 lockdowns and t he reluctance of people to visit 
crowded areas  as well as supply chain challenges . As a result, a number of businesses have had to close permanently and 
vacancy levels have risen.  
 
5.2 In response to the above challenges, the government has provided support to  town centres through a number of initiatives. The 
government’s Town  Deal Fund aims to drive the economic regeneration of towns across the country. Bedford has been awarded 
£22.6m to develop its proposals into Business Cases for delivery up to 2026. Bedfor d High Street has also been selected as a 
Heritage Action Zone to secure improvements to buildings and the public realm.  The government has also introduced greater 
flexibility in the uses that can occupy shop units by creating a new use class for commerci al, business and service uses, and 
permitting their change to residential use up to a certain size.  
 
5.3 The Council has also produced a Bedford Town Centre Plan which sets out a series of actions to tackle challenges facin g the town 
centre. The Plan  cover s the six themes of environment, regulation and property, promotion, strategy, connectivity and events. It 
sets out the Council’s vision for the town centre as “Bedford – a place to live, work, shop, learn and explore”.  
 
5.4 As part of this local plan review the C ouncil asked the public about the issues facing town centres and retailing in the borough. A 
wide range of comments were made and these can be grouped into the following areas:  
 focussing on niche and independent small businesses  
 enhancing physical and cult ural features  
 promoting events and activities, community space and leisure facilities  
 increasing the number of town centre dwellings  
 managing the night -time economy to reduce disturbance  
 making the town safer  
 increasing green spaces  
 improving cleaning and  maintenance  
 promoting sustainable transport   
85 5.5 These comments have informed the Council’s work on regenerating and promoting town centres, and also the policy approach of 
the local plan.   This section sets out an up -to-date planning policy approach that responds to the issues facing town centres.  
 
Hierarchy of Town Centres  
5.6 The Bedford T own Centre  Study commissioned by the Council confirms that the town centre hierarchy set out in Local Plan 2030 
remains appropriate.  It confirms that Bedford town centre is the main focus for retailing in the borough.  In order to maintain and 
enhance its role, it is important that the primary shopping area of Bedford town centre continues to be the preferred locatio n for new 
retail development and other town centre uses.  
 
5.7 Kempston (the Saxon Centre together with parades on Bedford Road and Bunyan Road) continues to perform the role of a district  
centre.  In addition, the Council has identified a number of local centres which serve smaller catchment areas.  Five local c entres 
are designated within the Bedford urban area, whilst in the rural parts of the borough a number of Key Service Centres are 
designated which serve their surrounding rural areas.  Remaining groupings of shops which are of purely neighbourhood 
significance  are identified as neighbourhood centres. Wixams new settlement is identified as a potential Key Service Centre as, 
over the course of the plan period, the planned town centre will be constructed and, once completed, will serve the settlemen t and 
wider rur al area.  
 
5.8 Town centre boundaries are shown on the Policies Map .  These are impo rtant for the operation of the g overnment’s ‘town centres 
first’ policy.  
 
 
Policy  TC1(S) Hierarchy of town centres  
The hierarchy of centres is as follows – 
Type of centre  Designated centres  
1) Strategic centre  Bedford town centre  
2) District centre  Kempston  (including the Saxon Centre, Bedford Road and Bunyan Road)  
3) Local centres  Urban centres  
Castle Road, Bedford  
Church Lane, Bedford  
Ford End Road, Bedford   
86 Midland Road (west), Bedford  
Tavistock Street, Bedford  
Key Service Centres  
Bromham  
Clapham  
Great Barford  
Sharnbrook  
Shortstown  
Wilstead  
Wixams (proposed new town centre)  
Wootton  
4) Neighbourhood centres  Remaining centres (small parades of shops of purely neighbou rhood significance which are not 
town centres in retail policy terms)  
New main town centre uses1 are required to locate in Bedford town centre, Kempston district centre and the local centres.  If no 
suitable site s are available, edge of centre2 locations should be considered.  
Development should contribute positively to the vitality and viability of the centre, and should be appropriate to the scale,  character 
and function of the centre.  
 
1 Main town centre uses:  
Defined in the National Planning Policy Fra mework as retail  development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres);  
leisure , entertainment and more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive -through restaurants, bars 
and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres  and bingo halls) ; offices;  and arts, culture and 
tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  
2 Edge of centre:  
For retail purposes, a location that is well connected to, and up to 300 metres from, the primary shopping area. For all other main 
town centre uses, a location within 300 metr es of the town centre boundary. For office development, this includes locations outside 
the town centre  but within 500 metres of a public transport interchange.  
   
87  
Amount of Development Required  
5.9 The town centres’ study has assessed  the future need for new retail floor space in the borough over the plan period taking account 
of expected population growth, competition from other centres, internet shopping and unimplemented planning permissions.  The 
study shows that there is insufficient quantitative demand to support the provision of additional convenience goods floor spa ce in 
the immediate future , but that  by 2030 demand could support up to 2,500 m2 of net additional floor space, increasing to 5,800 m 2 
net by 2040.   
 
5.10 For comparison goods, quantitative demand to support the provision of additional floor space does not arise until after 2035 and 
only by 2040  could there be demand to support up to 12,400 m 2 of net floor space .  However, the  town centres’ study advises that 
the use of long -term projections should be treated with caution and reviewed regularly in order to test the accuracy of the forecasts 
again st emerging datasets.  Recent changes in shopping habits may mean that additional floor space is not needed.   
 
5.11 The town centres’ study also includes an assessment of the need over the plan period for new commercial leisure facilities 
(including leisure and entertainment facilities such as cinemas, restaurants, bars and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, health and fitness 
centres, indoor bowl ing centres, bingo halls, theatres and concert halls).  The study concludes that for most commercial leisure 
categories there is already adequate provision.  Although no new allocations are made in the plan, any future proposals for new 
commercial leisure facilities that come forward will be considered on their merits.  
 
Location of Development  
5.12 Government guidance in the NPPF requires a ‘town centres first’ approach to the location of new retail, office and leisure uses 
defined as ‘main town centre uses’ (known as the sequential test).  It requires planning policies to promote the long -term vitality and 
viability of town centre s, meeting anticipated needs for town centre uses in or on the edge of centres where sites are available or 
otherwise in other accessible locations that are well connected to the town centre.  The town centres’ study has considered 
potential development op portunities in and on the edge of Bedford town centre and no sites additional to those allocated in Local 
Plan 2030 have been identified.   
 
5.13 If there is demand later in the plan period for retail and other town centre development, and there are no suitable  vacant units 
available in and on the edge of town centres, then the Council accepts that that development will occur in accessible out of centre 
locations that are well -connected to the town c entre in accordance with g overnment guidance.  
 
5.14 It is recognised  that certain uses that are defined in the NPPF  as ‘main town centre uses’ and therefore expected to locate as a 
preference in town centres, may have particular market and locational requirements which mean that exceptionally they may onl y  
88 be accommodated in specific locations.  This may particularly be the case for bulky goods retailing and certain types of office and 
leisure development that require a parkland or main road setting.  These types of development have specific needs that often 
cannot easily b e accommodated in town centre locations.  Furthermore, the business model of some commercial, business and 
service uses means that they prefer not to locate in a town centre.  In such cases the Council will encourage them to locate in edge 
of centre locati ons and within easy walking distance of a town centre  in accordance with the  NPPF . 
 
5.15 To ensure that out of centre development does not have an adverse impact on town centres, the NPPF states that proposals for 
new retail, leisure and office development should consider the impact on town centre vitality and viability, as well as on existing, 
committed and planned investment in centres in the catchment area of the proposal.  The town centres’ study has confirmed tha t 
for retail proposals the locally set th resholds in Local Plan 2030 remain appropriate given the vulnerabilities of the various centres.  
 
5.16 Proposals for out of centre retailing will be expected to include details of the nature of the use proposed so as to demonstr ate that 
the requirements of the sequential test are met.  To ensure that a development does not change its character unacceptably in ways 
that would create a development that should have been refused on grounds of adverse impact on the vitality and viability of a n 
existing centre, it may  be appropriate to grant planning permission subject to conditions limiting the type of goods to be sold and 
preventing the development being subdivided.  
 
Policy  TC2 Out of centre development  
 
New retail, leisure and office development is required to locate in Bedford town centre, Kempston district centre and the loc al centres 
as defined in  Policy TC1S  – Hierarchy of town centres.  If no suitable sites are available, edge of centre* locations sh ould be 
considered.   Only if suitable sites are not available should out of centre sites be considered.  These should preferably be accessible 
sites which are well connected to the town centre.  Certain uses that have particular market and locational requi rements may 
exceptionally  be permitted in out of centre locations provided that they accord with the National Planning Policy Framework and 
subject to sufficient justification.  
 
Any retail and leisure development proposed outside of the  defined town  centre s must be subject to an impact assessment if it 
exceeds the following thresholds.  
 
For leisure development the threshold is 2,500 m2 gross floor space.  
 
For retail development:  
i. If the nearest centre to the proposed development is Bedford town centre or  Kempston district centre, the thresho ld is 500 sq m net 
floor space.   
89 ii. If the nearest centre to the proposed development is a local centre, the threshold is 200 sq m net floor  space . 
 
The assessment will relate to the impact on Bedford town centre, Kem pston district centre and local centres within the catchment 
and demonstrate that development will not have a significant adverse impact on town centre vitality and viability or existing , 
committed and planned investment in the centres.  Proposals for new retail development permitted in accordance with this policy will, 
where necessary, be subject to conditions to ensure that the development does not subsequently change its character unaccepta bly.  
Such conditions may limit the type of goo ds to be sold and prevent the development being subdivided.  
 
* Edge of centre:  
For retail purposes, a location that is well connected to, and up to 300 metres from, the primary shopping area. For all othe r main 
town centre uses, a location within 300 metr es of the town centre boundary.  For office development, this includes locations outside 
the town centre but within 500 metres of a public transport interchange.  
 
 
Bedford Town Centre  
5.17 The extent of Bedford town centre is shown on the Policies Map.  This encloses the area predominantly occupied by main town 
centre uses, which are defined in the NPPF as: retail  development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres);, leisure , 
entertainment  and more intensive sport and recreation uses  (including cinemas, restaurants, drive -through restaurants, bars and 
pubs, nightclubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres  and bingo halls) ; offices;  and arts, culture and tourism 
development (including theatres, museums, galleries, concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  The area is unchanged  from 
that defined in Local Plan 2030.  
 
5.18 A primary shopping area is al so defined on the Policies Map , which encloses the are a where retail activity is concentrated within the 
town centre.  Retail uses are expected to locate as a preference within the primary shopping area.  By defining a primary sho pping 
area. the aim is to retain a core of activity, which is one of the main at tractions and purposes of the town centre.  
 
5.19 Within the town centre a range of uses appropriate to a town centre location will be encouraged.  Allowing a wide range of us es will 
reduce vacancies and increase flexibility, giving niche retailers the freedom t o locate where it best suits them.  However, it is 
important to avoid a concentration of similar uses which might have a cumulative impact on such things as environmental quali ty, 
amenity or parking, or would increase the risk of anti -social behaviour and reduce the vitality, viability and diversity of the town 
centre.  
  
90 5.20 Where an application for planning permission for residential use is required, the premises should primarily be  located  above ground 
floor level because of the importance of maintaining activ e frontages at street level, however outside of the primary shopping area, 
residential use at ground floor level may also be appropriate if it would not adversely impact the vitality and viability of the town 
centre as a whole.  
 
 
Policy TC 3 Bedford town centre – changes of use  
 
Within Bedford town centre a range of uses will be supported provided that:  
 
i. They contribute to the vitality, viability and diversity of the town centre, and;  
ii. They avoid the concentration of similar uses whose cumulative impact would be to the detriment of environmental quality, 
amenity or parking, or would increase the risk of anti -social behaviour  or would create a significant length of inactive frontage 
at ground floor level . 
 
Acceptable uses in the town cent re other than retail will include: commercial, business and service uses, hot food takeaways, public 
houses, night clubs, cinemas, theatres, concert halls, community uses, educational uses and other uses appropriate to a town 
centre.  
 
Where an application for planning permission is required for residential use, it will be supported  for premises  above ground floor level 
throughout the town centre, provided that the use would have safe and convenient access and would not inhibit the functioning  of the 
ground floor use.  Outside of the primary shopping area residential use at ground floor level may  also be appropriate if it can be 
shown that the proposed residential use would not adversely impact the vitality and viability of the town centre as a whole.  
 
 
Local shopping  
5.21 Government guidance in the NPPF recognises the importance to communities of lo cal shopping facilities which provide for people’s 
day-to-day needs.  Local plans should promote the retention and development of local shops in local centres and villages.  Local 
shopping facilities reduce the need for residents to travel long distances and are particularly important for those with mobility 
difficulties , or who do not have access to a car . They promote sustainable living by encouraging travel on foot and by cycle.   Local 
shops are also valuable for ‘top -up’ shopping trips for mobile, car-owning households.  Policy TC 1(S) (Hierarchy of town centres) 
identifies district, local and neighbourhood centres as being important for local shopping.  
  
91 5.22 The town centres ’ study supports the identification of Kempston (Saxon Centre together with parades on Bedford Road and Bunyan 
Road) as a district centre.  As a town  centre , Kempston is a preferred location for new retail development.  The town centre 
boundary is shown on the Policies Map and is unchanged from that defined in Local Plan 2030.  A primary shopping area has not 
been defined for Kempston district centre as its size does not justify this. 
 
5.23 Residential use should primarily be above ground floor level because of t he importance of maintaining active frontages at street 
level, however in fringe areas of the district centre, residential use at ground floor level may also be appropriate , if it would not 
adversely impact the vitality and viability of the centre as a who le. 
 
Policy TC4 Kempston district centre – new commercial, business and service use development  
 
Proposals for new commercial, business, service and other uses appropriate to the district  centre  will be supported if:  
i. They  will enhance the appearance of the district centre; and  
ii. They  will be of a scale and form which is appropriate to the function of the district centre;  
and 
iii. Satisfactory servicing and car parking facilities can be provided to avoid on -street congestion and t o protect highway safety; 
and 
iv. The proposal will be accessible by a choice of means of transport other than the private car.  
 
 
Policy TC5 Kempston district centre – changes of use  
 
Within the district centre a range of uses will  be supported provided that:  
i. They contribute to the vitality, viability and diversity of the district centre; and  
ii. They avoid the concentration of similar uses whose cumulative impact would be to the detriment of environmental quality, 
amenity or parking, or would increase the risk of anti -social behaviour  or would create a significant length of inactive frontage 
at ground floor level . 
 
Acceptable uses in the district  centre other than retail will include: commercial, business and service uses, hot food takeaways, 
public houses, nigh t clubs, cinemas, theatres, concert halls, community uses, educational uses and other uses appropriate to a town 
centre.  
 
Where an application for planning permission is required for residential use, it will be supported for premises above ground floor level 
throughout the district  centre, provided that the use would have safe and convenient access and would not inhibit the functioning of  
92 the ground floor use.  In fringe areas of the district  centre residential use at ground floor leve l may also be appropriate if it can be 
shown that the proposed residential use would not adversely impact the vitality and viability of the centre as a whole.  
 
 
5.24 After Bedford town centre and Ke mpston district centre, Policy TC1 (S) (Hierarchy of town centr es) identifies the largest centres 
within the urban area as local centres.  These have a good range of shops that are locally important, together with non -retail 
services and local public facilities.  As town  centres, they are the preferred locations for n ew retail development.  The boundaries of 
the centres are shown on the Policies Map.  These are unchanged from those defined in Local Plan 2030.  Primary shopping area s 
have not been defined for local centres as their restricted geographical extent does no t warrant this.  The aim of Policy TC 7 is to 
protect the diversity of uses and ensure that the vitality and viability of local centres is not advers ely affected by changes of use.  
 
5.25 In rural areas, Key Service Centres also perform the role of local centres and are important in serving their surrounding rural areas.  
Town centre and primary shopping area boundaries have not been defined for such centres because the town centre uses within 
them are often dispersed.  They a re instead protected by Policy TC 7 whi ch applies to all shops associated with the centre.  
 
 
Policy TC 6 New commercial, business and service uses in local centres  
 
Proposals for new commercial, business, service and other uses appropriate to a local centre within or on the edge of existin g local 
centres, or in existing or proposed new residential areas where there is a local need, will be supported if the proposal is  of a scale 
appropriate to the role and function of the centre or residential area and is intended primarily to serve the needs of the local 
community.  
 
 
Policy TC7 Local centres (including key service centres)  – changes of use  
 
Within local centre s a ran ge of uses will be supported provided that:  
i. They contribute to the vitality, viability and diversity of the centre; and  
ii. They avoid the concentration of similar uses whose cumulative impact would be to the detriment of environmental quality, 
amenity or par king, or would increase the risk of anti -social behaviour  or would create a significant length of inactive frontage 
at ground floor level . 
 
Acceptable uses in local centre s will include: commercial, business and service uses, hot food takeaways, public houses, community 
uses, educational uses and other uses appropriate to a local centre .  
93  
Where an application for planning permission is required for residential use, it will be supp orted for premises above ground floor level 
throughout local centre s, provided that the use would have safe and convenient access and would not inhibit the functioning of the 
ground floor use.   In fringe areas of local centre s residential use at ground flo or level may also be appropriate if it can be shown that 
the proposed residential use would not adversely impact the vitality and via bility of the centre as a whole . 
 
 
5.26 Neighbourhood centres, which can be either in rural or urban areas, are smaller centres  which have a small catchment serving local 
needs and are of purely neighbourhood significance.  They are not considered to be town centres in policy terms and are not 
defined on the Policies Map, nevertheless the essential shops within them can be importa nt for those who do not have access to a 
car or for ‘top -up’ shopping trips.  Smaller groupings of shops which are not large enough to form a centre, together with individual 
shops may also be important locally where they provide for essential needs.  
 
5.27 In 2020 the government established new U se Class F2 which includes small shops of under 280 m2 floor space mostly selling 
essential goods, including food, where there is no other such facility within 1 ,000 m distance.  The creation of a separate class for 
such uses means that planning permission is needed before they can be used for other purposes.  Public houses can also be 
important for local communities, particularly in r ural areas.  The aim of Policy TC 8 therefore is to maintain essential local shops an d 
public houses which are important for the local community and where there are no others nearby.  
 
 
Policy TC 8 Essential local  shops  and public houses  – changes of use  
 
The Council will only grant planning permission for the change of use of essential loca l shops  within Class F2 or public houses to 
other uses when:  
i. There is an alternative facility  within 1 ,000 metres providing a similar service; and  
ii. The applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Council that the current (or last) use i s no longer  economically viable  
by providing evidence that the property has been actively  and appropriately  marketed  and supplying evidence that the use 
cannot viably be sustained;  and  
iii. The proposed use would not lead to  the concentration of similar uses whose cumulative impact would be to the detriment of 
environmental quality, amenity or parking, or would increase the risk of anti -social behaviour.  
 
 
  
94 Impact of town centre uses  
5.28 In order to avoid any over -concentration of un -neighbourly facilities, for example restaurants and hot food takeaways, and to 
maintain residential amenity close to residential areas, it may be necessary to restrict the opening times of town centre use s.  In 
addition , it will be important that restaurants and hot food takeaways provide appropriate refuse facilities.  
 
Policy TC9 Impact of town centre uses  
 
Town centre uses* will be supported where they will not give rise to a significantly detrimental effect (either ind ividually or 
cumulatively) on adjacent uses or the character and amenity of the area through noise, smell, litter, traffic problems or oth er side 
effects.  The Council will consider restricting the opening hou rs of premises where necessary.  
 
This policy ap plies to town centres, neighbourhood centres and individual shops throughout the borough.  
 
* Town centre uses:  
Defined in the National Planning Policy Framework as retail  development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres);  
leisure , entertainment and more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive -through restaurants, bars 
and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres  and bingo halls) ; offices;  and arts, culture and 
tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  
 
 
  
95 6.0 Development management policies  
 
 
6.1 This section contains  new or replacement development management policies.  Policies that are replaced are listed in Appendix  1.  
 
Housing   
6.2 The Council’s Local Housing Needs  Assessment  (LHNA) Addendum ( April 2022) establishes the standard method housing 
requirement for housing in Bedford for the period 2020 –2040 t o be 27,100 .  This includes a  need for affordable housing of 6881 
dwellings over the same period equivalent to an average of 344 dwellings per year.   
 
6.3 Affordable housing as  defined by the NPPF 2021 comprise s housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met  by the 
market (including housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and  / or is for essential local workers) which accords 
with the NPPF definitions of affordable housing for rent, starter homes, discounted market sales housing  and other a ffordable 
routes to home ownership .  
 
6.4 First Homes are now the Government ’s preferred discounted market tenure  and the  Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) advises that 
they should account for at least  25% of all affordable homes delivered by developers through  section 106 planning obligations  and 
that policies for  First H omes should reflect this requirement.  
 
6.5 First H omes are defined in the PPG as discounted market sale units which must be discounted by a minimum 30% against the 
market value, are sold to persons meeting specific eligibility criteria, are restricted on their title to ensure the discount is passed on 
and must be sold after discount at a price no higher than £250,000.  
 
6.6 In the context of this national definition Local Authorities may set an appropriate discount against market value in their ar ea and 
may set local eligibility criteria.  The PPG also makes pro vision for the development of First Homes exception sites (on land which is 
not already alloca ted for housing). See Policy DM4  below.  
 
Local eligibility criteria  
 
6.7 In order to ensure that local people are given priority in accessing First Homes in the borough the following eligibility criteria will be 
applied :  
 At least one of the purchasers of the property should, immediately prior to agreeing terms to purchase, either   
96 1. Have lived in Bedford borough for at least three of the last five years or  
2. Have a cl ose relative (mother, father, adult children, sister, brother, grandparents, grandchildren or corresponding step 
relations) who has lived in Bedford borough for at least three years or  
3. Be employed full or part time (at least 16 hours per week on average) at a place of work in Bedford borough for at least 
the last twelve weeks or   
4. Be a member of the Armed Forces, a spouse or civil partner of a deceased member of the armed forces (if their death 
was wholly or partly caused by their service) or a veteran wit hin 5 ye ars of leaving the armed forces or  
5. Be a key worker who works in health, education, the police or Local Government.  
 
First Homes discount  
 
6.8 The LHNA  analyses income levels in relation to housing costs. On the assumption that all those who can afford social rent without 
housing benefit could afford shared ownership  or First Homes at a 30% discount  and that 35% of household income is assigned to 
housing  costs there is a need  for 83.3 % of the affordable housing  provided to be affordable rent, 6.4% to be provided as shared 
ownership and 10.3% as First Homes .  
 
6.9 The LHNA addendum demonstrates that in order to meet the requirement for 25% of the homes to be F irst Homes it will be 
necessary for 30% of homes to be affordable housing ; with 75% as affordable rent and 25% as First Homes at a 50% discount.  
 
6.10 The Council has undertaken a plan -wide viability study to test the ability of a range of housing scheme types likely to come forward 
in the borough to deliver affordable housing . The study found that with an affordable housing  tenure split of 75% affordable rent and 
25% First Homes at a 50% discount , 30% affordable hous ing remains a reasonable target . 
   
6.11 In cases where the affordable housing quantum proposed is less than 30% or a tenure split is proposed which provides less than 
75% of the affordable housing as affordable rented accommodation the Council will expect the application to be accompanied by  a 
viability appraisal which evidences this to the Council’s satisfaction.  The verification of viability appraisals will be undertaken by  the 
Council at the applicant’s cost. Where affordable housing provision is approved at  a level below the policy requirement , it will be 
subject to a review mechanism .  
 
6.12 The maximum affordable rent that can be charged is 80% of the market rent.  Many households who require affordable housing can 
only afford a rent at this level with assistance from housing benefit.  The Council does not propose a general reduction on this 
percentage and benefit regulations change from time to time , but consideration will be given to the access to benefit that will be 
available at the time that an application is considered.   
97 6.13 On the basis of the Governme nt’s preference for First Homes  and the findings of the Council’s LHNA  as explained in paragraph 6.9 
above , shared ownership will not form part of the preferred tenure mix for sec tion 106 sites. Shared ownership may however come 
forward in other contexts a nd should be offered on the basis of a range of initial share purchases from 10 % - 80%.   
 
6.14 Affordable housing will be required on sites of ten or more dwel lings, or 0.5 hectares  or more .  In all cases, in determining whether 
the threshold has been met , the Council will take account of the net number of additional d wellings which are to be built.  
 
6.15 Where a commuted sum is deemed to be acceptable , more information is given in Appendix 4.  
 
 
Policy DM1 (S) Affordable housing  
 
Sites of 10 or more residential units or 0.5 hectares or more will provide 30% affordable housing with 75% of the dwellings as social 
or affordable rented properties and the remainder (25%) as First Homes  at a 50% discount .  
 
Affordable rents will be 80% of open market rents but a lower percentage should be set where this would preclude access to housing 
benefit.  
 
Where s hared ownership is offered it will be on the basis of a range of initial share purchases from 10 - 80%.  
 
The size mix of the  affordable  dwellings should reflect the type and size mix of the market dwellings within the proposed scheme  and 
take account of the needs set out in the Council’s current Local Housing Needs  Assessment and other current sources of housing 
needs information.  
 
Where on grounds of viability the total number of affordable dwellings or the affordable housing tenure split is proposed to be oth er 
than that outlined above the application should be accompanied by a viability assessment justifying the quantum and mix of 
affordable housing.  Where affordable housing provision is approved at level below the policy requirement it will be subject to a 
review mechanism (Policy DM2 ). 
 
On sites providing a mix of affordable and market homes the Council will expect the affordable housi ng to be integrated within the 
market housing and affordable housing clusters should not exceed 15 dwellings and should not be readily distinguishable from 
market housing.  
 
The policy will apply where a planning application could have been submitted for a larger site within the above policy threshold.   
98  
Other than in exceptional circumstances, affordable housing provision should be made on site rather than through the payment of 
commuted sums in lieu of provision.  
 
 
Affordable Housing Review mechanisms .  
6.16 The Council wants to ensure that development is policy compliant and maximises public benefits in line wit h the policies of the 
development plan . This includes the provision  of affordable  housing in line with Policy DM1 (S).  
  
6.17 The NPPF indicates that it is  the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate whether particular circumstances justify the need for 
a viability assessment at application stage in order to deviate from policy requirements. Where there is clear viability evid ence to do 
so, Policy DM 1(S) allows the Council to consider granting permission for schemes which provide less than 30% affordable housing.  
 
6.18 Where this is the case, n ational planning guidance recognises the pot ential for changes in viability post permission being granted 
and allo ws for the  review of scheme viability  to ensure that divergence from policy compliance is minimised over time. This means 
that improvements in scheme viability between the point at which the original viability appraisal was undertaken and viability  
establi shed at a later date(s) can result in an enhanced affordable housing contribution compared to that which was considered 
viable at the point that permission was granted.  
  
6.19 Guidance  indicates that plans should set out circumstances where review mechanisms m ay be appropriate, as well as clear 
processes and terms of engagement regarding how and when viability will be reassessed .  
 
6.20 To ensure that affordable housing contributions are maximised over time, the Council will  require a viability review , secured through 
a S106 agreement, in all cases where reduced affordable housing provisions have been agreed on viability grounds (Policy DM2 ).  
  
6.21 The Council will generally seek a mid -stage viability review because at this point, actual costs and sales va lues are likely to be 
quantifiable and a revised assessment can confidently be made.    
 
6.22 However, i t may be that there is justification for the review taking place at a different point. For example, where the site is large -
scale , it involves  phased developm ent and delivery will occur across different stages in an economic cycle , it may be appropriate to 
require more than one viability review . Where this this is the case the approach will be individually negotiated  and detailed in the 
legal agreement . 
  
99 6.23 Where the review(s) evidence that additional affordable housing is viable , the Council’s preference is for this to be provided on site. 
Where this is considered inappropriate the Council will expect the payment of an affordable housing commuted sum in lieu.   
 
6.24 At the point of review, applicants will be required to submit an updated viability assessment consistent with the format submitted a t 
planning application stage , along with  any supplementary information  / evidence  that the Council requires. The Council’s costs 
associated with commissioning independent assessment of these reviews will be met by the applicant. The approach should be 
agreed with the Council prior to submission of an updated viability assessment.   
 
6.25 The implementation of a viability review cannot result in the scheme providing a reduced level of planning obligations from that of 
the originally permitted scheme. It is a means to ensure full , or full er, policy compliance over time, optimising the benefit s from 
contributions to affordable housing.  
 
6.26 Viability appraisals will be made publically available.  
 
 
Policy DM 2 Review Mechanisms    
 
To ensure that affordable housing delivery is maximised as a result of any future improveme nt in viability, the Council will require 
schemes that have been viability tested and which have resulted in an affordable housing contribution below policy compliant levels, 
to be subject to viability review(s).   
 
Detailed requirements will be set out in a S106 agreement and will de pend on the size, nature and complexity of the scheme.  Save 
exceptionally, viability reviews will be undertaken where 50 % of the open market dwellings have been sold or after five years of the 
date of the independent viability assessment upon which the o riginal reduced affordable housing requirement was based, whichever 
is the sooner. For schemes with more than one phase or developer , more than one review may be required.  
 
The Council will require any additional affordable housing provision required as a  result of the viability review to be provided on -site 
in accordance with the provisions of the S106 agreement unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Council as part of 
the review that this is not achievable.  
 
 
 
  
100 Housing mix   
6.27 The growth in the number of older persons’ households is a key feature in the population and household change which  is expecte d 
to occur in the period to 2040 .  During the Local Plan period almost two fifths ( 39 %) of the overall population growth implied by the 
Standard Method is projected to be aged 65 , almost a quarter of which are projected to be over 75.  This is particularly important 
when establishing the types of housing required and the need for housing specifically for older people.  
 
6.28 The LHNA  Addendum found that, considering the increase in households from 2020  to 20 40, half of this household growth is likely 
to have household representatives aged 65 or over. Over two thirds (68%) of this group (34% of the overall household growth) are 
likely to have household representatives of 75 or over.  Given this context, the maximum need of around 12,600 dwellings for 
adapted housing in the plan period supports the need for at least 4 7% of all dwellings to meet Category 2 requirements, providing 
that thi s does not compromise viability.  
 
6.29 Around 1 -in-30 households in England (3.3%) have at least one wheelchair user, although the rate is notably higher for households 
living in affordable housing (7.1%).   The rates are also higher for older households and, g iven that the number of older person 
households is likely to increase over the period to 2040, the proportion of households needing wheelchair housing in future i s also 
likely to be higher.    
 
6.30 The LHNA  Addendum found that the amount of wheelchair adapted h ousing likely to be needed in Bedford Borough is likely to 
increase by approximately 1,1 90 over the period, equivalent to around 4. 4% of the overall Local Housing Need.   This comprises 
around 760 market dwellings (4. 0% of the market Local Housing Need) and  around 390 affordable dwellings ( 6.0% of the 
affordable Local Housing Need).   The evidence therefore supports the need for 4% of market and 6% of affordable housing to meet 
Category 3 requirements.    
 
6.31 This approach is consistent with the NPPG advice at Paragraph 916 which states that planning policies for housing can set out the 
proportion of new dwellings which will be delivered to the various M4 standards.   Part M of the Building Regulations sets a 
distinction between wheelchair accessible (a home readi ly useable by a wheelchair user at the point of completion) and wheelchair 
adaptable (a home that can be easily adapted to meet the needs of a household including wheelchair users) dwellings. Wheelcha ir 
accessible homes will only be required where the Coun cil is responsible for nominating a person to live in the dwelling.  
 
6.32 Around 35% of the growth in households during the Plan period comprises  households aged 75 or over.   It is likely that many of 
these households would also be identified as needing specia list housing for older persons.   The analysis of the needs of older 
people identified a need for almost 5,000 specialist older person housing units for households aged 75 or over, whilst the analysis 
                                                           
16 ID: 63 -009-20190626 updated on 26 June 2019   
101 of disability and mobility housing needs identifies an i ncrease in need of around 7 20 wheelchair adapted dwellings for households 
in the same age group.    
 
6.33 Whilst not all households aged 75 or over needing wheelchair adapted housing will live in specialist older person housing, at  any 
point in time it is likel y that up to a third of those living in specialist housing may need wheelchair adapted homes.   However, it is 
important to recognise that as individual household circumstances change, it is likely that some households will start using a 
wheelchair whilst l iving in specialist housing if their health deteriorates.   On this basis, a higher proportion of specialist older person 
housing units will need to be wheelchair  adapted.   The evidence in the LHNA supports the need for a target for all specialist 
housing f or older people to meet Category 3 requirements.  
 
 
Policy DM3(S) Housing mix  
 
New housing developments will be expected to provide a mix of dwelling size and type to meet the identified needs of the comm unity 
including families with children, older people, people wishing to build their own homes and people with disabilities and spec ial needs 
in accordance with the Council’s current Local Housing Needs  Assessment and other current assessments of housing need 
including the Older Person’s Accommodation Strategy, the Learning Disabilities Accommodation Strategy, the Mental Health 
Accomm odation Strategy (or their successor Strategies) and evidence in respect of the needs of other specialist groups.  
 
All developments of 500 dwellings or more in suitable locations, will be required to include self -contained housing designed to meet 
the nee ds of older persons, and  / or supported living accommodation in accordance with the Council’s most up to date statement of 
need on older person’s accommodation.  
 
All developments of 100 dwellings or more in suitable locations, will be required to include specialist housing designed to meet the 
needs of those with a learning disability or mental health need in accordance with the Council’s most up to date statement of need  
i. On sites of 3 or more dwellings 4 7% of all new residential development should meet Category 2 (Accessible and 
Adaptable dwellings) of approved Document M; Volume 1, and on sites of 20 or more dwellings a minimum of 4% of all 
market housing and 6% of affordable housing shou ld meet Category 3 requirements,  
ii. All specialist housing for older people shou ld meet Category 3 requirements,   
       
Affordable housing will be sought from all C3 development including and where a site provides a mix of C2 develop ment and C3 
dwellings , from the C3 element of the development . 
 
  
102  
First Homes Exception Sites  
 
6.34 First Homes Exception Sites are a potential option for developers wishing to build affordable homes on sites beyond the borou gh’s 
existing built up area s where certain planning constraints may make approval of an open market housing scheme less likely. 
However, they should not be viewed as an alternative to rural exception housing defined in the Local Plan 2030 Policy 67 which 
provides for the delivery of housing to meet specific local needs in the rural area. Sites should be adjacent to and proportionate in 
size to the settlement to which they relate. Proportionality will be assessed in relation to the scale of the proposal and its impact on 
the character of the settlement . 
 
6.35 To ensure applicants take account of Policy DM4  (ii), where it is proposed that a scheme requires market housing to be included to 
make an exception site viable, submission of a development appraisal will be required to demonstrate that this is the case.  
 
6.36 External consultants will be appointed at the applicant’s cost to provide an independent assessment of the scheme’s viability.   
 
6.37 Policy DM4  (iii) is in line with PPG, which allo ws the proportion of affordable housing on a First Homes exception site to be altered 
to include small quantities of other affordable housing products. The evidence that applicants will be required to provide wi ll need to 
be in the form of a Local Housing Needs Assessment, local authority Housing Register, or other sufficiently robust  local evidence.  
 
 
Policy DM4  First Homes Exception Policy  
 
i. Residential development proposals on qualifying small sites comprising primarily First Homes will be permitted wh ere: 
 the site is adjacent to an existing settlement  and the scale of the scheme is appropriate to the structure form and 
character of the size of the settlement ; and  
 the development contributes positively to the character of the settlement, maintains landscape character, does not lead 
to coalescence with other settlements and protects and where appropriate enhances the historic environment.  
ii. The minimum number of market ho mes required to make delivery of a First Homes  Exception Site viable without grant 
funding will be permitted where:  
 an applicant demonstrates that the scheme would be unviable without the inclusion  of market housing;  
 inclusion of market housing does not in flate the threshold land value; and  
 any market housing is suitably integrated into the First Homes development.  
iii. Small quantities of other forms of affordable housing may also be permitted on a First  Homes exception site where the 
applicant demonstrates evi dence of significant local  need for that type of housing.   
103  
Self-build and Custom Housebuilding  
6.38 The Self -build & Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 introduced the concept of an individual’s Right to Build  a home  and the 
requirement on Local Authorities to keep a register of both individuals and associations who are seeking to do so.  It has since been 
amended by the Housing and Planning Act 2016.  
 
6.39 Further regulations17 require Local Authorities to grant sufficient planning permissions for self -build  and custom  housebuilding  plots 
to meet annual register -evidenced demand.  
 
6.40 Councils are required to have regard to the register when carrying out their functions relating to planning, housing, the disposal of 
the authority’s land and regeneration.  
 
6.41 Self-build and custom housebuilding is defined in the Self -Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 as:  
the building or completion by — 
(a) individuals,  
(b) associations  of individuals, or  
(c) persons working with or for individuals or associations of individuals,  of houses to be occupied as homes by those 
individuals.  
 
6.42 Self-build is  where individuals , or associations of individuals, including those in community -led proje cts, are directly responsible for 
the design and construction of their own homes. These may be traditional DIY self -build homes where the eventual occupiers carry 
out all or much of the project management , construction and finish ; or, increasingly , where a  self-builder commissions all or much of 
the work , employing others to carry out the  actual build for them.  
 
6.43 Custom build homes are where developers, builders or industry specialist ‘home -builders’ work with individuals or associations to 
deliver finished or shell homes to a pre -agreed bespoke design standards and quality of finish. The developer may provide a plot, 
manage the construction and arrange the finance for the new home as a package. Whilst this is therefore more of a hands -off 
approach for the fi nal occupier, the homes will still be tailored from initial inception to match an individual’s requirements, within 
certain agreed parameters.    
 
6.44 Whether self or custom -build, the instigator s, funder s or commissioner s of the work must be the occupiers of t he dwelling.  
 
                                                           
17 Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Regulations 2016 and the Self -build and Custom Housebuilding (Time for Compliance and fees) Regulati ons 2016   
104 6.45 The Council ’s Self-build and Custom Housebuilding R egister is divided into two parts:  
 Part 1 – requires evidence from the individual or association to demonstrate a defined local connection to the area. 
Registrants on part 1 will be given first refusal on self -build plots that become available in the borough either through the 
application of Policy DM 5 (below) or as a re sult of the Council disposing of its own land (where it is suitable for and is being 
disposed of for self - build).  
 Part 2 – Other individuals or associations that have an interest in self -build plots in the borough but who do not have the 
required local co nnection to the area. Any plots that are available but are not taken up by anyone on part 1 of the register will 
then be offered to those on part 2 before being more widely marketed.  
 
6.46 Neighbourhood Plans may also allocate sites for self -build and  / or cust om housebuilding plots and where this is so, developers will 
be required to have regard to relevant policies and marketing requirements.  
 
6.47 The Council has a duty to provide serviced plots to meet the demand on Part 1 of its Self -build and Custom Housebuildi ng Register 
but will take into account the demand shown by both parts of the register in considering planning applications. To help to do  this, 
the Council will require qualifying developments to make available serviced plots specifically to provide self -build and custom 
housebuilding opportunities. The number of serviced plots to be made available will be determined by the capacity of the site.  
 
6.48 The policy sets out marketing requirements for advertising the availability of self -build and custom housebuild ing plots. These broad 
requirements differ depending on the number of dwellings proposed for a site. On sites of 49 dwellings or fewer, the timetabl e for 
marketing plots will generally be shorter.  This is due to the fact that smaller sites will build out faster, meaning there is a greater 
possibility that lengthier marketing would delay the delivery of dwellings.  
 
6.49 Whilst the nature of some proposals, for example high density sites of predominantly apartments or conversions of existing 
buildings, might mean  individual self -build plots may not be available or practical, such dwellings do provide opportunities for 
custom build. The Council therefore expects that all qualifying sites will meet the requirements of Policy DM5 .  
 
6.50 As an example, a planning application submitted for 80 dwellings would be required to provide 30% affordable housing, which 
means that 24 of the plots on the site would be affordable housing. 56 plots would therefore be for private dwellings and sub ject to  
providing  self-build plots. Using the scale set in the policy below, a site providing 56 private dwellings would be required to provide 
five self-build  / custom housebuilding plots.  
 
 
 
  
105 Policy DM 5 Self-build and custom housebuilding  
 
i. The Council will require applications for new housing development to include plots for self -build and custom house  builders 
in accordance with the following, based on the overall number of net -additional dwellings proposed:  
 1-4 dwellings = no requirement  
 5-9 dwellings = 1 plot 
 10-29 dwellings = 2 plots  
 30-49 dwellings = 3 plots  
 50-69 dwellings = 5 plots  
 70-89 dwellings = 6 plots  
 90-100 dwellings = 7 plots  
 100+ dwellings = by negotiation    
 
ii. Self-build and custom housebuilding plot sizes should take account of register evidenced demand;  
iii. All plots must be serviced with suitable connections to utilities such as water and drainage, electricity, gas and broadband ; 
iv. Prior to commencement of development , developers will be required to agree a marketing plan with the Local Plann ing 
Authority that complies with the following:  
 Self-build and Custom Housebuilding plots will be offered at an open value established by a RICS valuer , 
 Where an expression of interest in a plot has been rejected by the developer, evidence must be provided  to the 
Local Planning Authority, upon request, as to why it was not suitable . 
For sites of 50 or more dwellings:  
 Plots will be marketed solely to individuals and associations on Part 1 of the Council’s Register in the first instance 
for an initial period of two months (minimum) from the commencement of the site being marketed. Following the 
initial marketing period, the offer of any unreserved plots will be extended to those on Part 2 of the Council’s 
Register and any new registrants to Part 1 having joine d during the initial period. If the developer can provide 
evidence to the satisfaction of the Council that suitable purchasers from the Register have not been forthcoming 
within 6 months (minimum) of commencement of marketing the plots, they may be offered  for unrestricted market 
sale to self -build and custom homebuilders including industry sector specialist companies , 
 Any plots not reserved within a further 6 months (minimum) will be released from this specific policy requirement, 
following a total of 12 m onths of marketing.  
For sites of 49 or fewer dwellings:  
 Plots will be marketed solely to individuals and associations on Part 1 of the Council’s Register in the first instance 
for an initial period of 1 month (minimum) from the commencement of marketing ,  
106  Following the initial marketing period , the offer of any unreserved plots will be extended to those on Part 2 of the  
Council’s  Register and any new registrants to Part 1 having joined during the initial period. If suitable purchasers 
from the Register demonstrably have not been forthcoming within 3 months (minimum) of commencement of 
marketing the plots, they may be offered for u nrestricted market sale to self -build and custom homebuilders 
including industry sector specialist companies , 
 Any plots not reserved within a further 3 months (minimum) will be released from this specific policy requirement, 
following a total of 6 months o f marketing.  
v. To ensure timely delivery of plots, the S106 agreement will contain triggers that link the marketing of self -build and custom 
housebuilding plots to the occupation of specified per centages of open market housing;  
vi. Developments required by virtu e of this policy to provide self -build and custom housebuilding plots will , in addition and as a 
priority, be expected to deliver affordable housing across the whole development site in accordance with the Council’s 
adopted poli cy (Policy DM1 ) by way of on -site provision or in exceptional circumstances by payment of commuted sums for 
off-site delivery , where appropriate . The Council will not normally expect self -build serviced plots to be included as part of 
the site affordable housing proportion unless thi s has been agreed in writing within the Heads of Terms  of the proposed 
S106 agreement;  
vii. Where a development is phased, the siting and provision of self -build and custom housebuilding plots will be set out in a 
phasing plan ; 
viii. The number of self and custom bui ld plots to be provided will be based on the capacity of the site net of any affordable 
housing requirement. Development that constitutes 100% affordable housing will be exempt from providing self -build and 
custom housebuilding plots . 
 
 
Quality of development  and space  standards  
6.51 The quality of buildings and places , and how they integrate with the natural environment , have been shown to affect how people 
interact with them. Good quality development can create environments which promote wellbeing and happiness, as well as provide 
functional, well -built places.  
 
6.52 The Bedford Borough Local Plan 2030  has a set of design policies requiring that development proposals fully consider design 
issues .  The following  documents  are also available and give guidance on different  aspects of design :  
 Sustainable Drainage System SPD 2018  
 Parking Standards for Sustainable Communities SPD 2014  
 Open Space SPD 2013  
 Shopfronts and Advertisements in Conservation Areas SPD 2005   
107  Achieving Qua lity in Residential Layouts SPG 1997  
 Residential Extensions, New Dwellings and Small Infill Developments SPG 2000  
 Houses in Multiple Occupation SPD 2020  
 
Current National Guidance  
6.53 Chapter 12 of the  NPPF , “Achieving well -design ed places ”, supports good design and the creation of high quality places. It 
encourages plans to set out a clear vision and expectations on de sign quality in the local area.  
 
Nationally Described Space S tandards  
6.54 The g overnment has set out appropriate nationally described space stan dards for new developments. These space standards are 
predicated on the number of bedrooms and the number of people each new dwelling is intended  to cater for.  
 
6.55 For example,  a single bedroom, one-storey dwelling for one person should be a minimum of 37 m2; and a single bedroom, one-
storey dwelling for two people should be a minimum of 50m2.  
 
6.56 These standards have recently become mandatory for all new dwellings developed under permitted development rights18. This is in 
recognition of the fact that many have fallen below these standards in the past and created inappropriately sized homes. To b e 
consistent with this approach the Council will expect all new dwellings (including newly formed dwellings through co nversion) to 
conform with nationally described space standards.  
 
6.57 Further information can be found at : 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524531/160519_Nationally_Desc
ribed_Space_Standard____Final_Web_version.pdf .  Separate Regulations apply to sleeping accommodat ion floor areas  in 
licenced HMOs.19 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
18 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2020/1243/made  
 
19 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2018/616/ made?view=plain   
108 Policy DM6 Residential space standards  
 
The Council will require  all new dwellings to conform to nationally described space standard s as a minimum.   
 
 
Natural environment   
6.58 Royal Assent for the Environment Bill was granted on 9 November  2021, with the Statutory Instruments setting out the 
environmental targets to be laid before parliament in 2022. The biodiversity net gain requirements are not likely to take effect until 
2023, two years after Royal Assent.   For the L ocal Plan 2040 this means th at we will need to monitor progress and may need to 
amend policies during the plan’s examination.  
 
6.59 Due to the United Kingdom withdrawing from the European Union, there is now no relevance to previous reference s to European 
designated sites or Natura 2000 sites. To assist with the interpretation of current local plan policies, any references to Na tura 2000 
sites should now be read as referring to ‘ the new national site network ’. 
 
What is b iodiversity  net gain?  
 
6.60 The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) Biodiversity M etric was first introduced in 2012 and the third 
version was published in July 2021 . The metric is a calculator that is used to measure the biodiversity losses and gains that will 
result from development. It is designed as a template to which applicants can inpu t their baseline and development information, and 
it will then produce a figure for net biodiversity gain.  The Environment Act 2021 requires a minimum of  10% biodiversity net gain, 
however it has not become law at this stage.  
 
What is Natural Capital ? 
 
6.61 Natural Capital is defined in the government’s 25 Year Environment Plan as “the sum of our ecosystems, species, freshwater, land, 
soils, minerals, our air and our seas. These are all elements of nature that either directly or indirectly bring value to peo ple and the 
country at large. They do this in many ways but chiefly by providing us with food, clean air and water, wildlife, energy, woo d, 
recreation and protection from hazards”. The 25-Year Environment Plan introduced the concept of embedding an ‘environ mental 
net gain’ principle for development, and the concept of expanding net gain approaches used for biodiversity to include wider natural 
capital benefits.  
 
 
  
109 Environmental net gain 
 
6.62 In line with the  NPPF , biodiversity net gain was a concept first introduced in planning policy in Bedford in the Local Plan 2030. 
However, since the plan was adopted, the environmental agenda has moved on and it is now suggest ed we should go further than 
biodiversity net gain and adopt an environmental net gain approach in planning and development . The Local Plan 2040 provides an 
opportunity to update our policy. Environmental net gain is defined as : 
 
Environmental  net gain = bio diversity net gain  + natural capital gain  
6.63 HM Treasury’s Green Book further describes ecosystem services  as: “Stocks of natural capital provide flows of environmental or 
‘ecosystem’ services over time. These services, often in combination with other forms of capital (human, produced and social) 
produce a wide range of benefits. These include use values that involve interaction with the resource and which c an have a market 
value (food, timber, water) or n on-market value (such as  recreation, landscape amenity  and health and wellbeing ). They also 
include non -use values, such as the value people place on the existence of particular habitats or species.”  
 
 
Source: Bedfordshire Natural Capital Assessment, Natural Capital Solutions  
 
6.64 Environmental net gain builds upon the biodiversity net gain  principle, but goes further to include a focus on natural capital assets 
and the associated benefits such as flood protection, improved wate r and air quality that can be ach ieved from developments.  
 
 
110 6.65 The Council has been working with DEFRA as part of the Ox -Cam Arc Local Natural Capital Plan project which looked at how a 
natural capital approach can be implemented and incorporated into planning policy  across the Arc ; the documents are available to 
view on the website – https://www.oxcamlncp.org/ .  The Ecosystem Services Baseline and Comparison report was completed in 
March 2021. The information that has been mapped is at a strategic scale across the Arc area. A Natural Capital Accounting Tool 
has also been produced.  
 
6.66 In order to obtain  information at a more local level, The Bedford shire Local Nature Partnership  has commissioned natural capital 
and ecosystem services opportunity mapping for Bedford Borough, Central Bedfordshire and Luton  Borough Councils . This work  
will also inform Local Nature Recovery Strategies which are a requirement of the Environment Act. Further detail is set out in the 
evidence base document , ‘Bedford Borough Natural Capital Assessment Report ’.  We have incorporate d consideration of the 
combined opportunities into our site assessment methodology .  
 
6.67 Other work by the Arc Environment Working Group has led to the production of Arc -wide environment principles which in due 
course will lead to the development of an Arc Environment Strategy. The draft principles , support the concept of net environmental 
gain and commit partners to working with government to develop a net environment gain metric for use within the Arc. The aim is to  
put in place technical groups to assess net gain propositions on behalf of Local Planning Authorities and provide planning 
committees with independent advice.  
 
 
Policy DM7 Environmental  Net Gain  
 
Proposals for major d evelopment should provide a n environmental net gain (in accordance with g overnment policy) , securing  a 
minimum of 10%  biodiversity net gain,  through the following:  
 
i. Enhancement of the existing features of the site, particularly where these deliver significant levels of ecosystem services; or 
ii. The creation of additional habitats on the site; or   
iii. Where it is not possible to deliver net gain solely on -site, there will be a requirement to enhance or create off site habitats.  
 
Where possible and appropriate , linkages  should be created with existing habitats and ecological net works with adjoining features .  
 
Planning applications should demonstrate how net biodiversity and net environmental gain will be achieved through the production of 
a supporting statement that considers the contribution the proposal could make to the borou gh’s natural capital.  
  
111 Major development is defined as residential sites of 10 or more units; or on a site where the number of units is unknown, a s ite area 
of 0.5 hectare or greater. For non -residential uses, sites where the floorspace to be created is 1, 000 square metres or greater or the 
site area is 1 hectare or greater.  
 
 
New employment  development in the countryside  
6.68 Policy 75 of Local Plan 2030 encouraged  new employment development that needs to be in the countryside in order to support the 
rural economy.   Although the policy has only recently  been adopted, the opportunity has been  taken to review the policy  to provide 
greater clarity around the intentions  of the policy and make it more effective in its implementation.  
 
Policy DM8  New employment development in the countryside  
 
New office, industrial, warehousing  and sui -generi s business uses such as builder s’ yards  will be supported in the countryside in the 
following circumstances:  
i. Where it is within an existing employment area; or  
ii. Where it reuses land last used for office, industrial, warehousing or  sui generis  uses  or reuses existing buildings; or  
iii. Where it enable s the expansion of an established business within its existing operational site; or  
iv. Where it enables the development and diversification of agricultural and other land - based rural businesses; or  
v. Where it enables the limited enlargement of an existing empl oyment area.  
 
In all instances applicants will be required to demonstrate all of the following:  
vi. If a new building is proposed, there are no existing buildings that could be  used for the proposed use;  
vii. Open storage is ancillary to employment buildings and is  located in well -contained and screened areas of the site with an 
appropriate height restriction;  
viii. The proposal would not generate traffic movement and volume that would lead to unacceptable environmental impacts or 
detriment to highway safety objectives;  
ix. The proposal would not have a significant adverse effect on the established character of the area and the local amenities and 
adjoining land uses and accords with Policy 41S;  
x. There would be no adverse impact on biodiversity including national site network ( formerly Natura 2000) sites in accordance 
with Policy 42S.  
 
 
  
112 Horse and Equestrian Activities  
6.69 Keeping and riding horses can help provide new  opportunities for employment in rural areas.  However , high standards of design 
and construction for the  necessary  buildings are required to  ensure there is no adverse impact on the countryside.   A high  standard 
of maintenance is also essential to prevent a  harmful impact on the environment . 
 
Policy DM9 Horse and Equestrian  development  / activities  
 
Proposal s for horse related non -residential development  will be permitted provided that the proposal  would : 
i. not have an adverse impact on the character and appearance of the countryside; and  
ii. not be detrimental to the amenity of neighbouring properties; and  
iii. ensure a safe and acceptable form of access; and  
iv. be of a high standard of design and construction (including details of stabling, tack rooms, feed rooms, fencing, m anure 
storage and disposal) ; and  
v. not have an  adverse impact on biodiversity including national site  network (formerly Natura 2000) sites in accordance with 
Policy 42S . 
 
 
Non-designated  heritage assets  
6.70 Non-designated heritage assets are buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes identified as having a degree of 
heritage significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, but which do not meet the criteria for designated heritage assets. 
These places derive significance through their archaeological, historic, architectural and artistic interest. They also often  make an 
important  contribution to local distinctiveness.   
 
Policy DM1 0 Non designated heritage assets  
 
Non-designated heritage assets will be identified through the plan making process, through the planning decision -making process, 
through conservation area appraisals and reviews, through reviews of the data held in the Bedford Borough Historic Environmen t 
Record, or in conjunction with the Bedford Borough Council Historic Environment Team.  
 
Once identified, non -designated heritage assets will have their status recorded on the Bedford Borough Historic Environment Record 
and given material weight in the planning process in accordance with Policy 41S  and NPPF paragraph 203 . In each instance, the 
Council will identify non -designated heritage assets based on sound evidence, with assets expected to meet two or more of the  
113 selection criteria within Appendix 5  unless comprising archaeological remains where they will be required to meet only the 
Archaeological Interest criterion.  
 
The selection criteria will also be used to identify non -designated heritage assets for inclusion on a Local List for Bedford borough . 
  
 
Outdoor sports space   
6.71 The Council  commissioned a Playing Pitch and Outdoor Sport Strategy to assess the existing provision  of, and future demand for , 
outdoor sports facilities . The document was prepared by consultants in accordance with Sport England  guidance and an Action 
Plan was produced  to help inform and guide future outdoor sports development  in the borough . The outputs  from the strategy feed 
into the Sport England Playing Pitch Calculator which  should  be used to determine the amount of space required for future pitch 
sports  in association with new development and, where provision on site is not possible or preferred,  monetary contributions for the 
provision or enhancement of facilities off -site.  
 
6.72 The Playin g Pitch and Outdoor Sport Strategy loo ked at the following sports:  
 Cricket  
 Football  
 Rugby union  
 Rugby league  
 Hockey  
 Bowls   
 Tennis  
 Netball  
 Athletics  
 Multi use games areas (MUGA)  
 Informal sports facilities such as outdoor gyms, trim trails  
 
6.73 The Sport England Playing Pitch Calculator covers football, rugby union, rugby league, hockey and cricket. Tennis and outd oor 
lawn bowls are not included ; the priority is to improve existing tennis and bowls facilities in th e borough to increase usage.   
 
6.74 As a result of th is work, there is a need to partially update  existing Policy AD28 (Provision of Open Space in New Developments ). 
Standards relating to outdoor sports space are replaced by the following policy.  Other open sp ace standards in P olicy AD28 have 
been reviewed and do not need to change.    
114  
 
Policy DM1 1 Outdoor sports space in association with development  
 
All new residential development which results in additional dwellings will be required to contribute to additional outdoor sports 
provision  either through the enhancement of existing facilities or provision of new facilities . The Council will have regard to the Sport 
Engla nd Playing Pitch Calculator, the Bedford Playing Pitch Str ategy  (as amended)  and the Council’s priorities for sports and leisure , 
to determine the amount of open space and  type of contribution in association with new development.  
 
Where new pitches are provided on -site, the developer will be required to deliver the pitches and  the Council’s preference is for the 
ownership of those facilities to be  transfer red to Bedford Borough Council or a Parish or Town Council . 
 
Where a monetary contribution is sought, th is will be collected through a Section 106 agreement.  
 
 
Tall buildings  
6.75 When  planning tall buildings , it is important to understand the nature of the area s around them, and the impact they would have on 
heritage assets and historic character of places: the very things that make places distinctive and that people cherish . Tall buil dings 
will generally be located in the town centre. Tall buildings can make a positive contribution to the skyline but in some cases they 
can also have a lasting adverse impact due to an unsuitable location , poor design, construction or management.  Defini ng what a 
tall building is depends on the context in which it would be located , and is a building which ‘breaks the skyline’ and is significantly 
taller than the prevailing heights of buildings in the area. The Council will prepare an SPD to assist with the application of this 
policy.  
 
Policy DM1 2 Tall buildings  
 
Tall buildings will be located in the urban area. Tall buildings should:   
i. Achieve high arc hitectural quality and innovative design (which includes sustainable design and construction practices);  and 
ii. Achieve a good relationship to other buildings and structures, the street network  / development at street level, public and 
private open spaces (particularly at street level), and  / or other townscape elements and characteristics; and which has 
ground  floor activities;  and 
iii. Provide a positive contribution to the skyline, when perceived from all angles during both the day and night, ensuring that 
important local views and vistas are protected;  and  
115 iv. Where residential uses are proposed, include high quality  and useable private and communal amenity space and ensure an 
innovative approach to the provision of open space;  and 
v. Not adversely impact on sensitive locations such as: heritage assets  (both designated and non -designated), local views, or 
other areas whi ch have been designated as inappropriate for tall buildings;  and 
vi. Not adversely impact on; the microclimate of the surrounding area, including the proposal site and public spaces, or the 
biodiversity of open spaces, including watercourses and waterbodies an d their hydrology, as well as their settings and views 
to and from them;  and 
vii. Provide positive social and economic benefits and contribute to socially balanced and inclusive communities;  and 
viii. Comply with aviation and navigation operational requirements and n ot interfere, to an unacceptable degree, with 
telecommunication, television and radio transmission networks.  
 
 
   
116 Appendix 1  
Status of development plan policies  
The following table lists the existing development p lan policies and identifies th eir status  once the Local  Plan 2040 has been  adopted.  
Local Plan 2030  
Policy number  Policy name  Status - Delete, 
replace or save  Proposed p olicy in Local Plan 2040  
 
1S Reviewing the Local Plan 2030  Delete  
  
2S Healthy communities  Save  
  
3S Spatial strategy  Replace  
 DS2(S) – Spatial Strategy  
 
4S Amount and distribution of housing development  Replace  DS3(S) – Amount and timing of housing growth  
 
5S Development in villages with a Settlement Policy Area  
 Save   
6 Development in Small Settlements  Save  
  
7S Development in the countryside  Save  
  
8 Key development sites in St Paul’s Square  Save  
  
9 Land at Duckmill Lane / Bedesman Lane, Bedford  
 Save   
10 The station area, Ashburnham Rd, Bedford  Save  
  
11 Greyfriars, Bedford  Save  
  
12 Land at Ford End Road,  Bedford  Save  
  
13 Land at Borough Hall, Bedford  Save  
  
     
117 Policy number  Policy name  Status - Delete, 
replace or save  Proposed p olicy in Local Plan 2040  
 
14 Land south of the river, Bedford  Save  
 
15 Town centre uses  Replace  
 TC3 – Bedford town centre – changes of use  
 
16 Bedford High Street  Replace  
 TC3 – Bedford town centre – changes of use  
 
17 Riverside development  Save  
  
18 Land at Gold Lane, Biddenham  Save  
  
19 Land at 329 Bedford Road, Kempston  Save  
  
20 Land at Mowbray Road, Bedford  Save  
  
21 Land north of Beverley Crescent, Bedford  Save  
  
22 Land at Lodge Hill, Bedford  Save  
  
23 Land to the rear of Bromham Road, Biddenham  
 Save   
24 Land at Grazehill, Bedford  Save  
  
25 Former Stewartby Brickworks  Save  
  
26 Opportunity Sites  Replace  DS6 – Opportunity sites  
 
27 Land north of School Lane, Roxton  Save  
  
28S Place making  Save  
  
29 Design quality and principles  Save  
  
30 The impact of development – design impacts  
 Save   
31 The impact of development – access impacts  Save    
118 Policy number  Policy name  Status - Delete, 
replace or save  Proposed p olicy in Local Plan 2040  
 
 
32 The impact of development – disturbance and pollution 
impacts  
 Save   
33 The impact of development – infrastructure impacts  
 Save   
34 Advertisements  Save  
  
35S Green infrastructure  Save  
  
36S Forest of Marston Vale  Save  
  
37 Landscape character  Save  
  
38 Landscaping in new development  Save  
  
39 Retention of trees  Save  
  
40 Hedgerows  Save  
  
41S Historic environment and heritage assets  Save  
  
42S Protecting biodiversity and geodiversity  
 Save   
43 Enhancing biodiversity  Replace  
 DM7  – Environmental net gain  
 
44 River Great Ouse  Save  
  
45 Local Green Space  Save  
  
46S Use of previously developed  land and use of undeveloped 
land 
 Save   
47S Pollution, disturbance and contaminated land  
 Save    
119 Policy number  Policy name  Status - Delete, 
replace or save  Proposed p olicy in Local Plan 2040  
 
 
48  
Minerals and waste restoration policy   
Save  
  
49 Waste  Save  
  
50S Water resources  Save  
  
51S Climate change strategic approach  Replace  
 DS1(S) - Resources and climate change  
 
52 Water demand  Save  
  
53 Development layout and accessibility  Save  
  
54 Energy efficiency  Save  
  
55 Renewable energy – district heating  Save  
  
56 Renewable energy – broad locations suitable for renewable 
energy development  
 Save   
57 Renewable energy – general impact  
 Save   
58S Affordable housing  
 Replace  DM1(S)  – Affordable Housing  
59S Housing mix  Replace  DM3(S)  – Housing Mix  
 
60 Specialist housing  Save  
  
61 Provision of Gypsy and Traveller pitches and Travelling Show  
People plots  
 Save   
62 Kempston Hardwick Gypsy and Traveller site  
 Save   
63 Proposals for Traveller sites on unallocated land in the 
countryside  Save    
120 Policy number  Policy name  Status - Delete, 
replace or save  Proposed p olicy in Local Plan 2040  
 
 
 
64  
Design of Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Show  People sites  
  
Save   
65 Reuse of  rural buildings in the countryside  Save  
  
66 The replacement and extension of dwellings in the countryside  
 Save   
67 Affordable housing to meet local needs in the rural area  
 Save   
68 Accommodation for rural workers  Save  
  
69S Amount and distribution of employment development  Replace  DS4(S) – Amount of employment growth  
DS5(S) – Distribution of growth  
 
70 Key employment sites  
 Save   
71 Other employment sites  Save  
  
72S Additional strategic employment development  
 Save   
73 Wyboston Lakes  Save  
  
74 Employment skills  
 Save   
75 New employment development in the countryside  Replace  DM8  – New employment development in the 
countryside  
 
76 Improvement and provision of new visitor accommodation  
 Save   
77S Hierarchy of town centres  Replace  TC1(S) - Hierarchy of town centres  
 
78 Out of centre development  Replace  
 TC2 – Out of centre development  
  
121 Policy number  Policy name  Status - Delete, 
replace or save  Proposed p olicy in Local Plan 2040  
 
79 Kempston district centre – new retail development  Replace  TC4 – Kempston district centre – new 
commercial, business and service use 
development  
 
80 Kempston district centre – changes of use  Replace  
 TC5 - Kempston district centre – changes of use  
 
81 New shops in local centres  Replace  
 TC6 – New commercial, business and service 
uses in local centres  
 
82 Local centres (including rural key service centres) – changes 
of use  
 Replace  TC7 – Local centres (including key service 
centres) – changes of use  
 
83 Neighbourhood centres and individual shops – changes of use  Replace  TC8 – Essential local shops and public houses – 
changes of use  
 
84 All shop units  
 Delete   
85 Impact of town centre uses  Replace  TC9 – Impact of town centre uses  
 
86S Delivering infrastructure  Save  
  
87 Public transport  Save  
  
88 Impact of transport on people, places and environment  
 Save   
89 Electric vehicle infrastructure  Save  
  
90S Transport infrastructure and network improvements  
 Save   
91 Access to the countryside  Save  
  
92 Flood risk  Save  
  
93 Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS)  Save  
   
122 Policy number  Policy name  Status - Delete, 
replace or save  Proposed p olicy in Local Plan 2040  
 
94 Broadband  Save  
  
95 Domestic equipment  Save  
  
96 Communications infrastructure  Save  
  
97 New sports and leisure facilities  Save  
  
98 New community facilities  Save  
  
99 Loss of existing sports and community facilities  
 Save   
 
   
123 Local Plan 2002  
Policy number  Policy name  Status - Delete, 
replace or save   
H2 Britannia Iron Works  
 Delete  Development completed  
H6 Biddenham Loop  
 Delete  Development completed  
H7 Land west of Kempston  
 Delete  Development completed  
H8 Land north of Bromham Road, Biddenham  
 Save  Development under construction  
H9 Land at Shortstown  
 Save  Development under construction  
H11 Land south of Fields Road, Wootton  
 Save  Development under construction  
H12 Land north of Fields Road, Wootton  
 Delete  Development completed  
H13 Land off Rousebury Road, Stewartby  
 Save  Development under construction  
H14 Elstow Storage Depot  
 Save  Development under construction  
H23 Housing in second order villages  
 Save   
E2 Land south of Cambridge Road  
 Delete  Development completed  
E10 Elstow Brickworks  
 Save   
LR4 Rowing course  
 Save  Development started  
 
  
124 Allocations and Designations Local Plan 2013  
Policy number  Allocations and Designations Local Plan Policies (2013)  Status – Delete, 
replace or save   Proposed policy in Local Plan 2040  
AD1 Sustainable Development Policy  
 Save   
AD3 Land  at Hall End Road, Wootton  
 Save   
AD4 Land at Old Ford End Road, Queens Park, Bedford  
 Delete  Development completed  
AD7 Land East of Eastcotts Road, Bedford  
 Delete  Development completed  
AD10  Lansdowne Road, Warwick A venue and Dynevor Road, 
Bedford  Save  Development under construction  
AD11  Land at Medbury Farm, Elstow  
 Replace  EMP5 – Land at Pear Tree Farm, 
Elstow  
 
AD12  Land at Bell Farm, Kempston  
 Save  Development under construction  
AD13  Marston Vale Innovation Park Phase 2, Wootton  
 Save   
AD15  Manton Lane Reservoir Site, Bedford  
 Save  Development under construction  
AD16  Land West of Manton Lane, Bedford  
 Save   
AD17  Land West of the B530, Kempston  
 Save   
AD18  Land North of the A6 -A428 Link Road, Bedford  
 Save   
AD19  Land at Manton Lane, Bedford  
 Save   
AD20  Land at Bedford Road, Great Barford  
 Save    
125 Policy number  Allocations and Designations Local Plan Policies (2013)  Status – Delete, 
replace or save   Proposed policy in Local Plan 2040  
AD21  Land at Chawston Lake, Roxton Road, Wyboston  
 Save   
AD22  Land North of Ravensden Road, Salph End, Renhold  
 Save   
AD23  Bedford River Valley Park Enabling Development  
 Replace  HOU11 Land  at Bedford River Valley 
Park 
AD24  Green Infrastructure Opportunity Zones  
 Save   
AD26 Bedford River Valley Park  
 Save   
AD27  Bedford to Milton Keynes Waterway Park  
 Save   
AD28  Provision of Open Space and Built Facilities in Association 
with New Development  
 Save  Partly replaced  by Policy DM12 – 
outdoor sports space in association 
with development  
 
AD36  Pedestrian Routes  
 Save   
AD38  Commercial Vehicle Parking and Motorists Facilities  
 Save   
AD39  Cycling  
 Save   
AD40  Village Open Spaces and Views  
 Save   
AD41  Urban Area Boundary  
 Save   
AD42  Local Gaps  Save  
  
AD43  Urban Open Spaces and Gaps  
 Save    
126 Policy number  Allocations and Designations Local Plan Policies (2013)  Status – Delete, 
replace or save   Proposed policy in Local Plan 2040  
AD44  Former Land Settlement Association Area  
 Save   
 
Bedfordshire and Luton Minerals and Waste Local Plan 2005  
 Bedfordshire and Luton Minerals and Waste Local Plan 
Policies (2005)  Status – Delete, 
replace or save   Proposed  policy in Local Plan 2040  
 
W17 Land raising  
 Save  Also relevant is Policy 48 – Minerals 
and waste restoration policy  
W22 Safeguarding existing sites  
 Save   
 
Strategic Policies  in the LP2040  
Policy  
 Strategic policy title  Chapter  
DS1(S)  
 Resources and Climate Change  Climate change  
DS2(S)  
 Spatial Strategy  Spatial strategy and site allocations  
DS3(S)  
 Amount and timing of housing growth  Spatial strategy and site allocations  
DS4(S)  
 Amount of employment growth  Spatial strategy and site allocations  
DS5(S)  
 Distribution of growth  Spatial strategy and site allocations  
TC1(S)  
 Hierarchy of town centres  Town centre and retail p olicies  
   
127 DM1(S)  
 Affordable housing  Development management policies  
DM3(S)  
 Housing mix  Development management policies  
   
128 Appendix 2  
Monitoring and Review  
 
The Local Plan 2040 will influence the way the borough is developed in the coming years. To assess how effective the Plan is in achieving 
the vision and objectives, the Council will fulfil its requirement to monitor the policies along with any other saved policie s from other 
planning documents. It will do this through its monitoring reports.  
The monitoring reports will assess the s uccess of the Plan in meeting its aims and objectives by looking at how the policies are 
implemented. Targets and indicators to measure the effects of policies will be completed at regular intervals.  
The collection of data will be from a range of sources. These will include surveys carried out by the Council, for example housing, 
employment and retail completion surveys as well as the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment. Internal stakeholders  will be 
consulted on areas the Council has direct know ledge of (such as cycleway improvements, the tenure of affordable housing, historic 
environment assets). External and partner stakeholders will be consulted to provide further information on areas that affect development in 
the borough but is governed by o ther agencies (such as progress on the Forest of Marston Vale and the use of renewable e nergy or water 
in households).  
If monitoring indicates that targets are not being met, consideration will be given on why that might be the case and whether  the Local 
Plan requires reviewing as a result.  
 
 
 
 
   
129 Appendix 3   
Opportunity Sites  
 
1. Bedford Blues Rugby Club, Bedford  
  
 
  
There may be an opportunity to improve the major leisure facility at the 
Rugby Club, Goldington Road, Bedford and at the same time deliver 
new housing close to the town centre.   
The size of the rugby pitch and stadium capacity does not meet the 
standards that would allow promotion of Bedford Blues to the rugby  
Premiership .   
The Club wishes to improve its facilities and has sought policy support 
for some enabling development on the site.  However, at the current 
time there is not sufficient certainty that the site is available for 
development.   
More detailed design work will be required in relation to the impact of 
development on the adjacent listed building, conservation area and the 
surrounding local area.    
Existing schools in the area have capacity to serve the development.  
 
 
 
  
 
130 2. Jowett Siding s and Royal Mail Depot, Midland  Road , Bedford  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Bedford Midland  station will be redeveloped as part of the EWR 
project but the precise location and configuration of the station is 
as yet unknown. Until such time as the EWR proposals are 
confirmed, the impact on the Jowett sidings and Royal Mail land 
to the south of Midland road is als o unknown. As proposals 
become clearer, there may be the potential for additional land in 
this location to be  included in  development  proposals .  
 
As a result, the Jowett sidings and Royal Mail sites are included 
as an opport unity site in accordance with Policy DS6.
 
131 
 Appendix 4  
Affordable Housing Commuted Sum Calculation s 
The commuted sum will be based upon the difference between the open market value of the property and the estimated revenues t hat would have 
been paid by a Registered Provider or achieved by the developer from the sale of First Homes for commensurate off -site provision.  Sums will be 
calculated to two decimal places.  
1. Calculation of Commensurate Provision  
 
The Council’s affordable housing requirement is 30%. With off -site provision of affordable housing the actual development (which is 
entirely market housin g) equates to 70% of a notional development which does provide affordable housing. The affordable housing 
requirement for the purposes of determining a commuted sum is therefore assessed as follows:  
the number of dwellings in the actual scheme x 100    =  calculation base for affordable housing requirement  
 70 
2. Dwelling Mix for Affordable Housing:  
 
The assumed dwelling mix for affordable housing will be:  
 For schemes that are predominantly houses:    
o 50% 2 Bedroom Houses (72m2) 
o 50% 3 Bedroom Houses  (82m2) 
 For schemes that are predominantly flats:     
o 34% 1 Bedroom Flats (40m2) 
o 66% 2 Bedroom Flats (62m2)  
3. Tenure Balance:  
 
The assumed tenure balance for the affordable housing will be:  
 Affordable Rent  75% 
 First Homes  25% 
  
132 
 4. Affordable Housing Revenue Assumptions:  
 
Revenue assumptions for the affordable housing will be:  
 Affordable Rent:   Gross rent     80% of open market rent  
 less management costs  30% 
 Capitalised at   6%. 
 First Homes   Purchase Price (net of required discount)     
 
 
   
133 
  
Appendix 5  
BEDFORD BOROUGH’S  
NON -DESIGNATED HERITAGE ASSETS  
 
 
 
 
19th century limestone bridge, Village Road, Bromham  
 
 
BEDFORD BOROUGH COUNCIL  
HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT  
PLANNING SERVICES  
 
134 
  
1. Introduction  
This appendix sets out the criteria for identifying non -designated heritage assets in Bedford borough. Non -designated heritage assets are 
locally or regionally significant (see archaeology exception below) buildings, structures, monuments, sites, places, a reas, or landscapes 
which have been identified as having a degree of significance that merits consideration in planning decisions and plan making . Non-
designated heritage assets will possess different levels of significance, and the higher the level of sig nificance, the more weight it will be 
given in planning applications which potentially impact on that significance.  
The Council intends to create a single local list of non -designated heritage assets but until such time as that is produced, a criteria -base d 
approach will be employed on a case -by-case basis to identify such assets. Once identified, a non -designated heritage asset will be 
added to the Bedford Borough Historic Environment Record (if its details are not already held in the Record) and have this  status 
recorded; being already recorded in the Record does not automatically make a building, monument, landscape etc., a non -designated 
heritage asset; it must be identified as such in accordance with the criteria set -out in Table 1.  
 
2. Criteria  
Non-designated heritage assets will be considered against the criteria set out in Table 1 below. Such assessments are likely to a rise in the 
following situations: during local plan -making  and making planning decisions; as part of conservation area appraisa ls and reviews; in 
reviews of data held by the Bedford Borough Historic Environment Record ; or if put forward by members of the public or local groups.    
Non-designated heritage assets must fulfil at least two of the criteria set out below unless they comprise archaeological remains  which are 
required to meet the Archaeological Interest criterion only. Some assets may however meet  multiple criteria.  
It should be noted that some archaeological sites identified as non -designated heritage assets and added to the local list will be nationally 
significant, but unscheduled, and will therefore need to be afforded the same consideration as scheduled monuments in  planning 
decisions. Some nationally important sites cannot be designated as scheduled monuments because they are outside the scope of the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979 due to their physical nature, such as lithic scatters. However, t he NPPF requires 
non-designated heritage assets of archaeological interest, which are demonstrably of equivalent significance to scheduled monumen ts, to 
be considered subject to the policies for designated heritage assets.  
 
 
  
135 
 Table 1  
Criteria  Description  
Age and Integrity  Structures constructed before 1840 which retain much of their original style, features, form, 
or construction materials and layout. If built between 1840 -1919, the structure should retain 
most of its original external features; such as wi ndows, doors and roof covering etc. If built 
after 1919, the structure should retain almost all of its original  architectural features.  
Rarity  Heritage assets which can be demonstrated to be rare examples locally and  / or regionally.  
Architectural Interest  Structures that represent well -preserved typical examples of particular architectural styles, 
building materials, or building form. Structures that show considerable innovation in the use 
of materials or techniques, or early examples of styles tha t subsequently became popular. 
High quality work by notable architects whether local or otherwise.  
Archaeological Interest  Heritage assets identified as having the potential to provide evidence of past human 
activity. These may be in the form of below gro und remains and  / or in earthworks, 
structures, designed or historic landscapes. Please note that footnote 68 of the NPPF 2021 
will apply to heritage assets with archaeological interest demonstrably equivalent in 
significance to a scheduled monument.  
Artistic Interest  Heritage assets that demonstrate elements of creative skill including for example 
sculptures, paintings, decorations, advertisements, memorials, gates, and railings.  
Historic Interest  Heritage assets which hold a significant association with  important historic people or 
events. For example, former notable residents or landowners, commemorative or charity 
events, events and locations associated with religious or community groups. This category 
will not usually apply to assets associated with a  living person.  
Designed or Historic Landscapes  Heritage assets comprising locally or regionally important designed landscapes such as 
parks or gardens and assets formed through commercial, industrial, or agricultural 
processes.  
   
136 
 Landmark Value  Heritage assets that hold a strong communal or historic association, hold high aesthetic 
value, or form part of an important view or place.  
Group Value  Heritage assets that form a group with a clear visual design or historic relationship, for 
example ter race housing, farmyards, or estate buildings.  
 
 
3. Bibliography  
Historic England, 2021. Local Heritage Listing: Identifying and Conserving Local Heritage. Historic England Advice Note 7 (2nd edition).  
 
   
137 
  
Appendix 6 - Glossary  
Glossary Term  Meaning  
 
Affordable Housing  
 Housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the market (including housing that provides a 
subsidised route to home ownership and / or is for essential local workers); and which complies with definitions in the 
NPPF fo r affordable housing for rent, starter homes, discounted market sales housing, other affordable routes to 
home ownership.   
 
Allocations  Sites specifically identified in the development plan and on the Policies Map for development.  
 
Bedford and Milton Keynes 
Waterway Park  A proposed new broad beam canal set in a green corridor that will link the Great Ouse in Kempston to the Grand 
Union Canal in Milton Keynes, and connect the Fenland waterways to the central waterway network. The project is led 
by a Con sortium of local authorities including Bedford Borough Council, together with the Environment Agency, 
Bedford & Milton Keynes Waterway Trust and others.  
 
Bedford and Milton Keynes 
Waterway Trust  
 A non -profit group established to promote the development o f a waterway park to link the Grand Union Canal in Milton 
Keynes to the River Great Ouse in Bedford.  
 
Bedford River Valley Park  An area to the east of Bedford designated on the Policies Map for a new area of multi -functional greenspace.  
 
Biodiversity  The variety of life on earth or in a specified region or area.  
 
Biodiversity metric  
 A tool produced by DEFRA in which to assess an area’s value to wildlife and calculate a biodiversity value.  
Climate Change  Long -term changes in temperature, precipitation, wind and all other aspects of the earth's climate. Often regarded as 
a result of human activity and fossil fuel consumption.  
 
Commitment  Where planning permission has been granted or there is a resolution to grant planning permission awaiting the 
finalisa tion of a legal agreement. This term can also be used to describe existing development allocations.  
 
Conservation Areas  Under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, local planning authorities are able to 
designate as conservatio n areas any “areas of special architectural or historic interest, the character of which it is 
desirable to preserve or enhance”.  
  
138 
 Glossary Term  Meaning  
 
Corporate Plan  The Council’s plan for 2022 -2026 which sets out actions to focus the Council’s work on helping to achieve the  
potential of the borough. The plan includes four goals which are to support people, enhance places, create wealth and 
empower communities.  
  
Countryside  Land outside Settlement Policy Areas and the built form of the defined Small Settlements.  
 
Design Codes  A set of specific rules or requirements to guide the physical development of a site or place. The aim of design coding 
is to provide clarity as to what constitutes acceptable design quality and thereby provides a level of certainty for 
developers and  the local community alike that can help to facilitate the delivery of good quality new development.  
 
Design Guide  
 A series of general principles that allows for the creation of high quality places and buildings. Design guides often 
constitute the ‘first  step’ in understanding acceptable design for a place, with design codes (see above) providing 
more detail for specific sites or areas . 
 
Designations  Areas shown on the Policies Map to which specific policies apply (not allocations). These may be areas wh ere 
development is prohibited or restricted.  
 
Development Briefs  Adopted by the Borough Council as a detailed statement of its planning policies for a particular site and its aspirations 
in terms of uses, layout and design principles.  
 
Development Plan  Under the Planning Acts, this is the prime consideration in the determination of planning applications. The 
development plan includes local plan(s) and neighbourhood plans.  
 
England’s Economic Heartland  
 Covers an area from Swindon to Cambridgeshire. Bri ngs together political and business leaders to realise the region’s 
economic potential whilst working towards net -zero. Provides the region’s voice on strategic infrastructure.  
  
East West Rail  
 A new railway service and railway lines from Oxford in the w est through to Cambridge in the east.  
Environmental Net Gain  
 Biodiversity net gain plus natural capital gain  
First Homes  
 Houses which are discounted market sale homes which must be discounted by a minimum 30% against the market 
value and are sold to persons meeting specific eligibility criteria. There are restrictions on the title to ensure that the 
discount is passed on and must be sold after discount at a price no higher than £250,000.  
  
139 
 Glossary Term  Meaning  
 
Forest of Marston Vale  One of twelve community forests established throughout England by the Countryside Commission and Forestry 
Authority. These multi -purpose forests on the edge of towns and cities will provide opportunities for recreation, 
forestry, education and the creation of wildlife habitats.  
 
Green I nfrastructure  A combination of natural and planned, accessible open spaces and amenity areas including recreation and sports 
facilities, pathways and routes, natural and historic sites, canals and water spaces, accessible countryside and other 
open areas t hat create a network and contribute to the character of towns and villages.  
 
Green Wheel  A vision to develop and enhance the existing network of traffic free paths and quiet routes around the Bedford urban 
area for use by pedestrians, cyclists and horse r iders where possible.  
 
Gypsy and Traveller Pitch  The space required to accommodate one household with their caravans, parking and manoeuvring space and usually 
a day room.  
 
Health Impact Assessment  A tool to measure the potential health impacts of a pro posed project or plan on the wider population. This assessment 
is to appraise both the positive and negative impacts help to achieve better policies and developments.  
 
Heritage Impact  Assessment  A document outlining the historic and  / or archaeological significance of a building or landscape within its wider 
setting. The document also includes an assessment of the proposed development on the setting of the heritage asset 
and a mitigation strategy . 
 
Housing Trajectory  
 An illustration of the expected rate of housing delivery over the plan period  
Historic Environment Record  
 An information source  maintained by Bedford Borough Council for the whole borough covering historical assets such 
as archaeological sites and finds, historic landscapes and historic buildings.  
 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
 A plan outlining the future infrastructure requirements over the lifetime of the local plan to support future development.  
Innovation Hub  
 A grouping of uses in a highly accessible location providing hig h quality, local employment opportunities, potentially 
linked to academic activities which will facilitate a more skilled and prosperous borough.  
 
Issues and Options  The first stage of the local plan process whereby the public is consulted on a number of different spatial options for 
the scope and detail of the Plan. Sometimes known as ‘Regulation 18’ consultation. May include more than one 
consultation.  
  
140 
 Glossary Term  Meaning  
 
Key Service Centres  Large villages with a good level of services identified in the Local Plan 2030 as  Bromham, Clapham, Great Barford, 
Sharnbrook, Shortstown; Wilstead, Wixams and Wootton.  
 
Landscape led design  
 Designing development considering the existing landscape and the relationship between nature, communities and 
people.  
 
Listed Buildings  Under t he Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and 
Sport has a statutory duty to compile lists of buildings of special architectural or historic interest. Buildings are graded 
I, II* or II to refle ct their importance and permission is required for works which may affect their character as buildings 
of special architectural or historic interest.  
 
Local housing needs 
assessment (LHNA)  
 An assessment of housing needs for a local authority using the go vernment’s standard method for determining the 
level of housing in plan period.  
Local Transport Plan  A five -year strategy for the development of local, integrated transport, supported by a programme of transport 
improvements. It is used to bid to governm ent for funding transport improvements.  
 
Master Plan  
 An overarching planning document that provides a conceptual layout to guide and structure future growth and 
development.  
 
Mixed Use Development  A development that promotes the integration and diversity of a number of land uses resulting in benefits such as 
reducing the need to travel and deterring criminal activity by generating different activities at different times of the day.  
 
Mobility hub  A mobility hub is a recognisable place with an off er of different and connected transport modes supplemented with 
enhanced facilities and information features to both attract and benefit the traveller.  
https ://como.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/Mobility -Hub-Guide -241019 -final.pdf  
 
National Highways  
 A government owned company which plans, designs, builds, operates and maintains    England’s motorways and 
major A roads (known as the strategic road network  – SRN), formerly Highways England.  
 
Natura 2000 sites  A Europe -wide network of sites of international importance for nature conservation established under the European 
Community Directive on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild Fauna and Flor a (92/43  / EEC 'Habitats 
Directive'). Following the UK’s exit from the EU in January 2021 the Government has created a new national site 
network within the UK replacing the Natura 2000 sites but comprising the protected sites already designated.  
  
141 
 Glossary Term  Meaning  
 
National  Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF)  National government policy for planning in England and how these are expected to be applied, introduced in 2012 and 
updated 2021.  
 
Neighbourhood Plan  
 A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a particular neighbourhood area (made under the 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004).  
 
Non-designated Heritage 
Assets  
 These are buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes  identified as having a degree of significance 
meriting consideration in planning decisions but which are not formally designated heritage assets.  
Oxford to Cambridge Arc  
 The area between Oxford, Milton Keynes and Cambridge. It includes the ceremonial  counties of Oxfordshire, 
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Northamptonshire and Cambridgeshire.  
 
Previously Developed Land  Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of the developed land (although it 
should not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage should be developed) and any associated fixed surface 
infrastructure. This excludes: land that is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been 
developed for minerals ext raction or waste disp osal by landfill purposes where provision for restoration has been 
made through development control procedures; land in built -up areas such as private residential gardens, parks, 
recreation grounds and allotments; and land that was previously -developed but  where the remains of the permanent 
structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the landscape in the process of time.  
 
Policies Map  Illustrates policies and proposals in the development plan.  
  
Renewable Energy  Energy derived from sources that  are available in an unlimited supply.  
 
Rural Service Centres  
 Centres which have fewer facilities than Key Service Centres (above) and provide a more localised convenience and 
service role to meet day to day needs of residents and businesses in the rural  areas. These are defined in the Local 
Plan 2030  as Carlton, Harrold, Milton Ernest, Oakley, Roxton, Stewartby, Turvey and Willington.  
 
S106 agreement  Section 106 (S106) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 allows a local planning authority to enter into a 
legally -binding agreement or planning obligation with a landowner or developer in association with the granting 
of planning permission. These agr eements are a way of delivering or addressing matters that are necessary to make 
a development acceptable in planning terms. They are used to support the provision of services and infrastructure, 
such as highways, recreational facilities, education, health  and affordable housing.  
  
142 
 Glossary Term  Meaning  
 
Scheduled Monuments  Archaeological sites and monuments of national importance legally protected under the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act 1979 (as amended). These monuments are given legal protection by being place d on the 
‘list’ and once on this schedule, Scheduled Monument Consent is needed before any wor ks can be carried out that 
would affect the monument.  
 
Self-build and custom 
housebuilding  Defined in the Self -build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amende d) as “self -build and custom housebuilding 
means the building or completion by (a) individuals, (b) associations of individuals, or (c) persons working with or for 
individuals or associations of individuals, of houses to be occupied as homes by those indiv iduals”.  
 
Settlement Policy Areas  A line drawn around the main built up part of a village in a local plan document.  
 
Small Settlements  Settlements that do not have a defined Settlement Policy Area but have a definite built form. Small Settlements 
comprise a distinct group of buildings and their immediate surroundings that include 30 or more dwellings.  
 
Site Specific Flood Risk 
Assessment  An assessment prepared by an applicant at the planning application stage to demonstrate how flood risk from all  
sources of flooding to the development site itself and flood risk to others will be managed and taking climate change 
into account.  
 
Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA)  Prepared by or on behalf of the local authority, a study to inform the preparation  of Local Development Documents, 
having regard to catchment -wide flooding issues from multiple sources which affect the area. The SFRA provide s the 
information needed to apply a sequential approach in identifying land for development, with areas at the lea st risk of 
flooding being sequentially preferable to areas with higher risk.  
 
Stepped trajectory  A trajectory which reflects step changes in the level of housing expected to be delivered across the plan period.  
 
Sui Generis Uses  
 Certain uses that do not  fall within any use class are considered 'sui generis'. Such uses include: betting offices  / 
shops, pay day loan shops, theatres, larger houses in multiple occupation, hostels providing no significant element of 
care, scrap yards, petrol filling stations and shops selling and  / or displaying motor vehicles, retail warehouse clubs, 
nightclubs, launderettes, taxi businesses, casinos, public houses, drinking establishments with expanded food 
provision, hot food take aways, live music venues, cinemas, bingo hal ls and dance halls.  
 
Supplementary Planning 
Documents (SPD)  Documents which add further detail to the policies in the local plan. They can be used to provide further guidance for 
development on a specific site or on particular issues such as design. Suppl ementary planning documents are 
capable of being a material consideration in planning decisions but they are not part of the development plan.  
  
143 
 Glossary Term  Meaning  
 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA)  A social, economic and environmental appraisal of strategy, policies and proposa ls that is required for all 
Development Plan Documents and Supplementary Planning Documents. To be undertaken jointly with Strategic 
Environmental Assessment.  
 
Sustainable Development  “Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising t he ability of future generations to meet their 
own needs.” (World Commission on Environment and Development 1987).  
 
Sustainable Drainage System 
(SuDS)  
 A scheme for delivering a natural approach to managing drainage in developments.  
Transport Assessment  A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out transport issues relating to a proposed development. It 
identifies what measures will be required to improve accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, particularly for 
alternatives to the car suc h as walking, cycling and public transport and what measures will need to be taken to deal 
with the anticipated transport impacts of the development.  
 
Travelling Show  People Plot  A ‘plot’ has been taken to be the space which typically provides for a mixe d residential and business use, to enable 
on-site accommodation together with space for the secure storage, repair and testing of significant amounts of 
equipment. The site is traditionally the ‘winter quarters’ to w hich Show  People return at the end of th e show season, 
however sites may be occupied by some members of the family permanently.  
 
Urban Open Space  
 Designated areas of open space within the Urban Area boundary which relate to Policy AD43 in the Allocations and 
Designations Local Plan 2013.  
 
Viability Appraisal  
 An assessment of the financial implications of a development, often to determine whether a policy compliant scheme 
would result in an acceptable return to the landowner and would therefore go ahead. Informs negotiations on S106 
agreement s.    
 
Vitality and Viability  Essential elements in the stability and future prosperity of town centres. They stem not only from a variety of retail 
uses but from the range and quality of activities in town centres and their accessibility to people.  
 
Windfall sites  Sites which have not been specifically identified as available in the Local Plan process. They normally comprise 
previously -developed sites that have unexpectedly become available.  
 
 