BIRMINGHAM DEVELOPMENT PLAN
Part of Birmingham’s Local Plan
Planning for sustainable growth
Adopted January 2017
Contact
Planning and Regeneration
Economy DirectorateBirmingham City Council
Click:
E-mail:
planningstrategy@birmingham.gov.uk
Web:
www.birmingham.gov.uk/plan2031
Visit:
Office:
1 Lancaster CircusBirminghamB4 7DJ
Post:
PO Box 28BirminghamB1 1TU
You can ask for a copy of this document in large print, another format or another language. We aim to supply what you need within ten working days.
Call (0121) 303 1115
If you have hearing difficulties please call us via 
Typetalk 18001 0121 303 1115 or e-mail us at the address above.
Plans contained within this document are based upon Ordnance Survey material with the permission of Ordnance Survey on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
© Crown Copyright. Unauthorised reproduction infringes Crown Copyright 
and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings.Birmingham City Council. Licence number 100021326, 2017.contents / birmingham development planContents
Foreword                 5
1  Introduction               7
2  About Birmingham              11 
  3  The vision, objectives and strategy           17
The vision - Birmingham in 2031 
Objectives The strategy
  4  Planning for growth            27
PG1   Overall levels of growth
PG2   Birmingham as an international city 
PG3   Place making 
 
  5  Spatial delivery of growth           33
GA1   City Centre 
GA2   Greater Icknield 
GA3   Aston, Newtown and Lozells 
GA4   Sutton Coldfield Town Centre
GA5   Langley Sustainable Urban Extension
GA6   Peddimore
GA7   Bordesley Park
GA8   Eastern Triangle
GA9   Selly Oak and South Edgbaston
GA10  Longbridge2
birmingham development plan / contents   6  Environment and sustainability          67
TP1   Reducing the City’s carbon footprint 
TP2   Adapting to climate change
TP3   Sustainable construction
TP4   Low and zero carbon energy generation 
TP5   Low carbon economy
TP6   Management of flood risk and water resources
TP7   Green infrastructure network 
TP8   Biodiversity and geodiversity
TP9   Open space, playing fields and allotments
TP10  Green Belt
TP11  Sports facilities
TP12  Historic environment 
TP13  Sustainable management of the City’s waste 
TP14  New and existing waste facilities
TP15  Location of waste management facilities
TP16  Minerals
  7  Economy and network of centres          91
TP17  Portfolio of employment land and premises 
TP18  Regional Investment Sites
TP19  Core Employment Areas 
TP20  Protection of employment land 
TP21  The network and hierarchy of centres
TP22  Convenience retail provision
TP23  Small shops and independent retailing 
TP24  Promoting a diversity of uses within centres 
TP25  Tourism and cultural facilities 
TP26  Local employment
  8  Homes and neighbourhoods         107
TP27  Sustainable neighbourhoods 
TP28  The location of new housing 
TP29  The housing trajectory
TP30  The type, size and density of new housing 
TP31  Affordable housing
TP32  Housing regeneration
TP33  Student accommodation
TP34   Provision for gypsies, travellers and travelling 
showpeople
TP35  The existing housing stock
TP36  Education
TP37  Health
 contents / birmingham development plan  9  Connectivity           121
TP38  A sustainable transport network 
TP39  Walking
TP40  Cycling
TP41  Public transport 
TP42  Freight
TP43  Low emission vehicles
TP44  Traffic and congestion management
TP45  Accessibility standards for new development
TP46  Digital communications 
  10 Implementation                   137
TP47  Developer contributions 
  11 Monitoring                                143 
TP48   Monitoring and promoting the achievement               
of growth targets 34
birmingham development plan / foreword
foreword / birmingham development planThe Birmingham Development Plan was adopted by 
Birmingham City Council on 10th January 2017. It sets out our vision and a strategy for the sustainable growth of the City for 
the period up to 2031.
The City faces a number of challenges that will need to be 
addressed if we are to achieve our ambition for Birmingham to be renowned as an enterprising, innovative and green City.
The City’s population is projected to grow by an additional 
150,000 people by 2031, which means that new homes and jobs will be required, as well as the creation of quality 
environments in order for residents, workers, businesses and 
visitors to thrive.
The Birmingham Development Plan has a central role in how 
we address these challenges. It sets out a framework that will guide future development across the City, in particular how we address climate change, quality of life, delivery of infrastructure, creation of an inclusive economy and Birmingham’s national/international role. 
By planning positively, we can ensure that growth is 
accommodated in a way that is both sustainable and deliverable.
Councillor Ian Ward
Deputy Leader Birmingham City Council5 Foreword
6
birmingham development plan / introductionIntroduction1
introduction / birmingham development plan71.8 The BDP was submitted to the 
Secretary of State and considered 
at an Examination in Public in October/November 2014. This process has determined that the BDP:
•  Is consistent with national 
planning policy.
•  Meets the development and infrastructure needs of the City along with any needs from neighbouring areas where it is reasonable to do so.
•  Is consistent with achieving sustainable development.
•  Has considered all reasonable alternatives in producing the  plan.
birmingham development plan / introduction8
1.2 The preparation of the BDP 
started in 2007 when the City Council decided that a new strategic planning document was needed to guide future growth and development. In Autumn 2008 a period of public consultation was held seeking views on a proposed strategy and range of options for delivering housing and economic growth. Following this consultation further work was carried out and in December 2010 a document entitled the Birmingham Core Strategy Consultation Draft was published.
1.3 As progress was being made 
in producing the final version of the BDP a number of significant changes occurred. The publication of the National Planning Policy Framework and the emergence of higher population projections required a review of how the City should plan for future development, which necessitated a further round of consultation to identify options for meeting the new challenges. 
1.4 Between October 2012 and 
January 2013 a further options consultation on Planning for Birmingham’s Growing Population was held. The outcomes of that consultation, along with all previous work and comments made during the past consultations have been drawn together to inform this pre-submission version of the BDP .
1.5 Throughout all the consultations 
a wide range of people and organisations have been engaged to gain as many ideas and opinions as possible on how Birmingham could develop up to 2031.1.1 The Birmingham Development Plan 2031 (BDP) is the City’s statutory 
planning framework guiding decisions on all development and regeneration activity to 2031. The BDP sets out how and where new homes, jobs, services and infrastructure will be delivered and the type of places and environments that will be created.Introduction
1.6 In parallel with the stages of 
consultation a range of supporting evidence has been gathered to help inform the approach of the BDP . Also integral to the plan’s preparation has been the Sustainability Appraisal which has ensured that the approach is the most appropriate given the reasonable alternatives and that the full social, environmental and economic effects have been considered. The Plan is also supported by a Habitats Regulation Assessment.
1.7 In developing the BDP , the 
City Council has worked with authorities which adjoin or are close to Birmingham and other organisations collaboratively through the Duty to Co-operate to seek to identify a way forward on those issues of a strategic nature that are of greater than local significance.
New Street Stationintroduction / birmingham development plan•  Is justified with evidence to 
support the approach taken in the Plan.
•  Has been prepared through joint working to address cross boundary issues. 
• Is deliverable.
1.9 While the BDP is intended to 
provide a long term strategy for the whole of the City it will not be able to provide all the detail necessary to guide all development. To support the delivery of the BDP a range of area and thematic based planning policy documents will be brought forward to provide more detail building upon the principles and strategy of the BDP . The City Council’s Local Development Scheme will provide details of these documents with a schedule for their production.
1.10 The City Council has already 
adopted two Area Action Plans (AAP); Aston, Newtown and Lozells AAP and Longbridge AAP . A further AAP is in production for the Bordesley Park area. The City Council will also be producing a Development Management Development Plan Document (DPD) and has a range of Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) and Area Regeneration Frameworks.
1.11 The Big City Plan, launched in 
September 2010, sits alongside the BDP as a non-statutory document that sets out a vision and framework for how the City Centre will be transformed and the key proposals are reflected in the BDP .1.12 The BDP will replace the 
saved policies of the Birmingham Unitary Development Plan 2005, with the exception of those policies contained within chapter 8 and paragraphs 3.14 to 3.14D of that plan which will continue in force until the adoption of the Council’s proposed Development Management DPD. The BDP will also replace Policy ED1 of the adopted Aston, Newtown and Lozells AAP (July 2012).
Structure of the BDP
1.13 The BDP is divided into six 
parts:
•  Section 1 - provides an 
introduction to the BDP .
•  Section 2 - describes the key characteristics of the City and the challenges for the future to which the BDP responds.
•  Section 3 - sets out the vision, objectives and strategy for how the City will develop over the period to 2031.9
•  Section 4 and 5 - provides detail on how and where the future growth of the City will be delivered.
•  Section 6 to 9 - contains policies covering a range of topics to guide how future growth and development will be managed.
•  Section 10 and 11 - covers how the policies and proposals will be implemented and monitored. These provide a clear indication of how the BDP will be implemented and the indicators that will be used to measure its success.
1.14 There is an important emphasis 
on delivery and the BDP is accompanied by an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP).
Waheed Nazir
Strategic DirectorEconomy
Shoppers at the Bullring10
birmingham development plan / about birminghamAbout Birmingham2
about birmingham / birmingham development plan1112
birmingham development plan / about birmingham2.2 Since the 1980s the City has 
been revitalised through economic 
restructuring, estate regeneration and transformation of its environment.
2.3 With a population of just 
over 1 million, the Census 2011 recorded Birmingham as having a significantly younger population profile than the national average, and an ethnically diverse population. In 2011, Birmingham was recognised as the top English core city in terms of the diversity of languages spoken (Cushman & Wakefield, 2011). The latest Census also shows that there are approximately 411,000 households in the City, with an average household size of 2.6 residents. 
2.4 The City is a major employment 
centre, drawing in workers from across the West Midlands. It is a leading European business destination with an economic output of £20bn per annum. The local economy has major strengths, particularly in business, professional and financial services; digital media; advanced manufacturing (including the automotive industry); jewellery and environmental and medical technologies. Many international companies are based in the area, including Jaguar Land Rover, Kraft, KPMG, Deutsche Bank and GKN.
2.5 The local economy is supported 
by five universities and six major colleges. They provide world class learning environments, reflecting recent and ongoing investment programmes, supporting over 73,000 undergraduate and postgraduate students.2.6 The City is a centre for culture, 
sports, leisure and shopping. It benefits from world class venues for everything from arts to conferencing, with over 30 million people visiting a year. Many of these attractions are in the City Centre, but there are also others, such as Edgbaston Cricket Ground and Sutton Park. Birmingham’s sports teams and facilities regularly put it in the national and international spotlight. 2.7 There is a network of over 70 
local centres across the City, with the largest being Sutton Coldfield. These centres help to meet a range of shopping needs, and act as a focus for local life and successful communities. Some centres specialise in different services, including the independent retail shops in Moseley and restaurants in the ‘Balti Triangle’ in the Sparkhill and Ladypool Road Centres.About Birmingham
2.1 Birmingham is a major city, the UK’s largest outside London, with an 
established international standing and reputation as well as being the capital of the West Midlands.
The Library of Birminghamabout birmingham / birmingham development plan 2.8 In 2012, Birmingham was ranked 
as the most attractive UK regional 
City for quality of life.
2.9 Birmingham’s City Centre 
is a major business and tourist destination. It is an international economic hub, benefiting from a diverse mix of retail, cultural, recreation and leisure uses. It is the UK’s largest financial centre outside of London, with a large number of regional and national headquarters. 
2.10 The City Centre attracts 
people to the City with a number of visitor destinations including the Library of Birmingham, the Bullring shopping centre, the Mailbox, the International Convention Centre (ICC), Symphony Hall and the Barclaycard Arena. The Centre benefits from a successful network of public squares, spaces and streets.
2.11 Birmingham is one of the most 
connected cities in the UK. There are three main railway stations (New Street, Moor Street and Snow Hill), located in the City Centre with direct services to cities across England, Scotland and Wales. Birmingham Airport, adjacent to the City boundary, operates routes worldwide. The City has excellent links with the national motorway network.
2.12 The City is also served by an 
extensive road network, linking the surrounding areas into the City Centre. There is a network of local bus and suburban rail services and a Metro line. There are cycling and walking routes, including the National Cycle Network and the canal network.
2.13 The built environment of 
Birmingham is mainly as a result of development in the 18th, 19th and 20th Century. The historic character of the City can still be seen today, with nationally renowned assets in the Jewellery Quarter and Bournville. The historic parts of the City Centre, including characteristic Victorian buildings and St Martins Church, are complemented by a number of landmark buildings, including the silver disc Selfridges building on the Bullring Shopping Centre and the Library of Birmingham.
2.14 The City Centre is surrounded 
by many pleasant and desirable leafy suburbs each with its own character and identity. This includes Edgbaston, Sutton Coldfield, Moseley and Harborne. Other residential areas have been subject to improvements, including successful investment in Castle Vale and Attwood Green.
2.15 Birmingham currently has 13 
Scheduled Ancient Monuments, almost 1,500 Listed Buildings, 30 Conservation Areas, 15 Historic Parks and Gardens and over 400 Locally Listed Buildings - all of which are unique heritage assets. The City’s Historic Environment Record is continuously being updated and developed to include all aspects of the City’s historic environment including non-designated heritage assets.
2.16 The City is one of Britain’s 
greenest with more than one fifth of its area consisting of parks, nature reserves, allotments, golf courses and playing fields, many of which are linked by rivers, watercourses and a significant number of canals. Some of these assets are of national significance, including Sutton Park. There are also a number of Local Nature Reserves and sites identified for their nature conservation value and the City forms part of the Birmingham and Black Country Nature Improvement Area.13
The Cube14
birmingham development plan / about birmingham2.17 Birmingham is at the centre 
of the West Midlands region 
and has important relationships with surroundings areas. There are significant amounts of in-commuting to Birmingham, particularly from South East Staffordshire, South Warwickshire, Solihull and North Worcestershire and net migration from Birmingham to these areas. There are also important connections to neighbouring communities, regeneration programmes and environmental networks in the Black Country, North Solihull and Bromsgrove. The City collaborates with these areas through partnership arrangements, including the Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP).Challenges
2.18 The next 20 years are going to 
be amongst the most important for Birmingham. The progress that has been made has transformed the reputation of Birmingham, but if the City is to achieve its ambitions and prosper it will need to take a positive, proactive and plan-led approach to address the challenges that the coming years will pose:
•  The City will need to play its 
part in reducing the impact of climate change and be prepared to adapt to its consequences so it can continue to prosper socially, environmentally and economically. This will require new approaches to development.•  By 2031, Birmingham’s population is expected to grow by 150,000. It will be important that this growth is supported by high quality and affordable homes that integrate with communities, help reduce overcrowding and provide access to services and jobs.
•  For a densely built up area like Birmingham there are significant challenges in identifying appropriate sites to accommodate and deliver the long term levels of growth needed within the existing built up area. This will require joint working with partners in adjacent areas to address where housing and employment is best located.
•  The recent recession and resulting economic conditions 
have re-emphasised the 
continuing need to strengthen and diversify Birmingham’s economy. The role of existing sectors in the City will change reflecting adjustments in the wider economy.
•  There are a number of disadvantaged communities in Birmingham, particularly in the inner areas of the City. This corresponds spatially with other social issues including poor health and poverty. Worklessness is a significant issue - the employment rate is below the national average. There is a need to create local jobs for local people.
•  There is a need to continue to secure investment and improvements to public transport to improve access to services, jobs and address congestion. More could be done locally to take advantage of the benefits and opportunities offered by cycling and walking.
•  The changing nature of the retail industry is already impacting on the vitality of a number of the centres in Birmingham. These are an important part of the local economy and need to be supported to provide services for communities.
Selfridges at the Bullringabout birmingham / birmingham development plan•  Birmingham needs to continue to 
maintain and improve the quality of its built environment (including its historic environment) to help strengthen its local distinctiveness. Its design and archaeology standards must be higher to reflect that of a major international City. Birmingham’s unique heritage assets have a positive role to play in this.
•  The delivery of infrastructure (including health facilities, energy, schools, public spaces and transport) will require the effective coordination of delivery partners and agencies.
•  The quality of the natural environment will need to be conserved and enhanced to provide facilities for people and connected networks to support wildlife. This will include addressing flood risk and low levels of biodiversity quality in parts of the City.
•  Birmingham is part of a local and global market place and competes with other areas for investment. The positive progress that has been made in securing recent investment needs to continue to help the City prosper. 15
Aston Hall16
birmingham development plan / the planthe plan / birmingham development plan17
The vision, objectives 
and strategy318
birmingham development plan / the vision, objectives and strategy3.2 We will plan to ensure 
Birmingham’s residents will be 
experiencing a high quality of life, living within attractive and well designed sustainable neighbourhoods. The choice and affordability of housing will be meeting the needs of all and local jobs and services will be accessible by a range of sustainable transport choices.
3.3 The City’s economy will be 
strong and prosperous, built around a diverse base of economic activities and supported by a skilled workforce. The City Centre will have expanded, accommodating major new prime office developments and a series of exciting destinations boosting the cultural, leisure and retail offer. The network of thriving local centres will reflect the diversity of the City and the needs of local people.
3.4 The historic environment and 
the sense of place of localities throughout the City will have been enhanced. The City will have achieved high sustainability credentials with resilient, adaptive environments with all new developments built to high standards of design.Objectives
3.5 To deliver the vision of 
Birmingham in 2031 and ensure that future development meets the aspirations for the City the objectives of the BDP are:
•  To develop Birmingham as a City 
of sustainable neighbourhoods that are safe, diverse and inclusive with locally distinctive character.
•  To make provision for a significant increase in the City’s population.
•  To create a prosperous, successful and enterprising economy with benefits felt by all.
•  To promote Birmingham’s national and international role.
•  To provide high quality connections throughout the City and with other places including encouraging the increased use of public transport, walking and cycling.
•  To create a more sustainable City that minimises its carbon footprint and waste, and promotes brownfield regeneration while allowing the City to grow.
•  To strengthen Birmingham’s quality institutions and role as a learning City and extend the education infrastructure securing significant school places.
•  To encourage better health and well-being through the provision of new and existing recreation, sport and leisure facilities linked to good quality public open space.The vision, objectives and strategy
The vision - Birmingham in 2031
3.1 By 2031 Birmingham will be renowned as an enterprising, innovative 
and green City that has delivered sustainable growth meeting the needs of its population and strengthening its global competitiveness.
Proposals for Paradise Circusthe vision, objectives and strategy / birmingham development plan•  To protect and enhance the 
City’s heritage assets and historic environment.
•  To conserve and enhance Birmingham’s natural environments, allowing biodiversity and wildlife to flourish.
•  To ensure that the City has the infrastructure in place to support its future growth and prosperity.
The strategy
3.6 To meet Birmingham’s future 
needs and achieve the vision, we will need to provide for significant new growth in the most sustainable way, ensuring that the development of new homes is matched by the provision of opportunities for new employment, accessible local services and a high quality environment. 
3.7 Developing Birmingham’s 
international role will be an important part of its economic success, attracting inward investment and visitors, and supporting the delivery of the growth agenda. Building on previous plans the approach will continue to be to promote urban regeneration, and to encourage investment and improvement within the city wherever possible. However the growth pressures facing the city are such that some development will be necessary outside the limits of the existing urban area.The environment and sustainability
3.8 The City’s future growth will be 
pursued in the most sustainable way; reducing the City’s carbon footprint and creating resilient and adaptive environments. New development will need to be built to the highest sustainability standards, helping to generate wider benefits in terms of the quality of the environment and carbon reduction, be energy efficient, using renewable resources, and minimising the production of waste. The built environment will need to be resilient to the potential impacts of climate change with flood plains protected from inappropriate development and the sustainable management of the City’s watercourses promoted.3.9 All future development will need 
to be supported by suitable social and green infrastructure and set within environments that reflect the character and history of the City. Across the City all development must be well-designed, accessible and safe including for people with disabilities. Schools, health care facilities, shops and other services need to be available in accessible locations along with parks, sports facilities and well-maintained local public open space, forming part of a wider ‘green infrastructure network’ threading through the City and linking to the open countryside beyond. The canal network will continue to be promoted as a vital asset for the City, supporting movement, environmental and biodiversity quality and as the setting for development.19
Longbridge20
birmingham development plan / the vision, objectives and strategy3.14 Particular emphasis will be 
placed on ensuring that sites are 
available to support the economic sectors important to the City’s economic growth. These include business, financial and professional services, creative and digital media, life sciences, food and drink, ITEC, logistics and advanced manufacturing.
3.15 Clustering these high growth 
sectors in specific locations will play a vital role in attracting investment and enabling growth. Six Economic Zones have been created to provide the clustering of economic activity within high quality business environments that are supported by the right infrastructure.
3.16 The Economic Zones are an 
Advanced Manufacturing Hub at the East Aston Regional Investment Site, ITEC Park at the Longbridge Regional Investment Site, Life Sciences Campus around the Queen Elizabeth Hospital and Birmingham University Campus, Environmental District at Tyseley, Food Hub at the former IMI site at Witton and The City Centre Enterprise Zone (EZ). The EZ, covering 26 sites in the City Centre, will play a key role in delivering high quality office accommodation for growth in business, financial and professional services, and supporting digital media and creative industries.
3.17 Outside of the core 
employment areas other land in employment use will continue to be protected and the provision of accommodation for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) will be supported. Marginal industrial land of poor quality that no longer meets the requirements of the market or business needs may be promoted for redevelopment to alternative uses.
3.18 The provision of land and 
premises is only part of creating a prosperous economy and the City will need a skilled and competitive workforce now and in the future. The role of the Universities, education establishments and 3.10 The historic environment 
will be central to shaping the City’s future. Heritage assets will be valued and conserved as part of the delivery of distinctive places. Equally, biodiversity and geodiversity will be critical components in delivering a high quality of life. Birmingham’s wide variety of natural environments will be protected and enhanced in line with the principles of the Birmingham and Black Country Nature Improvement Area and taking account of the Arden and Cannock Chase and Cank Wood National Character Areas identified by Natural England. New opportunities for wildlife and biodiversity will be encouraged as part of new and existing development.
Economy and network of centres
3.11 The continued revitalisation 
and modernisation of the City’s 
economy will be central to the growth agenda ensuring that jobs and prosperity are generated for current and future residents.
3.12 A continuous supply of land 
and full range of premises will be made available for all forms of employment development, including for the growth and modernisation of existing companies, the establishment of new businesses and to attract investment from both within the UK and internationally.
3.13 The City’s Core Employment 
Areas will play an important role in accommodating the requirements of a wide range of economic sectors. These Core Employment Areas provide the City’s main employment opportunities and include the Regional Investment Sites and other high quality areas such as The Hub, Witton and Bromford. To meet the City’s need for a flexible supply of high quality sites, to accommodate economic development and investment, some development will need to take place on land removed from the Green Belt. The site at Peddimore will provide the City with much needed employment land of the right size and type for major investors.other providers will be central to ensuring the workforce is equipped to drive the economy. 
3.19 A thriving network of centres 
will be central to delivering new office and retail development and other services to support communities throughout the City. The priority will be to promote retail and office development within the defined centres and resist development that would undermine the strength of the network.
3.20 This network comprises:
•  The City Centre, which will continue to be strengthened as a centre for financial and business services, and as a destination for shopping, business tourism and major cultural events with world class conference facilities and venues. Five wider areas of change will deliver the growth to strengthen the role of the City Centre, investing in new high quality buildings and public spaces and creating new vibrant destinations. This growth will be coupled with a focus on promoting the distinctive character of the Quarters. The success of the City Centre will be central in promoting the international profile of the City and attracting investment and visitors.
•  Sutton Coldfield Town Centre as a sub-regional centre is capable of accommodating significant additional comparison retail floorspace and some office space.
•  Perry Barr, Selly Oak and Meadway as district growth centres accommodating both retail and office uses at lower levels to the City Centre and sub-regional centre.
•  A network of some 70 other district and neighbourhood centres accommodating more limited levels of growth supporting local needs.the vision, objectives and strategy / birmingham development plan21
Plan 1 Employment sitesn
NORTHvBirmingham
AirportNational
Exhibition
CentreM6
M6M6 (Toll)
M42
M5
KEY
                 City Boundary 
                 Motorway
 
                 Main Rail Line
 
                 Economic Zones
   
                 Core Employment Areas
 
                 Green Belt
 
                 Regional Investment Sites
 
                 City Centre and Wider                  Areas of Change The Food Hub
Life Sciences
CampusTyseley Environmental
Enterprise District
Longbridge
ITEC ParkAdvanced 
Manufacturing Hub
City CentreEnterprise Zone22
birmingham development plan / the vision, objectives and strategyHomes and neighbourhoods
3.21 At the heart of the City’s 
growth agenda will be the 
promotion of sustainable neighbourhoods as a means of supporting the City’s increasing and diverse population in the most sustainable way possible. For sustainable neighbourhoods to flourish they will be supported by high quality local infrastructure and services, including a thriving network of local centres that provide for the local population and are accessible by a range of sustainable travel options.
3.22 High standards of design 
in new residential areas will be expected with a strong sense of place, environmental sustainability and climate proofing, attractive, safe and multi-functional public spaces and effective long-term management ensured. There will be an expectation that new housing will complement the character and environment of the surrounding area, in order to create high quality living environments, which promote good health and well-being.
3.23 In delivering the principles 
of sustainable neighbourhoods a wide choice of housing sizes, types and tenures will be provided to meet community needs including homes for families, the elderly and appropriate levels of affordable housing. The contribution that ‘mature suburbs’ make to quality and choice within the City’s housing stock will continue to be maintained and enhanced.
3.24 Over the period 2011 to 2031 
the focus will be on delivering as much of the new housing that the City needs within the urban area as possible subject to maintaining the attractiveness of neighbourhoods as places to live. Brownfield and other available sites within the existing built-up area, including major developments such as Greater Icknield, the Southern Gateway and Longbridge, will be the priority. Within the urban area there is capacity for some 45,000 homes including bringing vacant property back into use and utilising industrial land and some open space that no longer performs its original function.
3.25 While development in the 
urban area will be prioritised there is a limit to the amount of available space to accommodate the City’s growing population. The removal of land from the Green Belt will provide for an additional 6,000 homes. Development in this location will be treated as a Sustainable Urban Extension (SUE) and will be required to deliver the principles of sustainable neighbourhoods.
3.26 In order to ensure the most 
effective use of land we will seek to ensure a density of 40 dwellings per hectare throughout most new residential schemes with higher densities required in the City Centre and areas well served by public transport. There will also be an emphasis on improving existing housing of poor quality and replacing that which is beyond repair or improvement.
3.27 The strategy of the BDP is to 
accommodate as much of the City’s housing requirement as possible within the boundary. However, the land that is available to the City to accommodate future development is limited. Alongside the BDP a wider growth strategy for the LEP area and other adjoining authorities will set out how and where the remaining housing could be delivered. This will take account of historic trends where adjoining authorities have accommodated a proportion of the City’s growth.the vision, objectives and strategy / birmingham development plan 23
Plan 2 Housing Sitesn
NORTHvBirmingham
AirportNational
Exhibition
CentreM6
M6M6 (Toll)
M42
M5
KEY
                 City Boundary
 
                 Motorway
 
                 Main Rail Line
 
                 Green Belt
 
                 Langley SUE
                 Housing sites (SHLAA,
                 Large Sites, 2012)                                    City Centre 24
birmingham development plan / the vision, objectives and strategyConnectivity
3.28 If Birmingham is to deliver 
its growth agenda and attract  
investment it must provide the necessary infrastructure. This will include easy movement within the City and the provision of high quality transport links to the rest of the country and beyond.
3.29 Transport improvements, as 
set out in the BDP , will be required to support the overall strategy for growth and ensure that the City has a world class transport network that is delivered in the most sustainable way. The Birmingham Mobility Action Plan (BMAP) develops the City’s transport requirements under a number of themes including:
•  City Centre connectivity and 
internal mobility.
•  Improving strategic connectivity for regionally and sub-regionally important locations.
•  Connected communities.
3.30 This transport vision for 
the City will support the Local Transport Plan (and its successors) and its delivery will require partnership working with the Highways England, Network Rail, Centro the LEPs, and will build upon the existing strength of the City’s transport network and the opportunities created through growth.
3.31 The redevelopment of New 
Street Station will be a major - and symbolic - step in improving the profile and quality of infrastructure in the City. This development will be accompanied by a programme of further investment in public transport, including improvements to the rail network and extension of rapid transit routes vital to ensuring intra-city connections are efficient and effective.
3.32 Major planned improvements 
to the City’s national and international accessibility will be brought about by the continued expansion of Birmingham Airport. The expected development of the High Speed rail link (HS2) will provide further opportunities to build on this success and enhance the City’s connectivity and improve rail capacity.
3.33 The City benefits from a 
number of transport corridors which provide an essential means of connectivity within the City and due to this accessibility provide opportunities for more intensive forms of development. These corridors including amongst others the A45 and A38 which will be suitable for a range of developments whilst continuing to provide essential transport functions.
3.34 New and improved routes 
for pedestrians and cycle priority will be promoted connecting the network of centres, residential areas, employment opportunities and the open countryside.
3.35 These investments will help 
to reduce car dependency and encourage use of public transport and non-motorised forms of transport such as cycling and walking. Those activities which generate a high number of trips will be encouraged to locations which have high levels of accessibility or where the infrastructure can be provided to enable sustainable modes to be promoted.
3.36 State of the art digital networks 
will be made available throughout the City. This is an essential step in ensuring that Birmingham can fulfil its potential as a centre of innovation drawing on the strong academic base established in the City’s universities.
3.37 The provision of high quality 
infrastructure will underpin the successful delivery of growth that is sustainable and long term. A range of mechanisms will be utilised to ensure that the necessary infrastructure is in place covering highways and transport, surface water and flood management, waste, broadband, green infrastructure, libraries, education, sports and leisure, adult care, public health and wellbeing.the vision, objectives and strategy / birmingham development plan25
A4040A453
A4040A34
A47
A4040A452
A452A5127A5127
A453
A38A38
A38
A38
A38B4096A441A435A34A41A45
A45A456A457
A441A4040
A4040A4040A4040A41
A47
✈Birmingham
AirportNational
Exhibition
CentreTo Manchester
To WarwickSnow Hill To Worcester
To London
To Stratford
To RedditchTo Lichﬁeld
Birmingham MetroTo Walsall
New StreetTo Derby/
Nottingham
To Nuneaton/
Leicester
Moor StreetM6
M6M6 (Toll)
M42
M5
KEY
                 City Boundary
   
                 Motorway 
                 Main Road Network 
                 Rail Network
                 Possible Reintroduction
                 of Passenger Service 
                 Proposed HS2 
                 Metro 
                 Metro Extension 
                 City Centre
                 Rail Stations                 Proposed Rail Station 
Plan 3 The City’s Transport Infrastructuren
NORTH26
birmingham development plan / planning for growthplanning for growh / birmingham development plan27
Planning for growth428
birmingham development plan / planning for growthOverall levels of growth
Introduction
4.2 Over the period to 2031 the 
City faces new challenges and 
opportunities. Significant levels of housing, employment, office and retail development will be planned for, along with the supporting infrastructure and environmental enhancements.
Why we have taken this 
approach
4.3 One of the most significant 
challenges the City faces is the growth in its population and the resultant pressures this places on services, jobs and infrastructure. 
4.4 The Office of National Statistics 
(ONS) projections (2012) indicate that by 2031 Birmingham’s population will rise by 156,000 and the DCLG 2012-based household projections indicate that this will rsult in an increase of 86,000 households between 2011 and 2031. 
4.5 To meet the needs of this 
growing population and ensure the City capitalises on its status and past investment the BDP seeks to plan for these significant levels of  growth in the most sustainable way.
4.6 In the case of housing the City 
Council has sought to maximise the level of housing delivery within the built-up area of the City. However, it is not possible to achieve the levels of new housing development which would be required to meet this need within the City boundary. This reflects the fact that the land supply within the City is limited, even when Green Belt development options are considered. To meet the rest of Birmingham’s housing need, options outside the City’s boundaries will need to be explored.
4.7 The City Council will seek 
to work collaboratively with neighbouring authorities to secure the development of further homes to contribute toward meeting Birmingham’s housing requirement over the period to 2031. This will focus on the Greater Birmingham Housing Market Area (HMA), which comprises, in addition to Birmingham itself, The Black Country, Bromsgrove, Redditch, Solihull, North Warwickshire, Tamworth, Lichfield, Cannock 4.1 The overall approach of the BDP is to support the continued 
renaissance of Birmingham which will see the City plan for significant new development to meet the needs of its growing population and ensure that it builds a prosperous economy for the future.Planning for growth
Policy PG1  Overall levels of growth
Over the Plan period significant levels of housing, employment, office 
and retail development will be planned for and provided along with supporting infrastucture and environmental enhancements.
•  51,100 additional homes.
•  2 Regional Investment Sites of 20 and 25 ha and a 71 ha employment 
site at Peddimore.
•  A minimum 5 year reservoir of 96 ha of land for employment use.
•  About 350,000 sq.m. gross of comparison retail floorspace by 2026. 
•  A minimum of 745,000 sq.m. gross of office floorspace in the network of centres primarily focussed on the City Centre.
•  New waste facilities to increase recycling and disposal capacity and minimise the amount of waste sent directly to landfill.
Birmingham’s objectively assessed housing need for the period 2011 to 2031 is 89,000 additional homes, including about 33,800 affordable dwellings. It is not possible to deliver all of this additional housing within the City boundary. The City Council will continue to work actively with neighbouring Councils through the Duty to Co-operate to ensure that appropriate provision is made elsewhere within the Greater Birmingham Housing Market Area to meet the shortfall of 37,900 homes, including about 14,400 affordable dwellings, within the Plan period. Policy TP48 provides further details on this.
Implementation
Policy PG1           3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementplanning for growth / birmingham development planChase, South Staffordshire and 
parts of Stratford-on-Avon. In 2014 the Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local Enterprise Partnership and the Black Country authorities jointly commissioned a study to assess future housing requirements within the two areas and to identify scenarios to provide for additional housing to meet any shortfall, including any unmet 
needs within Birmingham. The 
study area covers the majority of the Greater Birmingham HMA. The final phase of the study, together with additional work in relation to employment and sustainability, will provide a basis for a strategy to be agreed to accommodate additional housing provision to meet the shortfall arising in Birmingham and any other shortfalls within the study area. In the case of the Greater Birmingham and Solihull LEP , this will be reflected in the LEP Spatial Plan for Growth. The outcome of this will then be taken forward through revisions to individual Local Plans, where this is necessary, to ensure that additional land is allocated for new housing.
4.8 In order to provide employment 
for the City’s growing population and reduce existing levels of unemployment and worklessness an additional 100,000 jobs need to be created. The levels of employment land provision proposed aim to enable this to be achieved and are supported by the Employment Land and Office Targets Study and the Employment Land Study for Economic Zones and Key Sectors.
4.9 The proposed levels of 
comparison retail development are in line with the Birmingham Retail Need Assessment (BRNA) Update (2013) and support the City’s position as one of the UK’s top retail destinations. The retail provision will also allow the network of centres to thrive serving their local communities.
4.10 The BRNA update 
(2013) provides specific retail requirements to 2026, however beyond this period and upto 2031 the figures identified are indicative reflecting the uncertainty surrounding longer term retail growth. Specific figures for post 2026 will be subject to further study, to be undertaken at an appropriate time, later in the plan period.29
Birmingham Airport30
birmingham development plan / planning for growthBirmingham as an 
international city
Introduction
4.11 Birmingham’s future prosperity 
and success is underpinned by its regional, national and international standing and reputation. 
4.12 Since the 1980s Birmingham 
has seen significant change restructuring its economy, enhancing its environment and improving its national and international standing. Further diversification of the economy, new investment in infrastructure and continued environmental enhancements will be essential to ensure the City strengthens its position.
Why we have taken this 
approach
4.13 Birmingham is internationally 
renowned for its innovation and industry, its strong academic base and commercial activity. The City benefits from being at the heart of the UK’s transport network, with direct access to international markets through proximity of Birmingham Airport. Proposals for HS2 will further enhance this position. This connectivity and economic foundation are major assets for the City, underpinning its position both nationally and internationally.
4.14 Major attractions such as 
the Bullring shopping centre, Cadbury World, the International Convention Centre and Symphony Hall and National Indoor Arena are vital to the City’s attraction as a business and leisure tourism destination.
4.15 The City’s cultural diversity is 
increasing, characterised by the hosting of a variety of sporting, community and cultural events city-wide, attracting people from throughout the West Midlands region and beyond. Cultural diversity is also promoted through the range and number of international students who attend the City’s universities each year. Major plans for the future, outlined in Big City Culture 2010-2015, will continue to strengthen the City’s position and reinforce Birmingham as a key destination. 
4.16 Schemes such as the 
redevelopment of New Street Station, the new Library of Birmingham, major regeneration at Longbridge and ongoing expansion at Birmingham Airport will be central to the City’s future success.
4.17 The continued economic 
restructuring will be supported by the six Economic Zones which provide a sectoral and spatial focus for investment in key growth sectors.
BrindleyplacePolicy PG2  Birmingham as an international city
Birmingham will be promoted as an international city supporting 
development, investment and other initiatives that raise the City’s profile and strengthen its position nationally and internationally.
Implementation
Policy PG2          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementplanning for growth / birmingham development planPlace making
Introduction
4.18 Creating an economically 
successful, safe and healthy City 
where people choose to live and work will be underpinned by the successful delivery of well designed development and places.
Why we have taken this 
approach
4.19 The quality of development 
and the ability to create well designed places will be central to how Birmingham is perceived and functions as a City in the future. For the City to compete in the international arena and secure investment, attention needs to be focussed on the design, quality and function of places. 
4.20 The existing character 
and context of Birmingham will be an intrinsic component and consideration for any new development. New development and reuse of existing buildings has a significant visual, amenity and psychological impact on the people who will use them. It is essential to ensure the creation of places that are fit for purpose, attractive and sustainable.
4.21 The form a development 
takes will depend on the context, character, assets and constraints of a site, which in turn will be affected by its location within the City. Development will largely take place within the existing built up area, reusing land, buildings and spaces to best effect within a modern context. Further understanding of the context within which new development will take place will be provided by the Historic Landscape Characterisation Study which the City Council is undertaking in conjunction with English Heritage.
4.22 This policy sets the scene 
for how development should be brought forward and further detail is provided through the relevant thematic policies which follow. SPDs that have or will be produced to guide future development provide detailed guidance and policy advice on matters of design.31Policy PG3  Place making
All new development will be expected to demonstrate high design 
quality, contributing to a strong sense of place. New development should:
•  Reinforce or create a positive sense of place and local distinctiveness, 
with design that responds to site conditions and the local area context, including heritage assets and appropriate use of innovation in design.
•  Create safe environments that design out crime and make provision for people with disabilities through carefully considered site layouts, designing buildings and open spaces that promote positive social interaction and natural surveillance.
•  Provide attractive environments that encourage people to move around by cycling and walking.
•  Ensure that private external spaces, streets and public spaces are attractive, functional, inclusive and able to be managed for the long term. 
•  Take opportunities to make sustainable design integral to development, such as green infrastructure, sustainable drainage and energy generating features.
•  Support the creation of sustainable neighbourhoods (Policy TP27).
•  Make best use of existing buildings and efficient use of land in support of the overall development strategy.
Implementation
Policy PG3                         3                     3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management
Park Central32
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan33
Spatial delivery of 
growth534
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growth5.2 Delivering the City’s growth 
agenda will require focusing 
significant development into a number of locations which currently play an important role in providing homes, jobs and supporting facilities.
5.3 Equally the wider City will also 
see levels of growth reflecting the historic patterns of development and availability of land. This distribution of growth is more dispersed, focused on opportunity sites and key transport corridors which will be considered against the overall strategy and thematic policies within the BDP .
5.4 The network of local centres, 
housing regeneration sites and Core Employment Areas located across the City will contribute toward the delivery of new homes, retail, office and employment based development that will make, alongside the growth areas, a significant contribution toward the delivery of the overall levels of growth set out in Policy PG1. The network of centres, as set out in Policy TP21, will provide opportunities for a range of new development and improvements to the quality of the environment and accessibility will be encouraged and supported.
5.5 The Core Employment Areas, 
as set out in Policy TP19, will be retained in employment use and be the focus for economic regeneration and development.5.6 Housing growth across the 
City will be supported in locations in line with Policy TP28. The regeneration and renewal of existing housing areas, Policy TP32, will provide a contribution to improving the housing offer and quality of residential environments available within the City.5.7 The City’s administrative 
boundary is however constrained and there are also limits to the available land within the urban area to accommodate future growth requirements. As a result land will need to be removed from the Green Belt for housing and employment development.5.1 Over the Plan period Birmingham will support sustainable growth in 
housing, retail and employment development to meet the needs of its growing population. The City has traditionally seen new development accommodated through the regeneration, redevelopment and renewal of its urban area with periodic expansion. This approach will continue as the City seeks to accommodate the levels of development set out in Policy PG1 and deliver the overall strategy. Spatial delivery of growth
BHX
NECHS2
GREATER
ICKNIELDPARK
LONGBRIDGEURBAN
EXTENSION
PEDDIMORE
EASTERN
TRIANGLE
SELLY OAK AND
SOUTH EDGBASTONSUSTAINABLE
ASTON, 
NEWTOWN
AND LOZELLS
CITY CENTREPERRY BARR
BORDESLEY
HS2SUTTON COLDFIELD
TOWN CENTRE
LANGLEY
Plan 4 Spatial distribution of growthn
NORTH•  Bordesley Park - the AAP once 
adopted will deliver 750 new homes, enhanced connectivity, an improved environment and new employment generating activity.
•  Eastern Triangle - regeneration and growth of around 1,000 new homes and improvements to local centres focused on the Meadway, Stechford and Shard End.
•  Selly Oak and South Edgbaston - major regeneration and investment opportunity including growth of the District Centre, 700 new homes and a new life sciences campus.  
•  Longbridge - the adopted AAP proposes significant levels of growth including a Regional Investment Site, 1450 new homes, a new local centre and other employment sites. 
  5.11 To meet the needs of the 
growing population and ensure that sufficient high quality accessible land is available for residential and economic development the City has also planned for the expansion of the urban area through the removal of land from the Green Belt. This will enable the delivery of a planned sustainable urban neighbourhood and a large employment site both located in the northeast of the City. 
5.12 The City Council will continue 
to work proactively in these locations with existing landowners, stakeholders and other agencies to bring forward developments. 
5.13 The following section sets 
out the policies and proposals for those key areas. Each policy is accompanied by a plan which illustrates the proposals. This is provided as a visual aid, and does not form part of the policy
spatial delivery of growth / birmingham development planThe growth areas
5.8 Across Birmingham there are 
a number of key areas, as shown in the diagram on page 34, which will make a significant contribution toward delivering the levels of growth in Policy PG1.
5.9 The focus for growth will 
primarily be upon re-using existing urban land through regeneration, renewal and redevelopment. The City Centre, as the regional centre and key growth point, has established itself as the economic engine of the City and wider region, it will be the focus for significant levels of housing, retail and office development.
5.10 The City has a number of 
further key areas, outside the City Centre, where there is significant opportunity for growth. These are:
•  Greater Icknield - a strategically 
significant site to the west of the City Centre which will be developed to provide a sustainable neighbourhood of 3,000 new homes.
•  Aston, Newtown and Lozells - the adopted Area Action Plan (AAP) proposes a 20 ha Regional Investment Site, over 700 new homes and new office and retail development, including the growth of Perry Barr District Centre.
•  Sutton Coldfield Town Centre - significant growth and diversification of the town centre to improve the current limited retail and leisure offer.35
Grand Central at New Street Station36
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthCity Centre
Introduction
5.14 Accounting for a third of 
Birmingham’s economic output, 
supporting over 150,000 jobs, attracting more than £2 billion of shopping expenditure every year and home to over 30,000 people, the City Centre is central to Birmingham’s future growth agenda and continuing success in promoting itself as an international City. 
5.15 Covering 800 ha the City 
Centre is positioned as the hub of the City providing local, regional and national transport access, nationally significant visitor attractions and major economic assets. 
5.16 In order to strengthen the 
role of the City on a national and international basis there will be an emphasis on delivering major new investment in retail and office provision. Alongside its important economic and visitor role the City Centre is home to a growing residential population which will continue to expand in the future. This will happen in the context of the wider aspiration of providing a high quality environment and delivering a diverse mix of uses vital to a vibrant centre.
5.17 To support this growth and 
ensure its ongoing success the traditional City Centre Core will be expanded through five wider areas of change, incorporating significant new office, retail, leisure, residential, civic and cultural uses.
Custard Factory
Policy GA1  City Centre
Policy GA1.1  Role and Function The City Council will continue to promote the City Centre as the focus for 
retail, office, residential and leisure activity within the context of the wider aspiration to provide a high quality environment and visitor experience.
New development should make a positive contribution to improving the 
vitality of the City Centre and should aim to improve the overall mix of uses. 
The City Centre Retail Core, as defined on the Policies Map, will continue 
to be focused around The Bullring, New Street, Corporation Street, The Mailbox and Grand Central and improvements to the quality of the environment and the shopping experience within this area will be promoted. Appropriate scale retail development will continue to be supported where it complements the existing Retail Core and as part of mixed-use redevelopments throughout the City Centre. Independent retailing will also be supported (see policy TP23). New leisure uses will be promoted within and on the edge of the City Centre Retail Core to support the diversification of the City’s offer as a top visitor attraction.
The role of the City Centre as a major hub for financial, professional 
and business services will continue to be supported. The primary focus for additional office development will be within and around the City Centre Core including the Snow Hill District and Westside. The area of Brindleyplace, around the proposed HS2 station in Eastside and along Broad Street and around Five Ways will provide further focus for these uses.
Residential development will continue to be supported in the 
City Centre where it provides well-designed high quality living environments. Developments will need to provide flexible and adaptable accommodation meeting a range of needs including for families.
continued...spatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan37Policy GA1.2  Growth and Wider Areas of Change
In order for the City Centre to maintain and develop its position as a 
top visitor destination and driver of the City’s economy, significant new levels of growth will be accommodated. The City Centre has potential to accommodate in the region of 12,800 new homes, 700,000 sq.m. gross of office floorspace and 160,000 sq.m. gross of comparison retail floorspace. The following wider areas of change will be the focus of the proposed growth.
Eastside - The ongoing regeneration of this area will enable the City 
Centre Core to expand eastwards and will require well designed mixed use developments including office, technology, residential, learning and leisure. Any proposals for a HS2 station will need to be integrated into the area creating a world class arrival experience with enhanced connectivity to surrounding areas including Digbeth and the City Centre Core.
Southern Gateway - This area will be the focus for the expansion of the 
City Centre Core southwards through the comprehensive redevelopment of the wholesale markets site delivering a vibrant new destination for the City. Development will be supported that diversifies the City’s offer as a retail and leisure destination including niche retail, improved markets, food and leisure space. Residential development will be supported as part of the future mix of uses with opportunities to stimulate the regeneration of the wider area. The redevelopment will require high quality public spaces and routes to be incorporated with a new public event space creating a centre piece for the area. Integral to creating a new destination will be the creation of exemplar development in terms of its architecture and sustainability credentials, the reinterpretation of the historic moat and manor house, the creation of a gateway to the Digbeth creative quarter and space for a new cultural facility. Development across the wider Southern Gateway will need to address the sustainable management of the River Rea Corridor associated with areas of flood risk and be supported by a range of infrastructure (including green infrastructure)and services, employment opportunities and public spaces and improve connections to Highgate.
New Street Southside - Acting as the catalyst for the wider regeneration 
of the City Centre the redeveloped New Street Station, which opened in 2015, will transform the arrival experience and create new linkages. Selective redevelopment of areas around the station will be encouraged.
Westside - Commercial led mixed use developments will be supported 
in this area including the redevelopment of the Paradise Circus and Arena Central sites. The redevelopment of the Paradise Circus site will require new public spaces, improved pedestrian connections including to the Jewellery Quarter, active frontages, restoration of key views and the enhancement to the setting of listed buildings. The extension of the metro line and other improvements to connectivity within the area will be supported. The redesign of Centenary Square will need to provide improved public transport accessibility and significantly enhanced pedestrian environment alongside a useable event space.
The Snow Hill District - The eastern expansion of the central office core 
around Snow Hill station will be supported through key office and mixed use developments. Connected routes and incidental spaces throughout the district will be promoted to provide a public realm that will encourage new business activity. In particular enhanced pedestrian linkages across Great Charles Street, St Chads Queensway and Lancaster Circus will be central to a transformed pedestrian environment and connections from the City Centre Core into the surrounding areas supported.
continued...38
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthWhy we have taken this 
approach
5.18 The City Centre has long been 
central to the economic success of the City. Since the late 1980s the City Centre has established itself as one of the UK’s top centres for  professional, financial and business services and as a major visitor destination. 
5.19 In the latter part of the 20th 
century the City Centre was constrained by the Inner Ring Road which was both a physical and psychological barrier to the expansion of the City Centre Core. Much has been done to allow the core to grow beyond this, for instance the lowering of the Inner Ring Road at Paradise Circus facilitating the ICC, Symphony Hall and Brindleyplace; and to the east by the removal of Masshouse Circus linking Eastside to the core.
5.20 Continuing the process of 
transforming the City Centre, building upon the gains since the 1980’s, the future focus will be upon extending and connecting the City Centre Core further beyond its existing boundaries whilst diversifying its activities and supporting economic growth. 
5.21 In September 2010 the City 
Council launched its Big City Plan which sets out the vision for the future transformation of the City Centre over a 20 year period. It identifies the opportunities available in the City Centre and the actions that would need to be taken to deliver long term economic growth and secure a competitive and successful centre for the future. In order to achieve the ambitions and support Birmingham’s growth agenda the principles and proposals of the Big City Plan are reflected in the BDP .
5.22 To achieve future growth five 
wider areas of change (based on the Areas of Transformation in the Big City Plan) have been identified which will create new distinctive places. These are shown on Plan 5. These five areas are based upon existing concentrations of Policy GA1.3  The Quarters
New development must support and strengthen the distinctive character 
of the areas surrounding the City Centre Core raising their overall quality, offer and accessibility. The City Centre is formed by seven Quarters with the Core at its heart. Within each Quarter varying degrees of change are proposed that relate to the overarching objectives of delivering ambitious growth whilst supporting the distinctive characteristics, communities and environmental assets of each area. 
The City Centre Core - Providing an exceptional visitor and retail 
experience with a diverse range of uses set within a high quality environment.
Digbeth - Creating a thriving creative and cultural hub with a high quality, 
exciting and easily accessible environment.
Eastside - Maximising its role as an area for learning and technology 
realising its extensive development opportunities and the integration of any proposals for HS2 station.
Gun Quarter - Maintaining the area’s important employment role and 
industrial activity complemented by a mix of uses around the canal and improved connections to neighbouring areas.
The Jewellery Quarter - Creating an urban village supporting the area’s 
unique heritage with the introduction of an appropriate mix of uses and radically improved connections to the City Centre Core.
Southside and Highgate - Supporting the growth of the area’s 
cultural, entertainment and residential activities and its economic role complemented by high quality public spaces and pedestrian routes.
Westside and Ladywood - Creating a vibrant mixed use area combining 
the visitor, cultural, commercial and residential offer into a dynamic well connected area, which supports development in the Greater Icknield Growth Area.
Policy GA1.4  Connectivity
Measures to improve accessibility to and within the City Centre will be 
supported, including:
•  An enhanced high quality network of pedestrian/cycle routes, public 
open spaces and squares taking advantage of the canal network.
•  Improvements to and prioritisation of pedestrian and cycle accessibility.
•  Integration of public transport including the proposed HS2 station.
Implementation
Policy GA1          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plandevelopment activity, forming 
logical extensions of the City Centre Core and making a significant contribution to the city centre’s overall growth proposals.
5.23 Central area functions have 
already stretched west with the development of Brindleyplace, but there are other sites in the vicinity such as Paradise Circus and Arena Central that will provide development potential to transform and integrate Westside. The Eastside area, land around Snow Hill Station and the wholesale market site, all present significant potential to accommodate a range of uses and densities of development expanding the core and diversifying the overall offer. The prospect of the proposed HS2 rail link to the heart of the City will bring a new level of opportunity and investment enhancing Birmingham’s role as an international City. 
5.24 The new terminus station will 
need to be integrated into the City Centre and all opportunities to enhance access from and to the surrounding areas, including Digbeth, taken.
5.25 The heart of the City Centre 
is formed by the City Centre Core. It contains office space for international and national businesses, a varied retail offer catering for a national audience, leisure, cultural and tourist facilities and a transport hub. Located around the outside of the Core are the distinctive Quarters of the City Centre. These Quarters collectively represent the strength of the City Centre, but are an underutilised asset that presents potential to deliver an outstanding and distinctive environment.
5.26 Each of the Quarters have 
unique qualities which contribute towards the authenticity, diversity and vibrancy of the City Centre. These areas are largely based on historic clusters of related uses and existing physical boundaries. 5.27 By allowing the City Centre 
Core to grow, and in supporting the distinctive activities and environments of the Quarters this will facilitate the City Centre to change and adapt to meet future needs and to support Birmingham’s ability to succeed economically. The quality of the built environment, the canal network and the protection and promotion of the heritage assets will be vital to how future development is brought forward and on-going success of the centre is achieved. This will support the aspirations as set out in the Big City Plan. Additional planning guidance will be brought forward where necessary to provide further detail on the development and growth of the quarters. This includes the proposed Jewellery Quarter Neighbourhood Plan.
39
City Centre wayfinding40
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growth5.28 The establishment of the 
Enterprise Zone (EZ) in April 
2011, will facilitate long term economic development helping to accelerate delivery of key sites including Paradise Circus and the redevelopment of the wholesale markets site. The LEP has committed significant funding to help deliver the EZ including for infrastructure and site development. The EZ designation will help strengthen Birmingham’s role as a centre for professional, financial and business services and support ongoing diversification of the economy through growth of creative industries. Development on EZ sites is expected to have a strong office/commercial element as part of mixed use or standalone proposals.
5.29 The City Centre’s role as a retail 
destination will continue to be strengthened with schemes such as the new John Lewis store as part of the redevelopment of New Street Station and refurbishment of the Pallasades transformed into Grand Central. A Retail Strategy will be brought forward by the City Council to set out a vision and a series of actions to deliver a world class retail and leisure offer in the Retail Core.The scale of future comparison retail growth will be less than previously expected reflecting the impact of the recession, growth of internet shopping and changes in spending patterns. For the future the focus will need to be upon diversifying the City Centre’s offer and providing new activities and uses which are attractive to a wider audience. The relocation of the wholesale markets presents a significant opportunity to deliver a major new destination strengthening Birmingham’s position on the international stage. The growth of the education sector in the city centre is also supported, reflecting the important role of higher and further education.
5.30 Alongside its economic and 
visitor focus the City Centre is home to over 30,000 people and since early 2000 has seen significant growth in the resident population. This will continue to be supported with new residential schemes, such as the redevelopment at Bristol Street and St Lukes, that will need to deliver both high quality environments and a diverse mix of accommodation.
5.31 The vital role that the City 
Centre plays as a transport hub is already being strengthened with the £600 million major redevelopment of New Street Station and the £128 million Metro extension. Proposals for HS2 and further investment in public transport will continue to strengthen this role. The Birmingham Curzon HS2 Masterplan has been prepared for the area around the proposed HS2 station and this demonstrates how the benefits of this significant investment can be maximised.
Colmore Rowspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan41
New Street
StationMoor Street
StationSnow Hill
StationA38
Aston Expressway
A38 Bristol StreetSt Paul’s
StationJewellery Quarter
Station Gun Quarter
Jewellery Quarter
Westside and Ladywood
Southside and HighgateDigbethEastside
City Centre Core2411
22
1413
12
1516
176
B
27CD
127E
10828
26
23
95
34
21
201918
A
28
Plan 5 City Centre Spatial PlanKEY
Growth Area
Development sitesWider areas of changePublic open spaceCity Centre QuartersMajor highwaysRailRail stationMetroMetro stationMetro (due to open 2015)Proposed Metro extensionHS2 route/terminusCanalRiver ReaGreater Icknield GACity Centre Retail Core
Wider areas of change
EastsideSouthern Gateway New Street StationWestsideThe Snow Hill DistrictA
B
C
D
ECity Centre Enterprise Zone Sites
Major Sites
Arena Central
Paradise CircusSnowhill Building 2Snowhill Building 3Post and MailSouthern Gateway103 Colmore RowBirmingham Children’s HospitalBeormaMasshouse (Phase 2)Eastside Locks
Digbeth
Typhoo WharfWarwick BarGreat Barr StreetCustard Factory ExtensionSmithfield CourtConnaught Square1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 
13
14
15
16
17Jewellery Quarter
St Georges Urban VillageUniversity College BirminghamNewhall SquareLudgate Hill
Eastside
Curzon ParkCity Park GateBirmingham City University 
Campus
Birmingham Science Park
Digital Plaza
Venture Way
Other Major Development Site
Bristol Street and St LukesMartineau Galleries18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28n
NORTH742
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthGreater Icknield
Introduction
5.32 Greater Icknield occupies a 
strategically significant location 
directly to the west of Birmingham’s City Centre. The A457 (Dudley Road/Spring Hill) runs through the area and acts as the main corridor route linking the City Centre to Sandwell/West Bromwich and the motorway network beyond.Why we have taken this approach
5.33 Greater Icknield consists of 
seven main development sites of largely unused and semi-derelict land. The area has the potential to play a major role in meeting the City’s challenging growth agenda set out in Policy PG1. It is anticipated that Greater Icknield will provide 3,000 new homes founded upon the principles of creating sustainable neighbourhoods as set out in Policy TP27. New family based models of urban living will be explored and will be supported by a full range of community facilities, local shopping and working opportunities, and better quality streets, parks, squares and gardens. Connections by public transport, walking and cycling will be enhanced including links to the City Centre utilising the canal network and existing primary routes.
5.34 The area has a wide range 
of uses and facilities of varying condition, and is made up of a number of large development sites and opportunities that offer potential for major change.
5.35 Icknield Port Loop is the 
primary site and enjoys a canalside environment. It has potential for a residential-led mixed use development, taking account of its good accessibility to the City Centre and proximity to existing well established residential neighbourhoods. The site largely comprises an area of former industrial land, a considerable proportion of which is cleared. The area includes a loop of the Birmingham Canal Old Line, which currently has very limited public towpath access. The area also contains Edgbaston Reservoir, one of the most significant areas of open space, which is relatively under-used at present.
5.36 The canal network - 
Birmingham Main Line and Old Line Canal - is a major feature running through Greater Icknield. Due to limited public access and an isolated environment created by developments backing on to the canal, they are an under-used resource for both leisure and travel. The canals should be protected and enhanced in accordance with Policy TP7 Green Infrastructure Network and Policy TP12 Historic Environment, and their use should be encouraged.Policy GA2  Greater Icknield
An area of 324 ha bounded by City Road, Winson Green Road, Pitsford 
Street, Icknield Street and including part of the City Centre and City Hospital, is proposed to accommodate the delivery of 3,000 new homes. As part of the development local facilities and employment opportunities will be brought forward to support the delivery of a sustainable neighbourhood.
The following key sites will support this future growth:•  The Icknield Port Loop and the Tower Ball Room sites. As the largest 
development opportunity in the area their transformation will provide innovative family housing close to the City Centre along with a mix of commercial and community uses including a new swimming pool.
•  The City Hospital site. Following the relocation of the City Hospital to the new Midland Metropolitan Hospital in Sandwell the site will be redeveloped for a new mix of living and local shopping facilities, with some medical facilities retained.
•  The site at Spring Hill/Dudley Road. The future redevelopment will provide for a residential-led mixed use scheme west of the canal with employment uses focused on the east.
•  The Ledsam Street site offers potential to extend the successful Brindleyplace development out from the City Centre, along the canal, to Ladywood Middleway and to link with Icknield Port Loop. Opportunities exist for canal-side ‘city style living’, alongside hotel, leisure and other business uses.
•  The Chamberlain Gardens site will become a new family living area with extensive green space accommodating playing areas and sport activities surrounded by medium to high density city houses and family friendly flat accommodation.
•  Severn Trent Waterworks will be brought forward mainly for new residential development. The grade II listed engine house, boiler house and chimney will be retained and should be brought into use and sensitively integrated into the development.
•  A new secondary school will be provided adjacent to the existing Nelson Junior and Infant School to help meet the increasing demand arising from the anticipated population growth within the area.
Opportunities for employment growth will be supported with a particular focus on the existing industrial areas at Western Road and Spring Hill as well as Dudley Road local centre.
Implementation
Policy GA2          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan5.37 Part of Dudley Road Local 
Shopping Centre falls within 
Greater Icknield and enhancement of the centre, including improvements to the road between City Road and the Ring Road, will be needed as part of future proposals for the area.
5.38 City Hospital is a major hospital 
providing a wide range of services, including accident and emergency facilities. Following the relocation of most of its services westwards along the A457 to the new Midland Metropolitan Hospital, near Birmingham’s boundary with Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council, most of the site will become available for redevelopment.
5.39 A masterplan for Greater 
Icknield is being prepared that will be used to guide investment decisions on these major sites and realise the vision of Greater Icknield in delivering the principles of sustainable neighbourhoods. A wide range of social, economic and environmental issues will be addressed through future development.
5.40 Further background 
information can be found in the evidence base for the Greater Icknield Masterplan.43
Hagley RoadDudley Road
Edgbaston
ReservoirSummerfield
Park
Ring Road (Middleway)Jewellery Quarter
Station
Icknield Port
LoopCity Hospital
Spring Hill/
Dudley Road
Ledsam
StreetNew
Secondary
SchoolWestern Road
and Spring Hill
Waterworks
Road
Chamberlain
GardensWestern Road
and
Spring Hill
Plan 6 Greater Icknield Spatial Plann
NORTH
KEY
Growth Area boundary
Development sitesPublic open spaceCity Centre GAMajor highwaysRail line Rail stationMetro lineMetro stationCanal
44
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthAston, Newtown and Lozells
Introduction
5.41 The Area Action Plan (AAP) 
for Aston, Newtown and Lozells 
was adopted by the City Council in July 2012. It covers a large area to the north of the City Centre and includes the neighbourhoods of Aston, Nechells, Perry Barr, Witton, Lozells and Newtown. 
5.42 The AAP provides a clear vision 
and strategy for the regeneration and development of the area and sets out a comprehensive and co-ordinated approach to shaping employment, housing, retail, and transport infrastructure.
Why we have taken this 
approach
5.43 Aston, Newtown and Lozells is 
home to a broad mix of land uses, a range of distinctive local centres and vibrant communities, which make up this diverse and dynamic place. It has excellent transport connections with good access to public transport and the motorway networks. The major arterial routes of the A38 (Aston Expressway), the A34 Birchfield Road and A5127 around 3,000 new jobs. Growth and expansion of Perry Barr/Birchfield District Centre, the protection and regeneration of the Core Employment Areas and new mixed use areas will also result in the creation of new job opportunities.
5.46 The housing stock in the area 
has been characterised by areas of large-scale post war housing with high rates of obsolescence, proportionally fewer detached and semi-detached properties, and low home ownership. There is a lack of family housing in the area, evidenced by overcrowding and aspirations for larger properties. The majority of the AAP area was covered by the Birmingham- Sandwell Housing Market Renewal Programme (Urban Living) which came to an end in 2011. There is a need to continue to improve the housing stock in the area and the AAP supports this by identifying sites for new housing and housing regeneration areas.
5.47 Perry Barr/Birchfield is 
identified as a District Centre growth point in the AAP , and has the potential to accommodate a significant level of retail and office development. Potential exists to diversify the commercial offer (retail and office), whilst also delivering infrastructure improvements, new community facilities and housing growth. Sites with development potential include the Birmingham City University site, One Stop Shopping Centre, Perry Barr Stadium, Gailey Park and the bus depot on Wellhead Lane. 
5.48 The Birmingham City 
University (BCU) teaching campus, covering 8 ha, has a significant presence within the local area and the adopted AAP safeguards the majority of the campus for educational use. However, since the AAP’s examination and subsequent adoption, the University has announced its relocation to Eastside in the City Centre. A regeneration framework will be prepared to ensure that comprehensive development is Lichfield Road run north-south, and the A4540 Ring Road and A4040 Outer Circle run east-west through the area. It is also served by the Birmingham Walsall rail line with stations at Perry Barr, Witton and Aston. The AAP supports a range of cross-cutting aims of the City Council and contributes towards the overarching objectives of the BDP by promoting employment and economic activity and improving environmental quality.
5.44 The majority of the AAP 
area falls within the 10% most deprived in the country according to the 2010 Indices of Multiple Deprivation. Unemployment and worklessness rates are among the highest in the City, with significant numbers of people experiencing long-term unemployment. Policies in the AAP seek to stimulate new economic activity, create employment opportunities and support business growth. 
5.45 The AAP proposes a Regional 
Investment Site (designated as the Advanced Manufacturing Hub) in East Aston, near Salford Lake, which alone will help to create 
Policy GA3  Aston, Newtown and Lozells
An AAP is in place for the area to secure comprehensive regeneration 
and guide future development over a 15 year period.
The AAP has planned for the following levels of growth; over 700 new 
homes, one Regional Investment Site, up to 10,000 sq.m. gross office space and up to 20,000 sq.m. gross comparison retail. The growth  of Perry Barr will be supported in line with Policy TP21.
In the case of the Birmingham City University teaching campus there is 
the potential, due to the relocation of the University, to accommodate growth including a range of local centre uses and housing. High quality design to assist with place-making and a more attractive public realm is essential given the site’s prominent location. Any proposal brought forward for the site should contribute to improving pedestrian linkages, particularly to the One Stop Shopping Centre, Perry Barr rail station and the more traditional retail area to the south at Birchfield Roundabout. This replaces Policy ED1 of the adopted AAP . 
Implementation
Policy GA3          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development planbrought forward that benefits the 
wider community and contributes towards economic growth within the area. As part of the site is located along the main road frontage, a strong emphasis should be placed on high quality design and depending on the uses brought forward, access improvements may need to be undertaken.5.49 The AAP Delivery and 
Implementation Plan sets out the mechanisms, timescales and agencies involved in delivery of the proposals. Its also sets out policies regarding planning obligations and the contributions which will be required to deliver the necessary infrastructure, and other measures, to offset the consequences of development.45
Lichfield RoadM6
M6
Aston
Expressway A38(M)BirchfieldRoad A34Perry Barr
Station
Witton
Station
Aston
StationRiver Tame
Aston
ParkSalford
ParkThe Hub
Lozells Road
New John Street (4040)Hockley
BrookTame Valley CanalRiverTame
BCU
Teaching
CampusPerry Barr
Stadium
One Stop
Shopping
CentreGailey
Park
Perry Barr District
Growth Centre
Plan 7 Aston, Newtown and Lozells Spatial Plann
NORTH
KEY
Growth Area boundary
Development sitesWider areas of changePublic open spaceAston Regional Investment SiteDistrict centreMajor highwaysRail lineRail station
Canal
Watercourse46
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthSutton Coldfield Town Centre
Introduction
5.50 Sutton Coldfield Town 
Centre is located to the north of 
Birmingham and is the largest suburban town centre in the City. It extends from the High Street (A5127) in the north to Birmingham Road to the south, incorporating the train station and Town Hall to the north-west and bounded by Victoria Road and Queen Street to the east and the rail line to the west. Why we have taken this approach
5.51 Sutton Coldfield Town 
Centre will play a leading role in the continued transformation of Birmingham. The limited retail and leisure offer, coupled with increased competition from other shopping destinations, prompted calls for a critical appraisal of the centre, leading to a vision and strategy for its rejuvenation. This is encapsulated in the adopted Sutton Coldfield Town Centre Regeneration Framework SPD (2009).5.52 The background studies 
undertaken for the SPD identify that the centre is under performing in relation to its population and local spending power and its position within the wider Birmingham economy. The SPD sets out a long-term vision for the centre, seeking to address deficiencies in existing retail, commercial, leisure and residential provision. It recognises that the competing demands of these various sectors would need to respect the character of the area, whilst making the centre a ‘destination of choice’ rather than just a local shopping centre.
5.53 There are a number of 
opportunity sites within and around the centre which will accommodate the future growth and help to strengthen its role now and into the future.
5.54 Sutton Coldfield Old Town, 
which is the historic heart of the town, set within the High Street Conservation Area, is an important part of the centre. The two main challenges which the Old Town faces are centred on promoting commercial sustainable development in historic and listed buildings and seeking to reduce the impact of traffic in the area. A Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan for the High Street Conservation Area has been adopted which will support the regeneration aspirations of the SPD while at the same time protecting the intrinsic quality of the historic environment.Policy GA4  Sutton Coldfield Town Centre
The ongoing growth and diversification of uses within Sutton Coldfield 
Town Centre will be encouraged. In particular:
•  The delivery of mixed-use residential and retail and office 
developments will be supported including accommodation for the growth of:
-     Up to 30,000 sq.m. gross of comparison retail floorspace.
- Up to 20,000 sq.m. gross of office floorspace.
•  Proposals to redevelop land within the town centre to create an improved retail and residential offer together with associated public realm improvements such as a new town square will be supported. In particular redevelopment of the primary shopping area will be encouraged.
•  Provision will be made for levels of convenience retail to meet the needs of the wider area in line with Policy TP22.
•  A bus interchange will be provided, to retain good bus penetration, improved pedestrian linkages to the rail station and selective junction and highway improvements.
•  A relief road is proposed to enable environmental improvements to the High Street Conservation Area.
•  Enhancements will be undertaken to the pedestrian environment and the existing retail offer along Birmingham Road between the southern junction with Holland Road and the Queen Street/Brassington Avenue roundabout, and associated minor junction and highway improvements along Lower Queen Street and Holland Road.
Implementation
Policy GA4          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan47
Sutton Coldfield
Station
Birmingham RoadStation Street
Car Park
Brassington
AvenueBrassington Avenue
Queens Street
Lower Queens Street
Holland RoadPlants Brook
Plan 8 Sutton Coldfield Town Centre Spatial Plann
NORTH
KEY
Growth Area boundary
Development sitesWider areas of changeMajor highwaysRail line Rail stationBrook48
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthLangley Sustainable Urban 
Extension
Introduction
5.55 Land to the west of the A38 
at Langley will be developed as 
a sustainable urban extension to provide for new housing to meet the needs of the City’s growing population. The development will achieve the highest standards of design and sustainability and a network of green spaces including a green corridor to New Hall Valley Country Park. A range of supporting facilities will be provided, including new schools and other services, together with significant improvements to the local highway infrastructure and public transport services.Policy GA5  Langley Sustainable Urban Extension
Land to the west of the A38 at Langley will be removed from the Green 
Belt to provide a sustainable urban extension of approximately 6,000 new homes. 
The Langley Sustainable Urban Extension will be an exemplar of 
sustainable development and a destination of choice for families wishing to live in Birmingham. The development will achieve the highest standards of sustainability and design, and provide a range of supporting facilities to help foster a strong sense of community. The creation of well-connected, integrated and sustainable transport links will be essential to making this a sustainable neighbourhood. Development will also protect and enhance existing heritage assets in the area and provide a network of connected green spaces. 
The new neighbourhood will provide for a mix of housing sizes, types 
and tenures, including affordable housing in line with the requirements in Policy TP31. There will, however, be a primary focus on the provision of family housing. As the primary focus of the Langley SUE will be for family housing, this will include areas of residential development at densities averaging around 35dph-40dph. The key design principles of the Langley SUE will be managed through the Masterplan and SPD process.
Sustainability and design 
•  Development layout, buildings and open spaces will be designed to 
the highest possible standards. The new neighbourhood will have a strong sense of place and distinctive character with building layout and design informed by the local topography, landscape and heritage assets complemented by appropriate use of innovation in design. It will be a safe place where carefully considered site layouts and well designed buildings and open spaces promote positive social interaction and natural surveillance and minimise the potential for  crime and anti-social behaviour. Appropriate provision will be made for people with disabilities. Local people will play a meaningful role in shaping development and managing the new neighbourhood, contributing to a sense of community.
•  The development will need to achieve the highest standards of sustainability including the use of low carbon energy generating technologies such as Combined Heat and Power. 
•  A range of supporting facilities will be included as part of the development including early years provision, new primary schools, a new secondary school, health care facilities and local shops and services.
•  Prior to development commencing an investigation should be undertaken into the existence of mineral deposits on the site and any viably workable minerals should be extracted.
Connectivity
•  A network of integrated pedestrian and cycle routes will be required 
throughout the site which should be linked to the adjoining employment area at Peddimore, the North Birmingham Cycle network, Sutton Coldfield Town Centre, Birmingham City Centre and other local centres. Routes are required to be direct, connected, safe, attractive and comfortable. This includes the provision of further Public Rights of Way that can be planned to link with those that already exist within the area.continued...spatial delivery of growth / birmingham development planWhy have we taken this 
approach
5.56 The limited capacity of 
the urban area to meet the needs of the City’s growing population represents exceptional circumstances which justify the release of land from the Green Belt for housing development. 
5.57 Land to the west of the 
A38 at Langley represents the most sustainable option to accommodate additional housing growth and will have the least impact on the Green Belt.
5.58 The majority of the 
development area is considered to have low ecological value, with small areas of higher value designated as SLINCS. However, opportunities exist to secure adequate mitigation and compensation as part of the development process. Development should seek to protect and enhance biodiversity and should consider wider links to the Birmingham and Black Country Nature Improvement Area. 
5.59 The landscape and visual 
sensitivity of the majority of the area is judged to be low due to the lack of landscape components and potential development being able to be accommodated in the area without significant loss of landscape features and opportunities for replacement/ mitigation. 
5.60 Land west of the A38 is clearly 
the most sustainable and accessible of all the options considered due to its proximity to existing local facilities. It also has fewer highway constraints and will impact on fewer junctions.
5.61 Heritage assets within the 
development area include Fox Hollies and its surroundings, including the parkland to its south and the crucible walls to its east; Langley Heath Farm and its setting; Langley Gorse and its setting; Langley Hall and its surroundings, including the moat and two fishponds; former 49•  New and improved bus connections such as ‘Sprint/Rapid Transit services will be needed to directly link the site with Sutton Coldfield Town Centre, Birmingham City Centre and other key employment destinations. The enhancement of rail services could significantly improve accessibility to North Birmingham, including longer term projects such as new commuter stations at Castle Vale, The Fort, Walmley and Sutton Coldfield.
•  The development will benefit from a new junction with the A38 and new connections into the built up area. Improvements will be required to increase the capacity of the local road network, which will be identified through a comprehensive Transport Assessment developed in a partnership between the developers and Birmingham City Council. Upgrades have already been identified to corridors connecting the site with Sutton Coldfield, Birmingham City Centre and the adjoining area.
•  Strategic modelling has been undertaken so that impacts and appropriate mitigation, where necessary, can be identified and discussed with the Highways England (in relation to the Strategic Road Network) and adjoining highway authorities.
•  An area wide community travel plan will be developed to promote the use of local amenities and encourage greater use of the cycle, bus and rail networks. The products can be spread beyond the site to benefit those who live in neighbouring areas, and reduce the amount that people use the private car. Strong targets will be required to achieve a modal split and travel demand comparable to the adjacent residential areas.
Green space and ecology
•  Green space will be an important feature of the development to reflect 
the urban edge location and to provide multiple benefits for residents that include recreation, landscape and wildlife value, sustainable drainage, cycling and walking routes.
•  All residents should have access to publicly accessible open space, children’s play areas, playing fields and allotments, in line with the requirements of policy TP9.
•  An appropriate buffer will be provided from designated sites/existing habitats, particularly semi-natural broadleaved woodland and watercourses. Additional habitats, including woodland, semi-improved grassland and hedgerows, should be created as part of the development to increase the biodiversity value of the area. These areas should link into the existing green infrastructure network across the city.
•  A substantial green corridor connecting New Hall Valley Country Park with the wider Green Belt beyond the A38 will be an integral part of the development. This green corridor will incorporate and enhance existing woodland, wetland and other landscape features and wildlife habitats. The corridor will be accessible to the public and include linkages with the North Birmingham Cycle initiative. 
•  Further flood risk modelling is required for Langley Brook to the north west of the site.
•  Development will need to consider impacts on soil resources during construction and operation, adhering to Defra’s Code of Practice to protect soil.
continued...50
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthfishponds or millponds on Langley 
Brook; Springfield Farm and its enclosure; fields around Ash Farm; and Fox Hollies Road. These include designated heritage assets  and their settings which will be excluded from development, and heritage assets whose contribution to the character of the place can be enhanced by retention and through design solutions. Archaeological excavation will be required where development affects known, predicted or potential heritage assets of archaeological interest.
5.62 New Hall Valley Country Park 
is an important countryside area which penetrates deep into the urban area and is designated as Green Belt. Retaining a green corridor to the Country Park and the wider Green Belt is a key element of the proposed development. At an appropriate time in the future this green corridor should be re-designated as Green Belt.
5.63 Langley’s housing density 
will average around 35-40 dph, reflecting the site’s urban fringe location adjacent to open countryside. This density responds to the site’s landscape character, environmental qualities and its primary focus on family housing.
5.64 Landowners have indicated 
their support for the proposal so deliverability is anticipated to be achievable in the plan period. However, market capacity means that it is unlikely that the development will be fully completed within the plan period and capacity will remain for housing development post 2031. It is anticipated that a maximum of 5,000 homes will be developed by 2031 based on a study undertaken by Peter Brett Associates.
New housingPolicy GA5          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
ManagementHeritage assets
•  The development area contains 3 listed buildings and many currently 
undesignated heritage assets including a locally listed building, archaeological remains and other historic buildings.
•  The design of the development will be required to protect and enhance known archaeological features and the character and setting of heritage assets in the area.
•  Archaeological excavations will be required in advance of development, followed by analysis of the results and publication of reports. 
An Supplementary Planning Document will be prepared to provide detailed guidance on design, phasing and site access to ensure a comprehensive development of the site and relationship with Peddimore (GA6).
Implementationspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan51
A38Birmingham Northern
Relief Road
Ox Leys RoadLangley Brook
Springfield Road
Thimble End
Road
Webster
Way
Walmley Ash RoadWalmley
Local CentreNewhall
Country Park
Walmley Road
Plan 9 Sustainable Urban Extension Spatial Plann
NORTH
KEY
Growth Area boundary Major highways Brook52
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthPeddimore
Introduction
5.65 A high quality employment site 
of 71 ha is proposed at Peddimore, 
Minworth. The site which will be removed from the Green Belt is required to meet the shortfall in best quality employment land. Providing high quality employment land to meet the needs of the expanding growth sectors is essential in supporting the economic prosperity of the City.  
Why we have taken this 
approach
5.66 A Study by Warwick Economics 
and Development found that there is a shortage of high quality land to meet the needs of the expanding advanced manufacturing sector in the City, a proportion of the site is therefore, reserved to meet the needs of this sector. The conclusions of this report are reflected in the findings of the 2012 Employment Land Review (ELR). The ELR shows that there is currently a significant shortfall in the supply of high quality Best Urban employment land. Best Urban sites are large high-quality sites attractive to clients with an international, national and regional choice of location. The ELR recommends that there is an urgent need to identify new development opportunities in the best urban market.
5.67 Peddimore represents the 
best opportunity of the Green Belt options considered to accommodate new employment development. The site has low ecological and landscape value and sits within a low lying basin which provides an opportunity to visually contain large scale employment development. The site lies in close proximity to the M42 junction 9 and existing employment areas at Minworth and Kingsbury.
5.68 The shortage of suitable 
brownfield sites within the urban area to meet the City’s needs for large industrial sites represents the exceptional circumstances justifying the release of Green Belt land for development.Policy GA6  Peddimore
Peddimore will deliver 71 ha of new employment land for B1 (b) Research 
and Development, B1 (c) Light Industrial, B2 General Industrial and B8 Warehousing and Distribution uses. Office development should remain ancillary to the main industrial use. 
40 ha of the site should be safeguarded for B1 (c) or B2 uses. Future development will need to ensure:
•  High quality design and landscaping: The development will be of 
the highest quality in a landscaped setting. A landscaped buffer area including reinstatement of historic hedgerows will reinforce the Green Belt boundary to the north and east. Development should not take place outside the developable area shown on the Policies Map, and building heights close to the northern and eastern edges of that area should be carefully controlled in order to limit their visual impact on the higher ground/ridge to the north and east which screen longer distance views of the development from the wider Green Belt. 
•   Access improvements: A network of integrated pedestrian and cycle routes will be required throughout the site which should be linked to the Langley Sustainable Urban Extension and the North Birmingham cycle network. Routes are required to be direct, connected, safe, attractive and comfortable.
    New bus connections such as Sprint/Rapid Transit services, will be required including direct links to Sutton Coldfield Town Centre, Birmingham City Centre and the major residential areas of Sutton Coldfield, East Birmingham and North Solihull.
    The development will benefit from a new junction with the A38 and new connections into the built up area along with upgrades to corridors connecting the site with Sutton Coldfield, Birmingham City Centre and the adjoining area. Strategic modelling has been undertaken so that impacts and appropriate mitigation, where necessary, can be identified and discussed with the Highways England (in relation to the Strategic Highway Network) and adjoining highway authorities.
    A travel plan will be prepared to reduce private motorised journeys as a means of travel to work and promote sustainable modes of travel. The implementation of an agreed plan, including Freight Management, will be a requirement on all development occupiers.
•  Enhanced biodiversity and protecting heritage assets: Opportunities to enhance the biodiversity value of the site such as enhancements to Peddimore Brook and reinstatement of hedgerows will be required. 
    The design of the development will be required to protect and enhance known archaeological features and the character and setting of heritage assets in the area. These include; the long distance views of Peddimore Hall and the scheduled ancient monument, Forge Farm and its setting, Wiggins Hill Farm and its setting, and the Birmingham and Fazeley Canal and its setting. Archaeological excavations will be required in advance of development, followed by analysis of the results and publication of reports.
    Development will need to consider impacts on soil resources during construction and operation, adhering to Defra’s Code of Practice to protect soil.
continued...A38
Kingsbury RoadBirmingham  and Fazeley CanalPeddimore BrookWishaw Lane
Minworth
RoundaboutWiggins Hill
Road
Peddimore
Hall
KEY
Growth Area boundary
Major highwaysCanalBrook
spatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan5.69 The moated site at Peddimore 
Hall is a Scheduled Ancient 
Monument and its setting is of archaeological importance and will remain in the Green Belt.
5.70 Other heritage assets in the 
development area include Forge Farm, buildings at Wiggins Hill, the Birmingham and Fazeley Canal and its embankment and bridge, former boundaries in Fox Covert and south of Ramshurst Farm and Linda Vista, ridge and furrow and Wishaw Lane. Archaeological excavation will be required where development affects known, predicted or potential heritage assets of archaeological interest.53
Plan 10 Peddimore Spatial Plann
NORTHA Supplementary Planning Document will be prepared before development commences to address issues of design, access and phasing to ensure a comprehensive development and relationship with Langley SUE (Policy GA5).
Prior to development commencing an investigation should be 
undertaken into the existence of mineral deposits on the site, and any viably workable minerals should be extracted.
Implementation
Policy GA6          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management
Developable Area
54
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthBordesley Park
Introduction
5.71 The Bordesley Park area 
incorporates the residential and 
industrial areas to the east of the City Centre. An Area Action Plan (AAP) is being produced to regenerate the area delivering growth within a high quality urban environment. This will have the effect of transforming a part of Birmingham which is currently difficult to access and is lacking in investment, despite its close proximity to the City Centre. The area is bounded by Alum Rock Road Local Centre to the North and the Small Heath Highway to the South. 
Why we have taken this 
approach
5.72 The AAP covers an area of 
around 580 ha to the immediate east of the City Centre, including parts of Washwood Heath, Bordesley Green, Bordesley Village and Small Heath. The development of the AAP provides the opportunity to work with the local community to build upon the area’s assets and set out land use proposals and policies to guide development up to 2031. The AAP will promote sustainable growth within the area, including new employment generating activities, housing and enhanced connectivity and an improved environment. The AAP will also act as a tool to promote the area to potential investors and developers.
5.73 The Wheels site and 
surrounding environs is the major opportunity for transformational change in the area and provides the potential for new employment uses that are integrated with the adjoining areas of Saltley, Bordesley and Small Heath. There are issues with regard to land contamination (the Wheels site is a former landfill site) and infrastructure (mainly transport and access) that will need to be addressed as proposals for the area come forward. The site currently accommodates the Birmingham Wheels Park, providing a range of wheeled sports facilities including speed-skating and go-kart tracks and a stock-car racing circuit, which attract users and spectators from across Birmingham, the West Midlands and further afield. Some of the facilities are extensively used by young people from local schools and community groups. The importance of these facilities is recognised and the AAP will need to support their continued operation through equivalent or better quantity and quality replacement provision elsewhere and/or consolidation on site, in conjunction with any redevelopment of the Wheels site. This will include consideration of the catchment area of the participants involved. Appropriate provision will also need to be made for other existing business occupiers of the site.
5.74 Opportunities to improve 
existing housing and create new housing will be promoted across the area. In particular there is the opportunity for a new residential neighbourhood in the Cherrywood Road area. 
5.75 There are thriving local centres 
at Alum Rock Road and Small Heath and measures to support their continued growth and vitality will be promoted.
5.76 The Camp Hill rail line runs 
through the AAP area and it is proposed that the line is re-opened to passenger services between Kings Norton and Bordesley and between Bordesley and Tamworth. A connection into Moor Street Station will be provided within Policy GA7  Bordesley Park
An AAP will be prepared for the Bordesley Park area. Future growth and 
development will be brought forward in line with the policies set out in the AAP .
The AAP will plan for the following levels of growth; 750 new homes and 
up to 3000 new jobs.
The AAP covers an area of around 580 ha to the immediate east of the 
City Centre, including parts of Washwood Heath, Bordesley Green, Bordesley Village and Small Heath. The development of the AAP provides the opportunity to work with the local community to build upon this area’s assets and to establish:
•  A focus for growth including a wide range of employment opportunities 
for local people.
•  Attractive and thriving local centres.
•  High quality housing suitable for the needs of existing and new communities.
•  Infrastructure that meets the current and future needs of business and residents.
•  A connected place including enhanced public transport and a high quality pedestrian environment.
•  A clean, safe, attractive and sustainable environment in which to live and work.
•  Protection for and, where appropriate, enhancement of the varied sports facilities currently located in the area, including at Birmingham City Football Club and Birmingham Wheels Park.
Implementation
Policy GA7          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development planthe AAP area via new ‘chords’ at 
Bordesley. Rapid Transit routes through the area linking the City Centre to the Airport and NEC will also be supported. The HS2 rail line is also proposed to run through part of the area and the City Council is working with HS2 Ltd to minimise and mitigate the impact of the rail line on local residents and businesses both during its construction and future operation.
5.77 The City Council will lead 
the preparation of the AAP in cooperation with a wide range of 55
Watery Lane MiddlewaySaltley
Viaduct
Alum Rock
Road
River ReaBirmingham and WarwickJunction CanalDuddeston
Station
Bordesley
Station
Small Heath
StationCherrywood Road
Small Heath
Local CentreAlum Rock Road
Local Centre
Small Heath ParkAdderley
Park
Adderley Park
Station
Bordesley Green
Small Heath HighwayCoventry RoadWheels Site
and Environs
River Cole
SparkbrookGarrison Lane
Bordesley Green Road
Grand Union Canal
Plan 11 Bordesley Park Spatial Plann
NORTH
KEY
Growth Area boundary
Wider areas of changePublic open spaceLocal CentreMajor highwaysRail line Rail stationHS2 routeCanalRiver Reapartners, agencies, and the local 
community. As well as setting out land use proposals, the AAP will address viability issues, including those associated with infrastructure and ground conditions.56
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthEastern Triangle
Introduction
5.78 This area has been an historic 
focus for development and 
regeneration, and a number of housing areas have benefitted from redevelopment and significant new investment including Bucklands End and Shard End. The area continues to provide the opportunity for regeneration and economic growth and a number of projects have been identified that will deliver positive change. 
These include:
Stechford - an established mixed 
residential, commercial and local centre with opportunities for a number of sites to be brought forward for housing development.
The Meadway - a local centre with 
opportunities for redevelopment to provide an improved centre, regeneration and a reconfigured and enhanced area of open space.
Shard End - an area of recent 
change, but with ongoing potential for new housing including at the site of the former Yardley Sewage Works.
Why we have taken this 
approach
5.79 Each of the identified locations 
provide significant development opportunities in their own right, but collectively they have the scope to deliver new housing, improved local centres and enhanced community facilities for this part of East Birmingham. 
5.80 The wider area is therefore 
recognised as having considerable development potential with scope to deliver over 1000 new houses. The area benefits from good access to both the City Centre and the Airport/NEC and the proposed interchange station that will serve the HS2 network. A potential rapid transit route is being explored which would link the city centre to the airport and which would run along Bordesley Green and the Meadway.5.81 The Stechford area is served 
by both bus and rail services with Stechford rail station providing local rail services to Birmingham City Centre, the NEC and Coventry. There is a mixture of residential, industrial and retail (including Stechford Retail Park) uses in the area. Given its public transport accessibility, there is the potential for Stechford to be the focus for new residential growth.
Policy GA8  Eastern Triangle
It is proposed that the Eastern Triangle will deliver regeneration and 
growth for around 1000 new homes. This will be across a number of locations and offering a range of housing types. The potential for the redevelopment of further unsuitable housing stock as well as the more efficient and effective use of existing land and buildings where practical and particularly at locations that are close to local centres, accessible by public transport and on or close to main transport corridors will be explored. In addition, a range of other growth proposals are identified to improve connectivity and transportation across the area including road improvement schemes and investment in public transport. Proposals also include the regeneration and improvement of key local centres and improvements to the wider local environment.  
At Stechford this will include:
•  The promotion of new residential development including the 
redevelopment of the former Bulls Head Allotments and potentially in the longer term the industrial/commercial area to the south of Stechford Bridge. 
•  The growth and improvement of Stechford Local Centre to meet the retail, service and community needs of the local area.
•  Improved accessibility by all means of transport including enhanced pedestrian and cycle linkages and connectivity to Stechford rail station and the local centre.
•  A resolution to the transportation and congestion issues within the area including the junction of Station Road, Flaxley Road and Iron Lane and the bridge over the River Cole.
•  Environmental improvements, including enhancement of water quality, biodiversity and management of floodrisk along with enhanced access to the River Cole Valley.
•  Potential to consider the future of other sites for housing or associated development including under-used allotments at Burney Lane and Francis Road.
At the Meadway this will include:
•  Redevelopment of the former Meadway flats site which will deliver 
the reconfiguration and enhancement of the adjoining Kent’s Moat Recreation Ground.
•  The development of the Meadway District Centre which could comprise either the redevelopment or remodelling of the existing Poolway Shopping Centre.
•  Improvements to Lea Hall rail station, including formalisation of vehicle parking, and improvements to interchange and the pedestrian and cycle links from the station to the centre and adjoining residential areas.
•  Support for a new rapid transit route connecting the area to the City Centre and the Airport/NEC.
continued...spatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan5.82 The rail station has poor 
access for those with mobility 
difficulties, so enhancements will be supported both to the station facilities and environment, as well as improvements to the level of services.
5.83 The area also suffers from 
road congestion, particularly at the junction of Station Road, Flaxley Road and Iron Lane, and measures to reduce this congestion will be promoted.
5.84 The former Bulls Head 
Allotments have been declared surplus and provide animmediate opportunity for new residential development. Other residential opportunities in the area will be explored in the longer term including the industrial and commercial area to the south of Stechford Bridge. Any proposals should enhance and provide connections with the River Cole Valley which passes through Stechford and is a significant leisure and nature conservation asset for the area.5.85 Wider opportunities for 
housing in the area will also be explored including the potential redevelopment of under used allotments on Burney Lane and Francis Road.
5.86 At Stechford there is the 
opportunity for new retail development that is within or is well integrated with the local centre and the rail station. Environmental and public realm improvements to the local centre will also be promoted.
5.87 Further planning guidance 
will be produced to guide future development in the area.
5.88 The Meadway is a focus 
for regeneration that comprises the redevelopment of the cleared Meadway flats site, the reconfiguration and enhancement of the adjoining Kent’s Moat Recreation Ground and proposals for development at the local centre itself. These proposals will include the potential provision for a rapid transit link through the area from the City Centre to the Airport/NEC. 5.89 Improvement of the public 
realm within the centre and the adjacent Kent’s Moat Recreation Ground will be required and improvements will be made to the centre’s relationship with and linkages to the recreation ground and adjoining and nearby housing regeneration proposals.
5.90 There is a limited retail offer 
in East Birmingham and the appropriate growth of both the Meadway and Stechford local centres will be supported to address this shortfall.
5.91 It is proposed to improve 
the scale and range of retail, service and community facilities at the Meadway Centre (Poolway) to create a new focus for the surrounding community. The centre could accommodate additional comparison floorspace in line with policy and an enhanced convenience retail offer.
5.92 The remodelling of the 
existing Poolway Centre will be considered to accommodate development that could range from refurbishment and expansion to more comprehensive restructuring. The emphasis will be on creating a more attractive local centre that addresses current design and access issues and provides facilities that are accessible by all modes of travel. A review of the provision and range of services and community facilities will be undertaken.
5.93 Detailed proposals for this 
area will be developed through the production of further planning guidance.
5.94 Within Shard End targeted  
redevelopment has delivered a high degree of social and affordable housing to meet immediate re-housing requirements in this area. The former Yardley Sewage Works provides a much larger development opportunity that can deliver a broader range of accommodation that will further improve the attractiveness of the housing offer and regeneration potential of the area.57At Shard End this will include:
•  The removal from the Green Belt of part of the former Yardley 
Sewage Works site and development of up to 350 new homes. The development will be expected to provide:
•  High quality new housing environment that will ensure wider housing choice within the Shard End area in line with the principles in Policy TP27. This will include broader housing opportunities and associated community facilities.
•  Enhancement of the Cole Valley both on the site with improved access, amenity and landscaping and along the wider corridor - improving the offer of the Cole Valley in terms of leisure, recreation, education and nature conservation.
•  Enhancement of community facilities both on and off site, including scope for the use of planning obligations in connection with development proposals. 
Implementation
Policy GA8          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management58
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growth5.95 The site provides the 
opportunity to facilitate both 
the delivery of a new residential area that will help address local regeneration issues (in terms of the diversification and widening of choice within the local housing stock) as well as securing significant environmental works to the Cole Valley that will transform the amenity value of the site along with the access to it and the range of facilities available to the immediate and wider community.
5.96 The site forms part of the 
former Yardley Sewage Works, which ceased operation in the 1970s. Following decommissioning, only limited remediation was carried out and parts of the site were used for the landfill of demolition and construction waste. Initial investigations of the ground conditions and potential contamination have been undertaken and further investigations will be undertaken as the proposals are advanced.
5.97 The site comprises a generally 
featureless area to the south of the River Cole. Although included within the Green Belt as part of the Cole Valley, the site currently has restricted access and a limited environmental and recreational value. Principal sporting and recreational sites are located elsewhere in the Cole Valley corridor and are more accessible by local communities (such as the rugby pitches on the opposite side of Cole Hall Lane).
5.98 The River Cole road bridge 
at Cole Hall Lane has also been recently upgraded to facilitate regeneration opportunities in this area and to encourage better public transport services.
5.99 Development of part of the 
former sewage works site would seek to secure compensatory measures including opportunities for the improvement of access to the heart of the Cole Valley for the surrounding communities; opportunities to improve facilities (including local centres) within the wider area as part of the delivery of new residential development; and the retention and further enhancement of the most attractive aspects of the Valley. This includes the potential relocation of Yardley and District Rugby Club’s clubhouse and changing rooms to their pitches on the opposite side of Cole Hall Lane. The limited value of the Yardley Sewage Works site in terms of the role and function of the Green Belt and the shortage of land for housing in the City, together with the local regeneration benefits and the potential for significant enhancements to the Cole Valley, represent exceptional circumstances which justify the release of the site from the Green Belt.
5.100 Further development 
guidance for the site will be prepared as necessary to bring forward  development. This will include the potential remediation strategy for the site.
New housingspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan59
Stechford
StationRiver Cole
Kents Moat
Recreation GroundLea Hall
Station
MeadwayStation RoadStechford
BridgeCole Hall
LaneShard End
Local CentreFormer Yardley
Sewage Works
Meadway District
Growth CentreBulls Head
Allotments
Stechford
Local Centre
Plan 12 Eastern Triangle Spatial Plann
NORTH
KEY
Growth Area boundary
Development sites
Public open spaceDistrict/Local CentreMajor highwaysRail lineRail stationRiver Cole60
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthSelly Oak and South Edgbaston
Introduction
5.101 Selly Oak and South 
Edgbaston is a strategically 
important location on the A38 corridor to the south-west of the City Centre. The area includes the Queen Elizabeth Hospital and University of Birmingham, Selly Oak District Centre and adjoining residential areas. 
5.102 Selly Oak and South 
Edgbaston will see significant investment in major strategic sites which will further help to transform the area. The aims are to maximise the potential of the University and Hospitals, promote economic diversification and to secure significant spin off benefits from new development. In particular the area will provide the focus for the clustering of activities associated with medical technology in the Life Sciences sector. This recognises the potential to marry growth in the Life Sciences sector with the unique spatial opportunities offered in this location. This will further enhance the City’s future economic competitiveness and attract investment and jobs.Policy GA9  Selly Oak and South Edgbaston
The Selly Oak and South Edgbaston area will be promoted for major 
regeneration and investment and will include: 
An economic, research and health role, focused around:
•  A new Economic Zone as the focus of investment in the Life Sciences 
sector. At the heart of the zone and key to its success will be a new 4 ha Life Sciences Campus on the northern end of the Birmingham Battery site. It will provide a purpose built campus in a high quality environment that will be of a size that will provide the critical mass needed for its success.
•  The University of Birmingham where further educational and associated uses that maintain and enhance the University’s facilities will be supported recognising the unique character of the campus and the important historic and architectural value of its Listed Buildings.
•  The new Queen Elizabeth Hospital campus area will remain a major focus for medical facilities of regional and national importance. Proposals for new hospital facilities and improvements to existing hospitals and associated facilities will be supported.
The strengthening of Selly Oak District Centre growth point with:
•  New mixed use developments including retail, leisure, community, 
medical services and office uses. The centre has capacity for: 
-  up to 25,000 sq.m. (gross) of comparison retail floorspace.
-  and up to 10,000 sq.m. of office floorspace.
To address the need for regeneration of the centre all developments should contain a mix of uses, make a positive contribution to the diversity and vitality of the centre, and be well integrated with the centre and easily accessible by all modes.
Delivery of over 700 new homes at:
•  The former Selly Oak Hospital site which will be developed for housing 
to create an exemplar sustainable residential environment with associated open space, leisure and community uses.
•  The development of smaller sites across the wider area for residential development in line with the overarching strategy for the area.
Several large sites are available for development in and on the edge of the centre to support this growth:
 •  The southern end of the Birmingham Battery site will be suitable for a 
replacement supermarket, comparison retail, offices, leisure, other town centre uses and residential.
•  The Triangle site will be suitable for small scale retail, offices, other town centre uses and residential.
•  Battery Retail Park will be suitable for comparison retail, offices, leisure, other town centre uses and residential.
•  The Dingle will be suitable for community, medical and small scale retail and other town centre uses.
Future development across the area will need to be supported by and where necessary contribute toward infrastructure including:
•  The completion of the Selly Oak New Road which will require the 
upgrading of Harborne Lane where it passes the Triangle site.
continued...spatial delivery of growth / birmingham development planWhy we have taken this 
approach
5.103 There is around 35 ha of 
vacant land/buildings available for development including the former Birmingham Battery site, other sites in Selly Oak District Centre growth point and the former Selly Oak hospital to deliver the growth and regeneration aspirations. In addition there is potential for significant investment in the existing hospital and university campuses. The area is expected to make a significant contribution to the City’s needs for new employment providing around 3,000 new jobs in the Biomedical and Life Sciences sector with further significant job creation in the office, education, retail and healthcare sectors. Opportunities for residential development in the area will provide over 700 new homes.
5.104 The Queen Elizabeth Hospital 
offers state of the art clinical facilities and has established a growing regional and national role. The proximity of the University with its Medical School has enabled strong partnerships to develop between academics and clinicians. The area is already home to extensive clinical research and many successful companies in the medical technology/Life Sciences sector. The proposed Life Sciences Campus will benefit from co-location with the University and Hospitals and will build on the successes in this field providing a basis for further growth in high value jobs.
5.105 Selly Oak District Centre 
growth point straddles the Bristol Road, and contains retail warehousing, a foodstore and numerous smaller shops, many providing for the needs of the local student population. However, the centre has been declining as a comparison retail destination, and is in need of investment to improve the diversity, vitality and viability of retail offer and measures to address congestion through the centre and improve the quality of the 61
The Queen Elizabeth Hospital•  A package of environmental enhancement, pedestrian, traffic management and public transport improvements along Bristol Road to support the regeneration of the centre. 
•  Improvements to access for public transport, pedestrians and cyclists including enhancements to University and Selly Oak rail stations.
•  Improvements to the natural environment, including improvements to the Bourne Brook corridor to encourage habitat connectivity between Woodgate Valley and Cannon Hill Park, completion of key missing links in the City’s Linear Open Space walkway network, and improvements to the canal network including assistance for the restoration of the Lapal Canal.
Implementation
Policy GA9          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management62
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthenvironment and public realm. The 
development of key sites will help to address these issues. 
5.106 Further investment in the 
University of Birmingham will be encouraged to ensure it can maintain its role as one of the premier educational establishments in the country for higher education, research and development, and supporting activities.
5.107 The new Queen Elizabeth 
(QE) Hospital is a facility of both regional and national importance. Also the wider South Edgbaston area is the focus of an emerging healthcare quarter with numerous clinics and hospitals. Within the QE campus there are opportunities for further new healthcare developments including new hospitals that build on the area’s success.
5.108 Extensive infrastructure and 
environmental improvements will be needed to support this level of new development and the policy seeks to ensure that all development contributes to these. 
5.109 Finally the policy seeks to 
address some of the problems faced by residential areas and make Selly Oak/Bournbrook an attractive, balanced and sustainable residential community. The policies in this plan will be supported by other measures to address these issues including an Article 4 Direction and the Student Accommodation SPD.
5.110 A SPD is being prepared for 
Selly Oak/South Edgbaston that will be used to guide investment decisions on the major sites and realise the vision for the area. 
5.111 The City Council will work with 
the private sector including key landowners such as the University of Birmingham, University Hospitals Trust and Sainsbury’s to deliver this policy.
Graduates at the University of Birminghamspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan63
University of
Birmingham
Former Selly Oak
HospitalProposed
Life Sciences
CampusQueen Elizabeth
Hospital
Bristol Road
Bristol RoadRaddlebarn RoadHarborne LaneUniversity
Station
Selly Oak Station
and Park and RideAston Webb
Boulevard
Birmingham
Battery Site
The
Dingle
The
TriangleBattery
Retail Park
Worcester andBirmingham CanalBourn Brook
Selly Oak District 
Growth Centre
Elliott
Road
Plan 13 Selly Oak and South Edgbaston Spatial Plann
NORTH
KEY
Growth Area boundary
Development sitesWider areas of changePublic open spaceDisttrict CentreMajor highwaysProposed final stage of new roadRail lineRail stationCanalPotential canal restorationBrook64
birmingham development plan / spatial delivery of growthLongbridge
Introduction
5.112 Following the closure of the 
MG Rover plant at Longbridge 
the City Council, in association with Bromsgrove District Council and other stakeholders, prepared the Longbridge Area Action Plan (AAP) to secure the comprehensive regeneration of this strategically important brownfield site that straddles the City boundary. The plan was adopted by the City Council in April 2009.
5.113 The AAP covers a 
developable area of approximately 130 ha. It has excellent transport connections with good access to the motorway network - being close to junctions with the M5 and M42. The A38, a major arterial route, crosses the area. It is also served by the Cross City rail line and Longbridge rail station immediately adjoins the site. Enhancements will be made to the station and its surrounding environment, improvements to bus services made, and a wayfinding strategy implemented to improve Longbridge’s quality of place and connect neighbourhoods to employment opportunities.
Why we have taken this 
approach
5.114 The AAP provides a 15-20 year 
framework for the comprehensive regeneration and development of the area. It sets out proposals for an exemplar sustainable employment led mixed use development to  deliver 10,000 jobs and a minimum of 1450 new homes, a Regional Investment Site (RIS), a new local centre, a Bio-mass CHP facility, new education facilities, retailing, leisure, community and recreation uses all underpinned by quality public transport facilities and highway infrastructure and other community infrastructure. 
5.115 The AAP seeks to respond to 
the closure of the former MG Rover plant by proposing an employment led approach to regeneration. It seeks to create jobs across a range of skills and types, protecting existing employment, creating new employment and securing the economic diversification of the area. The RIS will contribute around 4,500 jobs and the new local centre and other employment sites will also result in the creation of significant new job opportunities.
5.116 All the proposals in the 
AAP emerged from extensive consultation with the local community, stakeholders and other key partners. For example, the new local centre responds to the need to provide a new heart for the community and improve the quantity and quality of retail provision in the area. 
5.117 The AAP Delivery and 
Implementation Plan sets out the mechanisms, timescales and agencies involved in delivery of the AAP proposals. However, the Longbridge Infrastructure Tariff ceased to apply when the Community Infrastructure Levy for Birmingham was adopted in January 2016.
5.118 Since adoption of the AAP the 
area has been promoted to an ITEC park in recognition of its potential to provide for businesses requiring buildings with high specification fittings in a centre location and with excellent accessibility. Work is underway to secure investment in high quality digital infrastructure. The ITEC park will be mainly focussed on the RIS and local centre, however investment in this sector will also act as a catalyst in forging a vibrant residential community.
5.119 Extensive progress has been 
made in delivering the first phases of the RIS (Longbridge Technology Park) and key elements of the new local centre including the new college, retail hotel and offices and new urban park.Policy GA10  Longbridge
An AAP is in place for the area to secure comprehensive regeneration 
and guide future development over a 15-20 year period.
The AAP has planned for the following levels of growth; 1450 new homes, 
one Regional Investment Site, 13,500 sq.m. gross of retail floorspace and 10,000 sq.m. office floorspace.
A total of 28,626 sq.m. of retail floorspace has been committed to date, 
reflecting changing circumstances since the AAP was adopted. Proposals for further retail development will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated through a full retail impact assessment that there will be no significant adverse impact on investment in, and on the viability of centres in the catchment area.
Implementation
Policy GA10                       3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementspatial delivery of growth / birmingham development plan65
Longbridge StationBristol Road South
Bristol Road South
Lickey RoadRiver Rea
Cofton Park
Cofton
Centre
Former
East
WorksFormer
North WorksFormer
West Works Longbridge
Technology
Park
Austin ParkLongbridge
District
Centre
Plan 14 Longbridge Spatial Plann
NORTH
KEY
Growth Area boundary
Development sitesRegional Investment SitePublic open spacceMajor highwaysRail lineRail stationRiver66
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityenvironment and sustainability / birmingham development plan67
Environment and 
sustainability6Thematic 
policies68
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityReducing the City’s 
carbon footprint
Introduction
6.2 The City Council is committed 
to a 60% reduction in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions produced in the City by 2027, based on 1990 figures. This is an accelerated commitment compared to the current government target which requires a 22% reduction by 2022 and an 80% reduction by 2050. Planning policies have a major role to play in helping to achieve this challenging target. Why we have taken this approach
6.3 Climate Change - the rise in 
average global temperature due to increasing levels of greenhouse gases in the earth’s atmosphere - is contributing to rising average global temperatures and more frequent extreme weather. The impacts of climate change and the need to reduce the cause are fundamental challenges facing the world. Birmingham is committed to taking action to tackle climate change and has set itself demanding CO2 reduction targets. These cannot be achieved through the planning process alone, but will require action on a number of fronts. However, planning does have a significant role to play and it is important that full advantage is taken of this. This policy highlights the key areas where planning can make a contribution. 
6.4 The Green Commission’s  
Birmingham Carbon Roadmap (autumn 2013) provides more detailed guidance on how Birmingham will achieve its 60% target, largely through:
•  Accelerating investment in how 
we heat and power the City.
•  Creating more local renewable energy.
•  Improving the way we travel and get around the City.
•  Widening our investment in building energy efficiency programmes.6.1 The quality of the City’s environment, ensuring sustainable 
development and dealing with the impacts of climate change will be central to the successful delivery of the BDP . Taking a proactive and positive approach, will be vital to the quality of life of existing and future citizens and enable the City to remain an attractive proposition for investment and visitors.Environment and sustainability
Policy TP1  Reducing the City’s carbon footprint
The City Council is committed to a 60% reduction in total carbon dioxide 
(CO2) emissions produced in the City by 2027 from 1990 levels. Actions to help achieve this target will include:
•   Supporting the delivery of the principles of sustainable 
neighbourhoods in residential development (Policy TP27).
•  Requiring new developments to reduce CO2 emissions and water consumption (Policy TP3).
•  Promoting and supporting the use of low and zero carbon energy sources and technologies (Policy TP4).
•  Promoting the use of CHP schemes and district heating (Policy TP4).
•  Encouraging the use of waste as a resource (Policy TP13).
•  Promoting sustainable transport systems including cycling and walking (Policies TP38-TP41).
•  Supporting the development of new low carbon technologies (Policy TP5).
•  Supporting the expansion of trees and woodland for many purposes including carbon uptake (Policy TP7).
•  Encouraging developers to take account of the natural features of a site (e.g orientation and landscape features) to minimise energy use.
Implementation
Policy TP1          3            3                      3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementenvironment and sustainability / birmingham development plan6.5 The BDP and the planning 
process have a significant role 
to play in implementing the City Council’s wider policies for tackling climate change and creating a green city. It also provides opportunity for maximising the social and economic opportunities available to the people of Birmingham from building a leading green city. 
6.6 The policies in the BDP are 
supportive of National, European Union and International policies and programmes aimed at tackling climate change. They will also play an important role in supporting the delivery of some of the objectives of the Green Commission’s Carbon Roadmap.69
City Centre canal at Brindleyplace70
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityAdapting to climate 
change
Introduction
6.7 Planning has a role to play in 
managing the impact of climate change. Climate change could potentially have a major impact on Birmingham including extreme weather events such as flash flooding, storms, drought and heat waves and extended cold periods. The impacts can affect everyone who lives and works in Birmingham. The BDP can play a role in managing and mitigating these effects.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.8 Climate change will lead to a 
greater intensity and frequency of extreme weather events including droughts, storms and heatwaves. While it is not possible to neutralise the impact of these events, it is possible to put in place measures to minimise and mitigate them.
6.9 As a densely built urban area 
Birmingham suffers from the urban heat island effect and work by the University of Birmingham shows that the City Centre can be up to 5°C hotter at night than the surrounding rural areas. 
6.10 The projections for future 
rises in average temperatures would have serious implications for Birmingham’s built infrastructure and the health of its people. Urban greening can make a significant contribution to reducing the effects of urban heating. Birmingham’s Green Living Spaces Plan sets the priorities for creating a green network covering open spaces and parks, linear corridors, blue infrastucture, trees and green roofs/walls to help cool the City. Flood risk is also likely to increase significantly through the 21st Century and there is a need to steer development to areas with lower flood risk and improve storage and re-use of rainwater. Climate change will also impact on biodiversity within the City - but conversely maintaining and enhancing habitats can help to mitigate its impact.6.11 Blue infrastructure refers 
to waterways, rivers, streams, watercourses and canals including their towpaths and environs. The blue network refers to the network of such features across the city. Areas particularly subject to the effects of climate change are shown on Plan 1 of the Green Living Spaces Plan.
Policy TP2  Adapting to climate change
The City will need to adapt to the impacts of extreme weather and 
climate change. Measures to help manage the impacts will include:
•  Managing Flood Risk and promoting sustainable drainage systems 
(Policy TP6).
•  Promoting and enhancing a green infrastructure network in the City (Policy TP7).
•  Protecting the natural environment and promoting and enhancing biodiversity and ecosystems (Policy TP8).
•  Encouraging greater resilience to extreme weather conditions in the built environment and to transport, energy and other infrastructure.
In order to minimise the impact of overheating, new development and residential schemes should also:
•  Demonstrate how the design of the development minimises 
overheating and reduces reliance on air conditioning systems.
•  Demonstrate how the development integrates green infrastructure as part of the design process to encourage urban greening.
•  Where feasible, viable and sustainable, provide an accessible green roof and/or walls to aid cooling, particularly in the city centre, add insulation, enhance biodiversity, plant urban trees and promote sustainable drainage.
•  Where applicable, maintain and enhance the blue network to reflect the benefits that canals and rivers bring to urban cooling.
The Council will also encourage the retrofitting of these features in areas particularly susceptible to the risk of climate change.
Implementation
Policy TP2                    3             3        3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementenvironment and sustainability / birmingham development planSustainable construction
Introduction
6.12 Ensuring that new buildings 
within the City meet high 
standards of sustainable design and construction will be essential in reducing CO2 emissions and creating adaptable buildings in environmental terms. Households and non-domestic buildings account for a high proportion of the City’s CO2 emissions.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.13 The City will need to 
accommodate significant housing and economic growth in the period to 2031 increasing the demand for energy and water consumption. There is an opportunity to minimise the impact of this growth by creating high quality sustainable developments and new sustainable communities. In the case of new residential development, this will be achieved through energy performance standards applied through the Building Regulations in line with the Ministerial Statement of March 25th, 2015.
6.14 Ensuring that development is 
constructed in the most sustainable way, will require consideration to be given to the inclusion of measures reducing energy and water consumption, reducing waste and using sustainable building materials. 
6.15 The Building and Research 
Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) provides market recognition for low environmental impact buildings that are not housing. It addresses a wide range of environmental issues and enables developers and designers to prove the environmental credentials of their buildings. Standards for buildings range from pass to excellent.
6.16 In meeting the requirements 
of this policy developers should, where relevant and applicable, demonstrate the performance of their proposals against the relevant national standard or code.6.17 Improving the energy 
efficiency of the City Council’s existing and new building stock is a key objective of the Green Commission’s Carbon Roadmap (Autumn 2013) and Birmingham’s Climate Change Action Plan 2010+. The Summerfield Eco Neighbourhood Scheme is an example of a partnership approach towards a large scale renewable retrofit project. The project helped to reduce energy usage amongst households as well as providing local employment opportunities.
6.18 The Birmingham Energy 
Savers Scheme is a City Council and Carillion project working with organisations across the city, aiming to help the people of Birmingham save money on their fuel bills, become more energy efficient and help protect the environment with no upfront costs.71
Policy TP3  Sustainable construction
New development should be designed and constructed in ways to which 
will:
•  Maximise energy efficiency and the use of low carbon energy.
•  Conserve water and reduce flood risk.
•  Consider the type and source of the materials used.
•  Minimise waste and maximise recycling during construction and 
operation.
•  Be flexible and adaptable to future occupier needs.
•  Incorporate measures to enhance biodiversity value.
From whatever date the Government prescribes for the introduction of residential zero carbon standards through the Building Regulations, all new non-residential built developments in excess of 1,000 sq. m. gross permitted floorspace or being developed on a site having an area of 0.5 ha or more should aim to meet BREEAM standard excellent (or any future national equivalent) unless it can be demonstrated that the cost of achieving this would make the proposed development unviable.
Developers will be encouraged to find innovative solutions to achieve the 
objectives of this policy.
Developers will need to demonstrate how their proposals accord with 
the provisions set out above and if not to provide a justification as to why they cannot be achieved. A post construction review certification process will be required for developments expected to meet the BREEAM excellent standard.
Measures to adapt and enhance the sustainability of existing buildings 
and neighbourhoods, for example through the Birmingham Energy Savers Scheme, will also be encouraged providing there is no conflict with other policies such as the protection of heritage assets.
Implementation
Policy TP3                          3                                    3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management72
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityLow and zero carbon 
energy generation
Introduction
6.19 Reducing energy consumption 
and finding alternative sources will be central to meeting CO2 targets and helping achieve more sustainable forms of development. Moving toward lower carbon forms of energy will play an important role in achieving this.Why we have taken this approach
6.20 There is significant potential 
to utilise lower carbon forms of energy production, in particular Combined Heat and Power (CHP) as part of District Heating Schemes in Birmingham. CHP has particular potential for expansion within the city. CHP involves the simultaneous generation of heat and power and is a highly efficient way to use both fossil and renewable fuels. Large residential developments on sites over 200 units in size and new non-residential developments over 1,000 sq.m. offer the economies of scale necessary to include CHP generation or a network connection to an existing CHP facility. 
6.21 There are already examples 
within Birmingham of CHP generation. The Broad Street District Energy Scheme serves many of the City Centre’s most prominent buildings including the ICC, NIA, REP Theatre, Council House and Town Hall. The project utilises a large CHP engine in the ICC boiler house and heating mains linking the various buildings to the energy centre. The scheme will result in cost savings for those linked to it and reduce the City Centre’s CO2 emissions by 20%. A similar scheme is proposed in the Eastside area of the City Centre.
6.22 There is also potential within 
Birmingham to use natural renewable energy sources such as solar panels. Other initiatives to reduce energy consumption include the development of Smart Grids. A Smart Grid delivers electricity from suppliers to consumers using digital technology to save energy and reduce costs. Whilst Smart Grids are not being widely used at present it is possible that during the plan period the technology will become more widely available.
6.23 Because of Birmingham’s 
location and topography, wind power is unlikely to be a significant source of renewable energy in the City.
6.24 Further guidance on the 
application of this policy will be contained in the ‘Your Green and Healthy City’ Supplementary Planning Document.Policy TP4  Low and zero carbon energy generation
New developments will be expected to incorporate the provision of 
low and zero carbon forms of energy generation or to connect into low and zero carbon energy generation networks where they exist, wherever practicable and unless it can be demonstrated that the cost of achieving this would make the proposed development unviable. 
In the case of residential developments of over 200 units and non-
residential developments over 1,000 sq.m. first consideration should be given to the inclusion of Combined Heat and Power (CHP) generation or a network connection to an existing CHP facility. However, the use of other technologies - for example solar photovoltaics or thermal systems, wind turbines, biomass heating or ground source heating - will also be accepted where they will have the same or similar benefits, there is no adverse impact on amenity and, in the case of ground source heating, environmental risks can be adequately managed.
Smaller developments should also connect to a District Heating 
Scheme where such schemes exist, unless it is demonstrated that such a connection is not practicable or viable.
Encouragement will also be given to the development and 
implementation of new technologies which reduce energy consumption such as SMART Grid and promoting new homes to be SMART Grid ready.
Implementation
Policy TP4          3              3                                    3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementenvironment and sustainability / birmingham development planLow carbon economy
Introduction
6.25 The need to adapt to 
climate change and reduce the 
dependence on traditional fossil fuels represents an opportunity for the Birmingham economy to lead the way in the development of new low carbon technologies.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.26 Birmingham has been 
designated as a Science City, which is a partnership of public, private and research sectors to drive forward innovation. The Science City Research Alliance of the Universities of Birmingham and Warwick is funded by Birmingham Science City. It is currently undertaking a range of projects including energy futures such as hydrogen cells and advanced lightweight materials.
6.27 Birmingham’s Carbon 
Roadmap (autumn 2013) promotes the development of low carbon fuel efficient technologies and the benefits of efficient resource management and waste minimisation. In this respect small scale local biomass projects such as woodfuel heat and power offer the potential to minimise the costs and carbon emissions associated with transport.
6.28 Facilitating the roll out of 
low carbon technology and encouraging the sustainable management of the City’s waste is a major growth opportunity and offers potential for existing companies to diversify and for new companies to be formed creating new jobs and investment.73
New housing with solar panelsPolicy TP5  Low carbon economy
The development of innovative energy technologies to reduce the use 
of fossil fuels and CO2 emissions and promotion of low carbon industries will be supported and encouraged. In particular the following initiatives will be supported:
•  Low carbon vehicle technologies such as electric and hydrogen fuel cell 
vehicles and hybrid buses including the installation of refuelling and recharging stations.
•  The development of new technologies for the sustainable management of the City’s waste such as anaerobic digestion and gasification processes.
•  Low carbon design and construction, including low carbon renovation of the housing stock and provision of low carbon construction service and trades.
•  Bioenergy initiatives such as woodfuels, (biomass) and biogas.
Implementation
Policy TP5          3            3                                                            3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management74
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityManagement of flood 
risk and water resources
Introduction
6.29 Flooding is one of the 
most immediate and visible consequences of extreme weather. Measures to minimise the risk of flooding and mitigate its effects are therefore required. The City Council will work with the Environment Agency to reduce floodrisk in Birmingham in line with the River Trent Catchment Flood Management Plan.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.30 Parts of Birmingham are 
at risk of flooding from main rivers, ordinary watercourses, surface water, sewer flooding and groundwater. There is also the potential for canal and reservoir breach and overtopping. As there has been development within flood zones, particularly along the Rea and the Tame, fluvial flood risk is an issue. There have also been considerable instances of flooding from surface water with small watercourses and sewers being particularly susceptible to flash flooding.    
6.31 In order to manage this risk it is 
essential that future development is planned appropriately to ensure that where possible:
•  Development is located in the 
lowest areas of flood risk.
•  Measures are put in place to mitigate new development against flood risk and ensure that it does not increase flood risk elsewhere.
•  Surface water is managed effectively on site through the appropriate application of Sustainable Drainage Systems.
•  Opportunities should be sought to reduce the overall level of floodrisk in the area and beyond through the layout and form of development.
•  Development should be designed to be safe throughout its lifetime, taking account of the potential impacts of climate change.Policy TP6  Management of flood risk and water resources
Flood Risk Assessments
Site specific Flood Risk Assessments will be required in accordance 
with the requirements of the relevant national planning policy and the guidance outlined in the Birmingham Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA).  
Sustainable Drainage Assesment and Operation and Maintenance Plan
A Sustainable Drainage Assessment and Operation and Maintenance 
Plan will be required for all major developments, as defined in Article 2(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015. 
As part of their Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) and Sustainable Drainage 
Assessment developers should demonstrate that the disposal of surface water from the site will not exacerbate existing flooding and that exceedence flows will be managed.
For all developments where a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment and/
or Sustainable Drainage Assessment is required, surface water discharge rates shall be limited to the equivalent site-specific greenfield runoff rate for all return periods up to the 1 in 100 year plus climate change event, unless it can be demonstrated that the cost of achieving this would make the proposed development unviable.
Sustainable Urban Drainage (SuDS)
To minimise flood risk, improve water quality and enhance biodiversity 
and amenity all development proposals will be required to manage surface water through Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS). Wherever possible the natural drainage of surface water from new developments into the ground will be preferred. Surface water runoff should be managed as close to its source as possible in line with the following drainage hierarchy:
• Store rainwater for later use.• Discharge into the gound (infiltration).• Discharge to a surface water body.•  Discharge to a surface water sewer, highway drain or other drainage 
system.
• Discharge to a combined sewer.
All SuDS must protect and enhance water quality by reducing the risk of 
diffuse pollution by means of treating at source and including multiple treatment trains where feasible. All SuDS schemes should be designed in accordance with the relevant national standards and there must be long-term operation maintenance arrangements in place for the lifetime of the development.
Rivers and Streams
Rivers and streams are liable to natural flooding and will be managed 
in ways which will ensure that this can take place in locations which will not place built development or sensitive uses at risk. The Sustainable Management of Urban Rivers and Floodplains SPD (SMURF) provides more detailed guidance. River corridors are also important elements of the City’s green infrastructure network. The management of floodplains will also need to take into account the potential to increase benefits to wildlife.
                                                                                                    continued...environment and sustainability / birmingham development plan•  Birmingham City Council, 
the Environment Agency and Severn Trent Water are working in partnership to deliver flood risk and environmental improvements throughout the River Rea catchment. To deliver these improvements, third party external funding is required to secure capital funds from government. Developers are encouraged to consult with the above mentioned partnership to identify opportunities and synergies prior to planning.6.32 The Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA) reinforces the need to apply a Sequential Test and the Exception Test, in accordance with the relevant national planning policy, to many proposed development schemes. Furthermore the SFRA includes further policies to ensure that all sources of flood risk are managed as part of any development.
6.33 The SFRA outlines the 
need to implement adequate SuDS techniques as part of a development. Large increases in impermeable areas for a site could contribute to a significant increase in surface water run-off, peak flows and volumes. In turn this could contribute to an increase in flood risk elsewhere. A Sustainable Drainage: Guide to Design, Adoption and Maintenance will be produced to provide detailed guidance to support the implementation of sustainable drainage systems including  guidance on the national requirements for SUDS, the local requirements placed on developers and the technical requirements.
6.34 In taking forward the SFRA 
the City Council will have regard to developing strategies such as the Local Flood Risk Management Strategy, Surface Water Management Plan, Trent Catchment Flood Management Plan, Humber River Basin Management Plan and future development of the Flood and Water Management Act 2010.
6.35 Historically many of 
Birmingham’s watercourses have been culverted. This limits their amenity and wildlife value and may also inhibit the potential for natural drainage. The removal of culverting through development can therefore bring significant benefits and contribute to the Water Framework Directive targets. Birmingham lies within the Tame, Anker and Mease catchment for which a catchment-based approach is being promoted by DEFRA and the Environment Agency. A Catchment Management Plan has been prepared for the Birmingham element of this catchment.
6.36 Water courses are important 
for some sports and the improvement of the main water courses will also enhance the sporting experience.
6.37 Canals have a wildlife 
and amenity value and take a proportion of surface water run-off. They also have a role as non-natural watercourses to help alleviate flooding in some cases.75
Policy TP6           3            3                                    3 Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
ManagementThe following development principles will apply:
•  An easement should be provided between the development and 
watercourses where appropriate and feasible
•  Opportunities should be taken to benefit rivers by re-instating natural river channels.
•  Culverted watercourses should be opened up where feasible.
•  Existing open watercourses should not be culverted.
Enhancements of Water Resources
As well as providing water and drainage, the City’s rivers, streams, 
canals, lakes and ponds are an important amenity and are also valuable as wildlife habitats. Opportunities to increase the wildlife, amenity and sporting value of natural water features and canals will also be encouraged, provided that there is no adverse impact upon water quality, flood risk or the quality of the natural environment. Proposals should demonstrate compliance with the Humber River Basin Management Plan  exploring opportunities to help meet the Water Framework Directive’s  targets.
Development will not be permitted where a proposal would have a 
negative impact on surface water (rivers, lakes and canals) or groundwater quantity or quality either directly through pollution of groundwater or by the mobilisation of contaminants already in the ground.
Trees and Woodland
Trees and woodland can provide significant benefits in terms of water 
management and flood alleviation and as part of SuDs in addition to their wider landscape, recreation, economic and ecological benefits. The provision of additional trees and woodland will therefore be encouraged.
Implementation76
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityGreen infrastructure 
network
Introduction
6.38 Green infrastructure has 
a critically important role to play in mitigating the impacts of extreme weather events, particularly extended heat waves, and reducing flood risk. In addition green infrastructure helps support biodiversity and makes an important contribution to the quality of the City’s environment, its quality of life and human well-being and its economic status and performance.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.39 Green infrastructure includes 
landscapes, natural environment, biodiversity and geological features which make Birmingham distinctive. Open spaces, linear corridors, blue infrastructure and blue spaces such as waterways, rivers, streams, watercourses, canals, towing paths and their environs and green-roofs or green-walls all contribute. The City Council’s approach to the maintenance and improvement of the Green infrastructure network throughout the City reflects the seven key principles which are set out in the Green Living Spaces Plan and the objectives of the Birmingham and Black Country Nature Improvement Area.
6.40 Birmingham has a network of 
green spaces including rivers, many small urban brooks, canals, parks and open spaces including playing fields, allotments and cemeteries. A more detailed analysis of this network together with a strategy for managing and enhancing it is provided in the Green Living Spaces Plan.
6.41 Waterways are important in 
creating character of place, provide biodiversity corridors and allow green leisure and commuting routes within the City. The rivers, Cole, Rea, Tame and numerous smaller watercourses together with their catchments and the canals, pass through the City and serve to link different parts of the City and provide valuable links to the countryside encouraging wildlife into the urban area. These linear corridors join other open spaces which enhance and provide variety to the natural environment. In addition to parks and recreational open space, the City’s allotments and cemeteries all play a role.
6.42 The City’s green infrastructure 
network provides a wide range of social, economic and environmental benefits. Specifically it:
•  Provides direct sport and 
recreational benefits, providing opportunities for physical activity.
•  Improves environmental quality.
•  Provides urban green, open spaces and city trees, which make a positive contribution to helping the City adapt to a changing climate.
•  Promotes urban quality and improves the image and attractiveness of areas.•  Helps with managing flood risk and water attenuation and helps manage urban storm water; and improving water quality.
•  Promotes human health through air quality improvement and recreation opportunities.
•  Provides green space and the opportunity for environmental education.
•  Offers alternative routes and safe routes for commuters travelling on foot or by bicycle and for leisure cycling and walking. 
•  Provides ‘breathing’ spaces (particularly the larger spaces such as Sutton Park, Sandwell Valley and Sheldon Country Park but also the linear corridors) bringing in cleaner air and allowing wildlife close to the City Centre.
•  Provides quiet places away from urban noise.Policy TP7  Green infrastructure network
The City Council will seek to maintain and expand a green infrastructure 
network throughout Birmingham. The integrity of the green infrastructure network will be protected from development and where possible opportunities will be taken to extend and enhance the network and to improve links between areas of open space.
Any development proposal that would sever or significantly reduce a 
green infrastructure link will not be permitted. New developments will be expected to address green infrastructure issues in an integrated way and to take advantage of new opportunities such as green and brown roofs. It is important that all new green infrastructure features and assets are designed to help the City adapt to a changing climate.
The City Council will also seek to conserve and enhance Birmingham’s 
woodland resource (collectively known as ‘The Birmingham Forest’). Particular attention will be given to protecting the City’s ancient woodlands as irreplaceable semi-natural habitats. All trees, groups, areas and woodlands will be consistently and systematically evaluated for protection and all new development schemes should allow for tree planting in both the private and public domains. The importance of street trees in promoting the character of place and strengthening existing landscape characteristics will be recognised.
Implementation
Policy TP7           3            3                     3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
ManagementPlan 15 Green infrastructure networkn
NORTH
environment and sustainability / birmingham development plan•  Provides visual amenity and 
serves to define areas.
•  Stimulates community cohesion by providing shared spaces that people can derive value from. 
•  Can help to mitigate climate change.
•  Provides recreational, landscape and tourism assets.
•  Helps to protect landscapes of historic significance.
•  Provides valuable habitats for urban wildlife.
The green infrastructure network is illustrated on plan 15 and can be viewed at a larger scale on the Council’s website at:www.birmingham.gov.uk/plan2031
6.43 Trees cover some 23% of the 
City’s land area. This woodland resource is now being referred to as ‘The Birmingham Forest’. The importance of trees is increasingly recognised in maintaining biodiversity and contributing to tackling climate change. Within the City the number and variety of trees is seen as being one of its most valuable environmental assets and one which the public perceive to be at risk. 6.44 The need for new trees is well 
documented and their visual and structural benefits are enhanced by concerns in respect of climate change (such as water run off, temperature control, pollution interception) and therefore every opportunity to plant new trees, especially large species, will be fully explored. Creating new woodland or community orchards and more tree planting is especially useful in tackling urban heat islands, encouraging biodiversity and in assisting in dealing with surface water run off. The use and value of hedgerows and permanent grasslands are also increasing in their importance and functional use within urban areas, will also be considered, as part of the green infrastructure.
7778
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityBiodiversity and 
Geodiversity
Introduction
6.45 Birmingham’s biodiversity 
and geodiversity are critical components of a high quality of life and contribute significantly to the quality of the environment within the City. These natural assets are valuable and their protection is important, not just for their intrinsic worth, but because of the wide-ranging services and benefits they deliver. 
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.46 Birmingham has a diverse 
range of biodiversity and geodiversity assets, including sites, habitats and species of national, regional and local importance. There are currently two Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), 11 Local Nature Reserves (LNRs), 55 Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINCs) and 121 Sites of Local Importance for Nature Conservation (SLINCs); these designated sites will be carried forward. In line with guidance produced by Birmingham and Black Country Local Sites Partnership, the City Council will designate additional SINCs, SLINCs or LNRs where there is adequate supporting information and consequently sites may receive new or increased protection during the plan period. Sites which are currently designated as of national, regional or local importance are shown on a plan which is available on the Council’s website at:www.birmingham.gov.uk/plan2031
6.47 In addition to these designated 
sites, the City includes a wide range of other semi-natural green spaces of value to wildlife and which create a network of habitat resources that help to connect designated sites. River and stream corridors, canals, and active and disused rail corridors are important linear landscape features; other areas of open space, including urban wasteland sites, woodlands, playingfields, churchyards, allotments and gardens, also contribute to the habitat network.
6.48 The Habitats Regulation 
Assessment (HRA) confirms that there are no sites of European significance within Birmingham’s administrative boundary although there are sites nearby - for example, the  Cannock Chase and Cannock Chase Extension Canal Special Areas of Conservation (SACs). The HRA confirms that the proposals within this Plan are not likely to have an adverse effect on any of these sites. However the Council will continue to have regard to the need to protect these sites in considering major development proposals.6.49 Biodiversity has been much 
affected by climate change in recent years. Increases in average temperatures and changing weather patterns have impacted on species’ distributions, affected the timing of seasonal events and caused wide-ranging effects on ecosystems. The City’s green infrastructure network has a vital role in enabling biodiversity to adapt to the impacts of climate change. The network of green corridors and open spaces such as river corridors, parks, allotments and informal green spaces need to be maintained to facilitate the movement of species to new locations in response to the changing climate.Policy TP8  Biodiversity and Geodiversity
The maintenance, enhancement and restoration of sites of national 
and local importance for biodiversity and geology will be promoted and supported. These include Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), National Nature Reserves (NNRs), Local Nature Reserves (LNRs), Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINCs) and Sites of Local Importance for Nature Conservation (SLINCs).
Development which directly or indirectly causes harm to sites of national 
importance (SSSIs and NNRs) will not be permitted. An exception will only be made where the benefits of the development, at that site, clearly outweigh the impact that it is likely to have on the features that make the site special and any broader impacts on the national network of SSSIs.
Development which directly or indirectly causes harm to local sites of 
importance for biodiversity and geology (LNRs, SINCs and SLINCs), priority habitats and important geological features, species which are legally protected, in decline, are rare within Birmingham or which are identified as national or local priorities will only be permitted if it has been clearly demonstrated that:
•  The benefits of the proposal outweigh the need to safeguard the 
designated site, or important habitat, species or geological feature.
•  Damage is minimised and measures can be put in place to mitigate remaining impacts.
•  Where damage cannot be avoided or fully mitigated, appropriate compensation is secured.
Development proposals which are likely to affect any designated site or important habitat, species or geological feature must be supported by adequate information to ensure that the likely impact of the proposal can be fully assessed.
The integrity of wildlife corridors and ‘stepping stones’ connecting them 
will be protected from development which would harm their function.
continued...environment and sustainability / birmingham development plan 79
Net fishing at a local poolPriority habitats and priority species listed in Section 41 of the Natural 
Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006 or in the local Biodiversity Action Plans will be maintained and opportunities to enhance and add to these natural assets will also be identified. The Biodiversity Action Plan for Birmingham and the Black Country and data from EcoRecord (the ecological database for Birmingham and the Black Country) will be used to inform the development of a strategic landscape-scale framework for the restoration and creation of priority habitats and recovery of priority species populations across Birmingham, including opportunities to create or restore linkages between important wildlife areas.
All development should, where relevant, support the enhancement 
of  Birmingham’s natural environment, having regard to strategic objectives for the maintenance, restoration and creation of ecological and geological assets, such as those identified for the Birmingham and Black Country Nature Improvement Area. Biodiversity and geodiversity enhancement measures should be appropriate to the nature and scale of the development proposed. Development proposals should clearly identify how ongoing management of biodiversity and geodiversity enhancement measures will be secured.
Implementation
Policy TP8           3            3                     3             3                    3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management80
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityOpen space, playing 
fields and allotments
Introduction
6.50 Open space encompasses 
a wide range of spaces, not just traditional parks and gardens, grassed areas and woods but also cemeteries, allotments and civic spaces. All are important in providing recreational, health and other benefits for Birmingham residents and others who work in or visit the City.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.51 Given Birmingham’s built up 
character and with an increasing population and pressure for development, opportunities to create new areas of open space are limited within the existing urban area. Further development pressures on the City’s open space resource will be carefully considered.
6.52 The main emphasis is on 
quality and accessibility; ensuring that people have access to good facilities and sufficient recreational space. Therefore accessibility and quality will inform the assessment of how much public open space provision is required.
6.53 In response to the need for 
assessments the City Council undertook a survey of demand which was published in 2004 which included 5,000 households, 4,000 within the City and 1,000 just outside. This together with work on the Parks Strategy has formed a background to the approach set in Policy TP9. 
6.54 The City Council maintains 
records of provision for public open space, public and private playing fields expressed in hectares (ha) per 1,000 population by ward. A minimum 2 ha per 1,000 population standard is a simple, initial indicator of adequacy of provision. It serves to identify where there are supply problems. The use of up to date assessments of need provides more subtle information, reflecting quality and accessibility issues as well as quantity.Policy TP9  Open space, playing fields and allotments
Planning permission will not normally be granted for development on 
open space except where:
•  It can be shown by an up to date assessment of need that the open 
space is surplus taking account of a minimum standard of 2 ha per 1,000 population and the accessibility and quality criteria listed below.
•  The lost site will be replaced by a similar piece of open space, at least as accessible and of similar quality and size.
•  Where an area of open space is underused, as it has inherent problems such as poor site surveillance, physical quality or layout, which cannot be realistically dealt with, then in this case proposals that would result in the loss of a small part of a larger area of open space will be considered if compensation measures would result in significant improvements to the quality and recreational value of the remaining area.
•  The development is for alternative sport or recreational provision, the benefits of which clearly outweigh the loss.
Playing fields will be protected and will only be considered for development  where they are either shown to be surplus for playing field use, taking account of the minimum standard of 1.2 ha per 1000 population, through a robust and up to date assessment and are not required to meet other open space deficiencies, or alternative provision is provided which is of equivalent quality, accessibility and size.
Provision of public open space
Public open space should aim to be provided throughout Birmingham in 
line with the following standards:
•  All residents should have access within 400m, (5 to 10 minutes walk) 
to an area of publically accessible open space which should have grass and trees and be at least 0.2 ha in size. Similarly, there should be children’s play facilities within 400m of all residents.
•  Within 1km (15 to 20 minutes walk) of all residents there should be an area of publically accessible open space of at least 2 ha in size. This should have paths, seating, bins, trees and landscape features. It should be capable of accommodating differing and potentially conflicting recreational activities without problem e.g. space for football and for those who want to sit and relax.
•  Within 3km of all residents there should be access to a publically accessible park which has a wide range of facilities and features which may include water features, children’s play facilities, cafés and formal landscaping. These spaces should be capable of holding local, or in some instances national events. These sites should be more than 2 ha in size and should also have good access for public transport and for walkers and cyclists. Some of these parks will have additional facilities and will be of a size which allows them to be used for major events and celebrations. It will be a priority to ensure that these parks have good access by public transport and adequate car parking.
New developments, particularly residential, will place additional demand upon all types of open space and children’s play areas. New residents, visitors to Birmingham and people working within the City all place         
                                                                                                        continued...environment and sustainability / birmingham development plan6.55 The City Council has a Playing 
Pitch Strategy. This shows a 
significant short-fall of natural turf and artificial grass pitches.
6.56 Allotments play an important 
role in recreation and sustainability and form part of the green infrastructure network. There has been renewed interest in allotments and a diversification of users. Assessing need is more straightforward as waiting lists and vacant plots provide barometers of demand and supply. Where there is a demonstrated shortage of provision then the possibility of creating new provision by using surplus open space land can be considered. 
6.57 For the purposes of the BDP 
the following definitions apply:
•  Open space is all open land 
of recreational or public value, including playing fields, which primarily consists of natural elements such as trees, grass and water. It may or may not have free public access. It may or may not be used or held by the City Council for recreational purposes.
•  Public open space is open space, including playing fields, owned by the City Council or to which there is a public right of access, used by the public primarily for recreation purposes. It does not include private or education playing fields, nor does it include municipal or private golf courses, cemeteries, or open areas within housing estates which substitute for private gardens.
 81
Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
Framework
Policy TP9           3            3                     3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Planning
Managementvarying demands upon open space. In new residential developments provision of new public open space will be required broadly in line with the standard of 2 ha per 1000 population. In most circumstances, residential schemes of 20 or more dwellings should provide on site public open space and/or children’s play provision. However, developer contributions could be used to address the demand from new residents on other types of open space such as allotments and civic spaces.
Further detail on the implementation of these requirements is provided 
in the Public Open Space in New Residential Development SPD.
The emphasis will be on good quality, accessible public open space 
that people want to use and feel safe to use. There should be well maintained paths, hard and soft landscape elements, bins, seats and other appropriate site furniture and the needs of people with disabilities should be taken into account.
Allotments
Provision of allotments should relate directly to demand in the area. 
Where there is a shortage of provision then consideration will be given to using other surplus open space land for allotments. 
Allotment land will only be released for development where it can be 
shown that the site is not required to satisfy the demand for allotments in the area, or equivalent alternative provision will be made available. Where it is demonstrated that an allotment site is surplus then the first consideration should be whether it can be used as other open space where there are deficiencies. If this land is not required for other open space use then it can be considered for development. Planning permission for the development of allotments will not be granted simply because the site has fallen out of use and become derelict. Every effort should be made to improve allotment provision in areas of deficiency when the opportunity arises.
Implementation
Cannon Hill Park82
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityGreen Belt
Introduction
6.58 Birmingham’s Green Belt forms 
a small part of the much wider 
West Midlands Green Belt which surrounds the West Midlands conurbation and Coventry. The five purposes of the Green Belt as set out in the relevant national planning policy are to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built up areas, prevent neighbouring towns from merging into one another, to assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment, to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns and to assist in urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban land.Green Belt policies may contribute to urban regeneration by encouraging new investment away from greenfield sites to locations within the built-up area. However, as explained in Section 3 of the BDP there is a need to remove land from the Green Belt for both housing and employment development to support essential elements of the BDP strategy.  
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.59 National planning policy makes 
it clear that established Green Belt boundaries should be altered only in exceptional circumstances and only when a local plan is being prepared or reviewed. As outlined in Section 3 and policies GA5 and GA6 it has been necessary to amend the Green Belt boundary to meet the needs of both housing and employment development. The remaining Green Belt within the City will be protected for the long term and opportunities which enhance the Green Belt particularly in terms of public accessibility will be supported.Policy TP10  Green Belt
The revised Green Belt Boundary is shown on the Policies Map. There 
is a general presumption against inappropriate development within the Green Belt, and such development will not be permitted unless very special circumstances exist. Development proposals, including those involving previously developed land and buildings in the Green Belt, will be assessed in relation to the relevant national planning policy. 
The Green Belt in Birmingham includes a number of areas of countryside 
which extend into the City, often along river valleys. Such areas are particularly important because of the valuable links which they provide to the open countryside, their visual quality, and their accessibility.
The following areas form part of the Green Belt, the detailed boundaries 
of which are shown on the Policies Map:
• Hill Hook.• Moor Hall.• Sutton Park.• New Hall Valley.• Sandwell Valley/Tame Valley.• Castle Bromwich.• Cole Valley.• Westley Brook.• Woodgate Valley.• Bartley Reservoir.
Measures to improve public access to these Green Belt areas and the 
wider Green Belt will be encouraged. Outdoor sport and recreational facilities will also be supported, provided that their provision preserves the openness of the Green Belt, and does not conflict with the purposes of including land within it.
Implementation
Policy TP10                                                               3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management
Sutton Parkenvironment and sustainability / birmingham development planWhy we have taken this 
approach
6.61 Birmingham has a wide range 
of sporting facilities ranging from small community sports halls and playing pitches through to larger leisure centres and swimming pools.
6.62 The City Council recognises 
the important role that sport and physical activity facilities have in terms of providing wider health and social benefits. These include:•  Helping to improve health and reduce health inequality.
•  Effective use of open space such as parks and canal towpaths.
•  Provide volunteering, employment skills and employment.
•  Provide social interaction and social cohesion.
•  Provide positive activity and help reduce anti-social behaviour and crime.
•  Provide opportunities for people to positively contribute to their communities through sport volunteering. 
•  Provide environmentally friendly activity/transport options such as cycling, jogging and running. 
6.63 The City Council will continue 
to review its sporting and physical activity facility infrastructure and work with Sport England, national governing bodies of sport and other agencies to improve sport and physical activity provision within the City. 
6.64 The City Council is 
endeavouring (with its key partners) to increase the levels of participation and formal sport and informal physical activity within its various assets across the City.
6.65 There are opportunities to 
link activities, for example the opportunity exists when planning transport infrastructure to include walk, run and cycle trails between these existing facilities to form a network of inter linked facilities.
6.66 It is recognised that the City 
has a number of stadia and facilities which attract residents and visitors to watch sport or leisure activities. While these are not covered by policy TP11 they will continue to be important assets for the City and are covered by policy TP25. 83Sports facilities
Introduction
6.60 Birmingham has a wide range 
of sports facilities which provide for a variety of recreational sporting needs. Participation in sport has physical and mental health benefits and promotes community cohesion and the City Council’s approach is to ensure facilities reflect need. The policy focuses on sports facilities that are used directly by members of the public. 
Policy TP11  Sports facilities
The provision and availability of facilities for people to take part in formal 
and informal activity, that contributes to healthier lifestyles and can provide a ‘stepping stone’ into more formal sport will be supported and promoted.
The City Council will keep the provision of sports facilities within the 
City under review in the light of changing demands and preferences, and where deficiencies and oversupply are identified in an up-to-date assessment will aim to work with partners to address this. 
Sports and physical activity facilities will be protected from development, 
unless it can be demonstrated that they are surplus to requirements through a robust and up to date assessment of need. Where there is identified need for particular sports and physical recreation facilities, the loss of existing sports facilities for these sports will not be allowed unless an equivalent or better quantity and quality replacement provision is provided.
Facilities within the City’s educational establishments that can be used by 
the community provide a useful contribution towards the recreational and leisure requirements of the City and this will be encouraged.
Facilities for participation sport which attract large numbers of visitors 
and incorporate elements of entertainment, retail or leisure uses which operate for many hours of the day should be located in highly accessible locations, preferably in or adjacent to town centres. It is important that community sport and leisure facilities should be located in easily accessible sites, with safe pedestrian and cycle access as well as being close to local public transport routes.
Proposals for new facilities or the expansion and/or enhancement of 
existing facilities will be supported subject to compliance with other relevant planning policies.
Appropriate and sympathetic sports lighting can enhance the use and 
sustainability of community sports provision to the benefit of the local community. However, any development involving sports lights should balance the benefits for sport with the amenity of local residents. Advice should be sought from Sport England when considering proposals for sports lighting. The use of planning conditions to control the use of sports lights may be applied where appropriate.
Implementation
Policy TP11         3            3                     3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management84
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityHistoric environment
Introduction
6.67 Birmingham’s character is 
shaped by its historic development, 
which is represented by a rich and varied environment consisting of archaeological remains, historic buildings, townscapes and landscapes. Some, such as the Jewellery Quarter and Bournville are nationally renowned. All contribute to the unique essence of the City, identifying it as a place with its own special character and history.
6.68 In addition to its intrinsic 
importance the historic environment is a finite and non-renewable resource and its protection is therefore an essential element in ensuring a sustainable future. The reuse of historic buildings can contribute to sustainability though retaining rather than wasting embodied energy and avoiding use of energy and materials for new build.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.69 The historic environment 
contributes to local distinctiveness and provides a sense of place. Reinforcing and revealing the historic environment through incorporating it rather than isolating it provides a context for new development and inspires innovative design which respects existing local character and distinctiveness.
6.70 The historic environment is 
not just important for its own sake, it adds value to regeneration, improves quality of life and has been a major draw in attracting businesses to the City; acting as a stimulus for local economic growth. It is also a source of significant local pride, contributing to local identity and acting as a valuable educational resource.Policy TP12  Historic environment
The historic environment consists of archaeological remains, historic 
buildings, townscapes and landscapes, and includes locally significant assets and their settings in addition to designated and statutorily protected features. It will be valued, protected, enhanced and managed for its contribution to character, local distinctiveness and sustainability and the Council will seek to manage new development in ways which will make a positive contribution to its character.
•  Great weight will be given to the conservation of the City’s heritage 
assets. Proposals for new development affecting a designated or non-designated heritage asset or its setting, including alterations and additions, will be determined in accordance with national policy. 
•  Applications for development affecting the significance of a designated or non-designated heritage asset, including proposals for removal, alterations, extensions or change of use, or on sites that potentially include heritage assets of archaeological interest, will be required to provide sufficient information to demonstrate how the proposals would contribute to the asset’s conservation whilst protecting or where appropriate enhancing its significance and setting. This information will include desk-based assessments, archaeological field evaluation and historic building recording as appropriate.
•  Where it grants consent for proposals involving the loss of all or part of the significance of a designated or non-designated heritage asset, the City Council will require archaeological excavation and/or historic building recording as appropriate, followed by analysis and publication of the results. 
•  Initiatives and opportunities to mitigate the effects of climate change by seeking the reuse of historic buildings, and where appropriate, their modification to reduce carbon emissions and secure sustainable development - without harming the significance of the heritage asset or its setting - will be supported.
•  Opportunities for information gain through investigations as part of proposed development will be maximised and such information will be widely disseminated.
•  Innovative design which retains the significance of the heritage asset(s) and is integrated with the historic environment will be encouraged.
Where a Conservation Area Character Appraisal or Management Plan has been prepared, it will be a material consideration in determining applications for development, and will be used to support and guide enhancement and due regard should be given to the policies it contains.
The City Council will support development that conserves the 
significance of non-designated heritage assets including archaeological remains and locally listed buildings.
The historic importance of canals is acknowledged, and important groups 
of canal buildings and features will be protected, especially where they are listed or in a Conservation Area. Where appropriate the enhancement of canals and their settings will be secured through development proposals.
Implementation
Policy TP12                        3                     3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementenvironment and sustainability / birmingham development plan6.71 Birmingham’s historic 
environment is exceptionally rich 
and diverse for a predominantly urban area. The City’s post-war commercial architecture, town planning, public spaces and public art are also significant parts of its character.
6.72 It contains well-preserved 
archaeological remains of prehistoric, Roman, medieval and post-medieval date, including deposits containing information on past environmental conditions and industrial processes. In addition to buried remains, earthworks survive in open spaces. Birmingham’s historic buildings include dwellings, public buildings, churches, and industrial and agricultural structures. There are relatively few buildings dating from before the 18th century, so their rarity gives them a special local significance. 
6.73 Historic townscapes in the 
City Centre and suburbs consist of buildings, land divisions and street patterns resulting from different periods of the City’s historic development. The varying character of much of the historic environment of the City and its suburbs results from the survival of many Victorian and Edwardian buildings and structures, including public buildings, industrial buildings, canals, railways, schools, places of worship and houses. Historic landscapes in parks and open spaces and in the urban fringe include agricultural buildings, ancient land divisions, historic woodland and planned parks and cemeteries.
6.74 English Heritage’s annual 
Heritage at Risk Register includes scheduled monuments, grade I and II* listed buildings, listed places of worship, registered parks and gardens, and conservation areas. The Register records condition, occupancy and use, vulnerability, priority actions and trends in condition. In addition, the City Council has itself identified other listed buildings at risk.6.75 The City Council will review or 
prepare character assessments and management plans for conservation areas and other areas of particular local significance to supplement existing policies for protection and enhancement. Historic Landscape Characterisation will be used to inform and understand the contribution of the historic environment to the city’s character and identity.
6.76 The City Council will adopt 
a protocol for the inclusion of the historic environment in AAPs, SPDs, Neighbourhood Plans, development briefs and other non-statutory area-based planning documents, and Local Development Orders, to ensure that its significance is conserved and its positive contribution to character is recognised.6.77 The City Council will maintain 
a list of heritage assets of local importance and a Historic Environment SPD will be produced.
6.78 The Historic Environment 
Record will be maintained and developed to include all aspects of the City’s historic environment so that it is a tool for decision-making and policy formulation.
6.79 Where appropriate and 
feasible, opportunities will be sought to bring heritage assets at risk, as identified in English Heritage’s Heritage at Risk Register and by the City Council itself, into sustainable economic use that retains their significance.85
The Barton Arms in Newtown86
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilitySustainable management 
of the City’s waste
Introduction
6.80 There is a need to reduce the 
waste the City produces from its homes and businesses and carefully and sustainably manage what is left. How the City deals with waste will be central to planning for sustainable growth.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.81 The City Council as a Waste 
Planning Authority (WPA) is required by Government to monitor and manage the City’s waste in a sustainable way by promoting the 3Rs - Reduce, Reuse, Recycle. The overarching objective set out in the national waste strategy is that waste must be considered a resource, and that its management should be pushed up the waste hierarchy. A significant part of this reduction in waste should include the removal of biodegradable and recyclable materials prior to waste being landfilled. Disposal, particularly to landfill is the least sustainable and desirable option for management of our waste.
6.82 The City Council supports the 
concept of ‘self sufficiency’ where Birmingham will seek to manage an equivalent of every tonne of waste that arises. It is not however viable for Birmingham to manage all the various types of waste the City produces. Some types of waste  will be more effectively managed at facilities outside Birmingham.
6.83 The City Council has 
undertaken a Waste Capacity Study (BWCS) and a subsequent Update, which explores a range of issues including predicted waste arisings and future capacity requirements. The Study shows that total waste arisings within the City are currently around 2.9 million tonnes per annum and taking account of planned growth in this period, total waste in Birmingham is expected to increase to 3.4 to 3.7 million tonnes.
6.84 Whilst there is theoretical 
capacity to deal with all of the City’s waste, Birmingham has limited disposal facilities. There are no active landfills in the City and the Tyseley Energy Recovery Facility primarily accepts municipal waste. There is potential for the City to increase disposal capacity to deal with specific waste streams such as commercial and industrial waste and reduce the amount of waste sent to landfill. The BWCS also shows that there is a shortage of Material Recycling Facilities (MRFs) within Birmingham, and that over 27,000 tonnes of waste is being exported cross boundary to facilities outside Birmingham.
Recycling facilitiesPolicy TP13  Sustainable management of the City’s waste
The City Council will seek to prevent the production of waste wherever 
possible, and where this is not feasible will seek to move and manage Birmingham’s waste up the waste hierarchy.
The key policy objectives of the City Council will be to minimise the 
amount of waste created, treat waste as a resource and encourage recycling, reuse and composting. 
The City Council will seek to ensure that the tonnage of waste treated 
and managed within Birmingham is equivalent to the tonnage of waste arising. There is currently a shortfall in the number of material recycling facilities within the City and more will need to be constructed during the plan period. The City Council will seek to reduce the proportion of the City’s waste which is sent to landfill. This will require an increase in alternative disposal capacity. The type of facilities needed and site location criteria are outlined in Policies TP14 and TP15.
In the case of development on any site of over 5 ha, the Council will 
require the preparation of a strategy for the prevention, minimisation and management of waste.
Implementation
Policy TP13                        3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementenvironment and sustainability / birmingham development planNew and existing waste 
facilities
Introduction
6.85 The BWCS shows there will be 
a requirement for additional waste management facilities during the plan period, particularly facilities that increase the City’s disposal capacity. These additional facilities should enable the City to increase recycling and reduce the amount of waste sent to landfill.Why we have taken this approach
6.86 Evidence in the BWCS 
supports the provision of new waste management facilities and highlights a particular need for additional material recycling facilities and facilities for the treatment of food waste. It also identifies the potential for additional facilities for the disposal of commercial and industrial waste and for the recycling of construction waste.
6.87 There are a number of current 
and emerging technologies which offer more sustainable ways of managing these waste streams within the urban area. Anaerobic digestion for example, has the potential to provide a more sustainable method of disposing of food waste while energy from waste and gasification/pyrolysis technologies offer the potential to recover value from commercial and industrial waste which is currently landfilled. ‘Urban quarries’ can provide high value aggregate from construction and demolition waste. New technologies may also emerge during the plan period.
6.88 Birmingham has a large 
number of existing waste management and treatment facilities. These will inevitably change over time but it is important that this does not lead to the loss of overall waste treatment capacity.
 87
Policy TP14  New and existing waste facilities
The expansion of existing or the development of new waste 
management facilities will be supported, providing that proposals satisfy the locational criteria set out in Policy TP15. Opportunities to improve the environmental performance of existing facilities will be explored.
This approach will include:
•  Encouraging the development of Material Recycling Facilities (MRF’ s) 
that would increase the City’s recycling capacity and efficiency.
•  Encouraging the management of food waste through existing and 
emerging waste management technologies and ensure that commercial and non-commercial biodegradable food wastes are treated as a resource. Schemes that promote technologies which will recover value from such wastes through techniques such as anaerobic digestion (AD) will be supported in appropriate locations in accordance with the criteria in Policy TP15. 
•  Seeking to reduce the amount of commercial and industrial waste sent to landfill, and encouraging new schemes and emerging technologies that enable this. Proposals to expand existing waste management facilities at the Tyseley Energy Recovery Facility plant in order to accommodate more commercial waste will be supported in principle. Gasification and pyrolysis technologies, which can generate energy and heat for District Heating Schemes, will also be supported in appropriate locations.
•  Protecting existing facilities that contribute to waste management capacity, provided that they meet the criteria in Policy TP15 and do not have a negative impact on the environment and amenities. Proposals that lead to the loss of such waste management facilities, without adequate provision to replace lost waste handling capacity, will be refused. New developments which would compromise the continued operation of existing sites will also be refused.
•  Supporting  recycling proposals for aggregate materials subject to the locational criteria in Policy TP15. On site recycling of construction and demolition waste will be expected wherever possible and proposals for additional ‘urban quarries’ which increase recycling and reduce the amount of construction and demolition waste sent to landfill will be supported.
 Implementation
Policy TP14                                                                3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management88
birmingham development plan / environment and sustainabilityLocation of waste 
management facilities
Introduction
6.89 In order to reduce the amount 
of waste the City sends to landfill, and to assist Birmingham to push its waste management up the hierarchy, new waste facilities will be required. Why we have taken this approach
6.90 The City Council will support 
the distribution of new waste facilities across the City providing the sites and facilities meet specified criteria. Where proposals for waste facilities can demonstrate they are sustainably located and meet waste management requirements and fulfil a need they will be supported. Modern well-run waste management facilities may present no more noise or loss of amenity than a typical industrial use and are essential to managing waste in a sustainable and efficient way.
6.91 Industrial areas with existing 
and complementary waste and industrial uses are well placed to specialise in new waste and sustainable energy technologies. There is an opportunity for the development of such technologies at Tyseley as an Environmental Enterprise District (EED), which has potential to cluster complementary waste and sustainable energy uses. The City Council will actively encourage and promote appropriate recycling and CHP energy generation schemes in this location.
6.92 Policy TP17 seeks to ensure 
that there is a reservoir of 96 ha of land available within Birmingham for industrial development, including proposals for the management and treatment of waste. This should ensure that there is a constant supply of suitable sites for waste-related uses.Policy TP15  Location of waste management facilities
The following locations are considered suitable for developments that 
involve the management, treatment and processing of waste:
 •  The Tyseley Environmental Enterprise Area which has potential to 
accommodate new waste and sustainable energy technologies, including recycling, Combined Heat and Power and waste recovery.
 •  Other industrial areas including the Core Employment Areas identified 
on the Policies Map.
 •  Sites currently or previously in use as waste management facilities.
 •  Appropriate sites adjacent to existing waste management facilities.
Proposals for new or expanded waste management facilities, including 
in the locations listed above, will be considered against the following criteria:
•  The effect of the proposed waste facility upon the environment and 
neighbouring land uses.
•  The impact of traffic generated by the proposal and the availability of  alternative transit modes, such as rail and waterways.
•  The need for pollution control measures appropriate to the type of waste to be processed or handled.
•  The impact of proposals on residential amenity. New waste facilities will not normally be approved adjacent to existing housing and proposals for anaerobic digestion will not be approved within 250m of existing housing.
•  The effect of proposals on aircraft safety.
•  The design of the proposal. Careful consideration should be given to the need to minimise environmental and visual impact. Wherever feasible, waste operations should be enclosed within buildings or sealed structures in order to minimise impacts on adjacent uses from noise, ordure, vermin and wildlife. Proposals advocating open air unenclosed storage of organic odour producing material will not be supported.
Proposals will be supported where it is demonstrated that these criteria are satisfied.
Implementation
Policy TP15                                      3                       3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementenvironment and sustainability / birmingham development planMinerals
Introduction
6.93 The delivery of the growth 
strategy set out in this Plan will 
require the use of a significant amount of aggregates and other minerals. Although there are no active mineral workings within the city, it is important that potentially valuable mineral deposits are not sterilised, and that minerals infrastructure is protected.
Why we have taken this 
approach
6.94 There are no active mineral 
workings within Birmingham, and this has been the position for many years. However there are known to be mineral deposits within the city boundary, including deposits which extend beneath the existing built-up area. Where major development/redevelopment schemes take place, it is important that any viably workable minerals are identified and extracted in order to prevent them from being sterilised.
6.95 The Council’s policies for 
the management of waste seek to encourage the recycling of construction and demolition waste. This can make an important contribution to meeting the demand for aggregates within the city. The Council will therefore seek to protect facilities associated with this, and minerals infrastructure generally.
6.96 The Council will continue 
to work in partnership with the other Metropolitan Authorities to produce and keep up-to-date a Local Aggregates Assessment and will continue to contribute to the work of the Regional Aggregates Working Party.89Policy TP16  Minerals
Prior to the commencement of development on any site of over 5 
hectares, an investigation should be undertaken into the existence of mineral deposits on the site and any viably workable minerals should be extracted.
Minerals infrastructure, including sites for concrete batching, the 
manufacture of coated materials, other concrete products and the handling, processing and distribution of substitute, recycled and secondary aggregate material, and any associated bulk transport facilities will be protected. Proposals that would lead to the loss of such facilities without adequate replacement will normally be refused.
Implementation
Policy TP16                                      3                       3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management
Tyseley waste disposal depot90
birmingham development plan / economy and network of centreseconomy and network of centres / birmingham development plan91
Economy and 
network of centres7Thematic 
policies92
birmingham development plan / economy and network of centres7.2 The projected growth in 
Birmingham’s population will 
require the City to plan for the creation of a significant number of new jobs. The increase in employment will need to meet the needs of the City’s growing population and help reduce the levels of unemployment and worklessness that currently exist. 
Portfolio of employment land and premises
Introduction
7.3 The maintenance of the 
industrial sector and the provision of sufficient land and premises to enable the economic base to diversify and grow are critical to the prosperity of the City. Ensuring that an adequate supply of employment land is maintained throughout the plan period will also be essential in enabling long-term balanced growth to be sustained.7.1 Birmingham is one of the most important employment areas within the 
UK and home to some of the country’s most successful companies such as Jaguar Land Rover and Kraft. Strengthening this position and ensuring the City has a successful and prosperous economy will require the City to provide for a wide range of opportunities for economic development and job creating activity. Key components of this will be a supply of good quality available employment land and premises and a vibrant network of local centres.Economy and network of centres
Land requirements
A minimum reservoir of 
60 ha of land.
A minimum reservoir of 
31 ha of land.
A minimum reservoir of 
5 ha of land.Policy TP17  Portfolio of employment land and premises
Provision will be made for a portfolio of ‘readily available’* employment 
land consisting of the following hierarchy of sites. Within the portfolio there is a requirement for Regional Investment Sites (Policy TP18) in addition to a 5 year minimum reservoir of 96 ha which will be maintained throughout the plan period consisting of the following:
A range of business premises will also be provided to meet a variety of 
business needs.
The portfolio of land will be managed and kept up to date through 
regular monitoring and the production of employment land reviews.
*  Readily available sites are defined as committed employment sites with no major problems of physical condition, no major infrastructure problems and which are being actively marketed.
Implementation
Policy TP17         3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
ManagementPortfolio of land
Best QualityHigh quality attractive sites, of a minimum 
10 ha in size suitable to attract clients with an international/national/regional choice of location.
Good QualityGood quality sites suitable for locally based 
investment, likely to exceed 0.4 ha in size.
Other Quality
Other sites less than 0.4 ha of average or 
poor quality likely to be of interest to local companies.economy and network of centres / birmingham development plana significant shortage of Best 
Quality employment land. To address this shortfall and ensure that there is a sufficient supply of sites, 71 ha of land has been identified on the site at Peddimore for Best Quality employment development (Policy GA6).93
Why we have taken this approach
7.4 Recent research undertaken 
by PA Consulting and Warwick Economics and Development highlights a number of key growth sectors, such as advanced manufacturing, which are vital to the future of Birmingham’s economy. These reports support the provision of a range of employment sites to meet predicted demand and highlight the importance of providing an adequate supply of land to enable the City’s economy to maximise the potential of the growth sectors.  
7.5 The portfolio of land set out in 
Policy TP17 is intended to meet the needs of all types and sizes of businesses and will ensure that desirable employment development is not lost due to a lack of site availability by ensuring that supply leads demand. The portfolio consists of a wide range of sites from large strategic sites such as Regional Investment Sites (Policy TP18) to smaller Good Quality sites suitable for local businesses. With the exception of the Peddimore allocation (Policy GA6) the approach towards employment land supply will be based on recycling existing sites in employment use to ensure that they meet the needs of modern business.
7.6 Much of the City’s employment 
land supply lies within the Core Employment Areas identified in Policy TP19. Future supply will be supplemented by additional recycling opportunities which can be expected to emerge through the plan period. 
7.7 However, monitoring of the 
employment land pipeline, undertaken through the Employment Land Review indicates 
Longbridge Technology Park94
birmingham development plan / economy and network of centresRegional Investment 
Sites
Introduction
7.8 It is essential that Birmingham 
is able to compete for investment in new employment sectors, and to provide opportunities for Birmingham-based companies to expand. To achieve this will require high-quality sites to be available across Birmingham’s area.
Why we have taken this 
approach
7.9 Regional Investment Sites (RIS)
are an established part of the portfolio of employment land in the West Midlands, their origin being within the former Regional Spatial Strategy, which identified a need for large sites capable of attracting ‘footloose’ investment and able to support the diversification of the economy. The study by Warwick Economics and Development supports the ongoing provision of Regional Investment Sites as an important component of the portfolio of employment land. 
7.10 Historically such sites have 
been provided on greenfield sites such as Birmingham Business Park and Blythe Valley Park in Solihull. These sites have been successful in attracting high value investment to the region. The challenge in Birmingham is to create this type of high quality employment site within an urban environment close to areas of deprivation and high unemployment.
7.11 Development on the Regional 
Investment Sites is intended to comprise high quality uses within the B1 and B2 Use Classes and appropriate complementary facilities to ensure that the sites are attractive to high value investment. Uses that would have a detrimental impact on the intended character of the Regional Investment Sites would undermine this aim and as such are not appropriate for these sites. Examples of such uses include vehicular repairs and waste activities falling within the B2 use class.Policy TP18  Regional Investment Site
Regional Investment Sites (RIS) are intended to support the diversification 
and modernisation of the City’s economy. Regional Investment Sites are large high quality sites attractive to national and international investors in the order of 25 to 50 ha that are:
•  Served or capable of being served by multi modal facilities and 
broadband IT infrastructure.
•  Possess good quality public transport links.
•  Located within or close to the areas of greatest need and
•  Accessible to effective education and training opportunities to ensure that the employment benefits are available to the local workforce.
Two Regional Investment Sites are currently being developed at Longbridge and at East Aston. 
Development on these sites will be restricted to uses falling within 
Use Classes B1 and B2. Warehousing will only be permitted where it is ancillary to the main B1 or B2 use. Complementary facilities to the RIS such as leisure facilities, small-scale retail and conferencing facilities may be permitted but only at an appropriate scale and ancillary to the main B1/B2 use of the site. The potential for supporting facilities to be provided off site, through either new or existing facilities, will also be taken into account.
Implementation
Policy TP18          3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management
Employment siteeconomy and network of centres / birmingham development planCore employment areas
Introduction
7.12 In order to ensure that the 
City has a sufficient supply of 
land for employment uses to support the needs of businesses and meet the challenging targets set out in Policy TP17, the City will need to retain and recycle its limited reservoir of good quality employment land in employment use. A significant proportion of the City’s employment land lies within established employment locations which have been identified as Core Employment Areas.
Why we have taken this 
approach
7.13 Core employment areas have 
been identified as the focus of the City’s industrial activity and contain some of the City’s major employers such as Jaguar, Kraft, Specialist Computer Holdings and GKN.
7.14 These areas are also the focus 
of a number of current committed major industrial regeneration schemes. Major developments within these areas include:
•  Prologis Park, Minworth (32.5 ha).
•  The Hub, Witton (29 ha).
•  Signal Point, Tyseley (7.64 ha).
7.15 Additional redevelopment 
opportunities are likely to become 
available within these areas during the plan period - for example there is significant potential for redevelopment within Saltley Business Park in the Heartlands Area. These opportunities will play a key role in meeting the employment land targets set out in Policy TP17. The need to retain the areas shown as Core Employment Areas on the Policies Map will be kept under regular review. Land within the HS2 Safeguarding Area at Washwood Heath will also become available for employment use in the event that it is not required for HS2 purposes.95
Policy TP19  Core employment areas
Core Employment Areas will be retained in employment use and 
will be the focus of economic regeneration activities and additional development opportunities likely to come forward during the plan period.
For this purpose, employment use is defined as B1b (Research and 
Development), B1c (Light Industrial), B2 (General Industrial) and B8 (Warehousing and Distribution) and other uses appropriate for industrial areas such as waste management, builders’ merchants and machine/tool hire centres. Applications for uses outside these categories will not be supported unless an exceptional justification exists.
Measures to improve the operational and functional efficiency and 
the quality and attractiveness of these areas to investment in new employment will be supported. In particular improvements to the transport infrastructure will be encouraged to improve access, reduce congestion and reduce conflict with adjacent residential areas where this exists. Wherever possible, the movement of freight and goods by rail will be encouraged.
The Core Employment Areas are identified on the Policies Map.
Implementation
Policy TP19                        3                     3             3              Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management96
birmingham development plan / economy and network of centresProtection of 
employment land
Introduction
7.16 The constrained nature of the 
City’s employment land supply means that it is important to ensure that land with continued potential for employment use is not lost to other forms of development - while at the same time avoiding the risk of sterilising land which has no realistic potential for continued employment use.
Why we have taken this 
approach
7.17 The latest Employment Land 
Review (and Warwick Economics Study) has identified a shortage of best and good quality employment land within the City and a need to protect good quality employment land and sites forming part of consented supply. 
7.18 The study also concluded that 
there is some employment land in the City which is no longer suitable for ongoing employment uses due to factors such as its poor location and compatibility with other uses. These sites could be utilised for other uses without compromising the City’s ability to provide jobs and foster a competitive economy and can make an important contribution to meet any other development requirements, including the City’s housing requirements identified in Policy PG1.
7.19 The SPD on the Loss of 
Industrial Land to Alternative Uses provides further details on the information required when submitting a planning application involving the loss of employment land. An updated version of this SPD will be prepared to reflect the incorporation of aspects of it within this Plan.
Demolition at LongbridgePolicy TP20  Protection of employment land
Employment land and premises are a valuable resource to the 
Birmingham economy and will be protected where they contribute to the portfolio of employment land and are needed to meet the longer term employment land requirements set out in Policy TP17.
Outside Regional Investment Sites and Core Employment Areas there 
may be occasions where employment land has become obsolete and can no longer make a contribution towards the portfolio of employment land. In such cases change of use proposals from employment land to other uses will be permitted where it can be demonstrated that either:
•  The site is considered a non-conforming use.
or
•  The site is no longer attractive for employment development having 
been actively marketed, normally for a minimum of two years, at a price which accords with other property of a similar type in the area. Where it is argued that redevelopment for employment purposes would be commercially unviable, a viability assessment may also be required which should include investigations into the potential for public sector funding to overcome any site constraints.
Implementation
Policy TP20                                               3             3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementeconomy and network of centres / birmingham development planThe network and 
hierarchy of centres
Introduction
7.20 One of the characteristics of 
Birmingham is its extensive network of centres, which provide a focus for growth in the retail, office and leisure sectors. Centres also act as a focus for local community life and ensure that services are available in accessible locations. The network and hierarchy of centres will be the preferred location for retail and office development over the plan period. 97Policy TP21  The network and hierarchy of centres
The vitality and viability of the centres within the network and hierarchy 
identified below will be maintained and enhanced. These centres will be the preferred locations for retail, office and leisure developments and for community facilities (e.g. health centres, education and social services and religious buildings). Residential development will also be supported in centres having regard to the provisions of policy TP24. Proposals which will make a positive contribution to the diversity and vitality of these centres will be encouraged, particularly where they can help bring vacant buildings back into positive use. 
Alongside new development, proposals will be encouraged that enhance 
the quality of the environment and improve access.
The focus for significant growth will be the City Centre, Sutton Coldfield, 
Selly Oak, Perry Barr and Meadway but there is also potential for growth in several of the District centres, notably Erdington, Mere Green and Northfield. The scale of any future developments should be appropriate to the size and function of the centre.
The comparison retail floorspace requirements as set out in the table 
include commitments and should be treated as specific to each centre. 
City Centre
Sub-Regional Centre
Sutton Coldfield
District Growth Points
Perry Barr
MeadwaySelly Oak
District Centre
Acocks GreenAlum RockCastle ValeCoventry RoadEdgbastonErdingtonFox and GooseHarborneKings HeathLongbridgeMaypoleMere GreenNew OscottNorthfieldSheldonSoho RoadStirchleySwan
continued...Level of comparison 
retail floorspace
(sq.m. gross)Level of office
floorspace
(sq.m. gross)
160,000
30,000
20,000
15,00025,000700,000
20,000
10,000
5,000
10,0002012-2026 2013-2031
Within District Centres, levels 
of comparison retail and office floor space growth should be appropriate to the size and function of the centre but should not normally exceed 5,000 sq.m. gross in either case. However, higher levels of office development will be supported in Edgbaston (Five Ways) District centre because of its close links to the City Centre. In the case of Longbridge the provision of additional comparison retail floorspace will be controlled in accordance with policy GA10.98
birmingham development plan / economy and network of centresWhy we have taken this 
approach
7.21 Birmingham contains a 
large network of centres ranging from the City Centre that holds a national position as a retail destination to local centres which meet immediate day-to-day needs. These centres are varied in terms of size, offer and who they serve, some serving not just local people but a regional and in some cases national population. Birmingham’s centres are diverse and have a range of uses, particularly retail but also other focal points for the local communities which they serve, for example places of worship, community centres, universities and offices. Arising from this, centres are also important sources of employment. In addition to the centres identified in the hierarchy, there are also many smaller shopping parades. 
7.22 The network of centres 
proposed in the BDP is based on work carried out through the preparation of the Council’s Local Centres Strategy and the Retail Need Assessment which contains a health check of the larger centres (district level and above). The Shopping and Local Centres SPD contains boundaries and Primary Shopping Areas for each of the centres identified except for the City Centre. However it should be noted that the hierarchy used in the SPD differs in some respect from that in this policy. It is proposed to update the SPD to bring it in line with this Plan. The network includes a new centre at Longbridge which is proposed in the Longbridge AAP .
7.23 Definitions for the categories 
of centre used in the hierarchy are set out below:
•  Regional Centre - Very large 
centre, embracing a wide range of activities and serving a regional/national catchment.
•  Sub-Regional Centre - Major centre, providing an extensive range of facilities and services for a more than local population. Within local centres comparison 
retail and office floorspace will be acceptable in line with the size of the centre and provided that the proposal is aimed at catering for the 
local catchment population.Local Centre
Balsall Heath
Boldmere
Bordesley GreenCollege RoadCotteridgeDudley RoadFrankleyGlebe FarmGreen LaneThe Parade, Hall Green
Hawthorn Road
Hay MillsHighfield Road, Hall GreenHighgateIvy BushJewellery QuarterKings Norton GreenKingsbury RoadKingstanding Circle
Ladypool Road
Lea VillageLozellsMoseleyNewtownOlton Boulevard (Fox Hollies)PelhamQueslettQuinton
Robin Hood, Hall Green
Rookery RoadScott ArmsShard EndShort HeathSlade RoadSparkbrookSparkhillSpringfieldStechfordThe RadleysTimberley
Tyseley
Villa RoadWalmleyWard EndWeoley CastleWest HeathWittonWylde GreenYardley Road
Yardley Wood
Yew Tree
ImplementationExcept for any specific allocations in this Plan, proposals for main town 
centre uses outside the boundaries of the network of centres indentified in policy TP21 will not be permitted unless they satisfy the requirements set out in national planning policy. An impact assessment will be required for proposals greater than 2,500 sq.m. (gross). The City Centre boundary for main town centre uses, and the City Centre Retail Core boundary are both shown on the Policies Map. Boundaries for other centres are shown in the Shopping and Local Centres SPD.
Policy TP21         3             3          3        3            3                    3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementeconomy and network of centres / birmingham development plan•  District Centre Growth Point - A 
major group of shops, identified as a focus for retail growth and office development.
•  District Centre - A major group of shops, including at least one foodstore or superstore and a range of non-retail and public services.
•  Local Centre - A significant group of local shops and services, usually including one or more smaller foodstore. 
7.24 The comparison retail 
floorspace figures derive from the Birmingham Retail Need Assessment (BRNA) Update (2013) and reflect the position that growth in comparison retail expenditure is now expected to be lower than previously anticipated, and internet sales are expected to grow more rapidly. The floorspace figures are inclusive of commitments, which totalled around 142,000 sq m gross in 2012, about 77,000 sq m of which was in the City Centre, Sutton Coldfield and the District Growth Centres.
7.25 The City Centre will continue 
to be the primary focus for retail, office and leisure activity reflecting its national standing and attraction as a top visitor destination. Future growth will be in line with the role of the centre and need to ensure it remains competitive.
7.26 For Sutton Coldfield the 
comparison retail requirements are taken from the Retail Needs Assessment. They have been set at a level that allows for the implementation of the main retail components of the Sutton Coldfield Town Centre Regeneration Framework SPD.
7.27 The comparison retail 
requirements for the three growth centres (Perry Barr, Selly Oak and Meadway) are drawn from the Retail Need Assessment, but have been distributed on the basis of the capacity of these centres to accommodate growth. In the case of the Meadway, this figure also reflects the lack of comparison retail facilities currently in this part of the City.
7.28 No specific requirements for 
the other main town centre uses such as leisure have been identified - but these uses will continue to be encouraged in the network of centres at an appropriate scale. The leisure, evening economy is also important and will continue to be supported in suitable centres and in line with the principles established in policy PG3.7.29 Policy GA10 sets out specific 
levels of retail and office floorspace for the new centre at Longbridge.
7.30 Edgbaston (Five Ways) 
District Centre and surrounding area is an existing focus for office development on the edge of the City Centre and has the potential for future growth which will be supported.
7.31 A plan illustrating the location 
of all centres listed in the hierarchy is shown below.99
vBirmingham
AirportNational
Exhibition
CentreM6
M6M6 (Toll)
M42
M5A38(M)Sutton Coldfield
Selly OakMeadwayPerry Barr
KEY
                 City Boundary
 
                 Motorway
 
                 Main Rail Line
 
                 City Centre
 
                 Town Centre
 
                 District Growth Centre
 
                 District Centre
 
                 Local Centre 
Plan 16 Hierarchy of centresn
NORTH100
birmingham development plan / economy and network of centresConvenience retail 
provision
Introduction
7.32 Accessible convenience retail 
provision such as food stores is important for communities across the City. The BRNA Update (2013) shows that there is little overall scope for additional convenience floorspace.
Why we have taken this 
approach
7.33 The BRNA Update (2013) 
indicates that there is limited capacity for additional convenience retail development in Birmingham in the period to 2026 after existing commitments are taken into account. Over recent years there has been significant growth in the convenience retail sector that has seen a number of new and improved stores created throughout the City. This has served to improve the offer and quality of provision ensuring that local communities have access to convenience retail provision. As identified in the BRNA Update (2013) due to the recent number of developments there are no major gaps in provision although it is recognised that at a local level there may be variations in provision.
FoodstorePolicy TP22  Convenience retail provision
In principle, convenience retail proposals will be supported within centres 
included in the network of centres, subject to proposals being at an appropriate scale for the individual centre. Proposals should deliver quality public realm and create linkages and connections with the rest of the centre and improve accessibility. Proposals that are not within a centre will be considered against the tests identified in national planning policy and other relevant planning policies set at local level, in particular the policies for the protection of employment land.
Implementation
Policy TP22                                     3                        3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementeconomy and network of centres / birmingham development planSmall shops and 
independent retailing
Introduction
7.34 Throughout the network of 
centres there is a broad range of shops and services, however in overall terms the City lacks a diverse enough offer to ensure it provides a high quality shopping experience and offer. One key area to address will be the presence of more independent and niche retail shops.
Why we have taken this 
approach
7.35 The diverse retail offer in 
Birmingham’s extensive network of centres is provided not solely by large national retailers but smaller independent retailers who may operate one or more stores in the centres identified in the hierarchy. Although there are many small shops and independent retailers across the City, there are gaps in some of these centres and in particular the city centre where the BRNA Update (2013) has identified a particular deficiency.
7.36 The BRNA Update (2013), and 
City Centre Retail Assessment, along with discussions with key stakeholders in connection with the Big City Plan, identified that Birmingham (in comparison to other regional centres) lacks representation from independent, niche and small retailers to provide a diverse retail experience.
7.37 Areas across the City such as 
the Jewellery Quarter, Alum Rock and the Soho Road provide a unique retail offer and the provision of smaller retail units would assist in creating opportunities for smaller and independent retailers to flourish.101
Jewellery QuarterPolicy TP23  Small shops and independent retailing
Proposals which promote and encourage independent and niche retailers 
across the City will be supported. Specifically the City Council will seek to ensure that:
•  There is a range of retail premises across the City including provision of 
smaller units.
•  Future developments within centres consider the need for a range of unit sizes to suit all potential needs.
The BRNA Update (2013) has identified a particular deficiency in independent retailing in the City Centre. Proposals for new retail development within the City Centre should therefore include provision which will encourage the creation of new specialist and independent shopping destinations.
Proposals for other forms of retailing such as markets that encourage 
smaller and independent retailers will be supported and encouraged.
A number of other centres have developed specific niche roles (for 
example the Jewellery Quarter, Alum Rock Road and Soho Road) and this will continue to be supported.
Implementation
Policy TP23         3            3                                                           3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management102
birmingham development plan / economy and network of centresPromoting a diversity of 
uses within centres
Introduction
7.38 A mixture of uses in centres is 
essential to promote the diversity, vitality and viability of centres. It is key to the success of a centre to have alongside A1 retail units, other uses, for example bars, restaurants, leisure, local services and hot food takeaways. It is however important that the main retail function of a centre is not undermined by an over concentration of these non A1 uses.
Why we have taken this 
approach
7.39 Centres contain a wide range 
of uses, but their primary function and the use which underpins their economic vitality is almost always retailing. It is therefore important to achieve a balance between uses in centres to ensure that the retail role is not undermined. This policy seeks to ensure that the main retail function is not undermined by a concentration of non A1 uses and that an over-concentration of uses such as hot-food takeaways does not occur.
7.40 The principle of encouraging 
a diversity of uses in centres will ensure that they remain vibrant and successful into the future. More detail on the application of these policies is contained in the Shopping and Local Centres SPD.Policy TP24  Promotion of diversity of uses within centres
A diverse range of facilities and uses will be encouraged and supported 
in centres within the hierarchy, set out in Policy TP21, consistent with the scale and function of the centre, to meet people’s day-to-day needs. This will include:
•  Leisure uses.
•  Offices.
•  Restaurants, takeaways, pubs and bars.
•  Community uses.
•  Cultural facilities.
•  Tourist-related uses (including hotels).
•  Residential on upper floors where it provides good quality, well 
designed living environments.
As well as these uses it is also recognised that centres vary in terms of the mix of uses they contain and some have niche roles, for example the Balti Triangle in Sparkbrook. These niche roles will continue to be supported.Within this context it remains important to ensure that centres maintain their predominantly retail function and provide shops (Class A1 uses) to meet day to day needs. Primary Shopping Areas have been defined to help achieve this by protecting the retail function of centres.Within the Primary Shopping Areas:
•  55% of all ground floor units in the Sub-Regional and District Centres 
(including District Growth Points) should be retained in retail (Class A1) use.
•  50% of all ground floor units in the Local Centres should be retained in retail (Class A1) use.
Applications for change of use out of A1 will normally be refused if approval would reduce the proportion of units in A1 use to below these thresholds, unless exceptional circumstances can be demonstrated. In addition, within the Centre boundary of the Sub Regional, District (including Growth Points) and Local Centres, no more than 10% of units within the centre or within any frontage shall consist of hot-food takeaways.
Further detail on the application of this policy is contained in the 
Shopping and Local Centres SPD. The boundaries of the centres and the Primary Shopping Areas are defined within the SPD.
Implementation
Policy TP24                                                               3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementeconomy and network of centres / birmingham development planTourism and cultural 
facilities
Introduction
7.41 Birmingham is a top visitor 
destination attracting millions of people a year to experience the range of cultural, leisure and recreational activities. Tourism has an important economic role and Birmingham’s continued success as a destination for tourists will depend upon the City having a diverse mix of facilities that are attractive to a range of audiences.
Why we have taken this 
approach
7.42 Tourism is an important 
contributor to the City’s economy, which has grown significantly since the late 1980s. Birmingham already plays host to many cultural and music events and the City’s rich heritage plays a major role in attracting visitors, as do its business tourism venues. Birmingham ranks highly as a venue for international and national sporting competitions and there is potential for further facilities to be developed.
7.43 This will not only bring 
economic benefits but will also improve accessibility to culture and leisure pursuits for residents of the City.
7.44 The City has a wide range of 
assets including the NEC, Genting Arena, Alexander Stadium, Balti Triangle, Aston Hall, Barclaycard Arena and ICC and Symphony Hall which are key venues for business visitors and leisure tourism. While the City has enabled growth in provision of new facilities the City also benefits from a strong industrial heritage which includes  the Jewellery Quarter, Cadbury World and the canal network and other attractions such as Sutton Park, the Botanical Gardens, Think Tank - Birmingham Science Museum, the Barber Institute and the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery.7.45 The wide variety of attractions 
and events means that Birmingham has a diverse offer and this will continue to play an important role in the City’s overall national and international standing. 103
Symphony Hall and the International Convention CentrePolicy TP25  Tourism and cultural facilities
Proposals which reinforce and promote Birmingham’s role as a centre for 
tourism, culture and events and as a key destination for business tourism will be supported. 
This will include supporting the City’s existing tourist and cultural facilities 
and enabling new or expanded provision where it contributes to the City’s continued success as a destination for visitors. This provision will not just be focused on major sporting, business tourism and visitor attractions but also on protecting and promoting the City’s strong industrial heritage and the smaller scale venues and attractions that are an important part of creating a diverse offer.
The provision of supporting facilities such as hotels will be important 
and proposals for well designed and accessible accommodation will be supported.
Implementation
Policy TP25         3            3                                     3                    3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management104
birmingham development plan / economy and network of centresLocal employment
Introduction
7.46 One of the key challenges the 
City faces in the future is ensuring 
significant jobs are created and that new employment opportunities are accessible to the local population. This will help address Birmingham’s high levels of unemployment and worklessness.
Why we have taken this 
approach
7.47 Approximately one third of 
Birmingham’s working population is economically inactive, with high levels of inactivity prevalent in inner City areas and some edge-of-city estates. This distribution closely follows the pattern of deprivation across the City.
7.48 New development provides an 
opportunity to address this issue, particularly where it is located within or close to areas of high unemployment. In recent years the City Council has, on a number of occasions, worked successfully with developers to maximise  opportunities for local people to find employment - examples include the redevelopment of the Bullring and a number of foodstore schemes.
7.49 This policy aims to ensure 
that wherever it is reasonable to do so, new employment-generating development provides opportunities for local people to gain access to work..
Local employment opportunitiesPolicy TP26  Local employment
The City Council will seek to work closely with developers to identify and 
promote job training opportunities for local people, and encourage the use of the local supply chain to meet the needs of new developments.
In order to ensure that the benefits of new development wherever 
possible are targeted at local people, developers will be encouraged to sign up to targets for the recruitment and training of local people during the construction phase of development, and where appropriate for the end use.
Developers will also be encouraged to sign up to targets to use the local 
supply chain where appropriate.
Implementation
Policy TP26                                                   3            3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementeconomy and network of centres / birmingham development plan105
106
birmingham development plan / homes and neighbourhoodshomes and neighbourhoods / birmingham development plan107
Homes and 
neighbourhoods8Thematic 
policies108
birmingham development plan / homes and neighbourhoods8.2 The following policies 
contribute to the strategy for 
urban regeneration and economic revitalisation by ensuring that Birmingham’s residents can live in comfortable and affordable homes in sustainable and successful neighbourhoods. The approach will need to ensure that there is sufficient land available to enable a variety of good quality housing to meet a wide range of needs, and that the City is increasingly attractive as a place to invest and live.
Sustainable neighbourhoods
Introduction
8.3 At the heart of the City’s 
growth agenda is the concept of sustainable neighbourhoods ensuring that future housing, within and outside the growth areas, is delivered in the most sustainable way contributing to creating a strong sense of place, high standards of design and environmental sustainability, climate proofing and supported by high quality infrastructure and facilities.
Why we have taken this 
approach
8.4 The City is experiencing a 
period of rapid population growth, which leads to a requirement for many new homes and jobs. At the same time Birmingham has set itself a demanding target in terms of reducing its carbon emissions and needs to deliver development with high sustainability credentials.8.5 All new residential development 
will need to demonstrate that it is meeting the requirements of Policy T27, thus ensuring that it contributes toward meeting the broader objectives of the BDP . 
8.6 The principle underpinning the 
policy is that not only should new development be as ‘sustainable’ as possible, but it should also wherever possible contribute to the increased sustainability of what already exists, for example through reducing travel needs, extending CHP and the use of renewable energy.8.1 The provision of a sufficient quality and quantity of housing to meet the 
City’s growing population is a central part of the strategy of the BDP . The type and condition of homes, together with the quality of the immediate surroundings, is one of the most important factors affecting quality of life.Homes and neighbourhoods
Policy TP27  Sustainable neighbourhoods
New housing in Birmingham is expected to contribute to making 
sustainable places, whether it is a small infill site or the creation of a new residential neighbourhood. All new residential development will need to demonstrate that it is meeting the requirements of creating sustainable neighbourhoods. Sustainable neighbourhoods are characterised by:
•  A wide choice of housing sizes, types and tenures to ensure balanced 
communities catering for all incomes and ages.
•  Access to facilities such as shops, schools, leisure and work opportunities within easy reach.
•  Convenient options to travel by foot, bicycle and public transport (see Policies TP39-TP41) with reduced dependency on cars and options for remote working supported by fast digital access.
•  A strong sense of place with high design quality so that people identify with, and feel pride in, their neighbourhood.
•  Environmental sustainability and climate proofing through measures that save energy, water and non-renewable resources and the use of green and blue infrastructure.
•  Attractive, safe and multifunctional public spaces such as squar es, parks 
and other green spaces for social activities, recreation and wildlife.
•  Effective long-term management of buildings, public spaces, waste facilities and other infrastructure, with opportunities for community stewardship where appropriate.
Implementation
Policy TP27         3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementhomes and neighbourhoods / birmingham development planThe location of new 
housing
Introduction
8.7 Housing is the predominant 
land use within Birmingham and new housing will be appropriate in many locations across the City.Why we have taken this approach
8.8 In identifying potential 
development opportunities the City Council has sought to create a sustainable pattern of development. Account has been taken of the availability of previously developed sites, their location and accessibility, the capacity of infrastructure, the ability to build mixed and balanced communities and constraints on development land, both physical and environmental. 
8.9 Although every effort has 
been taken to make the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) as comprehensive as possible, it is inevitable, given the built-up nature of Birmingham, that other opportunities for development/redevelopment for housing will arise. The same principles will be followed in assessing planning applications for new housing development.
8.10 The majority of new housing 
provision within Birmingham will be located on previously developed land within the existing urban area. Based on an assessment of future land supply, the City Council expects that a minimum of 80% of new homes provided in the city  over the plan period will be built on previously developed land. As set out in Section 3 it has been necessary, in order to meet the needs of Birmingham’s growing population, to identify some land other than brownfield for housing development.109
Policy TP28  The location of new housing
New residential development should:
•  Be located outside flood zones 2 and 3a (unless effective mitigation 
measures can be demonstrated) and 3b. *
•  Be adequately serviced by existing or new infrastructure which should be in place before the new housing for which it is required.
•  Be accessible to jobs, shops and services by modes of transport other than the car.
•  Be capable of remediation in the event of any serious physical constraints, such as contamination or instability.
•  Be sympathetic to historic, cultural or natural assets.
•  Not conflict with any other specific policies in the BDP , in particular the policies for protecting Core Employment Areas, open space and the revised Green Belt.
*  As defined in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment.
Implementation
Policy TP28                                                               3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management110
birmingham development plan / homes and neighbourhoodsThe housing trajectory
Introduction
8.11 Over the period 2011-2031 
51,100 homes are planned to be 
delivered. This reflects the current capacity and land allocations available within Birmingham’s administrative area. It is however,  insufficient to meet objectively assessed need and additional provision will be required beyond the City’s boundary. This reflects the growth agenda and the desire to accommodate as much of the City’s projected housing growth as possible within the City’s boundary. 8.12 The trajectory takes account 
of the anticipated capacity of the urban area to accommodate additional housing; evidenced by the SHLAA, and the technical work to assess the deliverable capacity on land removed from the Green Belt to the north-east of the City.
Why we have taken this 
approach
8.13 The City Council’s aim is to 
increase the level of housing provision as quickly as possible as the country emerges from the difficult economic climate which prevailed at the beginning of the plan period. This has had a major impact on the house building industry with significant reductions in both housing starts and completions. In the short term it is unlikely that there will be a return to the levels of building experienced pre-2008 and this, together with a significantly increased house building target, will require a stepped approach if the trajectory is to be delivered. Whilst the trajectory sets out annual provision rates, they are not ceilings. Housing provision over and above that set out in the trajectory will be encouraged and facilitated wherever possible.
8.14 Housing completions reached 
a low point between 2010/2011 and 2012/2013. The City Council will seek to stimulate house building in the short term, and a range of measures will be set out in the Housing Growth Plan. In the medium term the trajectory increases in line with anticipated improvements to market conditions and delivery on the sustainable urban extension taking place. In the longer term it is assumed that there will be stronger market growth in the City Centre and other growth areas making a significant contribution to housing provision.
5001000150020002500300035004000
2011/12-2014/15 2015/16-2017/18 2018/1-2030/31
YearDwellings
Figure 1 Housing trajectoryPolicy TP29  The housing trajectory
The housing requirement will be delivered in accordance with the 
following indicative average annual rates:
•  1,650 dwellings per annum (2011/2012 - 2014/2015).
•  2,500 dwellings per annum (2015/2016 - 2017/2018).
•  2,850 dwellings per annum (2018/2019 - 2030/2031).
Implementation
Policy TP29          3            3          3                       3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementhomes and neighbourhoods / birmingham development planWhy we have taken this 
approach
8.16 New housing provision in 
Birmingham should be made in the context of creating sustainable communities, which contain a mix of dwelling types, sizes and tenures together with the local facilities that make a neighbourhood successful. The amount of new housing provided over the plan period will be relatively small compared to the level of the existing dwelling stock. It is important that new housing is provided across all sectors of the housing market and that it meets the needs of a wide variety of households. New housing should add to the choice of accommodation available to people, whatever their circumstances. It should therefore be a mix of both market and affordable housing, and should consist of a mixture of tenures and prices, sizes and types. It should cater for specific needs, such as a wider choice of housing options for people whose current home is no longer suitable for their needs. 
8.17 The City Council has 
undertaken a Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) and will review this periodically during the life of the BDP . The table on page 113 sets out the current proportion of housing by tenure and Policy TP31 on Affordable Housing should be cross referenced when considering the overall mix of dwellings.
8.18 In ensuring an appropriate mix 
of housing is provided it is also important that the most efficient use of the land is made. Land is a scarce resource so it is important that it is used efficiently when new residential schemes are proposed. As such, the density at which development occurs should be maximised subject to the density being appropriate to the character of the area. Appropriate densities will vary across the City, with higher densities in the City Centre to lower density housing in the suburbs. Higher densities should be accompanied by high quality design and ensuring the impact on its surroundings is fully considered.
8.19 The spacious nature and low 
density of some of the City’s mature suburbs has led to development pressure for the intensification of existing housing areas through redevelopment at higher densities and the development of infill plots and backland areas. This can have a significant impact on local distinctiveness by the erosion of 
continued...111The type, size and density of new housing
Introduction
8.15 Over the Plan period a 
significant increase in the delivery of new housing will be required to meet the needs of the City’s growing population. In bringing forward new housing schemes the type, size and density of residential developments will be just as important as the overall numbers that are delivered. 
Policy TP30  The type, size and density of new housing
Proposals for new housing should seek to deliver a range of dwellings 
to meet local needs and support the creation of mixed, balanced and sustainable neighbourhoods. Account will need to be taken of the:
•  Strategic Housing Market Assessment (or any subsequent revision).
•  Detailed Local Housing Market Assessments (where applicable).
•  Current and future demographic profiles.
•  Locality and ability of the site to accommodate a mix of housing.
•  Market signals and local housing market trends.
New housing should be provided at a target density responding to the 
site, its context and the housing need with densities of at least:
•  100 dwellings per ha within the City Centre.
•  50 dwellings per ha in areas well served by public transport.
•  40 dwellings per ha elsewhere.
In assessing the suitability of new residential development full 
consideration will need to be given to the site and its context. There may be occasions when a lower density would be appropriate in order to preserve the character of the locality, for instance, within a conservation area or mature suburb, or where a proposal would make a significant contribution to the creation of mixed and balanced communities, for instance, through the provision of family housing in appropriate locations within the City Centre. Where the density falls below those specified above, the applicant will be expected to provide supporting information justifying the density proposed.
Implementation
Policy TP30                        3           3                       3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management112
birmingham development plan / homes and neighbourhoodsthe unique character that makes 
these places special, particularly if the principles of good design are not taken into account. It is essential therefore if development takes place in these areas, that it is appropriate in all respects and that it makes a positive contribution to the environment and community within which it is located.
8.20 The private rented sector, 
where multiple units are developed and held in single ownership for long term rental, is supported by the City Council as making an important contribution to the supply of housing in the city, and meeting the needs of a mobile workforce, young professionals, households who have deferred house purchase or those who prefer to rent as a lifestyle choice.  The City Council recognise the different characteristics of such developments (typically funded by large institutions or investors), including the lifetime development economics, which look to longer term returns rather than short term ‘market’ gains (compared to more traditional open market schemes), and will have regard to its particular characteristics during the decision making process when assessing the acceptability and viability of schemes.Affordable housing
Introduction
8.21 The City Council is committed 
to providing high quality affordable housing for people who are unable to access or afford market housing. This is an important commitment  to ensure that a choice of housing is available to all in mixed income and mixed tenure sustainable communities.
Policy TP31  Affordable housing
The City Council will seek 35% affordable homes as a developer 
contribution on residential developments of 15 dwellings or more. 
The level of developer subsidy will be established taking account of 
the above percentage and the types and sizes of dwellings proposed. The City Council may seek to negotiate with the developer in order to revise the mix of affordable dwellings (for instance to secure additional larger dwellings) or to adjust the level of subsidy on individual dwellings (a higher subsidy may be required in high value areas). Where such negotiations impact on the number of affordable dwellings secured the level of developer subsidy should be unchanged. 
There will be a strong presumption in favour of the affordable homes 
being fully integrated within the proposed development. However the City Council may consider off site provision, for instance to enable other policy objectives to be met, subject to an equivalent level of developer contribution being provided. Off site provision could be either by way of the developer directly providing affordable dwellings on an alternative site, or by making a financial contribution which would enable provision either through new build on an alternative site, by bringing vacant affordable dwellings back into use or through the conversion of existing affordable dwellings to enable them to better meet priority needs. 
In addition to general needs housing, development proposals for 
housing of a specialist nature within the C3 use class, such as housing for the elderly including extra care, supported housing and age restricted housing, will be expected to deliver affordable housing in accordance with this policy in order to assist in meeting the affordable housing needs of all members of the community.
In phased housing developments, developers will be expected to 
provide details of the affordable housing provision in each phase, including the number and type of affordable dwellings to be provided. 
Where the applicant considers that a development proposal cannot 
provide affordable housing in accordance with the percentages set out above, for example due to abnormal costs or changing economic conditions, the viability of the proposal will be assessed using a viability assessment tool as specified by the City Council. The use of a standard assessment tool* will ensure that viability is assessed in a transparent and consistent way.
                                                                                                         continued...homes and neighbourhoods / birmingham development plan113
Market
Shared ownershipAffordable rentSocial rent/
requires subsidy*
TotalOne bed Total Tenure Two bed Three bed Four bed
8.1
1.13.7
1.7
14.614.9
1.2
11.6
3.0
30.817.3
2.2
5.3
1.6
26.321.9
0.3
0.9
5.0
28.162.2
4.8
21.611.4
100
Figure 2 Tenure of housing required (as a percentage)* Can be provided in either the social or private sector.
Note: Figures may not sum due to rounding.
New affordable housingWhy we have taken this approach
8.22 The most recent City wide 
SHMA, published in 2012, found that about 38% of the City’s overall housing requirement is for affordable housing. The City Council will continue to seek to deliver the levels of affordable housing as set out below and so help meet the needs of the City’s growing population. Figure 2 below shows the split by tenure of affordable and market housing required for the City as a percentage.
8.23 The City Council will seek to 
achieve this challenging target by making the best use of the finance available including public subsidy, by directly building new council housing and by exploring all partnership opportunities to increase supply. Affordable housing provided through developer contributions will continue to play an important role in meeting the City’s affordable housing needs.
8.24 Whenever practicable within 
mixed tenure developments, the affordable dwellings should be located in clusters to enable  effective management of them.The level of provision will only be revised where viability has been assessed using the specified tool. The different characteristics of developments which look to longer term returns rather than short term ‘market’ gains, such as multiple units of private rented sector housing in a single ownership intended for long term rental, will be taken into account when assessing viability. Costs associated with assessing the viability of a proposal shall be borne by the applicant. 
* Currently the Homes and Communities Agency’s Economic Assessment Tool (EAT)
Implementation
Policy TP31                                                3             3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management114
birmingham development plan / homes and neighbourhoodsHousing regeneration
Introduction
8.25 The quality of residential 
neighbourhoods and the housing 
stock within them is an important factor affecting the quality of life. The City Council will work to improve the quality of existing residential neighbourhoods through a programme of regeneration. Some regeneration areas have already been identified whilst others will be brought forward during the plan period.
Why we have taken this 
approach
8.26 The City has a long tradition 
of supporting regeneration and the renewal of existing housing estates to deliver an improved environmental quality and housing offer. A large proportion of the City’s housing offer is contained within existing large residential estates. Some of these areas do not provide the quality of accommodation or environment that ensures a high quality of life for residents. The City Council will continue to support the regeneration and renewal of housing estates/areas. In particular the following have been identified as key opportunities:
•  The Lyndhurst Estate, Erdington 
- Redevelopment to provide up to 300 new homes, enhanced community facilities and public open space along with improvements to the existing tower blocks.
•  The Bromford Estate - Improvement of the housing stock, the environment and local amenities including the provision of enhanced community facilities. The future of land to the east of the estate, where clearance of housing has taken place, will be reviewed with consideration being given to alternative uses where sites are not suited for residential redevelopment.•  Newtown - the regeneration of the Newtown Estate has already seen 287 new houses built, alongside the rebuilding of Holte, Mayfield and Lozells Schools, a new youth centre (the Lighthouse), redevelopment of the Crocodile Works (168 homes) and completion of the Pannel Croft Extra Care Scheme (180 units). Further phases of the ongoing transformation of Newtown, which will focus primarily on selective demolition,  refurbishment and enhancement of community facilities, is expected to create approximately 115 additional new houses.
•  Druids Heath and Maypole - The Druids Heath Estate will be the focus of selective redevelopment and renewal to create a new neighbourhood, and deliver long-term social, economic and environmental improvements including over 500 homes.•  Kings Norton 3 Estates - Major redevelopment to create a sustainable neighbourhood and deliver long-term social, economic, physical and environmental improvements in accordance with the adopted Kings Norton Planning Framework. Around 500 homes will be provided.
•  The Meadway - A new sustainable neighbourhood will be created at the Meadway.
8.27 Over the plan period other 
areas will come forward for regeneration and a proactive approach between the City Council, delivery partners and local residents will be taken to deliver the change and improvements.Policy TP32  Housing regeneration
The regeneration and renewal of existing housing areas will continue 
to be promoted to ensure that high quality accommodation and environments are provided in line with the principles of sustainable neighbourhoods. The initial priorities will be:
•  The Lyndhurst Estate.
•  The Bromford Estate.
•  Newtown.
•  Druids Heath and Maypole.
•  Kings Norton Three Estates.
•  The Meadway.
Replacement rates on cleared sites will be maximised subject to 
the provision of high quality accommodation within a high quality environment. In redeveloping cleared sites the focus will not only be on addressing housing needs but, where appropriate, will need to identify and provide opportunities to improve local employment, open space provision, playing fields, sports facilities and the quality of the local environment and community, health and education facilities.
Implementation
Policy TP32          3            3          3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementhomes and neighbourhoods / birmingham development planStudent accommodation
Introduction
8.28 Birmingham has five 
universities attended by around 
72,000 students. These universities are important assets for the City. The City Council’s vision for the future is for the City’s universities to flourish and grow and for their strong academic and research base to stimulate growth in both the current and emerging business sectors. 
8.29 Student accommodation 
plays a major role in the student experience at a university. Well designed and managed accommodation in the right location provides not only a place to live but also a place to study and relax in a safe and secure environment.
Why we have taken this 
approach
8.30 In addition to the City’s 
universities, Birmingham has six large further education colleges for students over 16 years of age who have left school and wish to continue their education towards academic and vocational education qualifications.
8.31 The universities/colleges and 
their students bring many positive benefits to the City. They enhance its reputation as a dynamic and vibrant location, they create a critical mass for the delivery of goods, services and events, they boost the local economy, they provide local businesses with skilled workers and seasonal part time workers, and they can aid regeneration and investment.
8.32 The City Council wishes 
to ensure that there is a sufficient supply of good quality accommodation which meets the needs of all members of the student community which is provided in a suitable and sustainable location, is well designed and provides a high quality living experience in attractive buildings which enhance the local area. 8.33 Student households are in 
Government household projections and as such are included in the City’s housing requirement. In accordance with national guidance, when this accommodation is provided as self contained studio apartments or clusters, it counts towards meeting the City’s housing requirement. Where they are provided in the form of traditional halls of residence they do not. The City Council will continue to monitor the development of purpose built student accommodation and its contribution to meeting the City’s housing requirement.
115
BCU Campus EastsidePolicy TP33  Student accommodation
Proposals for purpose built student accommodation provided on campus 
will be supported in principle subject to satisfying design and amenity considerations. Proposals for off campus provision will be considered favourably where:
•  There is a demonstrated need for the development.
•  The proposed development is very well located in relation to the 
educational establishment that it is to serve and to the local facilities which will serve it, by means of walking, cycling and public transport.
•  The proposed development will not have an unacceptable impact on the local neighbourhood and residential amenity.
•  The scale, massing and architecture of the development is appropriate for the location.
•  The design and layout of the accommodation together with the associated facilities provided will create a safe, secure and welcoming living environment.
Implementation
Policy TP33                        3                                     3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management116
birmingham development plan / homes and neighbourhoodsProvision for Gypsies, 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
Introduction
8.34 Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople have distinct accommodation needs. The lack of good quality sites impacts on the health and education of these communities. The City Council will seek to meet identified need on suitable sites in sustainable locations and maintain a 5 year supply of deliverable pitches/plots.Why we have taken this approach
8.35 The Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment (2014) identified a need for an additional 8 permanent pitches in Birmingham by 2031. The GTAA also identified a need for 10-15 transit pitches and recommended that 5 stopping places be provided. 
8.36 There is currently one site for 
Travelling Showpeople in the City. This has sufficient spare capacity to accommodate additional needs up to 2031.8.37 The City Council will identify 
sufficient sites to address identified need in accordance with relevant national planning guidance, currently the PPTS. In particular a 5 year supply of specific deliverable sites will be maintained. 2 sites at Hubert Street/Aston Brook Street East and Rupert Street/Proctor Street have been identified and are shown on the Policies Map. These sites are of sufficient size to provide a 5 year supply and may, subject to good design, also be sufficient to meet identified needs for years 6 to 10.
8.38 The City Council will review the 
level of need periodically during the plan period. The broad location of search for additional sites required beyond the first five years, either to meet additional needs or to help meet current needs, will be the South Western part of the city’s urban area. The criteria set out in the policy will be used to assess the suitability of potential sites and to determine planning applications.  When sites have been identified in line with national policy, planning permission will not be granted for sites in the green belt.
Policy TP34  Provision for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
The following sites are allocated to provide for accommodation for 
gypsies and travellers:
•  Hubert Street/Aston Brook Street East.
•  Rupert Street/Proctor Street.
Other proposals for accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople will be permitted where:
•  The site is of sufficient size to accommodate pitches/plots of an 
appropriate size, and, in the case of Travelling Showpeople, to accommodate appropriate levels of storage space.
•  There is safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular access to and from the public highway and adequate space for vehicle parking and manoeuvring within the site.
•  The site is accessible to shops, schools, health facilities and employment opportunities and is capable of being served by services such as mains water, sewerage and power and waste disposal.
•  There is no conflict with other relevant policies such as those relating to the protection of the Green Belt, other greenfield land and industrial land, and those concerned with development within areas at risk of flooding and on contaminated land.
Implementation
Policy TP34         3                                                   3                    3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementhomes and neighbourhoods / birmingham development planThe existing housing 
stock
Introduction
8.39 The level of new housing 
provision in the City over the plan period is relatively small compared to the size of the existing dwelling stock. As the majority of the City’s households will continue to live in the existing stock, the condition of that stock will have an important impact on the quality of life of many of the City’s population, particularly those who live in parts of the inner city.
Why we have taken this 
approach
8.40 In view of the size of 
Birmingham’s new housing requirement over the plan period, it is important to make the best possible use of the existing housing stock.
8.41 The continued improvement 
and maintenance of the City’s existing dwelling stock will be a major priority for the City Council over the plan period. At the same time the City Council will seek to both protect and make the best use of that existing dwelling stock.
8.42 The City Council will seek to 
prevent the loss of ‘decent’ housing to other uses, to maximise use of the existing stock by reducing vacancies and to improve the existing stock where it has fallen into a sub standard condition or where it has the potential to become sub standard.
8.43 The City Council’s Empty 
Homes Strategy sets targets for bringing empty private sector homes back into use. Empty homes can have a negative impact on adjacent residents and the environment in the wider area. As a general rule the longer a property remains vacant the more dilapidated it becomes. For that reason the Empty Homes Strategy targets private sector properties that have been vacant for more than five years. Once back in use these properties will increase the supply of housing in the City.117
Existing housingPolicy TP35  The existing housing stock
Best use will be made of the existing dwelling stock and the City Council 
will seek to: 
•  Develop and implement initiatives which will improve the condition 
of both the older private sector stock and the City Council’s own dwellings. Many of these initiatives involve the City Council working with public and private sector partners.
•  Prevent the loss to other uses (through conversion or redevelopment) of housing which is in good condition, or could be restored to good condition at reasonable cost. Such loss of residential accommodation will only be permitted if there are good planning justifications or an identified social need for the proposed use. 
•  Bring vacant residential properties back into use. Whilst vacancies are highest in the private sector, the City Council will seek, through implementation of its Empty Homes Strategy, to encourage the physical improvement and occupation of vacant homes of all tenures including where necessary the use of its compulsory purchase powers. 
The City Council will also encourage retrofitting of the existing dwelling stock to achieve the sustainability standards set out in other planning policies.
Implementation
Policy TP35         3            3           3       Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management118
birmingham development plan / homes and neighbourhoodsEducation
Introduction
8.44 Education has a central role 
in the successful delivery of the 
growth agenda and a prosperous City. The provision of high quality facilities to create a learning environment will be as important as the overall level of education provision.Why we have taken this approach
8.45 Ensuring that children and 
adults have the opportunity to discover and develop their talents through learning is a key objective of the City Council and other organisations involved in education provision. As the City’s population grows the demands placed on the education and skills sector will increase. The planning system can support education by ensuring that sufficient land is available to accommodate the future growth in provision. Similarly successful schools are an important component of successful residential neighbourhoods.
8.46 Birmingham has seen a 
substantial increase in the number of births since 2001 and projections by the ONS suggest that this increase will continue. In response to this by 2013 more than 11,000 additional primary school places have already been provided in Birmingham. Current forecasts suggest that in 10 years time approximately 20,000 additional school places will be required at primary and secondary levels. This growth is not uniform across the City with some areas experiencing growth beyond existing provision while others have a surplus in capacity.
8.47 The Council’s response to 
meeting this challenge is set out in the Education Infrastructure Plan.
8.48 It is recognised that any major 
housing development such as the Langley Sustainable Urban Extension and the Greater Icknield proposal will generate the need for additional early years education provision and school places and these will be planned as an integral component of the new developments.
8.49 In addition to schools, the 
various Universities in Birmingham also have plans for growth. The University of Birmingham for example, has emerging plans for its Edgbaston Campus and other Universities such as Birmingham City and Aston are implementing their own plans for expansion and/or relocation.
 Policy TP36  Education
The development and expansion of the City’s Universities (Aston 
University, The University of Birmingham, The Birmingham City University, Newman University and University College Birmingham) and the City’s  Higher and Further Education Colleges will be supported. Links between the Universities and other research and development establishments will also be promoted. 
As the City’s population grows there will also be a need for additional 
Primary, Secondary and Special Needs school and college provision.  Proposals for the upgrading and expansion of existing schools and development of new schools in locations where additional provision is required will be supported subject to the criteria below. The City Council may use its Compulsory Purchase powers to facilitate the development of new schools where this is necessary.
Proposals for new education facilities should:
•  Have safe access by cycle and walking as well as by car and incorporate 
a school travel plan.
•  Have safe drop-off and pick-up provision.
•  Provide outdoor facilities for sport and recreation.
•  Avoid conflict with adjoining uses.
Implementation
Policy TP36         3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management
Matthew Boulton Collegehomes and neighbourhoods / birmingham development planHealth
Introduction
8.50 Birmingham is a City that 
sets the health and well-being 
of its residents, and in particular the vulnerable, as a high priority. Planning can play a key role in providing access to a healthier environment by ensuring both high quality development and protection, enhancement and increased accessibility to open spaces. It can also assist in the potential for new or improved health facilities.
Why we have taken this 
approach
8.51 Poor health can be inextricably 
linked to a number of factors including environmental, social, and cultural factors and high levels of deprivation. As an example, poor housing standards are well known to contribute to respiratory diseases, as are cold homes. Poor access to green space, walking and cycling opportunities and fear of crime contribute significantly to our obesogenic environment. Homelessness can lead to extremely poor health outcomes, often catalysed by poor employment opportunities, overcrowding, and a lack of access to affordable homes and a mixture of suitable tenures.
8.52 Although planning is not the 
solution alone - it is an integral part of it. The provision of an environment that allows people to participate in physical activity such as walking and cycling is of paramount importance to a City as large and diverse as Birmingham. Active travel that encourages access to local employment can have real positive public health outcomes. Planning can also contribute to closing the gaps in life expectancy, health inequality and health inequity, with the provision of affordable homes and developments that encourage healthy lifestyle choices for example.8.53 Planning for health is not 
just about public health. It is also important for planning departments to engage with CCGs and NHS area teams, to promote relationship that enable existing health facilities and services to be mapped early on in the planning stage of any developments. This will assist both parties in understanding existing and new health service provision early on in the planning process, and how to best facilitate this.
8.54 Most importantly, the City 
Council has a duty to work in partnership to deliver the priorities outlined in the Health and Wellbeing Strategy, and the Public Health Outcomes Framework.119
Policy TP37  Health
The City Council is committed to reducing health inequalities, increasing 
life expectancy and improving quality of life by:
•  Helping to tackle obesity and encourage physical activity through 
the provision of open space and playing fields (Policy TP9) and sports facilities (Policy TP11) accessible to all, creating and enhancing environments conducive to cycling and walking (Policy TP39 and TP40) such as the canal network, and supporting the network of local centres (Policy TP21).
•  Seeking to improve air quality and reduce noise within the City.
•  Providing good quality and well designed housing (Policy TP27 and TP30) and improving the existing housing stock (Policy TP35).
•  Promoting health care facilities especially within centres.
•  Promoting safe residential environments and addressing the fear of crime.
•  Improving road safety (Policy TP39 and Policy TP44).
•  Addressing climate change issues.
•  Making provision for open space and allotments (policy TP9).
Proposals for the development of new and the improvement of existing health care infrastructure required to support Birmingham’s growing population will be permitted provided they meet the requirements of other policies.
Implementation
Policy TP37         3            3           3       3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management120
birmingham development plan / connectivityconnectivity / birmingham development plan121
Connectivity9Thematic 
policies122
birmingham development plan / connectivity9.2 Transport is an enabler for 
economic growth and for the 
City to successfully deliver its sustainable growth agenda it will need to develop its existing transport networks ensuring that they provide an effective, efficient and comprehensive public transport system, high quality routes and environments for pedestrians and cyclists, an efficient road network and modern digital infrastructure. In addition to improvements to its internal connections, the City will need to secure further improvements in connectivity with commuter towns and surrounding areas, to the rest of the country and internationally  in order to attract investment and support access to jobs.
A sustainable transport network
Introduction
9.3 An efficient, comprehensive and 
sustainable transport system is an essential element in supporting the City’s economic competitiveness, meeting the targets for reducing CO2 emissions and enabling the delivery of sustainable development. Promoting sustainable transport modes will help re-balance the focus to those modes that have lower emissions and contribute to creating a higher quality environment across the City.
Why we have taken this 
approach
9.4 A key principle for the transport 
network is to make the existing connections as efficient as possible, ensuring the movement of as many people as possible in the most sustainable and safest way. Achieving this will require a road user hierarchy that favours sustainable modes of transport. Any development of the transport network will need to consider the impact of schemes on different road users and take this hierarchy into account to resolve competing demands. It will be necessary to strike a balance between the needs of road users and the function of different routes.  
9.5 The City Council is developing 
the Birmingham Mobility Action Plan (BMAP) and will work with public and private sector partners to develop the City’s transport system in a way which supports national goals for transport and local targets for reducing emissions of pollutants (including greenhouse gases), supports sustainable housing and community growth and addresses the changing needs of the City’s communities.9.1 High quality connections by road, rail, bus, walking, cycling or 
digital, are all vital to the City’s future economic prosperity and social inclusiveness. These connections provide access to education, employment, business, retail and leisure opportunities.Connectivity
Policy TP38  A sustainable transport network
The development of a sustainable, high quality, integrated transport 
system, where the most sustainable mode choices also offer the most convenient means of travel, will be supported.
The delivery of a sustainable transport network will require: 
•  Improved choice by developing and improving public transport, cycling 
and walking networks.
•  The facilitation of modes of transport that reduce carbon emissions and improve air quality.
•  Improvements and development of road, rail and water freight routes to support the sustainable and efficient movement of goods.
•  Reduction in the negative impact of road traffic, for example, congestion and road accidents.
•  Working with partners to support and promote sustainable modes and low emission travel choices.
•  Ensuring that land use planning decisions support and promote sustainable travel.
•  Building, maintaining and managing the transport network in a way that reduces CO2, addresses air quality problems and minimises transport’s impact on the environment.
•  In some circumstances, the re-allocation of existing roadspace to more sustainable transport modes. 
Implementation
Policy TP38         3            3           3        3            3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementconnectivity / birmingham development planIn particular, the City Council 
will seek to ensure that transport initiatives promote:
•  Economic sustainability by 
providing effective and efficient connections between people and jobs, and between businesses and their suppliers and customers.
•  Social sustainability by providing a comprehensive and fully accessible transport system which connects and serves all members of Birmingham’s diverse communities. 
•  Environmental sustainability by supporting the development of a connected city whilst seeking to minimise the negative impacts on the current and future environment.
9.6 The West Midlands Local 
Transport Plan (2011 to 2026) contains various targets for improving transport and reducing its impacts. The Local Transport Plan also contains accessibility targets for access to key services by public transport and active travel. Centro’s ‘Towards a World Class Integrated Transport Network’ document sets out a high level vision for achieving a world class public transport system. The BDP supports and complements the approach set out in these documents.
9.7 Transport has a range of impacts 
on the environment. It is a major source of CO2 (accounting for 25% of the City’s CO2 emissions) and it also contributes to poor air quality in the form of Nitrogen Dioxides, Particulate Matter and other emissions which are known to have consequences for health and life expectancy. Transport also requires infrastructure which requires land take and space. A balance must be struck between how much of our urban area should be developed to provide transport capacity against other uses.
9.8 Opportunities to minimise 
these impacts by reducing the need to travel, and through the use of alternative more sustainable transport and less polluting modes will be taken unless there is a good justification as to why this is not possible.
9.9 The Smarter Choices initiative, 
which provides a range of ‘soft’ transport policy measures aimed at providing and promoting a package of initiatives for influencing people’s behaviour towards more sustainable modes will be important in changing attitudes and approaches to travel. Smarter Choice measures can be introduced through the planning process and developed to address transport impacts arising from new developments through a range of measures including:•  Encouraging behavioural changes through the TravelWise campaign and Travel Planning (via a range of work place, school, residential, rail station and personalised travel plans) that encourage people to choose the most sustainable means of travel.
•  Supporting the growth of Car Clubs in the city as an alternative to private car ownership.
•  Requiring Travel plans in line with the relevant national guidance.
9.10 TravelWise is a national 
campaign to encourage people to think about the impact that their daily journeys have on the environment, their community and on their own health. TravelWise schemes can also help people to look for more environmentally-friendly alternatives to driving alone, such as car sharing, using public transport, walking or cycling. People can save money and improve their health whilst helping to reduce congestion, air and noise pollution and the negative effects of road traffic.123
Metro extension124
birmingham development plan / connectivityWalking
Introduction
9.11 Walking plays an integral 
part in the day to day life of most 
people. The provision of a safe and pleasant walking environment has a significant role to play in supporting quality of life and encouraging active travel.
Why we have taken this 
approach
9.12 The Transport Strategy for 
Birmingham places pedestrians at the top of the road user hierarchy with the commitment to encouraging walking as a safe, attractive and convenient means of getting around the city. The City Council is continuing to improve public realm environments, improve walking routes through the provision of dropped kerbs and pedestrian crossing facilities, and develop way finding facilities through a variety of media and community safety initiatives with a view to ensuring that walking is a safe option for as many people as possible. Interconnect Birmingham, for example, has been introduced to improve wayfinding through the streets and spaces in the City Centre.
9.13 Birmingham’s Rights of Way 
Improvement Plan (ROWIP) and the definitive map of routes support Birmingham’s commitment to preserving walking routes across the City and improving their level of maintenance.
9.14 The Department for Transport’s 
Creating Growth, Cutting Carbon document endorses the promotion of walking as an efficient, environmentally friendly and healthy option for making shorter journeys. Increased walking is promoted through ‘Smarter Choices’ measures which aim to promote more sustainable alternatives to single occupancy car use.9.15 Improvements to the public 
realm will be prioritised to improve primary routes first, and secondary and tertiary routes will then follow. To complement these major interventions, more localised spaces throughout the City Centre, for example, will be improved and created. This network will be explored further in a detailed public realm strategy for the City Centre.
 
Policy TP39  Walking
The provision of safe and pleasant walking environments throughout 
Birmingham will be promoted. In particular this will include:
•  Building upon the success in improving pedestrian safety and 
continuation of the support for the priority of pedestrians at the top of the road user hierarchy ensuring that in centres and residential areas, the public realm environment reflects this priority.
•  Ensuring new development incorporates high quality pedestrian routes which will promote walking as an attractive, convenient, safe and pleasant option for travel including to and from bus stops, train stations and Metro stops.
•  Ensuring good design of pedestrian routes/areas reflecting desire lines and providing adequate way finding facilities where appropriate whilst ensuring that routes/areas are free from unnecessary clutter.
•  Providing pedestrian crossing facilities where appropriate and ensuring footway surfaces are well maintained.
Implementation
Policy TP39         3            3                     3             3                    3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementconnectivity / birmingham development planCycling
Introduction
9.16 Cycling contributes towards 
reducing carbon emissions and 
improving air quality. As a form of active travel it can assist with the adoption of healthier lifestyles and managing the use of the City’s transport network more efficiently. 
9.17 Cycling has the potential to 
significantly contribute to the sustainable movement of people around Birmingham and as a mode of travel it can replace many car trips.
Why we have taken this 
approach
9.18 Cycling is increasingly seen 
as an essential component of successful 21st century cities moving towards sustainability and offering a healthy lifestyle. It can provide a means for residents from across the City to access areas of employment by affordable and sustainable transport. Cycling is still at a low level in Birmingham, comprising only 1-2% of total trips.
9.19 Birmingham has some good 
cycling infrastructure, but this is characterised by a number of off-road routes and canal towpaths. There is a relative lack of infrastructure to provide an appropriate cycling environment on busier roads. These roads tend to be the most well known and direct routes to major destinations, and use of them is almost unavoidable for some part of any urban cycling journey.
9.20 The ‘Birmingham Cycle 
Revolution’ sets out a 20 year strategy to provide a network of new and improved cycle routes. Phase 1 of this Strategy will focus on an area within 20 minutes cycling time from the City Centre. Later phases will extend this provision beyond this area to the wider City.
9.21 Infrastructure improvements 
will be supported by cycle training provision, access to bikes, promotional activities and travel behaviour initiatives.125
Cycle routePolicy TP40  Cycling
Cycling will be encouraged through a comprehensive city-wide 
programme of cycling infrastructure improvements (both routes and trip end facilities) supported by a programme of cycling promotion, accessible cycling opportunities, training and travel behavioural change initiatives. This will include:
•  Development of different route types e.g. improvements to major radial 
roads and other main roads including improved crossing facilities and creating new, quieter, parallel routes, using roads with lower speed limits and traffic flows, linking residential areas, green spaces, local centres and transport interchanges in order to encourage short trips and offer an alternative to busy A and B roads.
•  Further development and enhancement of an extensive off-road network of canal towpaths and green routes.
•  Incorporating cycling into the ‘Interconnect’ on-street wayfinding totems currently being rolled out across the City Centre, and using improved direction signing.
•  Improving cycle security with upgraded parking and trip end facilities within the City Centre, local centres and at railway stations.
•  Increasing access to bicycles with cycle loan and hire opportunities.
•  Providing enabling support to take up cycling through training and travel behaviour initiatives.
•  Ensuring that new development incorporates appropriately designed facilities which will promote cycling as an attractive, convenient and safe travel method.
Implementation
Policy TP40         3            3                     3             3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management126
birmingham development plan / connectivityPublic transport
Introduction
9.22 There is a continuing need to 
improve public transport facilities 
including interchanges so that access to places of employment, education, shopping, medical, cultural, leisure and social facilities is an attractive and viable alternative to private transport.
Why we have taken this 
approach
9.23 The bus remains by far the 
most important mode of public transport in Birmingham and is certain to remain so for the foreseeable future. The design and location of new development will need to ensure that travel between destinations by bus is as attractive and viable an option as possible. It is important that buses are easily accessible to and from, and able to penetrate residential and employment areas and offer a good choice of destinations to serve the needs of passengers. 
9.24 Centro works with transport 
operators and the West Midlands metropolitan councils to promote and develop public transport  throughout the West Midlands. Centro does not directly operate bus services, which are operated by a number of private operators on a commercial basis. However, Centro does provide subsidy support for non-profitable, but in-demand, services.
9.25 Coach travel is also important 
as a sustainable mode of travel with over 2 million visits made by the Group Travel Market to the City each year, and worth over £130 million to the local economy.
9.26 The City sits at the heart of the 
UK’s railway network. Between 2001 and 2011 the number of passengers travelling into the City Centre by rail has increased by 60%. This has coincided with improved frequencies and journey times on the West Coast Main and Chiltern Lines together with investment in rolling stock. The City’s suburban rail network is of only limited size and in need of further enhancement in order to meet the growing demand. HS2 provides further opportunities to enhance local and regional rail services by releasing network capacity.
9.27 The City Centre has three 
main line stations - New Street, Moor Street and Snow Hill. New Street Station is a key gateway into Birmingham City Centre. £600 million of planned investment (Gateway Project) is transforming the station into a bright, modern transport hub for the City and will support greater visitor and commuter numbers.
9.28 However, the City’s suburban 
rail network is of only limited size and in need of enhancement, particularly as levels of commuting are rising and journey lengths Policy TP41  Public transport
Bus and Coach
The bus remains by far the most important mode of public transport 
in Birmingham. There continues to be a challenge in making bus travel attractive as a sustainable alternative to the private car.
The City Council will continue to work with Centro and bus operators to 
improve the bus network by:
•  Supporting partnership measures to develop and improve the bus 
network including the City Centre Statutory Quality Bus Partnerships and Bus Network Reviews.
•  Ensuring that road space is managed efficiently to support public transport through initiatives such as bus priority measures and infrastructure.
•  Ensuring that adequate coach access is provided for as part of new developments where it is required. 
Rail
Proposals to enhance the City’s rail network will be supported,    
including:
•  Reopening the Camp Hill and Sutton Park railway lines to passenger 
services.
•  The delivery of the Camp Hill Chord scheme and the facilitation of services from the Camp Hill line and from Tamworth/Nuneaton to run into the new platforms at Moor Street station.
•  The provision of new stations at Kings Heath, Hazelwell and Moseley on the Camp Hill route, Castle Vale, Walmley, Sutton Coldfield Town Centre and Sutton Park on the Sutton Park route and at the Fort and Castle Vale on the Tamworth route.
•  Redevelopment of Snow Hill station and reinstatement of Platform 4.
•  The expansion of park and ride sites including Kings Norton, Four Oaks and Lea Hall.
The Council will continue to protect land within the designated HS2 Safeguarding Area. The area covered by the most recently issued Safeguarding Direction, at the time of the adoption of this plan, is shown on the Policies Map. Further updated Safeguarding Directions, which would supersede the HS2 Safeguarding Area shown on the Policies Map, may be issued by the Secretary of State for Transport and will be available at: www.hs2.org.uk/developing-hs2/safeguarding
continued...connectivity / birmingham development planincreasing. There are no local train 
services to existing stations on lines from Birmingham to Tamworth and Nuneaton and there are no local stations or local passenger services on the following lines: 
•  Camp Hill route (Kings Heath, 
Hazelwell, Moseley).
•  Water Orton Corridor (Fort and Castle Vale).
•  Sutton Park Line (Castle Vale, Walmley, Sutton Coldfield Town Centre, Sutton Park).
The delivery of the Camp Hill Chord and Water Orton Corridor schemes are required to enable these local services, whilst offering additional benefits to help relieve capacity constraints at New Street Station and the national rail freight network running through the region.9.29 Centro manage a number 
of Park and Rides within the City that are linked to suburban rail stations. Currently these sites provide over 2200 parking spaces. These are supplemented by additional sites in the other West Midlands Districts which provide additional capacity and reduce the length of commuter car trips on Birmingham’s road network. There is potential to increase park and ride provision alongside proposals to increase the capacity of the suburban rail network. In some cases this may require decked car parking to be provided at suburban stations along with localised access improvements and controlled parking measures. In addition, pedestrian and cyclist accessibility may need improvement to enhance modal interchange including at Five Ways Station on the edge of the City Centre.9.30 Rapid Transit provides a fast 
and reliable travel mode which can encourage more sustainable travel patterns, improve access to key employment locations and complement the City’s existing bus and heavy rail public transport networks. As such, it is a key component of the City Council’s Birmingham Connected transport strategy.
9.31 The City’s Metro line 
between Snow Hill station and Wolverhampton has been extended to New Street Station and Centenary Square, with a further extension proposed to Five Ways Edgbaston. To augment existing local bus and heavy rail services on certain key corridors, options are being considered for the route connecting Birmingham City Centre and Birmingham Airport/Solihull which would serve major growth, development and regeneration sites in the City Centre, Meadway, Bordesley Park, Birmingham Business Park and the NEC, before connecting to Birmingham Airport/Solihull. The system would also serve HS2 stations, with initial extensions planned to Eastside, the Curzon High Speed 2 station and Adderley Street. Consideration is also being given to the introduction of alternative rapid transit systems including SPRINT/bus rapid transit, with a range of corridors identified in the City Council’s Birmingham Connected transport strategy. Such services would be fast and reliable, operate with high quality vehicles and where practically possible have priority use of the highway network. Key routes include connecting the City Centre with the Airport (via A45), Bartley Green, Kingstanding, Longbridge, Maypole/Druids Heath, Quinton, Sutton Coldfield and Walsall. Movements will also be considered on the Outer Circle/Route 11 orbital along with cross boundary services. Interchange between modes will be strongly supported, with good access for pedestrians and cyclists forming key elements of all scheme proposals. The design of SPRINT/ 127
Policy TP41         3            3           3       3             3                    3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
ManagementRapid Transit - Midland Metro and Bus Rapid Transit
The development and extension of metro/bus rapid transit to facilitate 
improvement/enhancement in the public transport offer on key corridors and to facilitate access to development and employment will be supported. This will include cross-boundary routes, for example to the Black Country.
In particular support for:•  A new Metro station at All Saints.
•  An extension of the Midland Metro Tram network from New St to 
Centenary Square and Five Ways Edgbaston.
•  An extension of the Midland Metro Tram network to Eastside and the Curzon Street High Speed 2 station.
•  Additional SPRINT/Rapid Transit routes with cross city centre links on a number of key corridors including but not limited to:
   - Birmingham City Centre - Walsall.   - Birmingham City Centre - Quinton.   - Birmingham City Centre - Bartley Green.   - Birmingham City Centre - Longbridge.   - Birmingham City Centre - Airport (via East Birmingham).   - Birmingham City Centre - Airport (via A45).   - Birmingham City Centre - Maypole/Druids Heath.   - Birmingham City Centre - Sutton Coldfield   - Birmingham City Centre - Kingstanding.   - Outer Circle/Route 11 Orbital.
Implementation128
birmingham development plan / connectivitybus rapid transit routes will be 
undertaken so as to not preclude future Metro operations.
9.32 The High Speed 2 (HS2) 
Safeguarding Zone is a designation put in place by the Government. Safeguarding means that, except where that type of application for planning permission is exempted, LPAs must consult HS2 Ltd on any application for planning permission, or undecided applications for planning permission, which fall within the safeguarded areas. HS2 Ltd must then respond to the consultation within 21 days, or by an agreed date. If HS2 Ltd objects to a planning application and the LPA are minded to approve it, they must first notify the Secretary of State for Transport. The Secretary of State can within 21 days then either notify the LPA that he/she has no objections to permission being granted, or issue a direction restricting the granting of planning permission for that application. The purpose of the designation is to ensure that proposed developments within the safeguarded area do not negatively affect the delivery of the nationally important HS2 proposals. The designation does not necessarily mean that all of the land within the safeguarding zone will be required for the construction of HS2.Freight
Introduction
9.33 The efficient movement of 
freight is important to Birmingham’s economy. Freight is a key component of traffic on the road network, with over 10% of traffic movements being either heavy or light goods vehicles, with light goods vehicles making up three quarters of total freight traffic. Why we have taken this approach
9.34 All the items in the City’s 
shops, factories and homes have been transported at some point. The continuing modernisation of the City’s manufacturing base and the need to maintain its competitiveness mean that the efficient movement of goods to, from and within the City is vital.
Policy TP42  Freight
A well integrated freight distribution system which makes the most 
efficient and effective use of road, rail, air and water transport will be sought. Locations to support freight logistics will be required to demonstrate that:
•  Developments which generate large volumes of freight traffic or involve 
the transport of bulk materials should make use of rail (or water if appropriate) for freight movements wherever practical. They should include as part of the development, or be located close to, inter-modal freight facilities, rail freight facilities or wharves.
•  Sites which are used or are suitable for inter-modal transfer facilities, rail freight facilities, including rail aggregate facilities and water-borne freight facilities will normally be protected for these uses.
•  The retention of rail freight connections to existing industrial sites will be encouraged and the development of new inter-modal transfer facilities, new rail sidings and rail freight facilities and new wharves will be supported.
•  Consideration will be given to providing long stay lorry parking in areas where there are significant logistical movements.
Where road haulage is involved in the transport of large volumes of freight or the carrying of bulk materials, planning conditions and obligations will be used to define and agree suitable traffic routes and the need for other necessary environmental and traffic management controls.
Where freight movements result in negative environmental impacts, 
the Council will consider the use of restrictions on the size and type of vehicles and access restrictions at certain times to address this. Implementation
Policy TP42         3            3                                     3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementconnectivity / birmingham development plan9.35 Road haulage accounts for 
the bulk of freight movements 
within Birmingham and its levels are increasing. It is important to recognise the role of the Strategic Highway Network in providing access for freight movements and the need to provide the capacity necessary for efficient freight movements. A number of the Regional Transport Priorities will help to support this, for example, improvements to the Birmingham motorway network through Active Traffic Management. Within the City the needs of freight vehicles must be considered alongside other factors when considering the utilisation of road space and provision of new developments. In applying this policy the Council will also have regard to the West Midlands Metropolitan Freight Strategy and Centro’s Urban Road Freight Network.
9.36 Proposals for the development 
of Freight/Construction Consolidation Centres which rationalise the number of deliveries to main shopping centres or areas of demand by managing and concentrating logistics and the flow of delivery vehicles are being considered.
9.37 Over recent years it has 
become more cost effective to transport certain items e.g. bulk materials, aggregates and large volumes of non-perishable goods by rail. At the same time the environmental credentials of rail are also increasingly being used to encourage its use as a lower carbon alternative to road freight. There are a number of active rail freight facilities in the City at Landor Street, Washwood Heath and Small Heath. A number of other sites have potential for future use as rail freight facilities. The development of the High Speed Rail line between Birmingham and London, linking to High Speed Line 1 and the Channel Tunnel would widen the opportunities for the transport of freight by rail.
9.38 Birmingham is also a 
major through route for rail freight. Support for rail freight improvements in Birmingham will assist with resolving freight issues in the wider region and would help relieve rail traffic congestion through Birmingham.
9.39 In 2010 freight activity for 
Birmingham Airport was 22,172 tonnes. In the Government’s Consultation Document - The Future Development of Air Transport in the United Kingdom: The Midlands, published in 2002 prior to the White Paper in 2003, future levels were forecast to be 200,000 tonnes per year by 2030. The majority of freight growth and activity from Birmingham Airport is carried in the ‘belly-holds’ of scheduled passenger services. Future growth of freight activity at Birmingham Airport will be largely dependent upon the runway extension which will be operational in 2014, at which point it is estimated the Airport could have the capabilities to handle approximately 800,000 tonnes of mostly long-haul belly hold freight. 
9.40 The existing network of canals 
in Birmingham also offers some potential for freight transport. 129
Rail freight130
birmingham development plan / connectivityLow emission vehicles
Introduction
9.41 As a result of a number 
of factors including the need 
to address CO2 emissions, Government subsidy to support their uptake and rising fuel costs, alternative fuel and low emission vehicles are becoming increasingly common. There is therefore a need for the City to ensure it supports this both in terms of local journeys but acknowledging the City’s central location as a key national destination.
Why we have taken this 
approach
9.42 Road transport accounts 
for some 25% of the City’s CO2 emissions and is also the primary source of a number of health affecting pollutants including Nitrogen Dioxide. The City Council has carried out an extensive review and assessment of air quality which showed that the recommended level of nitrogen dioxide continues to be exceeded in several locations. 
9.43 Supporting the uptake of low 
emission vehicles supports efforts to decarbonise road transport and address local air quality issues and will act as a stimulus for the green economy.
Low emission vehiclesPolicy TP43  Low emission vehicles
Proposals for Low Emission Vehicles will be supported by:
•  Ensuring that new developments include adequate provision for 
charging infrastructure e.g. electric vehicle charging points in car parks, measures to encourage LEV use through Travel plans and other such initiatives.
•  Where appropriate the City Council facilitating the introduction of charging points in public places.
•  Working with partners to explore how the use of other alternative low emission vehicle technologies can be supported e.g.  hydrogen fuel cells across a range of modes e,g. private cars, buses and/or small passenger and fleet vehicles. 
•  Keeping under review the need to accommodate other infrastructure for other forms of LEV e.g. Hydrogen refuelling.
Implementation
Policy TP43         3            3                     3             3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementconnectivity / birmingham development planTraffic and congestion 
management
Introduction
9.44 Growth in car ownership 
and use is leading to increased congestion, poor air quality, community severance and more road traffic accidents. In order to facilitate a road transport network which operates as efficiently and sustainably as possible, measures to manage traffic and congestion are essential.
9.45 With the exception of the 
M6 (and small sections of the M6 Toll) the City Council’s highway maintenance Private Finance Initiative (PFI) maintains almost two and half thousand kilometres of roads within Birmingham, which includes 96,000 street lights, 1,000 traffic signals and over 850 bridges, structures and tunnels. Managing and maintaining all these assets is included within the PFI project.
9.46 The City Council is responsible 
for the maintenance, management and selective improvement of these networks in order to maintain the movement of goods and people. 
9.47 Working with the Highways 
Agency, transport operators and other agencies, the City Council will maintain a network which enhances the competitiveness of the region and improves accessibility within the region by providing journey time reliability, and supports the wider strategy, in particular regeneration and growth.
The Strategic Highway Network
9.48 Birmingham’s Strategic 
Highway Network (SHN), is shown 
on the Policies Map. The roads which make up the SHN are those limited number of major routes where the wider public interest requires high capacity, a relatively free flow of traffic and limited frontage access. These are the roads that are critical in maintaining good accessibility within the City, be it directly to the City Centre or key areas within the City. 131Policy TP44  Traffic and congestion management
The optimum use of existing highway infrastructure across all modes 
will be encouraged and priority investment in the highway network to support the city’s sustainable transport network and development agenda will be promoted. 
The efficient, effective and safe use of the existing transport network will 
be promoted through the following:
•  Route Management Strategies on key routes which will aim to improve 
the routes for all users and improve network resilience.
•  Targeted investments, including the provision of new connections, which reduce the negative impacts of road traffic, for example congestion, air pollution and road accidents.
•  Managing travel demand through a range of measures including the availability and pricing of parking and ensuring effective and proportionate parking enforcement.
•  To improve road safety the introduction of 20mph speed limits across the network, except on parts of the Strategic Highway Network where higher speed limits are acceptable.
•  Urban Traffic Management and Control (UTMC) and Intelligent Transport Systems that provide an effective means of managing and providing information about the transport network in Birmingham and the West Midlands conurbation.
•  Targeted construction of new accesses to provide access to development/redevelopment sites.
•  Ensuring that the planning and location of new development supports the delivery of a sustainable transport network and development agenda.
•  The prevention or refusal of development on transport grounds where the residual cumulative impacts of development are severe.
•  A requirement for Transport Assessments/Statements and Travel Plans as necessary in line with the relevant national guidance.
Highway Improvement Lines
In order to deliver a number of the City’s aspirational highway 
improvements the City Council will maintain a number of highway improvement lines. The purpose of a Highway Improvement Line (HIL) is to protect land required for highway and public transport schemes from other development(s). To avoid the unnecessary and costly sterilisation of land, HILs will only be maintained:
a) On the SHN where improvement is proposed.
b)  When required for specific schemes not on the SHN but identified in a 
current  programme.
c)  Exceptionally when it is appropriate for the proper planning of an area to introduce or maintain an HIL for a scheme even though it is not in a current programme.
d)  For the provision of appropriate public transport infrastructure and car parking facilities.
continued...132
birmingham development plan / connectivity9.49 On roads which are not part of 
the SHN (the vast majority of roads 
in Birmingham), the presumption is that local considerations should predominate in any decision regarding those roads. The road user hierarchy together with considerations including environmental impact, road user safety, pedestrian and cyclist needs, access control and the function of the road will be key factors in planning future development and highway design and determining planning applications. However, in applying the hierarchy it will be necessary to strike a balance between the needs of different road users and the function of different types of routes.  
Why we have taken this 
approach
9.50 The City’s Strategic Highway 
Network comprises of the M6 and A38(M) Aston Expressway, which connects road users directly to the City Centre (via the Tame Valley Viaduct and the best known motorway junction in the UK, Spaghetti Junction) and the A road primary route network which is generally characterized by key corridors radiating out from the City Centre. These link the City to the national motorway network via the M5, M6 and M42 (which form the Birmingham Motorway Box/Orbital) as well as the M6 Toll and M40. These roads will continue to be managed in ways which will ensure that their capacity is maintained or enhanced, and in order to achieve this, selective improvements will be promoted.
9.51 Roads form part of the urban 
landscape and help define areas of the City; the A4540 orbital ‘Ring Road’ forms an effective boundary to the City Centre and the radial routes provide areas prime for corridors of sustainable higher density development and links to many of the City’s local centres. 
9.52 A key challenge is that the 
highway transport network is under considerable pressure at peak times. Further, with competition Limited elements of the Strategic Highway Network will need upgrading to meet the requirements of the BDP and these are set out below. Elsewhere on the SHN only limited improvements are anticipated and will be delivered within available resources and other funding opportunities. 
HILs will continue to be reviewed to ensure they reflect the transport 
priorities of the BDP . It is the City Council’s intention to progressively lift past HILs as and when detailed SHN proposals are adopted. The following ‘Key HIL Schemes’ will be protected for transport improvements. Development(s) that would prejudice the proposed highway improvement will not be permitted:
1. Ring Road Improvements.
2. Hagley Road - Lordswood Road to Five Ways.3. Dudley Road - Spring Hill to City Road.4. Bristol Road - Selly Oak (Phase 1b, Selly Oak Triangle improvements).
5. Highgate Road - Ring Road to Stratford Road.
6. Alcester Road South - Hawkhurst Road to Warstock Road.7.  Gravelly Hill - Aston Expressway to Kingsbury Road (in relation to 
Green Belt expansion).
8. Station Road/Iron Lane - Stechford.
9. Six Ways - Erdington.10. Stockfield Road and Yardley Road to the Swan Roundabout.11.  Sutton Coldfield Relief Road to support the adopted Sutton Coldfield  
Regeneration Framework SPD.
12. Bordesley Green - (Rapid Transit Route development).13. Battery Way/Spring Road.14.  Lichfield Road - Aston Hall Road - related to Regional Investment 
Zone.
The location of these improvement lines within the City are shown on the Policies Map. In addition, there are a number of smaller-scale improvement lines which will continue to be protected. Details of these are held by the City Council and are available on request. Where appropriate the HILs have been cross referenced with the relevant projects within the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
Implementation
Policy TP44         3                          3       3                                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementconnectivity / birmingham development planfor street space so high and 
the need to provide significant improvements to other modes, reductions in traffic capacity are likely to be required in places, coupled with the redistribution of capacity where appropriate.
9.53 The City Council recognises 
that parking is an essential requirement for many developments, but the level of parking will need to be balanced against a desire to encourage sustainable transport patterns and reducing emissions and congestion. The City’s Parking SPD provides information on appropriate levels for various land uses. These are set out as maximums and the cycle/motorcycle and disabled car parking standards are minimums. The City Council will take account of whether there are any circumstances, related either to the site or the operation of the development, which may support an alternative level of parking.
9.54 Measures to maximise the 
effectiveness of the Strategic Highway Network by combining existing corridor-based initiatives such as Red Routes, Bus Showcase, Urban Traffic Management Control (UTMC) and Quick Wins funds, can deliver smoother traffic operations, provide priority and roadspace reallocation for specific users (e.g. for pedestrians, cyclists and buses), parking management and enhanced on-street controls. 
9.55 The City Council is considering  
20 mph schemes for residential streets and other town and city streets with high pedestrian and cyclist movement. There is clear and growing evidence on the effect of reducing traffic speeds through 20 mph schemes on the reduction of collisions and casualties. Other important benefits of 20 mph schemes include quality of life and community benefits, and encouragement of healthier and more sustainable transport modes such as walking and cycling. The introduction of 20 mph schemes has accelerated recently across the UK.9.56 UTMC and Intelligent 
Transport Systems (ITS) have an important role for traffic control in Birmingham. A major scheme bid was approved in September 2008 by the Department for Transport for the West Midlands Urban Traffic Control systems. This scheme will improve communication and coordination between the seven Metropolitan UTC centres together with the Police, Highways England and public transport operators. This will enable information to be shared more quickly and efficiently. As part of the ITS development, the City Council will ensure that its Urban Traffic Management and Control system will improve on the efficient use of its existing road space and tackle road traffic congestion, particularly along major strategic corridors during peak hours.
9.57 This policy reflects the 
objectives and operation of the Traffic Management Act 2004 and the Council’s duties as Highway Authority.133
A34 at Perry Barr134
birmingham development plan / connectivityWhy we have taken this 
approach
9.59 The most recent census 
information (2011) indicated that 35.8% of households in Birmingham do not own a car. The number of people without ready access to a car during much of the day is considerably higher than this. For example in Birmingham many teenagers are highly reliant on public transport. In addition, people who do drive and do have access to a car do not always want to use it. So, for a variety of reasons, it is important that Birmingham residents have good pedestrian access to every-day local facilities and good public transport access to a wider choice of employment, education and leisure opportunities.9.60 As a guide, ideally all 
development of 10 dwellings or more should be within:
•  A 15 minute walk of the nearest 
GP surgery or a 10 minute walk if residences are retirement dwellings.
•  A 15 minute walk of the nearest local shops that provide a good range of food items.
•  A 10 minute journey using a single public transport service with a frequency of at least every 30 minutes to shops that provide a range of items, including a good range of food items.
•  A 40 minute journey using public transport to the City Centre, using services with a frequency of at least every 30 minutes.
9.61 In addition, residences that are 
not retirement dwellings, student accommodation or single-person apartments should be within:
•  A 10 minute walk of a primary 
school with sufficient additional capacity.
•  A 20 minute walk of a secondary school catering for both sexes with sufficient additional capacity.
Centro’s accessibility standards can be found on Centro’s website:  www.centro.org.uk/transport/bus/access-standards
9.62 These criteria included are 
based on calculated journey times and distances that people are actually prepared to walk and assume a walking speed of 3 mph (4.8km/hr), where walks can be along footpaths and the relevant roads are easy to cross (for example refuges provided if necessary). Public transport journey times are based on including the walking elements but no initial wait time for a public transport service.Accessibility standards for new development
Introduction
9.58 Accessibility levels in 
Birmingham are generally good and it is important that this is maintained and improved as new development comes forward to ensure it is delivered in the most sustainable way.
Policy TP45  Accessibility standards for new development
All major developments which are likely to generate, either solely or in 
combination with other related developments, more than 500 person-trips per day should aim to provide:
•  An appropriate level of public transport provision (in terms of 
frequency, journey time and ease) to main public transport interchanges at the most relevant times of day.
•  Associated public transport stop(s), with shelters and seating, within 80m of the main focal point(s) for the location - this condition may be relaxed if the location is within an established local shopping centre. In circumstances where this standard is not achievable, accessibility to bus services should be in line with Centro’s accessibility standards.
•  Real Time Information (RTI) as appropriate (e.g. in a reception area, at the main outbound public transport shelters).
•  Good cycle access with a commensurate number of convenient cycle stands, with cycle shelters where stays are likely to be of longer duration.
•   Good pedestrian access, with seating where relevant.
Proposals for residential development should demonstrate that they are accessible to a range of local services such as General Practioners (GPs), Primary and Secondary Schools, local shops and open space.
Implementation
Policy TP45                                                                3                   3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementconnectivity / birmingham development planWhy we have taken this 
approach
9.64 In order for Birmingham 
to maintain its international competitiveness, sustain existing growth and attract new high value business, as well as to establish itself as a leading world-class Digital City, a ‘connected’ digital telecommunication infrastructure is needed. In addition, new developments will need to be ‘future-proofed’ with appropriate digital infrastructure that will meet both existing and future communication needs. It is essential that the City works with developers to ensure that the appropriate digital infrastructure is incorporated with new developments and other areas of regeneration. 
9.65 These aspirations are set out 
in the document ‘Birmingham’s Smart City Vision’ and ’Blueprint for a Smart City’ which describe the interconnectivity and mutual dependencies between these digital goals and Birmingham’s ability to ensure sustainable economic growth, reduce its carbon footprint and have a positive impact on people’s lives.
9.66 With the emerging digital 
connectivity technologies, Birmingham has the opportunity to transform its street services, particularly in the areas of street lighting and off street public car parking. A Unified Street Services Network will provide the City Council with the ability to manage all its street devices in a centralized networked approach. 
9.67 An Intelligent Transport 
System (ITS) is the integration of information and communications technology with transport infrastructure, vehicles and users. It enables information to be collected and shared in order to help people make more informed travel choices, improve journeys and helps to reduce the impact of transport on the environment. ITS incorporates a range of technologies from basic in-vehicle satellite navigation systems (Sat Nav) right through to traffic lights. Further development of ITS will enable the City Council to be more effective in managing its highway network and tackle congestion, particularly along major strategic corridors during peak hours.135Digital communications
Introduction
9.63 Digital technologies have been 
a major driving force in influencing and shaping industry and society in the last few years. Changes that are currently transforming our working, learning, leisure and community environments will need to be integrated into future developments.
Policy TP46  Digital communications
Technology developments and access to digital services such as the 
internet are critical to Birmingham’s economic, environmental and social development. Proposals for new commercial and residential developments should include appropriate infrastructure, wired and wireless, to provide high speed ubiquitous internet access. 
Provision of such connections should take into account:
•  The need for inclusive approaches to create open and competitive 
services that are accessible by all.
•  Efficiency such that enabling infrastructure (e.g. ducting) is installed alongside and concurrent with utility connections with suppliers and providers being encouraged to create open infrastructures and share assets such as chambers, ducting and data networks.
•  The need to provide for future flexibility to reflect increasing demands to provide connectivity and data traffic for a range of purposes.
The City Council recognises that this is an area where technological change is rapid and therefore standards will evolve and developers should seek to adopt the best current open technology standards available.
In the City Centre, the City Council will develop a Unified Street Services 
Network that provides a seamless connection for a range of digital technologies, linking together all the street activities such as street lighting and car parking. 
The City Council will continue to develop its Intelligent Transport System 
(ITS) for Birmingham that enhances real-time and interactive information for users to navigate and explore the City by all modes of transport through:
•  The efficient use of its existing road space and by tackling road traffic 
congestion, particularly along major strategic corridors during peak hours.
•  The City Council’s ability to manage its highway network in response to major planned and unplanned incidents.
•  Working with Centro and operators to provide quality public transport information and easy ticketing.
 Implementation
Policy TP46                                                3             3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management136
birmingham development plan / implementationImplementation10
implementation / birmingham development plan137138
birmingham development plan / implementation10.2 In implementing the policies 
and proposals within the BDP the 
private sector will have a key role to play in both the funding and delivery of development.
10.3 The City Council will equally 
have an important role to play and will make use of all appropriate mechanisms including:
•  Use of Government grants, 
European funding and prudential borrowing.
•  Working in partnership with other statutory delivery agencies (e.g. Centro, the Environment Agency, the Homes and Communities Agency, Sport England and the Water Companies) to ensure that essential infrastructure is provided.
•  Working in partnership with landowners/developers and other private sector organisations including Business Improvement Districts to secure deliverable development proposals and investment.
•  Engaging with education providers and other organisations to support skills and training initiatives.
•  Use of funding and incentives available through the Enterprise Zone initiative.•  Preparation of Local Development Orders (LDOs), AAPs, SPDs and other more detailed frameworks to provide context and support for site specific delivery.
•  Application of the Development Management and other regulatory functions.
•  Use of the Council’s Compulsory Purchase powers to assist with site assembly.
•  Use of Section 106 agreements to secure affordable housing and other benefits.
•  Support for Neighbourhood Planning and other local initiatives.
•  Use of tariff-based systems such as the Community Infrastructure Levy for infrastructure delivery, where appropriate and in line with current statutory regulations.
•  Use of other funding sources such as the landfill tax, the aggregates levy, the lottery fund, development incentives and other initiatives as they arise.
•  Pro-active use of the City Council’s land holdings to assist delivery.
•  Production of a Housing Delivery Growth Plan and Education Development Plan to set out detailed proposals and identify delivery mechanisms to support housing development and provision of school places.10.1 The BDP sets out how the City will develop over the period to 2031, 
identifying where the homes, jobs, services and infrastructure will be delivered and the type of places and environments that will be created. Having set out a clear direction for how the City will develop, and the planning policies and proposals that will help achieve this, it will be important that there are tools in place to help implement these and ensure the successful delivery of the overall vision for Birmingham. Implementation
Beormaimplementation / birmingham development plan10.4 Each policy within the BDP is 
accompanied by a table providing 
a summary of the key mechanisms that will be used to support their implementation covering one or more from the list of aspects identified above. These key implementation mechanisms are summarised as follows:
• Local and national funding.•  The Community Infrastructure 
Levy and Planning Obligations.
• Partnership working.
•  The City Council’s Compulsory 
Purchase powers.
• Planning Management process.
•  Other Development Plan 
Documents, SPDs, regeneration frameworks/masterplanning exercises and ongoing monitoring.
10.5 Over the lifetime of the BDP 
it is likely that new initiatives, partnerships and sources of funding will emerge that will play a new role in helping to implement proposals and deliver growth. The following provides examples of some of the specific mechanisms that are currently and will continue to play a key role in the short to medium term in ensuring the BDP is successfully implemented and growth delivered. 
Local and national funding
10.6 One of the key aspects for the 
successful delivery of the BDP will be the provision of infrastructure to 
enable and support development. There are a range of funding options that can be utilised to support the infrastructure and environmental improvements that are required to enable the delivery of the overall strategy and support sustainable growth. 
10.7 Enterprise Zone - The City 
Centre was designated an EZ in April 2011 as part of the national initiative to boost economic growth. The benefits on offer include business rates relief, simplified planning and enhanced marketing. The primary benefit however is the retention of business rates generated within the zone and the ability for the LEP to recycle these into supporting its economic priorities. In the case of the City Centre EZ the LEP has already committed a first phase of funding of £128m to support delivery.
10.8 The European Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) - is one of the European Union’s structural funds and is aimed at addressing imbalances in economic performance within and between member states.
10.9 The Regional Growth Fund 
(RGF) - is a Government challenge fund  to encourage private sector growth and new jobs, particularly in areas and communities currently dependent on the public sector.
10.10 The City Deal for Birmingham 
- is an agreement with Government that gives the City new powers to build infrastructure, create jobs and train local people with the right skills to fill them.139
Post and Mail Phase 2140
birmingham development plan / implementationDeveloper contributions
Introduction
10.11 Development will be 
expected to provide or make 
a contribution to the cost of providing what is necessary to support the new development.
Why we have taken this 
approach
10.12 These contributions will 
be sought in line with Circular 05/2005, Community Infrastructure Levy regulations or successor regulations/guidance. The City Council will, where appropriate, seek to secure site specific measures through planning obligations. The nature and scale of any planning obligations sought will be related to the form of development and its potential impact on the site and surrounding area. Infrastructure and mitigation measures will be provided in a timely manner to support the objectives of the Local Plan, and will ensure any new developments will provide the infrastructure, facilities, amenities and other planning benefits which are necessary to support and serve the development, and to offset any consequential planning loss to the local area which may result from the development. Developer contributions in the form of the Community Infrastructure Levy will contribute towards strategic infrastructure to support the overall development in the BDP .10.13 Planning Obligations - such 
obligations under Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) will continue to be used as a mechanism to make development proposals acceptable in planning terms, that would not otherwise be acceptable. Section 106 agreements will continue to be used to secure affordable housing, and on site public open space in residential development, ensure the development or use of land occurs in specific ways; and require specified operations or activities to be carried out.
10.14 Community Infrastructure 
Levy - the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) came into force in April 2010 and allows local authorities in England and Wales to raise funds from developers undertaking new building projects in their area. The CIL is a set levy based upon the type of use and floorspace proposed and provides a standardised method for calculating contributions. The money can be used to fund a wide range of infrastructure that is needed as a result of development. This includes new or safer road schemes, flood defences, schools, hospitals and other health and social care facilities, park improvements, green spaces and leisure centres. The City Council adopted CIL in 2016 to support the delivery of the sustainable growth agenda set out in the BDP . Inward investment
10.15 Alongside securing funding 
for infrastructure the ability to attract private sector investment will be central to the overall success of the BDP . The City Council will continue to take a proactive and constructive approach to potential local, national and international investors. There are likely to be particular challenges in achieving this with the pace of recovery of the national economy a key issue but one directly outside the City Council’s control. The City Council will however continue to work actively in promoting Birmingham and the opportunities on offer, for example, through the Big City Plan and the Area Investment Prospectuses, to ensure that the City is best placed to take advantage of improved economic conditions whenever they arrive. Securing the EZ status and promoting the Economic Zones will provide a focus for economic activity and help target inward investment.
Partnership working
10.16 While the City Council has 
a key role to play in delivering 
the policies and proposals  responsibility does not rest solely with the City Council and it will require the combined efforts and investment of a range of partners.
10.17 The successful 
implementation will require a wide range of organisations to work together. The City Council will have a vital role in coordinating the actions and activities of these partners be they in the private, public or third sector. 
10.18 The LEP will have a central 
role in supporting the delivery of the overall growth agenda for Birmingham. Local Enterprise Partnerships are led by businesses and local authorities across natural economic areas. They provide the vision, knowledge and strategic leadership required to drive sustainable private sector growth and job creation in their areas. The LEP for the Greater Policy TP47  Developer contributions
Development will be expected to provide, or contribute towards the 
provision of: 
•  Measures to directly mitigate its impact and make it acceptable in 
planning terms.
•  Physical, social and green infrastructure to meet the needs associated with the development.
Implementation
Policy TP47         3            3                     3             3                    3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Managementimplementation / birmingham development planBirmingham and Solihull area was 
formed in 2010 and is a business-led initiative with local authority, the business community and educational providers represented. Those local authorities covered by the LEP are Birmingham City Council, Bromsgrove District Council, Cannock Chase District Council, East Staffordshire Borough Council, Lichfield District Council, Redditch Borough Council, Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council, Tamworth Borough Council and Wyre Forest District Council.
Duty to Co-operate
10.19 The Duty to Co-operate is a 
requirement of the Localism Act 
2011 and is designed to ensure that all bodies involved in planning work together on strategic issues that are greater than local significance. The duty is particularly important and challenging for a major city like Birmingham where its influence spreads far beyond its administrative boundaries. It is also challenging to those authorities surrounding Birmingham especially in relation to the accommodation of growth that cannot be met within the City’s administrative boundary.
10.20 In relation to the local 
authority dimension of the Duty to Co-operate the City Council works collaboratively through the West Midlands Joint Committee (which brings together the seven districts in the West Midlands metropolitan area), The LEP and West Midlands Planning Officers Group. In addition to these groups the City Council works on a bi-lateral basis with all adjoining local authorities not only on the challenges faced by Birmingham but also in relation to the emerging plans in those adjoining areas.
10.21 The co-operation through 
the LEP has been particularly important. A Spatial Plan for Recovery and Growth is being progressed for the LEP area. This has included the joint commissioning of technical studies to inform the long term scale and distribution of growth. The intention of these studies is to sit alongside the progress being made by the current round of development plans - including the BDP - but also to help inform subsequent updating of plans.
10.22 This collaborative working 
has also been taken forward in bi-lateral discussions with adjoining authorities where there are strong connections with Birmingham including the Black Country and North Warwickshire. 
Use of City Council powers
10.23 The City Council has a range 
of powers that are available to 
help support delivery. This will not just be confined to those of the planning system but also the housing, education and highway functions it provides.
10.24 Compulsory Purchase Powers 
are an important tool for local authorities and other public bodies to assemble land to help deliver social and economic change. The City Council has a strong track record in utilising these powers to support urban regeneration schemes and the delivery of infrastructure and will continue to apply these powers where the acquisition of land is necessary to enable comprehensive schemes that deliver economic, social and/or environmental benefits.
10.25 The City Council has extensive 
landholdings within Birmingham and will seek to use these to take forward the strategy, whether through development promotion or through the protection and improvement of environmental assets. 
10.26 The preparation of more 
detailed plans to guide delivery in areas of change has proved to be successful in the past and will continue. Wherever possible the City Council will aim to make use of SPDs, AAPs, Neighbourhood Development Plans and regeneration frameworks to provide local and site specific policy and promote a comprehensive approach to development initiatives. The Development Planning and Development Management roles of the City Council will remain an important delivery mechanism.
Infrastructure Delivery Plan and 
Site Delivery Plan
10.27 The BDP is supported by 
an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) and Site Delivery Plan which provide detail of the infrastructure necessary to enable growth to occur and delivery issues in relation to key proposals. The City Council will keep these documents under review to measure progress and ensure funding, initiatives and action are targeted.
10.28 Combining all these 
mechanisms with the policies and proposals set out in the BDP will enable the successful delivery of the vision for an enterprising, prosperous, innovative and green City.141142
birmingham development plan / monitoringMonitoring11
monitoring / birmingham development plan143144
birmingham development plan / monitoring11.1 The City Council will measure the performance of the BDP by assessing 
how effective its policies are in delivering the vision and objectives.Monitoring
11.2 The main mechanism for 
reporting on the performance of 
the Plan will be the Authorities’ Monitoring Report. However it should be noted that not all indicators are appropriate for annual monitoring.
11.3 The indicators that will be used 
in monitoring the Plan are listed below. These will be monitored in line with targets set out in the policies.
11.4 In addition to these indicators 
the Council will also monitor the significant effects indicators set out in the Sustainability Appraisal.
Monitoring and promoting the achievement of growth targets
Introduction
11.5 The Council will monitor 
progress towards the achievement of key targets set out in policy PG1. Monitoring is required to ensure that the approach set out in the Plan continues to be relevant and effective. Regular monitoring will include analysis of data and trends and reviews of the evidence base. It provides the basis to trigger a review of actions, strategies and policies to reflect changing circumstances.Policy TP48   Monitoring and promoting the achievement                         of growth targets
The City Council will monitor progress annually towards the achievement of the key targets for growth (housing, including affordable housing, employment, offices and retail) set out in policy PG1. In the event that the supply of land falls significantly behind that required to achieve these targets, the Council will undertake a full or partial review of the Plan in order to address the reasons for this.
Key indicators which would trigger a review are:
•  A failure to provide a 5 year housing land supply in any monitoring 
year with the following 2 monitoring years indicating no recovery in the position.
•  Housing completions fall more than 10% beneath the targets in the housing trajectory over any rolling 3 year period.
•  A failure in any monitoring year to provide the minimum reservoir of best quality employment land with the following 2 monitoring years indicating no recovery in the position.
•  An inadequate supply of sites for offices to meet the targets set in the Plan.
•  An inadequate supply of retail sites to meet the targets set in the Plan.
The Council will also play an active role in promoting, and monitor progress in, the provision and delivery of the 37,900 homes required elsewhere in the Greater Birmingham Housing Market Area to meet the shortfall in the city. This will focus on:
•  The progress of neighbouring Councils in undertaking Local Plan 
reviews to deliver housing growth to meet Birmingham’s needs.
•  The progress of neighbouring Councils in delivering the housing targets set out in their plans.
•  The extent to which a 5 year housing land supply is maintained in neighbouring areas.
If it becomes clear that progress is falling short of the level required, the Council will undertake a review of the reasons for this, and if this indicates that it is necessary to reassess the capacity for housing provision in Birmingham, a full or partial review of this Plan will be undertaken.
Key indicators which would trigger this are:
•  Failure of a relevant Council to submit a replacement or revised Local 
Plan, providing an appropriate contribution towards Birmingham’s housing needs, for examination within 3 years of the adoption of this Plan.
•  Failure of Councils within the Greater Birmingham Housing Market Area to maintain a 5 year housing land supply in any monitoring year with the following 2 monitoring years indicating no recovery in the position.
continued...monitoring / birmingham development plan145
PG1 Overall Levels of Growth
PG2  Birmingham as an 
International City
PG3 Place-making
GA1-GA10 Growth Areas
TP1  Reducing the City’s Carbon 
Footprint
TP2 Adapting to Climate Change
TP3 Sustainable Construction
TP4  Low and Zero Carbon Energy 
Generation•  Net/gross dwelling completions in the City Council area.
•  Net/gross dwelling completions in other Council areas that contribute to meeting the City’s housing need.
•  Employment land developed.
•  Retail floorspace completed (comparison and convenience).
•  Office floorspace completed.
•  Major waste management facilities completed.
•  Development pipeline information in relation to residential, employment, retail and office development.
•  Population and employment change.
•  Major investments attracted and international events held.
•  Ranking in relevant monitors (e.g. European Cities Monitor).
•  See indicators TP12 and TP30.
•  Development completed in each area.
•  Development pipeline position in each area.
•  See indicators for TP3, TP4, TP5, TP13 and TP39.
•  Reduction in CO2 emissions from 1990 levels.
•  See indicators for TP6, TP7 and TP8.
•  Number of new homes meeting zero-carbon standards.
•  Number of commercial developments meeting BREEAM standard excellent.
•  Number of existing homes adapted through Birmingham Energy Savers.
•  Number of new homes and commercial developments connected to CHP or other forms of low or zero-carbon energy generation.POLICY MONITORING INDICATORS•  Housing completions within the Greater Birmingham Housing Market Area fall more than 10% beneath the planned targets in housing trajectories over any rolling 3 year period.
Implementation
Policy TP48         3            3                     3             3                    3Local/
National 
FundingPartnerships CPO CIL/
Section 
106Other Local Plan/
SPD/Regeneration 
FrameworkPlanning
Management146
birmingham development plan / monitoringTP5 Low Carbon Economy
TP6 Managing Floodrisk
TP7 Green Infrastructure Network
TP8 Biodiversity and Geodiversity
TP9  Open Space, Playing Fields 
and Allotments
TP10 Green Belt
TP11 Sports Facilities
TP12 Historic Environment
TP13  Sustainable Management of 
the City’s Waste
TP14  New and Existing Waste Facilities
TP15  Location of Waste Management Facilities
TP16  Minerals
TP17  Portfolio of Employment Land and Premises•  Low-carbon initiatives supported.
•  Number of developments approved against Environment Agency advice in relation to floodrisk.
•  Proposals approved resulting in a loss of green infrastructure.
•  New green infrastructure provided.
•  Number of development proposals approved within or adjoining designated sites (SSSIs, NNRs, LNRs SINCs and SLINCs).
•  Number and area of designated sites.
•  Number of approved development proposals adversely affecting or providing positive enhancement to the integrity of the wider ecological network (non-designated wildlife corridors and stepping stones).
•  Percentage of population within the distance thresholds set in the policy.
•  Open space/playing fields/allotments lost to development.
•  New open space/playing fields/allotments created.
•  Number of applications approved as an exception to the policy.
•  Sports facilities lost to other forms of development.
•  New sports provision created.
•  Number of designated heritage assets (Scheduled Ancient Monuments, Listed Buildings, Registered Parks and Gardens, Conservation Areas).
•  Number of applications approved adversely affecting or providing positive enhancement to a designated heritage asset or its setting.
•  Number of heritage assets recorded in the Historic Environment Record.
•  Number of investigations added to the Historic Environment Record.
•  Number of structures added to the local list.
•  Number of completed Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plans.
•  Number of heritage assets at risk.
•  Tonnage of waste produced in Birmingham, by methods of disposal.
•  Capacity of waste treatment facilities within Birmingham.
•  New waste facilities approved/constructed that meet location 
requirements.
•  Proposals approved leading to the loss of waste facilities.
•  Land available for development for waste treatment purposes in line with criteria in the policy.
•  Number of applications submitted which require a minerals investigation.
•  Employment land developed by category.
•  Land availability by category.POLICY MONITORING INDICATORSmonitoring / birmingham development plan147
TP18 Regional Investment Sites
TP19 Core Employment Areas
TP20  Protection of Employment 
Land
TP21  The Network and Hierarchy of Centres
TP22 Convenience Retail Provision
TP23  Small Shops and 
Independent Retailing
TP24  Promoting a Diversity of Uses within Centres
TP25 Tourism and Tourist Facilities
TP26 Local Employment
TP27  Sustainable 
Neighbourhoods
TP28  The Location of New Housing
TP29 The Housing Trajectory
TP30  The Type, Size and Density 
of New Housing•  Land developed in each RIS.
•  Permissions granted for uses outside those specified in the policy .
•  Employment development within Core Employment Areas.
•  Major investments in improving infrastructure within or serving Core Employment Areas.
•  Loss of land within Core Employment Areas to non-employment uses.
•  Loss of employment land to alternative uses.
•  Permissions granted for non employment uses on employment land.
•  Comparison retail, office and leisure developments completed in, on the edge of and out of centre.
•  Progress towards growth levels proposed for each centre.
•  Development pipeline information in relation to the above.
•  Major investments in infrastructure/public realm etc. within centres.
•  Convenience retail completions in, on the edge and out-of-centre.
•  Development pipeline information in relation to the above.
•  Changes in numbers of small shops and independent retailers.
•  Number of applications determined in line with/contrary to the Shopping and Centres SPD.
•  Changes in the range of uses within centres.
•  Hotel completions and pipeline.
•  Major tourism schemes completed/approved.
•  Number of tourists visiting the city.
•  Number of schemes approved with local recruitment or supply chain targets.
•  No specific indicators, but indicators for policies TP3, TP4, TP5, TP7, TP30, TP31 and TP44 will be relevant.
•  Number of residential schemes approved not complying with the specific criteria in the policy.
•  Completions by greenfield/brownfield location.
•  Annual net dwelling completions.
•  Completions by number of bedrooms.
•  Completions by dwelling type (apartment/house).
•  Completions by density in relation to the targets set in the policy.POLICY MONITORING INDICATORSTP31 Affordable Housing
TP32 Housing Regeneration
TP33 Student Accommodation
TP34  Provision for Gypsies, 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
TP35 The Existing Housing Stock
TP36 EducationTP37 HealthTP38  A Sustainable Transport 
Network
TP39 Walking
TP40 CyclingTP41 Public TransportTP42 Freight
TP43 Low Emission Vehicles
TP44  Traffic Congestion and 
Management
TP45  Accessibility Standards for New Development
TP46 Digital Communications•  Completions by tenure and delivery mechanism (eg. S106):
   - In the City Council area.   -  In other Council areas that contribute to meeting the City’s affordable housing needs.
•  Commuted sums secured.
•  Net/gross housing completions within each area.
•  Purpose-built Student Accommodation Completions by bed space and cluster.
•  Pipeline information.
•  Pitches provided (transit and permanent).
•  Pipeline information.
•  Vacancy levels.
•  House conditions.
•  New school provision completed/approved.
•  Number of children in ‘basic need’ of school provision.
•  New health facilities approved/developed.
•  See also indicators for TP9, TP11, TP39 and TP40.
•  Modal split information.
•  See also indicators for TP39 and TP40, TP41 and TP42.
•  Pedestrian priority schemes delivered.
•  Number of accidents involving pedestrians.
•  Extensions delivered to cycle network.
•  Percentage of trips made by cycle.
•  Rail, rapid transit and bus enhancements delivered.
•  Percentage of trips by public transport.
•  Development involving or loss of inter-modal freight transfer facilities.
•  Number of charging points provided.
•  Progress in delivering priority improvements.
•  Changes in journey times.
•  Numbers of people killed or injured in road accidents.
•  Percentage of major developments meeting specified accessibility standards.
•  Availability and speed of high speed internet access.POLICY MONITORING INDICATORSP&R/11/???/A/???/02/11