 
  
 
 
 
BLABY DISTRICT COUNCIL  
NEW LOCAL PLAN  
ISSUES AND OPTIONS CONSULTATION  
 
June  2019  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
This page is intentionally left blankBlaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
1 
 Contents  
 
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  2 
2. Scope of the Issues and Options Consultation  ................................ ..............................  7 
3. Scale of Growth and Locational Strategy  ................................ ................................ ....... 8 
4. Health and Well -being  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 17 
5. Housing Need  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  21 
6. Environment and Sustainability  ................................ ................................ ...................  27 
7. Economy, retail and leisure  ................................ ................................ .........................  33 
8. Transport  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  38 
9. Local Services and Infrastructure  ................................ ................................ ................  41 
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
2 
 1. Introduction  
 
1.1 Over the coming decades, Blaby District will  undergo change . The population will 
increase, commuting patterns will change, and bu sinesses will expand and move. In 
order to help to ensure that the District of Blaby remains a great place to live, work and 
visit, we are  now updating  our Local Plan.  
 
1.2 Blaby District Council ( The Council ) is seeking to engage  with individuals and 
organisations , who have  an interest  in the District , to get involved in shaping the plan 
to ensure that we can secure the best outcomes for the next 15 to 20 years and 
beyond.   
 
1.3 Consultation  with interested parties will help to better inform where new growth is 
located, what services and facilities need to be  delivered and /or improved and what 
valued characteristics of the District need to safeguarded. By responding to the  
questions set out within this document, you will assist us in preparing a new Local Plan 
that reflects the needs and requirements of our  communities, service provider s and 
other interested parties.  
 
1.4 This document  considers a range of  planning related issues and poten tial op tions. It 
focuses on the  overarching  strategic matters  and does not go into  site specific  issues. 
It will also help to deliver the following priorities for the District, as identified within the  
Blaby Plan 2018 -2021  (the current corporate p lan):  
 
 Live – Strong, healthy, safe, sustainable communities where the most 
vulnerable are supported.  
 Work - A thriving, prosperous, innovative local economy with a skilled and 
healthy workforce contributing to the local community.  
 Visit – A strong leisure and tourist s ector and well maintained and accessible 
attractions available in the local area encourage visitors to the District.  
 
 
What is the Local Plan?  
 
1.5 All local authorities are required to develop a Local Plan to deliver sustainable 
development in their area , which should plan ahead  over a  minimum  15 year period. 
Part of the Local Plan’s role is to identify and deliver  a wide range  of built development 
(e.g. schools, houses, retail, employment etc.) to meet the needs of both existing and 
future communities.  
 
1.6 The Local Plan is the primary way in which local communities can  shape the future  
growth and development of the D istrict. Once the final version of the Local Plan is 
adopted  it will be used to direct  and shape the  growth of the D istrict , and used to 
assess p lanning applications. It will also be used  to protect  built and natural assets and 
will help to reinforce local features, character and identity.  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
3 
  
1.7 The current Blaby District Local Plan comprises of  the Core Strategy Development 
Plan Document (adopted in February 2013) and Delivery Development Plan Document 
(adopted in February 2019). Combined the two documents set out the spatial plan for 
the District up to 2029 , along with any Neighbourhood Plans .  
 
 
Why are we reviewing the Local Plan?  
 
1.8 The National P lanning Policy Framework (NPPF) sets out the Government’s planning 
policies for England and how they should be applied. It also sets a framework f or local 
plans to be prepared and outlines how  sustaina ble development can be promoted at a 
local level.      
 
1.9 The NPPF requires policies in local plans to be reviewed at least once every five 
years. This process ensures that local plans remain as up to date as possible, by 
taking into account changing circums tances , which  may affect their area.  
 
1.10 The current Local Plan is being reviewed for the following reasons:  
 To ensure that the Local Plan is up to date and looks ahead at least 15 years;  
 To take account of new circumstances , such as updated populati on and 
household projections;   
 The need to take account of and plan for the wider issues  across the Leicester 
and Leicestershire Housing Market Area;  
 To take account of the Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic Growth Plan 
(and associated Statements of Common Gr ound); and  
 To take account of revised national planning policy.  
 
1.11 The review of the Local Plan will ensure that an effective planning policy framework is 
in place to help guide and shape future development in a sustainable manner. It will 
enable continued protection of the District’s natural and built assets and help to guard 
against piecemeal development.  
 
1.12 Fundamental to the review  of the Local Plan is the involvement of local residents, 
community groups, businesses, stakeholders and other interested part ies. It is 
therefore crucial that the views of t he wider community are sought from  the outset .  
Timetable for the  new Local Plan  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
4 
 1.13 The production of the new  Local Plan  is expected to take 2 to 3  years. It will involve a 
number of stages, including  further  periods of public consultation, before being 
submitted for examination by an independent planning inspector. A summary of the 
proposed timescales for preparing the new Local Plan  are outlined below:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.14 The Council’s latest Local Development S cheme (LDS) (February 2019) sets out the 
full Local Plan  timetable.  
 
 
Relationship with other plans and policies  
 
National Planning Policy and Guidance  
 
1.15 The Local Plan must be prepared so it is in accordance with the National Planning 
Policy Framework (NPPF) and national planning legislation. In order for it to be found 
‘sound’ at examination (by an independent planning inspector) it must be:  
 
a) Positively  prepared  – providing a strategy which, as minimum, seeks to meet the 
area’s objectively assessed ne eds; and is informed by agreements with other 
authorities, so that unmet need from neighbouring areas is accommodated where 
it is practical to do so and is consistent with achieving sustainable development;  
 
b) Justified  – an appropriate strategy, taking int o account the reasonable 
alternatives, and based on proportionate evidence;  
 
c) Effective  – deliverable over the plan period, and based on effective joint working 
on cross -boundary strategic matters that have been dealt with rather than 
deferred, as evidenced  by the statement of common ground; and  
 
d) Consistent with national policy  – enabling the delivery of sustainable development 
in accordance with the policies in the NPPF.  
 Issues and Options Consultation (July / August 2019)  
Consult on Publication Local Plan (September 2020)  
Submit Local Plan for Examination (March 2021)  
Local Plan Examination (August 2021)  
Adopt Local Plan (March 2022)  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
5 
 1.16 The NPPF is supported by the National Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). The PPG 
is a web-based resource which sets out the Government’s planning guidance on 
various topics. This will be used to help provide further detail within the Local Plan.  
 
Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic Growth Plan  
 
1.17 The Leicester and Leicester shire  Strategic Growth Plan (SGP) 2018 was  jointly  
prepared by the seven District and Borough  Councils  in Leicestershire, Leicester City 
Council, Leicestershire County Council and the Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise 
Partne rship  to set out a strategy fo r the growth and development of Leicester and 
Leicestershire up to 2050 . It is a non-statutory strategic plan  that provides a framework  
to guide individual Local Plans.  
  
1.18 The SGP  focuses on four key matters: delivering new housing, supporting the 
economy, identifying essential in frastructure, and protecting the  environment and built 
heritage. It considers the scale of growth in terms of housing and employment land 
based  on the evidence set out in the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and 
Economic Develop ment Needs Assessment (HEDNA)  2017.  
 
1.19 The SGP  recognises that significant new development cannot be accommodated 
within Leicester and Leicestershire without significant investment in infrastructure and 
services. It proposes:  
 Focusing growth in areas close to existing employment clusters and 
opportunities and new infrastructure proposals;  
 Focusing growth in major strategic locations and to reduce the amount that 
takes place in existing towns, villages and rural areas;  
 Five key growth areas are identified. Th ose relevant to Blaby District are: 
Leicester: Our Central City, the A46 Priority Growth Corridor and the A5 
Improvement Corridor;  and 
 Delivery of the strategic growth areas will be as 21st century garden towns, 
villages and suburbs. New housing and employment will be planned together 
with new and improved roads, public transport, schools, health services, local 
shops and open space.  
 
Blaby District Growth Plan  
 
1.20 The Blaby  District  Growth Pl an (2019 ) sets out the District Council’s ambition for 
existing and new communities in the context of delivering new housing growth. It 
includes six fundamental key principles for designing and delivering new developmen t: 
 Infrastructure led ; 
 Integrated and  self sustaining ; 
 Active and healthy ; 
 Well designed ; 
 Well connected ; and  
 Accessible for employment , business  and skills.  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
6 
  
1.21 The Blaby District Growth Plan is the link between the Leicester and Leicestershire 
Strategic Growth Plan and the Local Plan. It is not a statutory plan but provides a 
strong framework for the new Local Plan.  
 
 
Neighbourhood Plans  
 
1.22 Neighbourhood planning gives communities direct power to develop a shared vision 
for their neighbourhood and shape the development and growth of their local  area. 
Neighbourh ood planning provides  tools for local people to plan for the types of 
development to meet their community’s needs.   
 
1.23 All Neighbourhood Plans need to be produced in broad conformity with the strategic 
policies set out within the District Co uncil’s Local Plan.  
 
1.24 Whilst a number of Neighbourhood Planning Groups  are engaged in the process and 
progressing well , currently only Blaby Parish has a ‘made’ plan which forms part of the 
Development Plan for the District.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
7 
 2. Scope of the Issues and Options Consultation  
 
2.1 This Issues and Options consultation is the first stage in the formulation  of the  new 
Local Plan. It accords with Regulation 18 of the Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 by  notifying residents, community groups, 
businesses and other interest ed parties of the subject of the local plan, and  inviting  
comment s on what the Local P lan ought to contain.  
 
2.2 At this stage we welcome your views on whether or not we have identified the correct 
issues facing the District  and whether any of the potential policy options are the most 
appropriate for addressing the identified issues . We also welcome views on additional 
planning issues which have not been covered by this document  and any potential 
option s that need to be considered to address them . Please note that this  document 
is not a draft Plan. We will prepare and consult on a draft Plan at a later date.  
 
2.3 To help structure the  consul tation , this document is  split into the following policy 
themes : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Health and 
Well -being  
Housing 
Needs  
Environment 
and 
Sustainability  Economy, 
Retail and 
Leisure  Transport  
Scale of Growth and Location al Strategy  
Local Services and Infrastructure  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
8 
 3. Scale of Growth and Location al Strategy  
 
Introduction  
3.1 The current Local Plan sets out a spatial strategy for the Dis trict up to 2029. It  
promotes a strategy of ‘urban concentration’ and focuses the majority of development 
within and adjoining the Principal Urban Area (PUA)  of Leicester. This will l argely be 
delivered in the  Sustainable Urban Extension at Lubbesthorpe.  A lesser amount of 
development will be delivered in the non -PUA of the District.   
 
3.2 Development at Lubbesthorpe  now is well underway and a significant amount of 
housing development has also been delivere d in the non -PUA since the beginning of 
the current plan period in 2006.  
 
3.3 To be effective the NPPF  states that local plans and their policies should be reviewed 
and updated as necessary, at least once every 5 years. The Council’s c urrent Local 
Plan is now being reviewed to ensure that its spatial strategy and supporting plannin g 
policies are appropriate and up to date.   
 
3.4 The new Local Plan will cover a specific timescale, known as the ‘plan period’ . The 
NPPF tells us that a  Local Plan should look forward at least 15 years from the date the 
Plan is adopted. This means that the end date of the new Local Plan should be at least 
2037.  
 
  
 
  Question 1: What start and end dates do you think are the most appropriate 
for the new Local Plan?  
   Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
9 
 Where we are now  
3.5 Performance against the c urrent Local Plan requirements has been strong. As at  31 
March 2019 , performance can be summarised as follows :  
 11,180  homes  have been built and committed in the District against a 
minimum plan requirement of 8,740 homes  to be delivered by 2029 ;  
 271 new homes  have been  completed on the Lubbesthorpe SUE; and 
 Approximately 95  hectares of employment land has been granted planning 
permission or allocated for employment uses  against a minimum plan 
requirement of 68 hectar es by 2029 .  
 
3.6 A review of the current Local Pl an, national  requirements and data has identified the 
following issues which the new Local Plan may need to address:  
a) Issue 1 : The population of the District , and wider housing market area , is 
continuing to grow and new households require housing as a result ;  
b) Issue 2 : A suitable amount of additional employment land will need to be 
provided to ensure that it supports the local economy and future housing 
growth; and  
c) Issue 3: The plan must identify sustainable locations for housing, 
employment and other new development .  
 
  Question 2: Do you agree with the issues identified? Are there any other 
issues that should be considered?  
   Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
10 
 How are we going to get there?  
 
Housing Growth  
 
3.7 Across Leicester and Leicestershire, the local planning authori ties are working 
together to plan for long  term housing needs of the  Leicester & Leicestershire Housing 
Market A rea (HMA) . A Strategic Growth Plan looking forward to 2050 has been 
approved and the local authorities are working on a Statement of Common Ground to 
agree the distribution of  housing to each local authority area.  
 
3.8 Leicester City Council has indicated that it will be unable to deliver the entirety of its 
own housing requirement. A  Statement of Common Ground  will address this issue in 
terms of finding agreement o n how the unmet needs from the City will be met, once 
the exact level of  their unmet housing need  is known . 
 
3.9 In advance of this, the following options are present ed as being the most up -to-date 
potential methods for estimating the Council’s future housing requirement:     
 
 
Table 1: Housing Growth Options  
 
Option A: Continue with existing level of housing growth beyond 2029.  
This method would see the continuation of providing 380 homes per year as set out 
within the existing Local Plan.  
Option B: Use the standard methodology for calculating local housing need.  
The National Planning Policy Framework expects local planning authorities to use 
the national standard method to identify the minimum number of homes expected to 
be planned for (wi th other methods only being acceptable in exceptional 
circumstances). This approach would plan to deliver a minimum requ irement of 339 
homes per year.  
Option C: Use the standard methodology and provide for a share of the unmet 
need (towards the end of th e Plan period).  
This would reflect the approach set out in the Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic 
Growth Plan. It would plan to deliver a minimum of Blaby District Council’s own 
needs per year to 2031 and then deliver an increased housing requirement per year  
post 2031 , to accommodate an agreed share o f Leicester City’s unmet needs.  
(Further work is required to confirm the exact level of unmet need and for the local 
authorities to agree through a Statement of Common Ground, how that c an be 
accommodated  elsewhere).  
Question 3: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? Are 
there any other options to consider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
11 
 Employment Growth  
 
3.10 The Local Plan Core Strategy  ident ified a n outstanding  need to find  approximately 68  
hectares of employment land for the District to 2029. This has now been planned for 
through a range  of consents  and site allocations , including  Land West of St Johns, 
Enderby.  
 
3.11 Going forward , the amount of employment land required in the future will be in formed 
by various employment land forecasting s tudies. The most recent  is the Leicester and 
Leicestershire Housing and Economic D evelopment Needs Assessment  (HEDNA)  
2017 . 
 
3.12 Changing economic circumstances and working practices over the plan period also 
need to be planned for. The Council therefore intends to update its employment 
evidence base to help better inform future economic need forecasts.  
 
 
Table 2 : Employment Growth Options  
 
Option A: Plan for the  employment requirements specified within the 2017 
Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Economic Development Needs 
Assessment (HEDNA).       
The 2017 HEDNA identifies a requirement of around 4 hectares of additional 
employment land per year for Blaby D istrict between 2011 and 2031. This 
requirement is based on previous trends and forecasts of future employment growth. 
It also reflects the requirements contained within the cu rrent Local Plan.     
Option B: Work with neighbouring authorities to meet the different types of 
employment requirements across a wider area (and update the joint evidence 
base where required).    
The HEDNA acknowledges that policy decisions may in reality influence the future  
spatial distribution of employment growth and land provision between authorities 
(within the Functional Economic Market Area).  
Cross boundary working may allow redistribution of identified requirements based on 
other factors such as availability of suitab le sites or wider Local Authority ambitions 
to promote certain types of employment growth. Any such agreement would be 
subject to the Duty to Cooperate process to ensure that an open and clear audit trail 
can be evidenced.  
Option C:  Support employment gro wth above identified needs.  
This approach would provide employment land above identified needs to increase 
Blaby Di strict’s competitive advantage.  
Question 4: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? Are 
there any other options to con sider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
12 
 Locational Strategy  
 
3.13 As explained in the previous Housing Growth and Employment Growth sections, the 
level of growth for the District beyon d 2029 has not yet been agreed with the other 
local planning authorities within  Leicester and  Leicestershire . However, we still need to 
start to consider where new housing and other development growth will go and how it 
will be delivered.   
 
3.14 The current focus for development is within and adjoining the Principal Urban Area 
(PUA) of Leicester. This includes a significant number of new homes and employment 
land at the Lubbesthorpe Sustainable Urban Extension. Outside the PUA, 
development is focused within and adjoining the larger settlements in the centre of the 
District (Blaby and the larger central villages) with lower levels of growth in the south of 
the District.  
 
3.15 There is ongoing concern about the expansion of existing settlements , in recent years, 
without the corresponding level of infrastructure to support the growth. As a result, the 
Leicester  and Leicester shire  Strategic Growth Plan and Blaby District Growth Plan 
promote  the delivery  of strategic -scale  sites where supporting infrastructure is planned 
for and employment opportunities  are included on site. T here are however, other 
optio ns that t he Council will  consider for the new Local Plan to ensure that housing, 
employment and other development is directed to sustainable locations. These are set 
out below. For each option, further work is required to consider whether there is 
sufficient land, market capacity and op portunity to provide infrastructure to support the 
option.  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
13 
 Table 3 : Location al Strategy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with existing policy approach for the locational strategy.  
The existing policy approach of ‘urban concentration’ directs most development to 
the Leicester Principal Urban Area (the PUA). A settlement hierarchy is used to 
determine the le vel of growth for other areas.  
Option B : Extended Leicester PUA focus.  
This option builds on Option A by proposing to extend the P rincipal Urban Area of 
Leicester. Whilst the extent is not defined this could potentially include Enderby, 
Narborough and Blaby , based on the ir levels of service provision.  
Option C: Spread the distribution of growth . 
This option gives a wider spread to the distribution of growth across the District. 
There are different ways to do this:  
 Trend distribution – based on where growth has taken place recently;  
 Proportionate share – based on current size of settlements an d/or a settlement 
hierarchy; or  
 Equal sha re to each s ettlement irrespective of size.  
Option D: Infrastructure led development at strategic sites / garden villages . 
This option is consistent with the Strategic Growth Plan and Blaby District Growth 
Plan.  The SGP directs development to maj or strate gic locations to reduce the impact 
of development on  existing towns, villages and rural areas. I n so doing, it allows new 
development to be focused in association with significant new and improved 
infrastructure, such as the proposed A46 expressway and A5 corridor.  
It also allows for development in  Leicester , other identified key centres and to a 
lesser degree, development  of non -strategic scale sites elsewhere.   
The SGP is a long term plan to 2050 and some of the major infrastructure proposed 
is not expec ted to happen until after the end of the Plan period. However, for this 
long term plan to be delivered effectively the foundations for this approach will need 
to be put i n place through the Local Plan.  
Option E: Single New Standalone Settlement  
A single new settlement to accommodate the majority of the housing requirement. It 
is likely that development  of this new settlement  will extend beyond the plan period.  
Question 5: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? Are 
there any other op tions to consider?  
 
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
14 
 Strategic Greenfield Designations  
 
3.16 The locational strategy  of the Local Plan is not just  about where new development 
should be located. It is also about identifying locations that should be protected from 
development.  
 
3.17 The current Local Plan includes Green Wedge, Areas of Separation and Countryside 
designations. Green Wedges have long been used in Leicestershire as a tool to 
influence and direct urban development. They are important strat egic areas, of which 
there are six  in the Dis trict, designated to prevent the merging of settlements, guide 
development form, provide a green lung into the urban areas and provide a recreation 
space.  
 
3.18 Areas of Separation perform the important function at the localised level of maintaining 
the charact er and identity of settlements by preventing their coalescence. Countryside 
is those areas of the District that  are outside settlement boundaries and are not subject 
to other designations – Green Wedge or Area of Separation.  
 
 
Table 4 : Strategic Greenfield  Designations Options  
Option A: Continue with existing approach to retain the designations.  
This option would retain the Green Wedge, Area of Separation and Countryside 
designations in principle. The detailed boundaries would be reviewed to take account 
of the new Local Plan site allocations and any other factual updates.  
Option B: Consider whether or not to retain the designations.  
This option would review whether or not to retain the Green Wedge, Area of 
Separation and Countryside designations in principle. If the designations are 
retained, the detailed boundaries would be reviewed to take account of the new 
Local Plan site allocations and any other factual updates.  
Question 6: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? Are 
there any other options to consider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
15 
 Other issues relating to scale and location of growth  
3.19 The Council recognises that there are a number of other issues that will need to be 
considered in t erms of the locational strategy. These include : 
 
Brownfield sites . National policy gives substantial weight to using suitable brownfield 
land within settlements for new homes. We will consider opportunities for development 
of brownfield sites but current evidence shows that there is limited capacity to 
accommodate significant numbers of new homes on such sites.  
Windfalls . The contribution of windfall sites to the housing land supply will be 
considered but current evidence shows that there is limited capacity to accommodate 
significant numbers of new homes on such sites within the existing settlement 
boundaries.  
Settlement hierarchy . The existing Local Plan includes  a settlement hierarchy to 
attribute housing requirements by settlement based on their sustainability and capacity 
for growth. Continuing the current approach would allow us to provide housing targets 
for neighbourhood planning purposes, i.e. for parish ar eas. 
Setting the scene for longer term growth . The Strategic Growth Plan proposes a 
strategic sites approach and key infrastructure to support that growth. Whilst, thi s 
Local Plan will not plan up to  2050, we will need to consider putting in place the 
foundations for the long term aspirations of the SGP.  
3.20 A ‘Call for Sites’ was carried out between March and May 2019. This involved asking 
landowners and site promoters to provide details of sites that th ey wished to be 
considered for inclusion  as site allocati ons in the Local Plan. We would welcome 
information about further sites for us to consider.  
 
 
Hinckley National Rail Freight Interchange  
 
3.21 Blaby District is located in the heart of the East Midlands within the ‘Golden Triangle’ 
for logistics. To respond to development pressures, the Leicester and Leicestershire 
local planning authorities are continuing to work together to consider the supply and 
demand for large -scale distribution warehousing to respond to increasing occupier 
demand for such properties1. 
 
3.22 Notwithstanding the plan -making process, a private developer is preparing a planning 
application for the proposed Hinckley National Rail Freight Interchange to the north of 
Junction 2 of the M69 motorway. The site is wholly within the Blaby District Counci l 
administrative area and involves approximately 178ha of land. It is currently at pre -
application stage with the Secretary of State (Infrastructure Planning Unit). A formal 
                                                
1 Leicester a nd Leicestershire Strategic Distribution Study (2015), Leicester and Leicestershire 
Strategic Distribution Study Update and Refresh (2016) and Wider Market Developments : 
Implications for Leicester and Leicestershire (2017)  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
16 
 planning application will be submitted to the Government and is expected to be 
determined by the Secretary of State during 2020 / 2021. The implications of this 
strategic proposal will need to be taken into account but may not be clear until late in 
the plan -making process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
17 
 4. Health and Well -being  
 
Introduction  
 
4.1 Spatial planning has an important role to play in the creation of healthy, safe and 
inclusive communities. The environment in which people live can have a profound 
impact on their health and wellbeing  (including physical and mental health) . In addition 
to direct health benefits, enhancement of the built and natural environment can have 
an impact on people’s attitudes, behaviours and perceptions of their environment 
(Public Health England, June 2017).   
 
4.2 The design of neighbourhoods impacts how individuals i nteract with, and navigate 
through, them. Well designed neighbourhoods can, for example, encourage the use of 
sustainable modes of transport  (e.g. walking and cycling) , encourage social interaction 
(which in turn can foster community cohesion and reduce the fear of crime) and have a 
positive impact on physical activity levels (resulting in improved physical and mental 
wellbeing).   
 
4.3 The Local Plan has a critical role in  helping to shape and deliver places , to ensure that 
they have a  positive impact upon local communities . A fundamental theme running 
throughout the Local Plan will therefore be the achievement of healthy communities.  
 
 
Where we are now  
 
4.4 The health of the District ’s residents  is generally good. The District performs well 
against most measurement s of health,  for example:  
 Almost half of the District’s population identify themselves as having very 
good health (2011 Census data).  
 Life expectancy for both men an d women is higher than the England average 
(Blaby District Health Profile 2017, Public Health England).  
 The percentage of children (in Year 6) that are classified as obese is below 
the national average  (Blaby District Health Profile 2017, Public Health 
England) .  
 For the period 2013 -2015 excess weight in adults was however, significantly 
higher  than the England average (Blaby District Health Profile 2017, Public 
Health England).  
 
4.5 The Council is also undertaking w ork to assess how better walk and ride  connections 
can be created throughout th e District and also into Leicester City Centre. This work is 
at an early stage and  will be used to help inform the Local Plan as it develops.  
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
18 
 4.6 A review of the Council’s curr ent evidence base and plans /  guidance pr oduced by 
other organisations has helped to identify the following issues which the Local Plan 
may need to address:   
 
a) Issue 4 : The District has some of the highest sports participation rates in 
the County . However, it ranks poorly in terms of both the qua lity and 
quantity of facilities;   
b) Issue 5 : The residents of Blaby District are heavily reliant on private cars 
to travel to w ork and leisure . Walk and ride  connections between key 
work, leisure and residential sites could be improved ; 
c) Issue 6 : Obesity i s an increasing  problem nationally and excess weight in 
adults within Blaby District is significant ly worse than the England 
average ; and  
d) Issue 7 : Pockets of the District s uffer from poor air quality,  predomina ntly 
from vehicle emissions.   
 
 
 
 
Where do we want to be?  
 
4.7 National planning policy clearly states that the planning system can play an important 
role in enabling and supporting healthy lifes tyles. Thi s can be achieved (in part) 
through  the delivery of mix ed use developments which e ncourage active modes of 
travel,  promote access to a network of high quality open spaces and help tackle locally 
identified health issues.  
 
4.8 Healt h and wellbeing should  be considered at the earliest opportunity in new 
development proposals. This will help to increase th e potential range and long -term 
benefits to both existing and potential new residents. This approach is also reflected 
within Principle 3 of the Bla by District Growth Plan , which  aims to provide residents 
with the opportunity to make choices that positiv ely affect their well being.  
 
  Question 7: Do you agree with the issues identified? Are there any other 
issues that should be considered?  
   Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
19 
 How are we going to get there?  
 
Open Space, Sport and Recreation  
 
4.9 The existing Local Plan seeks to ensure that all residents within the District have 
access to sufficient, high quality and accessible open space , sport and recreation . 
Update d Core Strategy Policy CS15  sets out minimum spac e standards for provision 
of facilities within new development (based on the Open Space Audit 2015) and 
protects existing areas  of open space . 
 
4.10 To ensure that the Council’s evidence is accurate and up to date, a new Open  Space 
Assessment has now been  commissioned . This will help to inform the new Local Plan 
and update the Council’s Supplementary Planning Document on Planning Obligations 
and Developers Contributions.      
 
4.11 In addition, a Playing Pitch Strategy for the District  has been commissioned to  assess 
the cur rent pitch provision in relation to quan tity, quality and accessibility. The strategy 
will also help  to identify existing and future require ments for various types of sports 
pitches  and facility enhancements .   
 
Table 5 : Open Space, Sport and Recreation Po licy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing approach and update the evidence base.  
Currently the Local Plan set s out (in Policy CS15 ) provision standards per 1000 
population for each type of open space. This is a well established approach and 
would be supported by updated Open Space Assessment evidence. It would also 
continue to protect open space, sports and recreation facilities from other form s of  
development (subject to consideration of their use and quality).  
Future needs  would also be derived from the latest Playing Pitch Strategy (or 
equivalent) f or sports related facilities.   
Option B: Do not set out specific standards and instead require provision to be 
delivered in line with the Council’s most up -to-date evidence.  
Instead of setting out development standards per 1000 population within policy, 
provision of new open space, spo rt and recreation could be required to be in line with 
the Council’s most up -to-date evidence. This approach would help to future proof the 
policy throughout the life span of the Local Plan  (given that Sport England 
recommend that open space and playing pi tch evidence is updated every 3 years) . 
Option C: Set out additional development criteria for new provision.  
To support either Option A or B outlined above, criteria could be developed which 
sets out design -related requirements. These could include, for example, 
requirements for new provision to be accessible by sustainable modes of travel, 
where feasible create links to other areas of green infrastructure or to be well located 
within a new development to help ma ximise its potential usage.     
Question 8: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? Are 
there any other options to consider?  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
20 
 Healthy Communities  
 
4.12 In recent years,  the health and wellbeing agenda within planning  policy has grown 
significantly. The NPPF  for example, states tha t planning policies should aim to 
achieve health y places and enable and support healthy lifestyles.  
 
4.13 The current Local Plan covers a number of areas  which help to promote healthy 
commun ities, for example  open space provision and  encou raging sustainable modes 
of transport. However, t he health related benefits of such policies are not explicitly 
stated and the current Local Plan does not include a Strategic Objective specifically 
relating to enabling / supporting healthy lifestyles.  
 
 
Table 6 : Healthy Com munities  Policy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing approach.  
This would continue the use of the  existing Local Plan policies to cover issues such 
as provision of open space and encouragement of sustainable  modes of travel. 
These policies would have health related benefits; however they may not be clearly 
referenced within the Local Plan.      
Option B: Consider setting out a specific policy which relates to healthy 
communities.  
A dedicated policy coul d be used to set out  requirements which specifically aim to 
improve the health of the District’s residents. This could include for example: a 
requirement for new residential proposals (over a certain number of dwellings) to 
submit a Health Impact Assessment; a requirement for all major new employment, 
retail and community facilities proposals to provide a suitable level of covered and 
secure cycle parking; or place restrictions on the number of hot food takeaway s 
permitted within individual neighbourhood parades  and /or within certain distances to 
schools.   
Option C: Consider th e use of a specific policy which looks to improve walking 
and cycling connections . 
The use of such a policy could  promote routes both within new development sites 
and thr ough into other  areas. This would help to improve / tackle a wide range of 
current issues regarding the health and well being of the District’s residents (for 
example improved air quality, increased activity levels and providing better access to 
green space).  
Question 9: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? Are 
there any other options to consider?  
 
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
21 
 5. Housing Need  
 
Introduction  
 
5.1 Planning for housing is not only about the overall number of new homes.  The NPPF  
requires planning policies to reflect and plan for the variety of needs of different 
sectors of the community. This includes, but is not limited to, those who require 
affordable housing, families with children, older persons, people with disabilities,  
Gypsies and Travellers and people who wish to build their own home.    
 
5.2 The Local Plan will  therefore  need to ensure that  it includes a sufficient range of 
planning p olicies  to ensure that all sectors of the community are able to  acces s 
suitable accommodation in appropriate and sustainable locations.  
 
 
Where are we now?  
 
5.3 The affordability of housing within the District is a growing issue as h ouse prices are 
rising faster than incomes.  For example, in 2011  the ratio  of hous e prices to earnings 
was 5.52. T his increased to 7.52 in 2017.  
 
5.4 Evidence from the  Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Economic Development 
Needs Assessment (HEDNA)  2017  indicates that for market housing the highest 
demand is for 3 bedroom homes. For affordable h ousing, the greatest need is for 
smaller units .  
 
5.5 Meeting the housing needs of the older population is also a key issue. Population and 
household projections for the District show considerable increases are expected in the 
number of people aged 60 or over,  and households headed by people aged 65 or 
over.  
 
5.6 Some of the District’s residents  also have long -term health problems or disabilities that 
require specialist housing or adaptions. The Census shows that 1 6% of all residents 
have a long -term health problem  or disability and that 30% of househol ds include a 
person with a long -term health problem or disability.  
 
5.7 The Council maintains a Self -build and Custom Housebuilding Register to inform 
demand for this type of housing. The Register shows that at May 2019,  48 individuals 
and 1 association of 2 people were accepted onto the Register.  
 
5.8 The Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment 2017 identified a sm all need for 
accommodation for Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Show P eople in the District. 
The report a lso identifies a need for public transit sites across the wider housing 
market area.  
 Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
22 
 5.9 A review of the C ouncil’s current evidence base has helped to identify the following 
issues which the Local Plan will need to address:  
a) Issue 8 : There is a lack of affordable housing to meet local needs, partly 
due to house prices increasing faster than incomes ;  
b) Issue 9 : Different sectors of the community have different housing needs 
in terms of type and size;  
c) Issue 10 : There is an increasing pressure within the Dis trict to provide 
suitable accommodation for older people  (including  dementia friendly, life 
long homes and bungalows); and    
d) Issue 11 : There is a need to further understand the requirements for  
Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Show P eople who meet the definition 
for planning purposes.  
 
 
 
W 
 
 
Where do we want to be?  
 
5.10 The Local Plan will need to set out robust planning policies which facilitate the deliver y 
of a wide range of housing types. These should reflect the needs of the community, 
with particular emphasis on those sectors with specific housing needs.  
 
5.11 The Council has a long and successful record of working with developers to ensure 
that a suitable level of affordable housing is provided within market hou sing schemes. 
We aim to build on  this proactive approach.  
 
5.12 Building on the work undertaken for the current Local Plan regarding accessible and 
adaptable homes, we wi ll aim to increase the delivery of such units (subject to viability 
considerations) , and look to increase the number of other specialist house types for 
the older population.  
 
  Question 10: Do you agree with the issues identified? Are there any other 
issues that should be considered?  
   Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
23 
 How are we going to get there?  
 
Affordable Housing  
 
5.13 The current Local Plan seeks to secure a minimum of 25% affordable housing on sites 
of 15 dwellings or more. It also allows rural exception sites for affordable housing in 
settlements with a population of 3,000 or less where a local need is demonstrated.  
 
5.14 The Council is considering a num ber of options to ensure that a sufficient amount of 
affordable housing is planned for the District. Each option will require new evidence on 
affordable housing need and viability to justify the approach.  
 
 
Table 7 : Affordable Housing Policy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing approach.  
Continue to seek 25% affordable housing on all sites across the District of 15 
dwellings or more; and enable the provision of rural exception sites.  
Option B: Modify the policy approach in terms of the threshold for and 
percentage of affordable housing.  
The current threshold is 15 dwellings or more. A lower threshold would mean that 
more sites would  be eligible to provide affordable housing. The curre nt percentage is 
25%. A higher percentage proportion could increase the amount of affordable 
housing provided  (subject to viability) . 
Option C: Allocate sites specif ically for affordable housing.  
Allocate sites for affordable housing and for rural except ions sites. This would require 
a willing landowner to provide a site at a suitable cost but currently there is funding 
available from Ho mes England.  
Option D : Provide hig her levels of housing overall.  
A higher level of housing overall would generat e more  affordable housing at 25%.   
Question 11: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
24 
 Housing Mix  
 
5.15 The current Local Plan seeks a n appropriate  mix of housing types, tenures and sizes  
on sites of 10 dwellings or more,  to meet the needs of existing and future households 
based on the latest evidence of housing need.  
 
5.16 The Council is considering a number of options to ensure that a range of suitable 
housing is planned for to meet the needs  of different sectors of the community. Each 
option will require new evidence on relevant housing need to justify the approach.  
 
 
Table 8 : Housing Mix Policy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with existing policy approach.  
The existing  policy is  flexible in that it takes account of  the most recent evidence to  
demonstrate need in terms of  housing type, tenure and size.  
Option B: Use a prescriptive poli cy approach.  
Set out within the policy the requirements for specific types and sizes of housing. For 
example for people who rent their homes a nd self and custom build plots.  
Option C: Allow the market to determine the mix of type and size of housing.  
Allowing the market to determine the mix of type and size of housing .  
Question 12: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
25 
 Housing for an ageing population and specialist needs  
 
5.17 The current Local Plan seeks to meet the needs of specific groups including extra care 
housing for the older population, supported housing and housing designed to meet 
wheelchair access standards. It also requires 5% of housing on large sites to meet 
acces sible and adaptable standards set by the national Building Regulations 
requirement M4(2). The Council will consider the options to ensure that the needs of 
the ageing population as well as those with specialist housing needs are planned for.  
 
 
Table 9 : Housing for an ageing population and specialist needs Policy Options  
 
Option A: Maintain the current policy approach.  
Taking into account current and future demographic changes the existing policy 
approach is considered to b e the minimum action necessary.  
Option B: Develop a higher policy requirement for the provision of accessible 
and adaptable homes.  
Population trends, both nationally and locally, clearly show that populations are 
aging. Local policy needs to reflect these trends and plan for them pr oacti vely. 
Higher requirements c ould be  considered to coincide with a  more forward looking 
plan period. Making homes accessible and adaptable for changing and unforeseen 
circumstances provides families and individuals with the choice of staying in their 
existing home.  
Option C: Include policy requirements for other house types which are suitable 
for older people and others with specialist needs.   
Subject to suitable evidence  of local need,  additional policy requirements could be 
set out to meet the range of ne eds for older people and others. This could include 
bungalows, extra care, re gistered care  and convalescent care and special ist housing 
for older  people as well as  people with dementia  or mental health difficulties.  All 
additional requirements would be sub ject to viability testing to ensure that they do not 
prevent additiona l development coming forward.   
Option D: Consider allocating sites specifically for older persons and other 
specialist housing.  
Subject to suitable evide nce of local need  sites of varying development scales could 
be allocated to meet specific needs including si tes for older persons homes,  
specialist needs, extra care and registered care.  
Question 1 3: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
26 
 Planning for  Gypsies and Travellers  
 
5.18 The current Local Plan sets out provision figures for Gypsies and Travellers and 
Travelling Show P eople and includes broad locations and criteria against which 
planning applications fo r such development will be assessed. No sites are allocated as 
there is currently a sufficient supply of pitches. The current Local Plan also recognises 
the need for the new Local Plan to consider making provision for public transit pitches 
to accommodate  a Leicester and Leicestershire -wide need.  
 
 
 Table 10 : Planning for Travellers  Policy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with existing policy approach.  
The current  approach  allows the most recent evidence to  be used t o demonstra te 
need . It includes broad locations and criteria to set out the approach to determine 
planning applications. New evidence is required to clarify the number of ‘unknown’ 
households in the District and to justify  a Leicester and Leicestershire -wide approach 
to the provision of  public transit pitches.  
Option B: Allocating sites.  
Currently there is sufficient provision but if this is no longer the case, we will need to 
consider identifying sites to allocate.  
Question 1 4: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
27 
 6. Environment  and Sustainability  
 
Introduction  
 
6.1 It is widely acknowledged, both nationally and internationally, that there is a pressing 
need to reduce the impacts of climate change and to encourage more sustainable 
ways of living. At the local level, the planning system has a crucial role in helping to  
facilitate these shifts through the policies contained within Local Plans.  
 
6.2 The Local Plan provides a key opportunity to set out an ambitious policy framework to 
help deliver higher levels of sustainability within new development pr oposals. It can 
achiev e this by  including policies which support appropriate measures t o help shape 
places in ways which  reduce greenhouse gas emissions, promote renewable and low 
carbon energy and encourage the reuse of existing resources (including land and 
buildings).  
 
6.3 The above  approach  is in line with the  NPPF , which  states that in order to contribute to 
the achievement of sustainable de velopment, planning has overarching economic, 
social and environmental  objectives .     
 
6.4 A key element of the  environment al objective  is for planning to contribute  to the 
protection and enhancement of the natural, built and historic envi ronment. The Local 
Plan therefore  has a fundamental role in facilitating the  creation of high quality 
buildings and places which respect and complement the D istrict’s built and natural 
assets.   
 
 
Where we are now  
 
6.5 Blaby District has a range of  historic and natural assets.  These include:  
 Some 200 Listed Buildings;  
 11 Conservation Areas;  
 4 biological Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and 2 geological 
SSSIs;  
 2 areas of Ancient Woodland;  
 70 Local Wildlife Site designations; and  
 Locally important landscape areas  (such as Croft Hill) .  
 
6.6 Over  the plan period of the  new Local Plan, the District is likely to face pressures to 
deliver large amounts of development. Whilst housing and wider development 
requirements have not ye t been identified or determined;  the following initial key issues 
have been identified to help e nsure that the Local Plan provides a suitable level of 
protection to the District’s valued built and natural assets:     
 Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
28 
 a) Issue 12 : There is a critical need to help adapt to and  mitigate the growing 
impacts of Climate Change and actively take steps to help promote lower 
carbon forms of development.  
b) Issue 13 : New development needs to be appropriately designed so it 
contributes to, and does not detract from, the local character an d 
distinctiveness of the District.  
c) Issue 14 : The Council’s policy approach towards conserving the District’s 
historic and cultural assets needs to be appropriate and up to date;     
d) Issue 15 : There is a limited amount of brownfield land suitable for 
devel opment. Pressure for development may mean loss of currently 
undeveloped land/countryside; and  
e) Issue 16 : Additional growth needs to ensure that it is located in the most 
suitable locations with regards to the District’s natural landscapes.  
 
 
 
 
Where do we want to be?  
 
6.7 Protection of the natural environment and appreciation of its wider associated benefits 
is growing both nationally and internationally. For example the Government’s recent 
consultation on Biodiversity Net Gain (December 2018) comments that:  
 
‘Nowhere do the state of the natural world and the actions of government meet more 
regularly and more critically than in the planning system’.   
 
6.8 At a local level, it is  widely  recognised that the District’s built and natur al environment  
assets are highly valued by residents and community groups.  This is reflected in 
consultation responses received during the production of the current Local Plan and 
also the work being undertaken by  various Neighbourhood Planning Groups within the 
District.  
 
6.9 Providing a robust level of protection to  the built and natural  environment , along with 
ensuring that new development is appropriate to its surroundings , will help to balance 
the economic, social and environme ntal objectives of the NPPF  and help to ensure 
that growth in the District is sustainable .  
 
  Question 15 : Do you agree with the issues identified? Are there any other 
issues that should be considered?  
   Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
29 
 How are we going to get there?  
 
Design  
 
6.10 National policy states that the creation of high quality buildings and places is 
fundamental to what the planning process should achieve. Far from being just about 
appearance and layout, good design encompasses a wide range of considerations.  
 
6.11 Core Strategy Policy CS2 Design of New Development aims to secure a high quality 
environment through setting out factors which all new development proposals should 
consider. Delivery DPD Policies DM1 Development within the Settlement Boundaries 
and DM2 Developm ent in the Countryside provide additional de velopment criteria to 
assess  development proposals against.     
 
6.12 Principle 4 of the Blaby District Growth  Plan states that good design is  essential in the 
creation of places where people want to live and can be p art of the local community. 
The following range of potential policy options have been identified to help meet both 
national and local ambitions regarding design.   
 
 
Table 11 : Design Policy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing approach.  
The existi ng Local Plan promotes the delivery of good design thr ough various 
policies. The most notable of which being Core Strategy Policy CS2 and Delivery 
DPD Policies DM1 and  DM2. The submission of a masterplan is also a requirement 
for the site specific policies which allocate land for residential and employment 
allocations.  
Option B: Consider setting out a more detailed approach to design policy.  
Going beyond the current Local Plan approach, additional design requirements could 
be set out for specific policy areas (for example sustainable design) or additional 
design criteria could be developed for large scale proposals (for example of 
propos als for 100 dwellings or more).  
Option C: Consider the use of a design specific Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD).  
To support either Option A or B outlined above, an SPD could be used to provide 
additional design guidance for a wide range of  design related issues  or focus on 
speci fic topics such as residential amenity .    
An SPD could also be used to set out more detailed design related guidance for 
large scale development proposals ( for example setting out how community facilities 
and/or open sp ace should be best incorporated into  a development ).   
Question 1 6: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
30 
  
Historic Environment   
 
6.13 National policy requires Local Plan’s to set out a positive strategy for  the conservation 
and enjoyment  of the historic environment. This should include consideration of  wider 
social, cultural, economic and environmental benefits.  
 
6.14 Core Strategy Policy CS20 sets out the Council’s overarching policy approach to the 
conservation of heritage assets and the wider historic environment. This is suppor ted 
by Delivery DPD Policy DM12,  which details how applications  potentially impact ing 
heritage assets will be considered.  
 
6.15 The Local Plan also provides detailed Conservation  Area boundaries for 10 
settlements and the Gr and Union Canal. A  review of the District’s conservation areas 
was last undertaken as part of the Blaby District Landscape and Settlement Character 
Assessment in 2008.  This was undertaken to gain an understandi ng of the aspects of 
the settlements that are considered to be of local value to the community.  
 
 
Table 12 : Historic Environment Policy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing approach.  
Delivery DPD Policy DM12 Designated and Non -designated Heritage Assets aims to 
offer a level of protection to heritage assets proportionate to the asset’s level of 
importance. This builds on Core  Strategy Policy CS20 Historic E nvironment and 
Culture’s overarching positive approach to the conservation of herita ge assets and 
the wider historic environment.  
Delivery DPD Policy DM12 was refined as part of the examination process of the 
DPD in 2018; and was subsequently adopted in February 2019. The  current  policy 
approach is therefore considered to reflect curren t national policy and guidance.  
Option B: Consider setting  out a more detailed approach.  
Addition al information could be gathered to see whether any specific areas or 
individual assets are worthy of protection for heritage reasons. Subject to evidence 
an additional heritage policy could be developed which builds on the e xisting District 
wide policy.   
Question 1 7: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
31 
 Natural Environment   
 
6.16 National guidance states that planning policies should contribute to and enhance the 
natural  environment. This should be achieved, in part, by protecting valued landscapes 
and recognising the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside.   
 
6.17 In December  2018, the Government consulted on whether mandatory requirements 
should be introduced to the planning system so that development must deliver 
biodiversity net gain. This  would strengthen the current wording of the National 
Planning Policy Framework which states that wherever po ssible, development should 
help to improve local environmental  conditions . Whilst the results of the above 
consultation have not yet been published, it shows the growing level of importance 
being given to the prote ction of biodiversi ty and habitats.   
 
6.18 The existing Local Plan contains a range of policies which cover various aspects  of the 
natural environment. The se include  specific policies which aim to protect and enhance 
the District’s countryside, green infrastructure, landscapes and ecological assets. 
Going forward however, current evidence suggests that there are limited opportunities 
to use brownfield sites to meet th e development needs of the District. It is therefore 
likely that some greenfield land may nee d to be considered for development; with 
resulting impacts on the natural environment.   
 
 
Table 13 : Natural Environment Policy Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing policy approach.  
The existing Local Plan contains a range of policies which cover various aspects of 
the natural environment. These are  considered if and when development proposals 
on greenfield sites come forward.  
Option B: Consider mapping all components of local wildlife -rich and wider 
ecological networks.  
The existing policy approach could be strengthened by mapping all designated sites 
of importance for biodiversity and wildlife corridors that connect them. This  would 
help to identify potential opportunities to create new linkages between existing 
assets.  
Question 1 8: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
32 
 Climate Change and Flooding  
 
6.19 Spatial planning has an important part to play in mitigating the negative effects of , and 
adapting to,  climate chan ge. Local Plans should  set out a strong policy steer to set out 
what measures can be realistically taken at a local level. This will need to support the 
national transition to a low / zero carbon future and co ntribute  to reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions.    
 
6.20 Core Strategy Policy CS21  aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions within the 
District by : focusing development in the most sustainable locat ions, encouraging the 
use of renewable and low carbon energy and seeking sustainable design principles  to 
be incorporated into new development .  
 
6.21 Core Strategy Policy CS22 sets out the Council’s approach to ensuring that all 
development minim ises vulnerability and provides  resilience to flooding, taking into 
account climate change. This is achieved through directing development to locations at 
the lowest risk of flooding, using Sustainable Drainage Systems and minimising 
surface water run -off. 
 
 
Table 14 : Climate Change Policy Options  
 
Option A: Update current policy to enhance  sustainable design principles and 
the efficient use of natural resources.     
This will ensure that any changes to national policy and guidance and local and  
regional evidence etc. can be taken into accoun t and reflected within policy.  
Option B: Consider  setting a requirement for  sites  (of a certain size)  to provide 
a percentage of their energy requirements through onsite renewable / low 
carbon energy generation sources .   
Decentralised energy supply systems (such as combined heat and power) could help 
to reduce the ongoing carbon  footprint of strategic sites.  
Option C: Consider the use of a Supplementary Planning Document to provide 
more detailed gui dance for sustainable development/design.  
This would help to support the Local P lan’s overarching sustainability objectives by 
providing ap plicants with  information  on sustainable design and what the Council 
expects to be delivered .  
Question 1 9: Which of  the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
33 
 7. Economy,  retail  and leisure  
 
Introduction  
 
7.1 The N PPF identifies  build ing a strong and competitive economy as  a key objective  for 
the planning system. To help achieve this, Local Plans are required to ensure that a 
sufficient  level of land is available for an appropriate range of economic uses to 
support growth and innovation.  
 
7.2 Loca l Plans should also identify a range of suitab le sites within town centres to meet 
the scale and type of development likely to be needed for retail, leisure, office and 
other main town centre uses.   
 
 
Where we are now  
 
7.3 Blaby District is an attractive location for business, largely as a result of its strategic 
location close to the M1 and the advantages of access to the wider Strategic Road 
Network. The number of jobs within the District is approximately 60 ,000, with 
significant levels in  the office and storage and distribution sectors.  
 
7.4 The District has a range of employment sites from regionally important sites such as 
Grove Park, Meridian Business Park  and Carlton Park  to smaller scale sites that meet 
a local need for smaller units. In total there are 21 key employment sites located 
across the District.  
 
7.5 Fosse Park provides a large number of retail jobs and is currently undergoing 
significant expansion. There is also a n increasing demand from the logistics sector for 
large scale warehousing units.    
 
7.6 Whilst the  District is performing strongly in employment and retail terms, the following 
issues have been identified:  
 
a) Issue 17 : Some e xisting employment sites are under pressure for re -
development for non -employment uses;  
b) Issue 18 : Blaby Town Centre and other retail centres require policy 
support to ensure that they maintain their vitality and viability.  
 
 
 
  Question 20: Do you agree with the issues identified? Are there any other 
issues that should be considered?  
   Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
34 
 Where do we want to be?  
 
7.7 Supporting businesses is  a key priority for the Council. Planning can support this 
process, in the first instance, by ensuring that it has an accurate picture of current and 
likely future demand for a range  of employment uses. Given the  District’s close 
proximity to Leicester City, a high level of joint working and cooperation will also be 
required with neighbouring local authorities to ensure that employment requirements 
across th e sub -region are suitably considered.  
 
7.8 Currently the  District has a good range of employment premises which cater for small -
scale business up to large -scale strategic distribution warehouse units. The District is 
also home to the (UK) head quarters of a number of large -scale  companies. The next 
Local Plan should seek to ensure that the District remains an attractive location for 
business es of all sizes.   
 
7.9 Blaby Town Centre is the only ‘town centre’ within the District and it continues to 
provide a range of facilities and services to a wide catchment area. The next Local 
Plan will need to give a good  level of consideration of how best to promote and support 
local retail facilities wi thin both Blaby Town and other  local retail areas . This wi ll need 
to consider the changing wider cont ext of how and where people  shop.  
 
 
 How we are going to get there?  
 
Employment Mix  
 
7.10 There is a growing recognition nationally that planning policy needs to be strengthen ed 
to reflect the growing role and significance  of the logistics sector. Locally,  demand for  
strategic warehousing has grown rapidly in recent years.  This is largely d ue to the 
District being located with in the Mi dlands , in the  so-called ‘Golden Triangle’ of logistics 
(spanning from Northamptonshire up the M1 to East Midlands Airport to the north and 
as far west as Tamworth. 90% of the UK population is accessible within a 4 hour drive 
from this triangle).   
 
7.11 Increa sing demand from the logistics sector local ly is putting pressure on land for 
smaller -scale employment  uses . The current  Local Plan sets out various policies to 
support and protect a mix of employment uses within the District but does not 
distinguish between B1, B2 and B8 employment use classes.   
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
35 
 Table 15 : Employment Mix Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing policy approach.  
Delivery DPD Policy SA5 identifies a wide range of key employment sites within the 
District to be protected for employment uses. The policy also sets out requirements 
to be met before they can be consi dered for changes of use to non -employment 
uses.  
Option B: Consider a policy which distinguishes between different types of 
employment sites (includin g strategic -scale B8 uses).     
Taking a more hierarchical approach , to providing and protecting employm ent land 
would , allow for a greater level of appreciation of the varying function s and role s of 
different types of employment. This would help to identify the specific needs of 
certain types of employment (for exa mple strategic -scale B8 uses).  
Option C: Update evidence base and allocate a range of employment sites to 
meet  (local and regional) demands.  
Subject to the findings of updated evidence, employment allocations could be 
considered for specific types of employment. This approach would accord wit h the 
growing national emphasis  on more detailed planning for the logistics sector a nd 
their bespoke requirements. It will also recognise the need for smaller scale 
employment sites to meet local scale needs.   
Question 2 1: Which of the above option(s) do yo u think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
36 
 Retail  
 
7.12 Whilst Fosse Park undergoes continued renovation and significant new expansion, the 
Local Plan will need to ensure that Blaby Town Centre and more localised  retail 
facilities are not overlooked.  
 
7.13 Core Strategy Policy CS13 Retailing and other town centre uses , establishes a re tail 
hierarchy for the District and sets out retail floorspace requirements to 2029. Delivery 
DPD Policy DM5 aims to protect the identif ied primary retail frontages within Blaby 
Town Centre for predominately A1 Retail use. Delivery DPD Policy DM6 also identifies 
22 neighbourhood parades to be maintained, and where possible enhanced, for day to 
day small scale retail uses.     
 
 
Table 16 : Retail Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing policy approach and update the Council’s 
evidence base where necessary.  
The existing approach is well established but requires an updated Retail Study to 
fully support it. Updating the evidence will als o allow an opportunity for recent 
changes to national policy and  guidance and r etail trends to be considered.  
Option B: Consider amending the existing policy approach to allow for a 
greater level of flexibility of uses within Blaby Town  Centre  and 
Neighbourhood Parades.    
The current policy approach includes a series of tests to be met before changes of 
use to non -retail will be considered. Consideration could be given to relaxing or eve n 
removing these requirements.  
Question 2 2: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
37 
 Leisure and Tourism  
 
7.14 Core Strategy Policy CS13 – Retailing and other town centre uses, sets out a 
sequential test for retail and leisure development proposals.  Policy CS18  – 
Countryside also allows for limited small scale leisure development subject to suitable 
consideration of its impacts.  
 
7.15 Currently there are no identified requirements for Blaby District relating to leisure. The 
main leisure destination withi n the District is  Meridian Leisure Park (which  incorporates 
a cinema, bowling alley and numerous restaurants). Additional leisure facilities are 
also current ly under construction at Everards Meadows (located near to the Fosse 
Park retail expansion). When completed this development will be anchored by a new 
Everards Brewery and  beer hall, cycle store, café and links to neighbouring areas of 
open space.  
 
7.16 Further  consideration of leisure related requirements can be incorporated within a 
wider review of the retail evidence base for the District.   
 
 
Table 17: Leisure and Tourism Options  
 
Option A: Continue with the existing policy  approach .  
The existing approach is well established  and focuses development proposals to 
most sustainable locations within the District.  
Option B: Consider the use of a specific tourism related policy  
This could expand on the current policy approach by promoting certain forms of 
tourism related development and / or promote certain areas of the District for 
touris m.  
Question 2 3: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
38 
 8. Transport  
Introduction  
8.1 The National Planning P olicy Framework (NPPF) states that t ransport issues should 
be considered from the earliest stages of plan -making and development proposals.  In 
doing so, plans can seek to address any potential transport impacts, encourage more 
sustainable forms of movement  and embrace changing transport technology.  
 
8.2 The Local Plan will need to consider the implications of growth and how best to 
mitigate any adverse transport impacts. The Local Plan can encourage growth in 
locations that have greater access to mo re sustainable forms of transport .  
 
Where are we now?   
8.3 The District contains a heavily trafficked road network which experiences congestion, 
delays and poor air quality, particularly at peak times. Existing ‘hotspots’ include 
junction 21 of the M1 (and its environs ) and the radial ro utes into the City of Leicester  
(including the A4560, A426, A47 and A50 ).  
 
8.4 The residents of the District are heavil y reliant on private vehicles. Retail 
developments a round Fosse Park , Grove Park and other nearby employment centres 
are likely to attract substantial additional vehicle movements.  
 
8.5 The current Local Plan seeks to locate development close to services and facilities and 
where there is greater transport choice. Adopted policy seeks to prioritise the use of 
‘sustain able modes’  of transport,  such as walking, cycling and public transport , over 
private cars. Core Strategy Policy CS10 Transport Infrastructure encourages new 
developments to consider design solutions  and ‘softer measures’ such as travel plans 
and travel pa cks to help encourage modal shift.  
 
8.6 In the context of transport impacts and implications associated with growth, the 
following issues have been identified:  
 
a) Issue 19: Some two -thirds of the working population of the District travel to 
work using a car or v an. This is substantially above the national and County 
average;  
b) Issue 20: There are five Air Quality Management Are as within the District 
which have mainly been designated as a result of vehicle emissions;  
c) Issue 21: Over -reliance on car use will continue  in new developments 
unless they are located in areas that have a wider choice o f transport 
options to access  a wide range of services and facilities; and  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
39 
 d) Issue 22: Some junctions and road links within the District are operating at 
or above capacity, with limited scope for further improvements.  
e) Issue 23 : The Birmingham to Peterborough railway line runs through the 
District via Narborough Station. The benefits of this  connection should be 
maximised.  
 
 
 
 
 
Where do we want to be?  
 
8.7 The Local Plan can strongly influence transport and travel patterns. Minimising the 
need for journeys using private cars and encouraging more sustainable modes can be 
achieved through a range of policy approaches and identifying potential allocations in 
the most sustainable locations.  
 
8.8 The plan must be realistic in that the re will inevitably be a need for people to travel to 
seek employment, education, shopping, leisure and other services and facilities. The 
transport impacts and implications of growth need to be addressed at the earliest 
opportunity and potential mitigation  measures identified where necessary. The Local 
Plan should seek to provide the necessary growth in a manner that minimises 
transport impacts.  
 
8.9 The Council’s future ambitions for growth as set out in the Blaby District Growth Plan 
identify the need for ‘ac tive and healthy’ communities and ‘well -connected’ places. The 
Council is also currently exploring opportunities to promote and improve walking and 
cycling connections both within the District and heading north into Leicester City 
Centre. This work will he lp to inform the Local Plan as it develops.  
 
 
  Question 24 : Do you agree with the issues identified? Are there any other 
issues that should be considered?  
   Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
40 
 How are we going to get there?  
 
8.10 Initially, further transport evidence will be required in order to understand the current 
pressures on transport and where there are capacity constraints. Growth options will 
be assessed to understand the transport impacts and implications.  
 
8.11 The development of new policies and allocations will allow the Council to explore 
options for delivering necessary growth whilst seeking the most sustainable forms of 
movement and mitigatin g any adverse impacts identified.  
 
 
Table 1 8: Transport policy options  
 
Option A: Continue with existing policy approach .   
This would maintain the policy approach of seeking to ‘encourage’ more sustainable 
transport modes whilst acknowledging that private cars have an important role in 
transporting people. Where adverse impacts are identified at junctions and links, 
mitigation  solutions will be required by the policy.  
Option B: Promote policies that actively encourage sustainable transport .   
To help shift the emphasis towards more sustainable transport modes consideration 
could be given to policies which promote for example:  the provision of  new and 
improved park and ride facilities, seeking greater financial contributions towards 
public transport or improving cycling / walking infrastructure in preference to road 
and junction upgrades.  
Option C: Promote policies that actively discourage use of private cars .  
Options such  as: traffic calming me asures for all new developments,  facilitating the 
infrastructure for congestion chargi ng / workplace car park charges, and  applying 
maximum car parking provision in new commercial  developments, could be 
considered to  help reduce  private car use.  
Option D. Promote improved technology and traffic management to address 
conge stion, delays and air quality.  
This assumes that technology, including  improved traffic management  and use of  
responsive satellite navigation systems, will be able to accommodate the anticipated 
levels of traffic  on certain routes .  
Option E. Allow for development and accept that junctions and links will 
continue to operate above capacity .  
This may result in ‘s elf-regulating’ behaviour where people choose alternatives 
where routes and junctions become too congested. This approach would place 
lesser transport constraints on growth but is likely to perpetuate traffic problems on 
the network.   
Question 2 5: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
41 
  
9. Local Services and Infrastructure   
Introduction  
9.1 The NPPF  identifies the overarching objectives for delivering sustainable development. 
In the context of social and economic objectives, encouragement is given to 
‘coordinating the provision of infrastructure’  and to ‘accessible services and open 
spaces that refle ct current and future needs and support communities’ health, social 
and cultural well -being….’ . 
 
9.2 The Local Plan should consider the implications of growth and ensure that the social 
and other infrastructure is in place to support the needs of new residents. Large scale 
growth will have substantial and complex infrastructure requirements. It is therefo re 
vital that the Local Plan adequately plans for this.  
 
 
Where are we now?  
 
9.3 The population of the District is forecast to grow by some 11,100 people between 2018 
and 20362. The occupants of new homes  have the potential to result in increased 
demand for s ocial and utilities infrastructure.   
 
9.4 In order to be sustainable, and in accordance with the NPPF, new development should 
seek to deliver the necessary infrastructure to support growth.  
 
9.5 In addition to the transport infras tructure , there will be substantial requirem ents for 
social infrastructure  such as new schools, health facilities  and community buildings 
and also infrastructure associated with ‘utilities’ such as power, water and 
telecommunications.  
 
9.6 Some schools and health  facilities in the District are operating close to, or above, their 
optimum capacity. Further growth in areas with capacity constraints has the potential 
for adverse impacts on new and existing communities.  
 
9.7 The adopted Local Plan seeks to ensure that all  new growth is accompanied by the  
necessary infrastructure. This  is identified in policies assoc iated with allocations and in 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan . 
 
  
                                                
2 Based on 2016 ONS population projections.  Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
42 
 9.8 In the context of infrastructure related growth, the following issues have been 
identified:  
a) Issue 24: There are capacity constraints withi n some services and facilities, 
such as health facilities  and schools . New development to accommodate  
increase s in the population  will necessitate  increases in capacity for these 
services and facilities;   
 
b) Issue 2 5: Infrastructure needs to be provided in a timely and viable manner 
and have certainty of delivery and ongoing management; and  
 
c) Issue 26: New development needs to have access to all necessary utilities 
including water, power, and telecommunications  (including broadband) ; 
and going forward , electric vehicle charging points   
 
 
 
Where do we want to be?  
 
9.9 The Local Plan will need to identify sites in locations which have the ability to access 
existing infrastructure (where there is capacity) or provide additional infrastructure 
through new provision or expansion of existing facilities.  
 
9.10 An appropriate range of supporting i nfrastru cture will need to be available in a timely 
manner . This will ensure that  residents of new development are able to access them 
immediately and that existing residents are not disadvantaged by increases in 
population resulting in capacity issues.  
 
9.11 We want the long term management of infrastructure to be certain. The initial 
identification and ongoing management of schools and health facilities  is essential in  
ensuring sustainable communities. The emergence of ‘Academies’ and privately run 
medical pr actices requires advance dialogue in order to increase levels of certainty.  
 
9.12 The Leicester and  Leicestershire Strategic Growth P lan promotes substantial gro wth 
between 2031 and 2050. The p lan is underpinned by a desire to “. ..plan for, and 
secure funding for, the essential infrastructure ….”.  In addition, the Blaby District 
Growth Plan is infrastructure -led and requires development to be accompanied by 
planned and funded infrastructure such as roads, schools and health facilities  
 
  Question 2 6: Do you agree with the issues identified? Are there any other 
issues that should be considered?  
   Blaby District (New) Local Plan  Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
43 
 How are we going to get  there?  
 
9.13 The Council  will engage with its partners from the Local Education Authority, Clinical 
Commissioning Group  / NHS and other infrastructure d elivery partners under the Duty 
to Co -operate process and at the appropriate time with individual site promoters in 
order to assess the deliverability and ongoing management of infrastructure.  
 
9.14 The development of new policies and allocations will allow the Council to explore 
options for delivering  growth , whilst seeking the necessary infrastructure. An 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan will be used in order to identify the type of infrastructure 
required, its cost, delivery agency, phasing and funding sources.  
 
 
Table 1 9: Infrastructure policy options  
 
Option A: Continue with existing policy approach  
This approach seeks on -site provision and financial contributions to a wide range of 
infrastructure wh ere new development requires the  provision. It  ensure s that 
developments su pport a wide range of services and  facilities (including  health, 
education, policing , libraries and other forms of social infrastructure ). 
Option B: Prioritise  infrastructure based on viability  
This would help to prioritise scarce financial resources towards key infrastructure to 
be agreed as the Local Plan progresses. This could  prioritise certain types  of 
infrastructure . 
Option C: Only allow development where there is demonstrable capacity or 
certainty of delivery of infrastructure such as schools / health services etc.  
This approach would result in an infrastructure -led appro ach where development 
sites are chosen on the basis of existing or poten tial supply of infrastructure.  
Question 2 7: Which of the above option(s) do you think should be pursued? 
Are there any other options to consider?  
 
 
 
 