Blackpool Local Plan  
Part 1: Core Strategy (2012 – 2027)
Adopted January 2016
Blackpool Core Strategy
Contents
1. Introduction 1
2. A Spatial Portrait of Blackpool 7
3. Spatial Vision and Objectives
Vision
Objectives
Policy NPPF1:  Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development21
23
24
27
4. Spatial Strategy
Key Diagram
Policy CS1: Strategic Location of Development29
30
31
5. Core Policies
Policy CS2: Housing Provision 
Policy CS3: Economic Development and Employment 
Policy CS4: Retail and Other Town Centre Uses
Policy CS5: Connectivity
Policy CS6: Green Infrastructure
Policy CS7: Quality of Design 
Policy CS8: Heritage
Policy CS9: Water Management
Policy CS10: Sustainable Design and Renewable and Low Carbon Energy
Policy CS11: Planning Obigations35
36
40
45
49
55
60
62
64
67
70
6. Strengthening Community Wellbeing
Policy CS12: Sustainable Neighbourhoods 
Policy CS13: Housing Mix, Density and Standards
Policy CS14: Affordable Housing
Policy CS15: Health and Education
Policy CS16: Traveller Sites73
74
79
81
84
86Blackpool Core Strategy
7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Policy CS17: Blackpool Town Centre 
Policy CS18: Winter Gardens 
Policy CS19: Central Business District (Talbot Gateway) 
Policy CS20: Leisure Quarter (Former Central Station Site)
Policy CS21: Leisure and Business Tourism 
Policy CS22: Key Resort Gateways
Policy CS23: Managing Holiday Bed Spaces89
91
95
96
98
100
102
104
8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and Enhancement
Policy CS24 : South Blackpool Employment Growth 
Policy CS25: South Blackpool Housing Growth
Policy CS26: Marton Moss 
Policy CS27: South Blackpool Transport and Connectivity109
112
114
115
117
Appendices
Appendix A: Evidence Base documents 
Appendix B: Schedule of “Saved” Blackpool Local Plan Policies
Appendix C: Monitoring and Implementation Plan
Appendix D: Glossary119
120
121
124
137Page D of E
IntroductionChapter 1
World Fireworks Championships, 2007 
(Photo - www.visitblackpool.com)Page E of E
Contents:
• What is the Core Strategy? 2
• Preparing the Core Strategy 2
• Supporting Documents 3
• Blackpool’s Planning Policy Framework 3
• Wider Policy and Strategy Context 5
Page 1Page 2What is the Core Strategy?
1.1 The Core Strategy is Part 1 of the Blackpool 
Local Plan and is a key planning document which 
sets out where new development such as housing, 
employment, retail and leisure should be located to 
meet Blackpool’s future needs to 2027.  The Strategy 
also identifies which areas within Blackpool will be 
regenerated, protected or enhanced; and sets out 
key development principles, including design and 
affordable housing.  
1.2 The Core Strategy will be used to determine 
planning applications and priorities for the Borough 
over the 15 year plan period (2012-2027).  However, 
it is likely to be reviewed before the end of this plan 
period, in whole or in part, to ensure that there 
are sufficient developable sites available for future 
needs.  It may also need to be updated to respond to 
unforeseen changes. 
1.3 In summary, the Core Strategy sets out:
Where we are now: 
 A spatial portrait of Blackpool , summarising 
the town’s main social, physical and economic 
characteristics and key issues;
Where we would like to be:  
Vision and objectives  identifying how we want 
Blackpool to have changed and developed by 2027; and
How we get there: 
Spatial strategy, policies and a Monitoring and 
Implementation Plan1  to ensure the right type of 
development will occur in the right location to meet 
Blackpool’s needs. 
1  A Monitoring and Implementation Plan is provided in Appendix CPreparing the Core Strategy
1.4 There are a number of stages we have had to 
follow in preparing the Core Strategy (figure 1).  Each 
stage presented an opportunity for the community and 
other stakeholders to be involved in choosing the right 
planning policies for Blackpool.
Figure 1: Blackpool Core Strategy Preparation Stages 
and Milestones
1.5 As part of the preparation process (and since 
the the revocation of regional plans), the Council has 
a Duty to Co-operate  on strategic planning issues that 
cross into neighbouring areas.  It is an ongoing process 
and involves working collaboratively with neighbouring 
councils and other public bodies, including Local 
Enterprise Partnerships, to ensure that strategic 
priorities across local boundaries are properly co-
ordinated and clearly reflected in the Core Strategy.1. IntroductionPage 31. Introduction
Supporting Documents
1.6 A significant number  of supporting documents 
have informed the preparation of the Core Strategy, 
including:
 ■Sustainability Appraisal (SA)  which evaluates the 
likely social, economic and environmental effects of 
the spatial vision, objectives and policies, including 
the cumulative effects.  The Council has responded 
to the SA recommendations at each stage including 
changes made to the policies where appropriate. 
 ■Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) screening 
which is required by law to protect European Sites 
of Biological Importance in the region. 
 ■Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which identifies 
the infrastructure required to support the delivery 
of the Core Strategy; and
 ■Background evidence documents which develop 
a detailed understanding of key issues and 
characteristics of Blackpool and the Fylde Coast, 
and have helped to inform and justify the preferred 
strategy and policies2 . 
1.7 All supporting documents can be viewed on the 
Council’s website:  
www.blackpool.gov.uk/evidencebase
1.8 The Core Strategy has also been prepared in 
accordance with the Council’s Local Development 
Scheme and is in general compliance with the 
Statement of Community Involvement.
2 A list of evidence base documents is provided in Appendix A.Blackpool’s Planning Policy Framework
1.9 The new Blackpool Local Plan for 2012 – 2027 
will comprise two parts: Part 1 is the Core Strategy,  
which is the key document in the Local Plan, while Part 
2 is the Site Allocations and Development Management 
Policies document .  Part 2 will be produced following 
adoption of the Core Strategy.  It will allocate sites 
for development, safeguarding or protection, and 
include development management policies to guide 
appropriate development.  In addition, Supplementary  
Planning Documents (SPDs)  will be produced where 
necessary to support, or provide more detailed 
guidance on, policies in the Core Strategy or Site 
Allocations and Development Management document.  
Some SPDs have already been adopted; these are 
detailed on the Council’s website.   
1.10 Both the Core Strategy and Site Allocations and 
Development Management Policies will eventually 
replace the current Blackpool Local Plan (2006).  
Until these are adopted, a number of development 
management policies set out in the Blackpool Local 
Plan (2006) will continue to be “saved” and considered 
alongside Core Strategy policies when determining 
planning applications.  Appendix B to this document 
details Local Plan policies which will continue to be 
“saved” for the time being, (until Part 2 of the Plan is 
adopted) and policies which will be superceded when 
the Core Strategy is adopted. 
1.11 Alongside the Blackpool Local Plan, Lancashire 
County Council and the two Unitary Authorities of 
Blackpool and Blackburn with Darwen have prepared 
a Joint Lancashire Minerals and Waste Local Plan, 
which consists of a number of minerals and waste 
documents.  This can be viewed at: www.blackpool.gov.
uk/mineralsandwaste
1.12 Whilst the Blackpool Local Transport Plan does 
not form part of Blackpool’s planning policy framework, 
it has informed preparation of the Core Strategy.Page 41. Introduction
Figure 2: Blackpool’s Planning Policy Framework
New Blackpool Local Plan 2012 - 2027
 Part 1: Blackpool Core Strategy 
 Part 2:  Site Allocations
Development  
Management Policies
 Supplementary Planning Documents
Saved policies in the Blackpool Local Plan  
(Adopted 2006)
Joint Lancashire Minerals and Waste Development 
Framework Core Strategy DPD (February 2009)
Site Allocation and Development Management 
Policies (September 2013)
1.13 The programme for the preparation of Part 2  of 
the Blackpool Local Plan 2012-2027 is set out in the 
Council’s Local Development Scheme (June 2014).
Page 51. Introduction
Wider Policy and Strategy Context
1.14 Blackpool lies within the Fylde Coast sub-region, 
along with Fylde and Wyre (two-tier areas covered by 
Lancashire County Council and the Borough Councils of 
Fylde and Wyre).  The sub-region demonstrates a high 
level of self containment in terms of housing markets, 
travel to work patterns and economic functionality; and 
the Fylde Coast authorities have been working together 
on strategic planning issues for many years.  It has 
been important to address cross-boundary issues in a 
collaborative way, to ensure Blackpool’s Core Strategy 
aligns with the policy framework of neighbouring 
authorities, and co-operate with them on strategic 
planning issues.  
1.15 As part of the Duty to Co-operate (introduced 
by Government following the revocation of regional 
plans) a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) has 
been prepared by Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre Councils 
and Lancashire County Council (LCC).  The MOU 
identifies the strategic planning issues which require 
cross boundary co-operation and collaboration in order 
to ensure the development plans of each authority 
are sustainable, deliverable and found ‘sound’ at 
examination.  It also guides the approach that the three 
authorities take with respect to responding to strategic 
planning applications and nationally significant 
infrastructure projects.
1.16 A Statement of Compliance with the Duty to 
Co-operate accompanies the Core Strategy and sets out 
how the Council has co-operated with neighbouring 
authorities and prescribed bodies set out in the Local 
Planning Regulations (2012).  This is available to view 
at: www.blackpool.gov.uk/planningpolicy1.17 Beyond the sub-region, Blackpool and the 
Fylde Coast area is part of the Lancashire Enterprise 
Partnership (LEP).  The LEP was established in April 
2011, to provide strategic leadership for directing 
economic growth and priorities across Lancashire.  
Blackpool Council works with the LEP as part of the 
Duty to Co-operate.  This has included the preparation 
of the Lancashire Growth Plan and the Lancashire 
Strategic Economic Plan (SEP), which sets out the 
growth ambitions for Lancashire as a whole for the 
next 10 years. The three Fylde Coast authorities, 
along with the Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre Economic 
Development Company (BFWEDC), are also developing 
a complementary local Growth Accelerator Strategy 
focused on delivering economic change in the Fylde 
Coast area.
Images of documents
Page 6 of 144
Spatial Portrait of BlackpoolChapter 2
View of the Blackpool urban area from Blackpool Tower 
(Photo - Pippa Greenway)
Page 6Page 7 of 144
Contents:
• Overview 8
• Blackpool’s People 11
• Blackpool’s Economy 12
• Blackpool’s Housing and 13 
Neighbourhoods 
• Blackpool’s Environment 14
• Blackpool’s Transport 16
• Summary of Overarching Issues 18
Page 7Page 82. A Spatial Portrait of Blackpool
Overview 
2.1 Blackpool is England’s largest and most popular 
seaside resort attracting more than 10 million visitors 
a year.  It is also the main retail, public administration, 
cultural and service centre for the Fylde Coast, 
supporting an estimated population of 326,000 and a 
workforce3  of around 152,000.   
2.2 Located in the North West of England and on 
the Fylde Coast Peninsula, Blackpool covers an area 
of around 35km², with 11.2km (7 miles) of seafront.  
Intensely urban and compact in form, it is characterised 
at its heart by the Resort Core, an area of some 5km² 
and the adjoining Town Centre.  Elsewhere, Blackpool 
is predominantly residential in character, largely built 
up to its boundaries, with the few remaining areas of 
open land located in the south and east of the town.  
The predominantly rural areas of Wyre and Fylde are 
located on the northern/eastern edge and eastern/
southern edge of the Borough boundary respectively.
2.3 For a coastal town, Blackpool has good strategic 
transport links.  This includes good connections to the 
national road and rail networks, as well as Blackpool 
International Airport which is located on Blackpool’s 
southern boundary in Fylde.
2.4 The town is built on tourism, where British 
holiday makers from all classes of society flocked to 
the resort for pleasure, fun and entertainment.  It 
grew rapidly at the turn of the 20th century after the 
arrival of the railway line with a period of phenomenal 
development leaving a legacy of high quality late 
Victorian architecture, including the iconic Blackpool 
Tower, piers and promenade.  Successive decades 
saw the introduction of the Winter Gardens, Pleasure 
Beach and Golden Mile, along with dense holiday 
guest houses and small hotels in a grid-iron pattern of 
terraced streets behind the seafront.  
3 Working or available to work i.e. all people economically activeIn its heyday Blackpool attracted around 17 million 
visitors each year, supported more than 100,000 
holiday bed spaces and was the largest holiday 
destination in the UK. 
2.5 Whilst Blackpool remains at the heart of the 
UK tourism and visitor economy, it has experienced 
a significant decline in visitor numbers from the 
1980s onwards; a consequence of growing affluence, 
enhanced consumer choice and the perceived 
obsolescence of the town’s visitor offer.  Three decades 
of resort decline has led to an underperforming 
economy and high levels of deprivation.Page 92. A Spatial Portrait of Blackpool
Figure 3: North West Region Figure 4: Fylde Coast Sub-Region 
NKendal
ChesterBarrowLake District National P ark
Yorkshire Dales National ParkCarlisle
Greater 
Manc hester Liverpool & 
MerseysideLancaster & 
Morecambe
Southpor tBlac kburn
BoltonPrestonBLACKPOOL
Stok e-on-T rent
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping with the permission of the Controller of 
Her Majesty’s Stationery Oﬃce © Crown Copyright. Unauthorised reproduction infringes Crown copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings. Blackpool Borough Council Licence No. 100019178.2012.
3
4BLACKPOOL
PrestonKirkham
WartonPoultonGarstangFleetw oodKnott EndPilling
Catterall
Great Ecc leston
Fylde BoroughWyre Borough
M55M6
Cleveleys
Thornton
St. Anne’ s
Lytham
N
Blac kpool Boundary
Fylde and W rye BoundariesMain Settlements
Railwa y Sta tionUrban Ar ea
Country sideKey
Blac kpool Ar ea
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping with the permission of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Oﬃce © Crown Copyright. Unauthorisedreproduction infringes Crown copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings. Blackpool Borough Council Licence No. 100019178.2012.Mainline R ailway
Tramw ay
Blac kpool Air port
Fleetw ood P ortMain R oadM55Page 10
Wyre
Borough 
Fylde
Borough 
WyreWyrWWyreWWyyrWWWyreWWWWWyrWyrWyrWyrWWyrWWyWeyreyyWyWyWWee
Borough ghghhghghhhhgghhhhhhgggggggggggguguu BBBBBorough hhhhh BoroughBBorBBoroBBBorBBBoBorrorBBorBBBBouBBB hhhghhhhhhhughhhhhhuuguuhhhhhhghgghhghughgh BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBoo hhhghgghgh
FyldelFyldedelddldlFFFFFFFyFyFFyldylddlldlllllldFFFylFyFFFFFylllldeFFFFyFFFFFdeedededeeeeeyyyyFyFyFyFFF
Borough Borouooooooooooooooghggg BoroughBBBBBBoooooBBBoooBBorooorouroBourorororourouorooouoouououBBouBooooooooBoroooooooBBBohhughhhgguggghg BBBBBBBBB ggggugughhhhhhgggggghhh
Built Up Ar eas
Green Space
Borough BoundariesTown Centr e
NKey
Mainline R ailway
Railwa y Sta tion
Tramw ay
Blac kpool Air port
Blac kpool T ower
Blackpool
Football Club
Stanle y Park
Blac kpool Zoo
BlackpoolPleasur e Bea ch
BlackpoolVictoria Hospital
Resor t Cor e
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping with the permission of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Oﬃce © Crown Copyright. Unauthorisedreproduction infringes Crown copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings. Blackpool Borough Council Licence No. 100019178.2012.BISPHAM
LAYTONANCHORSHOLME
SOUTH SHOREMARTON
SQUIRES GATE2. A Spatial Portrait of Blackpool
Figure 5: Blackpool BoroughPage 11Blackpool’s People  
2.6 Blackpool has a population of around 142,000 
people.  It is by far the most densely populated Borough 
in Lancashire and the seventh most densely populated 
Borough in England and Wales outside Greater London4.  
The population is heavily concentrated in Blackpool’s 
inner area, which is intensely compact.    
2.7 Between 2001 – 2011 Blackpool’s population fell 
by 0.2%, caused by a decline in net-in migration which 
has historically driven population growth.  By 2027, 
the population is projected to have grown by 7,600 
(5%) and the number of households by 4,100 (6%)5.  
This growth is largely as a result of migration as well as 
general trends towards smaller household sizes. 
2.8 Blackpool suffers from severe levels of highly 
concentrated deprivation, which has worsened over 
the last ten years.  In 2011, 30% of all children (9,000+) 
were living in child poverty.  The 2010 Indices of 
Deprivation ranked Blackpool as the 6th most deprived 
local authority in the country and almost one third of 
small areas within the town are amongst the 10% most 
deprived areas nationally.  Figure 6 illustrates that the 
highest concentration of deprivation occurs within 
Blackpool’s inner areas.
2.9 Blackpool has low educational attainment and 
skill levels.  In 2012, less than 50% of pupils achieved 
5+ GCSEs with grades A*-C (including English and 
Maths) and 14.5% of working age residents had no 
qualifications.  This poor attainment is linked to high 
levels of teenage pregnancy in Blackpool in part.  
Whilst this is of concern, teenage pregnancy rates have 
fallen since 2003 and skills levels are improving.  
2.10 The health of people in Blackpool is generally 
worse than the national average.  The town records one 
of the lowest life expectancy rates nationally and there 
are inequalities by deprivation and gender.  
4 Source: ONS population survey mid year estimates (2012 data)
5 Based on the Jobs-Led Oxford Economics Forecast modelled in the 2013 Fylde Coast 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)For example, men in the least deprived areas of the town 
can expect to live nearly 10 years longer than men in the 
most deprived areas. For women, this difference is 8.5 
years.  Health priorities in Blackpool include alcohol and 
drug misuse, mental health, smoking and obesity6.  A high 
percentage of working age residents claim Incapacity 
Benefit (over 12%), which is almost double the national 
average.
Figure 6: Deprivation Levels in Blackpool
6 Source: Department of Health © Crown Copyright 20112. A Spatial Portrait of Blackpool
MOST DEPRIVED
0-10% 10-20% 20-30% 30-40% 40-50% 50-60% 60-70% 70-80% 80-90% 90-100%LEAST DEPRIVED
Blac kpool Boundary Ward Boundaries Ward Name
(2010 IMD position)Park
(71)N
KeyAnc horsholme
(1779)
Norbr eck
(3906)
Bispham
(1862)
Greenlands
(1498)Ingthor pe
(747)
Warbr eck
(1130)
Clar emont
(9)
Talbot
(64)
Bloomf ield
(1)
Squir e’s Ga te
(1874)Highf ield
(1383)Stanle y
(2056)Clifton
(241)Victoria
(214)Hawes Side
(472)
Waterloo
(327)Tyldesle y
(599)Mar ton
(2217)Layton
(809)
Brums wick
(87)Park
(71)
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping with the permission of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Oﬃce © Crown Copyright. Unauthorised
reproduction infringes Crown copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings. Blackpool Borough Council Licence No. 100019178.2012.Page 12Blackpool’s Economy
2.11 Blackpool has a workforce of around 62,500 
people with an economy that is underpinned by 
tourism and the service sector.  Jobs are generally low 
skill and low wage and small businesses predominate. 
Blackpool also benefits from a high proportion of public 
sector employment.  Whilst there is no tradition of 
heavy industry, the town’s small manufacturing sector 
includes local specialism in food and drink, and plastics. 
2.12 As Blackpool experienced three decades of 
decline in the visitor economy, private investment 
stalled, jobs were lost and residents faced limited 
employment prospects.  The population declined as 
people looked elsewhere for work and social problems 
became deeply entrenched in parts of the town.  
Subsequently, between 1995 and 2008 Blackpool’s 
economy grew at under half the rate of England, with 
Gross Value Added (GVA) per head 33% below the 
national average7.  Blackpool’s unemployment rate 
is around 9%, which is higher than the regional and 
national figure.  A reliance on the tourism industry 
means there is high seasonal unemployment8.  
2.13 Blackpool’s economy is therefore under-
performing relative to the national level.  That said, 
Blackpool is not an economy in isolation and the wider 
Fylde Coast sub-region provides an important resource 
for Blackpool, especially for higher value economic 
activity with major employers in aerospace, chemical, 
nuclear processing and port industries.    
2.14 In recent years there have been positive signs 
that Blackpool is beginning to revitalise the visitor 
economy and attract a new generation of families 
and visitors.  Significant new public sector investment 
has improved the quality of the resort offer and the 
urban environment; and has stabilised the overall 
level of visitor numbers at around 10 million, of which 
7 Economic growth is measured by the gross value – of goods and services – added 
(GVA) to the economy
8 Source: ONS population survey mid year estimates 20104 million were estimated to be staying visitors in 
20139.  However, Blackpool still has some way to go in 
providing a high quality resort offer which appeals to a 
21st century tourist market and supports a sustainable 
visitor economy. 
2.15 Blackpool Town Centre is the main retail and 
cultural centre for the Fylde Coast.  It employs over 
6,000 people and generates a retail turnover of around 
£300 million per annum.  However, the town centre 
is under performing as a sub-regional retail centre.  
To prevent further decline it must claw back current 
leakage from its Fylde Coast catchment. 
2.16 Office development is heavily out-of-centre 
based, although recent investment in Blackpool’s 
Central Business District will help to improve 
the quantity and quality of town centre office 
accommodation to help address this imbalance.  Most 
employment estates have developed towards the edge 
of the Borough, including the newest business parks in 
the north and south.  A number of other key services 
are also located towards the edge of the Borough, 
including Blackpool Victoria Hospital and Blackpool & 
the Fylde College.
9 Source: TNS Omnibus Surveys 2013, commissioned by Blackpool Council2. A Spatial Portrait of BlackpoolPage 13Blackpool’s Housing and Neighbourhoods 
2.17 Blackpool has a unique and extreme set of 
housing challenges rooted in the town’s changing 
fortunes as the UK’s largest seaside holiday resort.  The 
decline in overnight visitors to the resort has resulted 
in a significant number of guest houses seeking 
alternative income through converting and sub-dividing 
their properties to permanent residential use.    
2.18 Whilst new dwellings resulting from conversion 
and subdivision are an important source of additional 
housing, in the inner areas of Blackpool the result of 
this is an extremely dysfunctional and unbalanced 
housing supply.  There is a significant oversupply of 
small, poor quality bedsits and flats or Houses in 
Multiple Occupation (HMO) and the building stock is 
poor quality and in need of investment and renewal.  
Half of the housing stock in the inner areas is in the 
private rented sector, housing a high percentage of 
people on housing benefit10.  The accommodation is 
unsuitable for families and undesirable to anyone who 
can afford to choose better. 
2.19 The attractiveness of Blackpool as a destination 
for low income and vulnerable households creates 
a steady demand for this type of accommodation, 
and the high number of properties involved and their 
concentration within certain areas has a negative effect 
on forming stable and cohesive communities.  The high 
levels of crime, anti-social behaviour, worklessness and 
low educational attainment coupled with significant 
transience means the inner areas of Blackpool present 
one of the most testing social and economic challenges 
in the country.
10 The proportion of unemployed and long-term sick tenants in private rented 
accommodation is estimated at 27% across Blackpool, which compares with 10% 
nationally.2.20 In contrast, outside of the inner areas the 
housing stock is generally of good standard, comprising 
predominantly semi-detached and terraced housing, 
providing choice for higher income households 
although limited options for people on lower incomes.  
Over the last decade median house prices have risen 
to between four and five times median household 
income, meaning affordability is a serious issue for 
many households who aspire to a better standard of 
living.  
2.21 Outside of the inner areas there are four main 
council housing areas in Blackpool at Grange Park and 
Queens Park, Kincraig and Mereside (Figure 15).  Social 
housing provision in Blackpool is lower than national 
levels due to the high proportion of private rented 
stock.  Social housing is also predominantly one-
bedroom flats (which accounts for over half of social 
rented households) and there is a need to improve the 
mix and introduce more family housing.
2.22 The result is Blackpool has an oversupply of 
smaller properties, limited choice of larger properties 
suitable for family occupation and a significant demand 
for good quality affordable housing across the Borough.2. A Spatial Portrait of BlackpoolPage 14Blackpool’s Environment 
2.23 Blackpool remains synonymous with seaside 
fun and entertainment, with a rich social and built 
heritage which continues to maintain a national profile, 
including the iconic Blackpool Tower, Winter Gardens, 
Pleasure Beach, and the Piers.  Despite the strong 
collection of entertainment buildings, the number 
of statutorily listed buildings in Blackpool (40) is 
below average when compared to similar sized towns 
nationally, and the number of conservation areas 
(4) is amongst the lowest overall in the North West, 
underlying the perception that Blackpool has a poor 
quality urban environment.
2.24 Approximately 80% of Blackpool’s urban area is 
developed.  With the exception of the promenade and 
beach, there is limited open space particularly in the 
intensively built up inner area, where some wards have 
the lowest level of provision in the UK. The promenade is 
a key tourism asset and provides an important recreation 
space.  In 2012, a multi-million pound programme of 
investment was completed to reconstruct damaged sea 
defences, improve the public realm, create new event 
space and improve pedestrian access to the beach. The 
beach is also a key visitor asset, although in the past, 
sections of Blackpool’s coastline have failed to meet 
the minimum mandatory standards for bathing waters. 
Ongoing improvements to the treatment of waste water 
are essential to improve the quality of Blackpool’s bathing 
water and maintain the standards required. 
2.25 Beyond the built-up area, undeveloped open land 
in the east of the town is made up of protected public 
open space, sites of nature conservation value, Green 
Belt and Countryside Areas.  Blackpool’s intensely built-up 
urban area means much of this open land has important 
landscape, nature conservation and environmental value.  
2.26 A quarter of the town’s open space is provided 
in and around Stanley Park, which is one of the largest 
parks of its kind in the country and has Grade II* status 
(as a historically important garden) on the National 
Register of Historic Parks and Gardens.  It provides a range of recreational facilities within an 
extensive area of green space east of the town centre.  
Blackpool has eight other principal parks, numerous 
playing fields and other small recreation grounds 
distributed across the Borough, providing important 
recreational, sports and visual amenity benefits for 
local communities. 
2.27 Marton Mere is located on the eastern edge 
of the town and is one of the few remaining natural 
freshwater sites in Lancashire covering an area of 39 
hectares.  The water area of the Mere itself covers 18 
hectares.  The reserve is of importance to the North 
West and Fylde Coast wildlife, and as such it is a 
statutorily designated Site of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI).  It is also designated as a Local Nature Reserve.  
2.28 Blackpool has a number of Biological Heritage 
Sites derived from a County-wide project undertaken 
by officers of Natural England, the Lancashire Wildlife 
Trust and Lancashire County Council, which identified a 
network of key wildlife sites across Lancashire.  Within 
Blackpool nearly all of these sites are within lands 
allocated to remain open; with many being ponds 
located on the town’s eastern boundary. 
2.29 The Borough has two areas of Green Belt 
comprising lands between Blackpool and Carleton on 
the north-east edge of the town, and lands between 
Blackpool and St Annes on the southern edge of the 
town.  Blackpool also has two designated Countryside 
Areas comprising lands at Marton Moss and lands 
between Newton Hall and Preston New Road.  
2.30 The designation of Countryside Areas in 
conjunction with the Green Belt defines the limit of urban 
development and provides much needed amenity and 
open space.  These lands within Blackpool form part of a 
larger area of adjoining Green Belt and open countryside 
within neighbouring Fylde and Wyre, to provide an 
important physical gap between the three authorities’ 
settlements. 2. A Spatial Portrait of BlackpoolPage 152. A Spatial Portrait of Blackpool
Figure 7: Blackpool’s Existing Green Infrastructure
Page 16Blackpool’s Transport  
2.31 The M55 motorway provides Blackpool with a 
strategic link to the wider national motorway network 
leading directly onto Yeadon Way/Seasiders Way, which 
is a key visitor route providing direct access to the town 
centre and resort.  Other key routes into Blackpool 
include the Promenade (A584), Talbot Road (A586), 
Preston New Road (A583) and Progress Way/Squires 
Gate Lane (A5230).
2.32 Blackpool has two terminus railway stations; 
Blackpool North in the town centre and Blackpool 
South at the southern end of the resort core.  There 
are smaller stations at Layton (Blackpool north line) 
and the Pleasure Beach (south line). Both lines connect 
Blackpool with the national rail network via Preston.  
2.33 The Blackpool to Fleetwood tramway is a key 
public transport asset to the Fylde Coast and forms a 
key tourist attraction.  The line runs for 11 miles along 
the coast from Starr Gate in the south to Fleetwood 
in the north and carries millions of passengers every 
year.  In 2012, investment in excess of £100 million saw 
the introduction of new trams with new supporting 
infrastructure.  This upgrade provides faster journey 
times and a high quality transport facility fit for the 
21st century.  The town is also well-served by a high 
frequency bus network.  
2.34 Blackpool was awarded ‘Cycling Town’ status 
in 2008.  It has implemented a programme of new 
cycling routes, facilities and events for both residents 
and visitors.  Two ‘Explorer Routes’ are designed to 
help cyclists travel through Blackpool between the 
promenade and undeveloped open land in the east of 
the town.2.35 Good public transport and cycle links are 
important for Blackpool residents as almost 40% of 
people have no access to a car.  Whilst there are good 
transport connections within Blackpool and connecting 
Blackpool to the Fylde Coast, Lancashire and beyond, 
there is a need for these networks to be more 
integrated to provide easy access to jobs, local services 
and community facilities.
2.36 Blackpool Airport is located on the edge of 
Blackpool’s southern boundary in Fylde.  It provides 
economic opportunities for attracting new investment 
into the area and enabling indigenous business to 
create trade links on a national and international basis. 2. A Spatial Portrait of BlackpoolPage 17
Layton
Blac kpool SouthBlac kpool Nor th
Pleasur e Bea ch
Squir es Ga tePromenadePromenade
Yeadon W ayPreston New Road
St. Anne’
s Rd.Lytham Rd.
Progress WayWaterloo RdTalbot Road
Devonshire Road
Strategic R oad Netw orkStrategic R oad Netw ork
(Dual Ca rriageway)
Distrib utor R oad Netw ork
Residential and Other Roads
Mainline R ailway
Tramw ayCycle Route
Railwa y Sta tion
Blac kpool Air port
NM55
Junction 4Key
M55
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping with the permission of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Oﬃce © Crown Copyright. Unauthorised
reproduction infringes Crown copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings. Blackpool Borough Council Licence No. 100019178.2012.2. A Spatial Portrait of Blackpool
Figure 8: Blackpool’s Transport InfrastructurePage 18Summary of Overarching Issues 
2.37 From this spatial portrait, it is clear that there are 
a number of priority issues for Blackpool which need 
to be addressed by the Core Strategy.  These can be 
summarised as follows: 
 ■Blackpool Borough is intensely urban and compact, 
largely built up to its boundaries.  Blackpool’s inner 
areas are densely populated and experience a high 
concentration of acute deprivation levels, leading 
to extreme health, social and economic inequalities 
between the richest members of society and the 
poorest.  
 ■The local economy is underpinned by the tourism 
and service sector, with jobs being generally low 
skill and low wage leading to lower productivity 
and a seasonal based economy.   The proportion 
of Blackpool’s population of working age is low, 
and unemployment levels are high. Low levels 
of educational attainment and skills have led to 
exclusion from the job market and businesses less 
likely to invest, although recent studies show skill 
levels are improving.  
 ■Despite significant resort investment and an upturn 
in visitor numbers in recent years, Blackpool still 
has some way to go in overturning three decades 
of decline in the tourism industry and providing a 
high quality resort offer which appeals to a 21st 
century tourist market and supports a sustainable 
visitor economy.  
 ■Blackpool Town Centre is the main retail and 
service centre on the Fylde Coast; however it is 
underperforming as a sub-regional centre and 
failing to attract Fylde Coast residents who are 
drawn to competing centres and out-of-centre 
retail parks.   ■Blackpool has an unbalanced housing market, 
characterised by an oversupply of poor quality 
one-person accommodation, limited choice of 
family housing particularly in the inner area, and 
a shortage of good quality affordable housing 
across the Borough.  The concentration of small, 
poor quality housing in the inner areas attracts 
low income and vulnerable households, leading 
to high levels of crime, anti-social behaviour and 
unstable, fragmented communities with high levels 
of transience.
 ■Blackpool has key iconic resort buildings and 
structures culturally rich in heritage which remain 
important to the town’s future and high quality 
public realm in key areas of the town centre and 
resort core, although these are contrasted with 
a generally poor quality built environment in the 
inner areas and across other parts of the town.  
 ■Blackpool’s intensely built-up urban area provides 
limited open space, in particular within the inner 
areas.  This means much of the open land in the 
east of the town has important landscape, nature 
conservation and amenity value.  Designated 
Green Belt and Countryside Areas on the edge of 
Blackpool define the limit of urban development 
to retain separation between Blackpool, Fylde and 
Wyre.  Any development in these areas will need to 
be managed in a positive way to balance the need 
for new development with environmental and 
climate change issues.   
 ■Despite Blackpool’s coastal location, it has good 
strategic transport links connecting Blackpool to 
the Fylde Coast, North West and beyond.  It also 
provides good public transport facilities and cycle 
links, though there is a need for these networks to 
be more integrated to provide easy access to jobs, 
local services and community facilities.2. A Spatial Portrait of BlackpoolPage 19
Housing intervention area prior to regenerationBlackpool’s regenerated seafrontBlackpool’s intensely built up urban areaPage 20 of 144
Spatial Vision and ObjectivesChapter 3
South Promenade and the Glitterball
(Photo - www.visitblackpool.com)
Page 20Page 21 of 144
Contents:
• Vision 23
• Objectives 24
• Policy NPPF1: Presumption in Favour 27 
of Sustainable Development 
Page 21Page 22Spatial Vision 
3.1 A Spatial Vision for where Blackpool aspires to be by 2027 is set out opposite.  This vision responds to key 
issues and characteristics summarised in Chapter 2.3. Spatial Vision and Objectives
Image: TonyWorrellPage 233. Spatial Vision and Objectives
A Vision for Blackpool
In 2027 Blackpool has built upon its status as Britain’s favourite seaside resort to become renowned 
for the quality and innovation of its culture, entertainment and business tourism offer.  Blackpool is 
the principal centre for business, culture and education on the Fylde Coast with the town centre firmly 
established as the sub-regional centre for retail. 
The resort offers a high quality visitor experience attracting new audiences and creating new reasons to 
visit Blackpool year-round.  The Promenade is revitalised, with quality development providing excellent 
attractions and accommodation, and public realm enhancements supporting an exciting cultural 
programme of events and festivals.  Blackpool Town Centre is thriving at the heart of the resort core and 
provides an important sub-regional retail, cultural and business centre for Fylde Coast residents.  The town 
centre offers a high quality shopping, leisure and entertainment experience throughout the day and into 
the evening centred on key assets including the Tower and Winter Gardens.  Attractive streets and spaces 
host events and activities and provide strong links to the beach.  
As the main economic centre of the Fylde Coast, Blackpool has a diverse and prosperous economy with 
a thriving culture of enterprise and entrepreneurship.  It retains a strong educational offer supporting a 
skilled and educated workforce encouraging aspiration and ambition.  A sustainable integrated transport 
system supports a competitive Fylde Coast economy with safe and convenient access to jobs and services, 
and provides visitors with a positive resort experience.  
Blackpool has created a more equal society with sustainable communities having fair access to quality jobs, 
housing, shopping, health, education, open space, sport and recreation.  The housing stock has significantly 
improved with a range of new, high quality homes in attractive neighbourhoods attracting new residents 
who aspire to live by the sea.  South Blackpool makes an important contribution to rebalancing the housing 
market and growing the Fylde Coast economy by providing improved choice in quality homes and jobs in 
sustainable locations to meet community needs and support regeneration. 
To complement the quality of the urban environment, Blackpool’s natural environment consists of an 
accessible network of quality green open spaces, coast and countryside, which have been protected and 
enhanced for people to enjoy and to sustain a rich biodiversity.  Promoting sustainable development has 
been integral to transforming Blackpool and addressing climate change issues.  A strong sense of civic pride 
pervades the town. Page 24Objectives
3.2 The spatial vision is underpinned by four goals.  Each goal is supported by a number of strategic objectives.  
The aim is to achieve these objectives through the implementation of Core Strategy policies.  The cross linkages 
between the objectives and policies are illustrated in Appendix C of this document. 
GOAL 1: Sustainable regeneration, 
diversification and growth  
 
Our key objectives are to:
1. Ensure a balanced approach to regeneration 
and growth with sustainable development 
which meets the needs of Blackpool’s people 
now and into the future 
2. Support new housing provision to deliver a 
choice of quality homes across the Borough for 
new and existing residents  
3. Strengthen the local economy through 
sustainable investment in new enterprise, 
entrepreneurship and business start-ups, 
creating better paid jobs and a wider choice of 
employment 
4. Enable easier and sustainable journeys within 
Blackpool and the Fylde Coast by integrating 
transport systems and promoting sustainable 
modes of travel 
5. Create well-designed places for people to enjoy 
with high quality buildings, streets and spaces, 
whilst conserving and enhancing Blackpool’s 
rich heritage and natural environment 
6. Address climate change issues by managing 
flood risk, protecting water quality, reducing 
energy use and encouraging renewable energy 
sources 
7. Ensure there is sufficient and appropriate 
infrastructure to meet future needs GOAL 2: Strengthen community wellbeing 
to create sustainable communities and 
reduce inequalities in Blackpool’s most 
deprived areas 
Our key objectives are to:
8. Develop sustainable and safer neighbourhoods 
that are socially cohesive and well connected to 
jobs, shops, local community services including 
health and education, culture and leisure facilities
9. Achieve housing densities that respect the local 
surroundings whilst making efficient use of land, 
ensure new homes are of a high quality design, 
and require a mix of house types, sizes and 
tenures suitable to the location to re-balance the 
housing market
10. Meet residents’ needs for affordable housing to 
provide people with a choice of homes they can 
afford in places they want to live
11. Improve the health and well-being of Blackpool’s 
residents and reduce health inequalities by 
maintaining good access to health care and 
encouraging healthy active lifestyles, including 
access to open spaces, the coast, countryside, 
sport and recreation facilities 
12. Increase access to quality education facilities 
to improve educational achievement, skills and 
aspirations 
13. Guide the provision of traveller sites in 
appropriate locations where there is an identified 
need3. Spatial Vision and ObjectivesPage 25GOAL 3: Regeneration of the town centre, 
resort core and inner areas to address 
economic, social and physical decline  
Our key objectives are to:
14. Sustain a high quality, year-round visitor offer 
by growing and promoting our tourism, arts, 
heritage and cultural offer including new 
high quality attractions, accommodation 
and conferencing facilities and an exciting 
programme of national events and festivals 
15. Secure investment in retail, leisure and other 
town centre uses in Blackpool Town Centre to 
strengthen the offer with high quality shopping, 
restaurants, leisure, entertainment and offices, 
making the town centre the first choice 
shopping destination for Fylde Coast residents 
and an attractive place to visit and do business 
16. Establish balanced and stable communities 
in the inner areas with sustainable housing 
regeneration and new landmark residential 
development which improves housing quality 
and choice GOAL 4: Supporting growth and 
enhancement in South Blackpool to meet 
future housing and employment needs for 
Blackpool and the Fylde Coast
Our key objectives are to:
17. Support economic growth along the Blackpool 
Airport Corridor and on lands close to Junction 
4 of the M55 
18. Link the delivery of new housing development 
in South Blackpool with resort regeneration, 
for example through New Homes Bonus and 
commuted sum payments, to create more 
sustainable housing markets 
19. Provide a complementary housing offer 
between new homes in South Blackpool 
and those delivered through regeneration in 
the inner areas to avoid competition within 
Blackpool’s housing market
20. Balance the requirement for new development 
in South Blackpool whilst recognising the 
distinctive character of remaining lands on 
Marton Moss 
21. Secure the necessary infrastructure to enable 
new sustainable development which integrates 
with its surroundings, providing choice and 
convenient access to employment, services and 
community facilities3. Spatial Vision and ObjectivesPage 263. Spatial Vision and Objectives
Sustainable Development 
3.3 The principle of sustainable development 
cross-cuts each of the four goals and objectives and is 
integral to transforming Blackpool (figure 9).  It is the 
core principle underpinning planning across the UK. 
Figure 9: Sustainable Development is cross-cutting 
each of the four goals which underpin the Core 
Strategy Vision 
Vision for Blackpool
Sustainable Development
Goal 1: Sustainable Regeneration, 
Diversification and GrowthGoal 2: Sustainable CommunitiesGoal 3: Regeneration of the town 
centre, resort core and inner areasGoal 4: Supporting growth and 
enhancement in South Blackpool
Objectives Objectives Objectives Objectives
Policies Policies Policies Policies
3.4 At the heart of sustainable development is the 
idea of ensuring a better quality of life for everyone, 
now and for future generations.  There are three 
dimensions to sustainable development: - economic, 
social and environmental, which are interlinked, 
mutually dependent and of equal importance.  
Therefore, to achieve sustainable development, 
economic, social and environmental gains should be 
sought jointly and simultaneously.      3.5 Sustainable development in Blackpool means 
pursuing solutions which effectively balance economic, 
social and environmental gain and consider short, 
medium and long-term effects.  This will improve the 
quality of the built, natural and historic environment 
and people’s quality of life.  This balanced approach 
is especially relevant for Blackpool, which is highly 
urbanised with limited green infrastructure, is 
geographically constrained, has an under performing 
economy and was ranked the sixth most deprived local 
authority in England in 2010, with a significant number 
of vulnerable people.  
3.6 Where appropriate, Sustainability Assessments 
will be required to support development to 
demonstrate that full consideration has been given 
towards the environmental, social and economic 
impacts and benefits of any scheme.  Applications 
should demonstrate the provision of short, medium 
and long-term benefits to all members of the 
community and the surrounding area.
3.7 Blackpool has the opportunity to successfully 
deliver sustainable development and create sustainable 
communities through the ambition for regeneration, 
diversification and growth within the Borough.  Every 
objective and policy within the Core Strategy has 
been developed to ensure that each contributes to 
achieving this, ensuring the right type of development 
in the most sustainable locations, and promoting 
urban development patterns that enable sustainable 
living.  To ensure the Core Strategy meets the demands 
for sustainable development and communities, 
the document has been critically evaluated by a 
sustainability appraisal process.  Page 27Presumption In Favour of Sustainable 
Development
3.8  The Core Strategy conforms to the National 
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 11.  Paragraph 15 
of the NPPF requires Local Plans to be ‘based upon 
and reflect the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development with clear policies that will guide how 
this will be applied locally’ . Local Authorities are 
required to include a suitable policy that highlights the 
presumption in favour of sustainable development. 
This is set out in Policy NPPF1 opposite, which is in 
accordance with the model policy provided by the 
Planning Inspectorate.
11 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-planning-policy-framework--2Policy NPPF1: Presumption In Favour Of 
Sustainable Development
1. When considering development proposals, 
the Council will take a positive approach 
that reflects the presumption in favour of 
sustainable development contained in the 
National Planning Policy Framework. It will 
always work pro-actively with applicants jointly 
to find solutions which mean that proposals 
can be approved wherever possible, and 
to secure development that improves the 
economic, social and environmental conditions 
in the area.
2. Planning applications that accord with the 
policies in this Local Plan (and, where relevant, 
with policies in neighbourhood plans) will 
be approved without delay, unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise.
3. Where there are no policies relevant to the 
application or relevant policies are out of date 
at the time of making the decision then the 
Council will grant permission unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise - taking into 
account whether:
a.  Any adverse impacts of granting permission 
would significantly and demonstratably 
outweigh the benefits, when assessed 
against the policies in the National Planning 
Policy Framework taken as a whole; or
b. Specific policies in that Framework indicate 
that development should be restricted.3. Spatial Vision and ObjectivesPage 28 of 144
Spatial StrategyChapter 4
Blackpool Tower from the Promenade
(Photo - Blackpool Council)
Page 28Page 29 of 144
Contents:
• Key Diagram 30
• Policy CS1: Strategic Location 31 
of Development 
Page 29Page 30
Centr al Business District
(Talbot Ga teway)
Winter Gar dens
Leisur e Quar terWhite gate Driv e
Waterloo R oad
Highf ield R oadLaytonBisphamDistrict Cent res
Strategic SitesSouth Blackpool Growth & EnhancementRegenerating Blackpool Town Centre & Resort  Core
District Cent resClar emont
North Beac hQueens P arkGrange ParkKincr aig
MeresideTalbot
& Brunswick
Revoe
Foxhall
St. Helier sSouth Beac hResor t Cor eInner Ar ea R egener ation 
Town Centr e Boundary
Urban Ar eaBlac kpool Boundary
Coastline
Green Space
Blac kpool T ower
Blackpool
Football Club
Stanle y Park
Blac kpool Zoo
Blackpool Pleasur e Bea ch
Mainline R ailwa y
Railway Sta tion
Tramway
M55
Blac kpool Air portOuter Esta te Priority 
NeighbourhoodsInner Ar ea NeighbourhoodsStrategic Site
District Cent res
Blackpool
Victoria Hospital
Emplo yment Gr owth
Housing Gr owthMar ton Moss Str ategic Site
(Neighbourhood Planning Appr oach)
N
t.  Unauthorised 
reproduc tion infringes Cr own c opyright and ma y lead t o pr osecution or civil pr oceedings .  Black pool Bor ough C ouncil Lic ence No . 100019178. 2012.Key
4.1 The Key Diagram illustrates the broad locations that will be the main strategic focus for development, 
investment and growth in Blackpool over the 15 year plan period.
Figure 10: Key Diagram4. Spatial StrategyPage 31Strategic Location of Development 
4.2 The Core Strategy Spatial Vision and the four 
overarching goals which underpin this vision support 
a dual strategy focus on Regeneration and Supporting 
Growth to deliver the change required and to meet 
the needs of Blackpool’s people now and in the 
future.  This is illustrated in Figure 10: Key Diagram 
and defined in Policy CS1. Chapters 7 and 8 of the 
Core Strategy provide further detail of this dual 
strategy focus. 
Policy CS1: Strategic Location of Development
1. To deliver the Core Strategy vision the 
overarching spatial focus for Blackpool is 
regeneration and supporting growth.
2. Blackpool’s future growth, development and 
investment will be focused on inner area 
regeneration, comprising:
a.  Blackpool Town Centre , including the three 
strategic sites of Central Business District, 
Winter Gardens and Leisure Quarter 
b. The Resort Core , containing the promenade 
and the majority of resort attractions and 
facilities, holiday accommodation and major 
points of arrival
c.  Neighbourhoods within the inner areas , 
including mixed holiday and residential 
neighbourhoods adjacent to the 
seafront, and predominately residential 
neighbourhoods on the edge of the inner 
areas.
3. Supporting growth in South Blackpool will be 
promoted to help meet wider housing and 
employment needs, whilst recognising the 
important character of remaining lands at 
Marton Moss, identified as a strategic site. 4.3 Regeneration within Blackpool Town Centre, the 
Resort Core and neighbourhoods within the inner areas 
is crucial to strengthening the economy, balancing 
the housing market and targeting investment to 
address decline and deprivation.  A regeneration focus 
marries opportunity with need, so that those areas 
most in need of regeneration can benefit from the 
new investment that accompanies development and 
growth.  It also looks to ensure that growth takes place 
in the most sustainable locations.
4.4 Due to Blackpool’s urban area being intensely 
developed, sustainable locations in South Blackpool 
also have an important role to play in helping to 
meet Blackpool’s housing and economic growth 
requirements.  This development must be achieved in 
the most sustainable way so as to protect and where 
appropriate, enhance the important character of the 
remaining open lands at Marton Moss. 
4.5 The level of regeneration and growth that will 
occur within these locations by 2027 is set out in 
subsequent Core Strategy policies.  These policies 
balance the need to plan for growth in line with the 
Government’s growth agenda against Blackpool’s 
geographical constraints in terms of the tightly drawn 
authority boundary and limited available land supply. 
Inner Area Regeneration
4.6 Blackpool Town Centre  has a pivotal role to 
play in driving the local economy and providing over 
300,000 Fylde Coast residents with a thriving sub-
regional centre which meets their needs in terms 
of retail, services, business, cultural and leisure 
activities.  It is a key part of the resort, containing 
the iconic landmarks of Blackpool Tower and Winter 
Gardens and a host of shops, cafes, restaurants and 
bars catering for residents and visitors.  However, 
the town centre’s influence and status, like the wider 
resort, has declined and there is wide recognition 
that it is under-performing as a sub-regional centre. 4. Spatial StrategyPage 32The town centre must be a focus for future economic 
growth, development and investment in order to 
successfully position it as the first choice shopping 
destination for Fylde Coast residents and an attractive 
place to visit and do business.  Three strategic sites 
are identified within Blackpool Town Centre: - the 
Central Business District, Winter Gardens and Leisure 
Quarter.  Development of each of these sites will help 
to transform the role and status of the town centre and 
the adjoining Resort Core, and help ensure that the 
overall Strategy and Vision are achieved.
4.7 The Resort Core  extends 5km along the seafront 
(from the Pleasure Beach to North Pier) and less than 
1km inland, connecting to the town centre.  It contains 
the famous Golden Mile, promenade, three piers and 
the majority of resort attractions and facilities, holiday 
accommodation and major points of arrival.  Three 
decades of decline in visitor numbers and insufficient 
investment means large parts of the Resort Core have 
become associated with a poor quality low-value offer 
which does not appeal to a 21st century tourist market.  
Despite a contraction of holiday accommodation there 
remain substantially more bed spaces than is required 
to sustain the level of visitors.  Whilst there has been 
significant public sector resort investment in recent 
years and recent figures show an upturn in visitor 
numbers, the Resort Core must be a focus for future 
tourism and leisure development and investment.  This 
will support a sustainable visitor economy and enable 
Blackpool to become renowned for the quality and 
innovation of its culture, entertainment and tourism 
offer.
4.8 Many neighbourhoods within Blackpool’s inner 
areas are amongst the 10% most deprived areas in 
England.  Despite these areas benefiting from good 
transport links and a seaside location, visitor economy 
decline and the attractiveness of Blackpool as a 
destination for low income and vulnerable households 
has resulted in severe problems caused by a significant 
concentration of small, poor quality, privately rented 
bedsits or HMOs.  This has created an unbalanced and dysfunctional housing market, with unstable 
residential communities experiencing extreme health, 
social and economic challenges.  It is essential for 
these neighbourhoods to be a focus for housing and 
community growth, development and investment to 
prevent the transition of more failing guest houses 
to poor quality residential uses and to rebalance the 
housing market and make them attractive places to 
live.  This focus will help to attract new residents and 
create new sustainable communities, complementing 
efforts to regenerate Blackpool Town Centre and Resort 
Core. Policy CS12 defines these neighbourhoods which 
are a focus for regeneration, as well as other priority 
neighbourhoods beyond the inner areas across the 
Borough.
Supporting South Blackpool Growth 
4.9 The area defined as South Blackpool is illustrated 
in Figure 10: Key Diagram.  It comprises developed and 
undeveloped land on the edge of the urban area close 
to the Blackpool/Fylde boundary.  This land is within 
close proximity to strategic transport connections, 
including Blackpool Airport and Junction 4 of the 
M55 motorway.  A number of sites (shown on the 
Key Diagram) provide opportunities for sustainable 
development, with quality new jobs and homes closely 
integrated with the surrounding area.  This will help 
to strengthen the local economy and rebalance the 
local housing market, complementing inner area 
regeneration.  
4.10 This area of South Blackpool includes Marton 
Moss, the only major area in the Borough which 
remains largely undeveloped.  A range of options have 
been considered for the future of the Moss, and there 
is recognition by residents in the area of some need 
for change but that this change should reflect and 
embrace as far as possible the open and semi rural 
distinctive character and appearance of the Moss.  
The focus for this area is to adopt a positive approach 
which recognises the character of the Moss as being 
integral to the nature of the Borough, whilst embracing 4. Spatial StrategyPage 33the localism agenda and providing the opportunity for 
appropriate enhancement to come forward through a 
neighbourhood planning approach.   
4.11 Supporting growth in South Blackpool is linked 
to the development of wider lands in this area.  
Through the Duty to Co-operate, the three Fylde Coast 
Authorities and Lancashire County Council are working together with respect to the strategic priorities for land 
around Junction 4 of the M55 on the Fylde/ Blackpool 
boundary and to promote the sustainable development 
of Blackpool Airport Corridor. This will establish a more 
balanced housing offer to improve choice in the sub-
regional housing market area and attract major new 
economic development to help strengthen the Fylde 
Coast economy. 
4. Spatial StrategyPage 34 of 144
Core PoliciesChapter 5
Astling Green built to Code 5 Code for Sustainable Homes by Great Places RSL 
(Photo - Great Places)
Page 34Page 35 of 144
Contents:
• CS2: Housing Provision 36
• CS3: Economic Development 40 
and Employment 
• CS4: Retail and Other Town Centre Uses 45
• CS5: Connectivity 49
• CS6: Green Infrastructure 55
• CS7: Quality of Design 60
• CS8: Heritage 62
• CS9: Water Management 64
• CS10: Sustainable Design and Low 67 
Carbon and Renewable Energy 
• CS11: Planning Obligations 70
Page 35Page 36Housing Provision  
5.1 Blackpool’s housing target for 2012 – 2027 
reflects the assessed needs of the future population, 
the level of housing considered realistic to deliver 
in the Borough (taking account of market signals, 
development viability and the availability of land) 
and the alignment of housing growth to economic 
prosperity.  An integrated housing and economic 
strategy is particularly important for Blackpool to 
address a number of distinct challenges regarding its 
current housing market and the dynamics of its local 
economy, rooted in the town’s changing fortunes as a 
major UK seaside holiday resort.
5.2 Blackpool’s challenging housing market is 
evidenced in the Fylde Coast Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment (SHMA).  In particular, there are a 
significant number of poor quality flats and Houses in 
Multiple Occupation (HMOs) which are unsuitable for 
families and undesirable for anyone who can afford 
to choose better.  Their location within the inner 
areas has resulted in an unsustainable concentration 
of vulnerable households reliant on housing benefit. 
Whilst there is a better mix of housing elsewhere in 
the Borough, these are difficult to access for many 
households due to low average incomes relative to 
house prices for sale and to rent.
5.3 The Core Strategy housing policies aim to 
deliver an appropriate scale, type and tenure mix 
of good quality homes across the Borough, in areas 
where people want to live.  This will improve choice 
and affordability issues to meet the future needs 
of the population, whilst creating more sustainable 
communities.  Inherent to achieving this will be 
intervention measures to rebalance the existing stock, 
along with new development focused in the existing 
urban area and in South Blackpool, in line with the 
overarching strategy for regeneration and supporting 
growth.  Policy CS2: Housing Provision deals with 
the scale of new housing required and the sources 
of supply, while the other aspects are dealt with in policies in Chapter 6 on strengthening community 
well-being.  
5.4 The Housing Requirement Technical Paper (June 
2014) provides detailed justification on Blackpool’s 
assessed housing need as well as information on 
delivery, including an indicative housing trajectory.
Policy CS2: Housing Provision
Provision will be made for the delivery of 4200 
(net) new homes in Blackpool between 2012 and 
2027. These new homes will be located on:
 ■Identified sites within the existing urban area, 
including major regeneration sites;
 ■Identified sites within the South Blackpool 
Growth area; and
 ■Windfall sites
The scale of new housing required
5.5 The scale and mix of housing and range of 
tenures that the population is likely to need over the 
plan period is evidenced in the Fylde Coast SHMA.  In 
terms of scale, this recommends that the objectively 
assessed needs for the Borough lie between 250 – 400 
homes per annum between 2011 and 2030 (the upper 
end of assessed need is reduced to 380 new homes per 
annum over the plan period). 
5.6 Reflecting the requirement for Local Plans to 
demonstrate a transparent and joined-up strategy 
between future housing growth and economic 
prosperity, further analysis of economic and housing 
forecasts and labour market assumptions support a 
housing requirement of 280 new homes on average 
per annum.  This is based on the most realistic and 
appropriate employment-led forecast.  It equates to 
4,200 new dwellings over the plan period.5. Core PoliciesPage 375.7 Whilst this forecast assumes an overall reduction 
in the number of jobs over the plan period, there will 
be economic growth in certain sustainable employment 
sectors, providing new jobs to help replace the 
significant number of public sector jobs expected 
to be lost as well as part-time, low-wage seasonal 
jobs.  This aligns with strategies to support a stronger, 
more resilient and diversified economy as opposed 
to high levels of job growth, which is not considered 
sustainable or achievable.  Aligning Blackpool’s housing 
requirement to this forecast reduces the level of in-
migration needed to support the new jobs created12 
compared to long-term trends.  This complements 
wider strategies which are ongoing to encourage 
existing residents to engage in the labour market and 
access the new jobs created, to improve economic 
activity levels.  Providing more houses than could be 
supported by the level of jobs expected to be available 
would undermine ongoing efforts to address the socio-
economic issues as a result of these past trends.  
5.8 An average of 280 homes per annum is 
considered realistic to deliver having regard to longer 
term development trends, which have averaged 250 
– 270 homes per annum as evidenced in the annual 
housing monitoring work; Blackpool’s challenging 
viability issues as evidenced in the Viability Study 
Report (2014); as well as the Borough’s physical 
constraints in terms of a tightly drawn boundary and 
limited available development land. 
Sources of supply
5.9 Blackpool’s housing supply will be delivered 
from three different sources, comprising identified 
sites from within the existing urban area including 
major regeneration sites; identified sites within South 
Blackpool; and windfall sites.  Collectively, these 
sources of supply will meet Blackpool’s full, assessed 
housing needs, and on this basis there is no unmet 
need to address. 
12 In-migration accounts for 3% of future population growth, while natural change 
accounts for 2%.5.10 Focusing housing supply in the existing urban 
area supports Blackpool’s strategy to maximise 
regeneration opportunities, ensures development takes 
place in the most sustainable locations and reflects 
the physical characteristics of the Borough.  However, 
given that the urban area is intensely developed and is 
more challenging in terms of viability, opportunities for 
new housing are also identified in South Blackpool to 
provide a complementary housing offer. These different 
sources are discussed in turn below.
5.11 Identified sites within the existing urban area, 
including major regeneration sites , will be allocated 
in the Site Allocations and Development Management 
Policies document. These sites are likely to include 
some or all of those identified in the Strategic Housing 
Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) which comprises 
sites committed for development; vacant underused 
or derelict land considered potentially suitable for 
housing; and major regeneration sites within the 
inner areas, priority neighbourhoods and resort core 
including seafront. 5. Core Policies
Page 385.12 The major regeneration sites include two 
large housing developments being brought forward 
by the Council and its partners at Rigby Road and 
Queens Park, to provide a choice of quality new 
homes that will appeal to different households and 
encourage sustainable communities to form.  The 
scale of intervention will encourage investment into 
the wider area to make these neighbourhoods more 
attractive places to live; and they illustrate the Council’s 
commitment to facilitating development in more 
challenging areas.
5.13 The SHLAA identifies as potentially suitable for 
housing sites for around 30% more dwellings than are 
needed to meet the housing target of 4200 between 
2012 and 2027. In recognition of Blackpool’s difficult 
housing market and the risks in delivering more 
challenging sites, it is likely to be necessary for the Site 
Allocations and Development Management Policies 
document to include a buffer of allocated sites over and 
above the minimum requirement. The scale of the buffer 
of sites within the Site Allocations and Development 
Management document will be kept under review and 
will be informed by housing delivery monitoring work.
5.14 Identified sites within the South Blackpool 
growth area  are expected to provide around 750 new 
homes on the edge of the urban area close to the 
Blackpool-Fylde boundary. This will comprise around 
600 homes on land committed for development 
at Moss House Road; and around 150 homes at 
Whyndyke Farm in relation to land within the 
Blackpool boundary (the majority of this site lies 
within Fylde). These two large developments present 
a real opportunity to improve the quality and choice 
of housing on the edge of Blackpool, linked to the 
development of wider lands in this area for major 
housing and employment growth.
5.15 To complement this housing growth, a 
neighbourhood planning approach for remaining 
land at Marton Moss will ensure the retention and 
enhancement of the distinctive character of this area. Further detail on South Blackpool Growth and 
Enhancement is provided in Chapter 8.
5.16 Windfall sites  are sites which have not been 
specifically identified as available in the Local Plan 
process.  They normally comprise previously developed 
sites that have unexpectedly become available.  A 
windfall allowance of around 1,500 homes will be 
the final component of Blackpool’s housing supply; 
with the majority expected to come forward from 
conversions and bringing back long term empty 
properties into use13.  
5.17 Historically, conversions have delivered a 
significant level of housing, averaging 87 new homes 
per annum over the past ten years. This reflects the 
decline in demand for holiday accommodation, which 
is realistic to expect to continue over the plan period. 
In addition to the policy approach to managing the 
current oversupply of holiday bed spaces by allowing 
more properties to change to residential use, the 
Council is helping to facilitate this with funding 
initiatives. This includes the Empty Homes grant 
funding secured in 2014, which will deliver a number 
of new homes in the early stage of the plan period by 
bringing long term empty properties back into use.  
Where planning permission is required, Policy CS13 will 
ensure they deliver quality homes and make a positive 
contribution to Blackpool’s future housing supply.
5.18 Linked to managing a reduction in holiday bed 
spaces and providing more flexibility for change of use 
on the seafront in order to promote a new high quality 
residential offer (set out in Policy CS23), some sites on 
the promenade that are not identified in the SHLAA 
will also be expected to come forward for high quality 
housing or mixed-use development.
Phasing
5.19 In aligning Blackpool’s housing and economic 
strategy, it is also important to consider variations 
13  Conversions committed for development are excluded from the supply of identified 
sites in the existing urban area, to avoid double counting.5. Core PoliciesPage 39within the plan period so that the pace at which 
housing development comes forward does not 
undermine efforts to engage residents into the labour 
market and address wider socio-economic issues. 
Blackpool’s circumstances are such that a phased 
approach to housing delivery is appropriate, which will 
provide flexibility to respond to the challenging housing 
market and local economy.  
5.20 Linked to particularly low economic growth 
forecasts in the first five years of the plan, Blackpool’s 
difficult housing market and challenging viability issues 
evidenced in the short term, as well as the uncertainty 
over economic recovery, Blackpool’s housing target 
between 2012 - 2017 will be 250 new homes per 
annum.  This is still within the identified range of the 
objectively assessed need recommended in the SHMA, 
but is considered more realistic to deliver. This target 
will increase to 280 new homes per annum between 
2017 - 2022 and 310 new homes per annum between 
2022 - 2027, following a period of more optimistic 
job growth forecasts and also capitalising on wider 
resort regeneration, improvements to infrastructure 
and successful housing, health and skills intervention 
programmes which will have improved the town’s 
image and prosperity and made Blackpool a more 
attractive place to live and invest. 
5.21 The expected rate of delivery over the plan 
period is illustrated in a housing trajectory set out 
in the Housing Requirement Technical Paper, with 
each delivery phase reflecting the Council’s focus on 
regeneration and supporting growth.  This trajectory 
will be monitored and reviewed on an annual basis 
through the housing monitoring work and also through 
future SHLAA updates.  The Technical Paper also 
identifies examples of Council-led initiatives to facilitate 
delivery in Blackpool’s challenging housing market.  
A Site Allocations DPD will identify sufficient sites to 
accommodate the housing requirement in the medium 
to longer term of the plan period where necessary.
Maintaining a Five Year Housing Land Supply5.22 Local Planning Authorities are required to 
identify a five year housing supply against the Plan 
requirements, in line with the National Planning Policy 
Framework, with a 20% buffer where there has been 
a persistent under delivery of housing. Reflecting 
Blackpool’s persistent under delivery against previous 
plan requirements 14, the housing trajectory in the 
supporting Technical Paper therefore shows the five 
year supply position and a 20% buffer; and it will 
continue to do so in annual reviews of supply until the 
Council can demonstrate delivery against the housing 
requirement set out in this Policy.
Meeting the housing needs of the Fylde Coast 
Sub-Region.  
5.23 The SHMA identifies an Objectively Assessed 
Need for each of the Fylde Coast authorities within 
the housing market area. The Council will continue to 
work with the neighbouring authorities of Fylde and 
Wyre through the Duty to Co-operate to ensure the 
overall housing needs of the housing market area are 
met in full.
Consideration of planning applications for 
new dwellings prior to the adoption of the 
Blackpool Local Plan Part 2:  Site Allocations and 
Development Management Policies
5.24 The Council is very keen to ensure that the 
housing target of 4200 is delivered over the plan period 
and that an average of at least 250 new homes is 
completed in the years 2012 – 2017.
5.25 Prior to the adoption of the Site Allocations and 
Development Management Policies document planning 
applications for new homes will be assessed against 
relevant policies in this plan, saved policies of the 
Blackpool Local Plan 2006 and the NPPF.
14  The North West Regional Spatial Strategy (now revoked) previously identified a 
target for Blackpool of 444 dwellings per annum.5. Core PoliciesPage 40Economic Development and Employment 
5.26 Whilst the visitor economy will continue to 
underpin Blackpool’s economy and remains an 
important growth sector (Chapter 7), to strengthen 
economic prosperity there is a recognised need 
to support new business growth and secure 
sustainable investment that will provide jobs in other 
employment sectors.  In particular, by growing those 
sectors that already have a strong foothold in the 
Fylde Coast and by encouraging other emerging key 
growth sectors.  
5.27 To ensure employment opportunities benefit 
Blackpool residents it is important that the local 
people have the skills necessary to access future 
jobs.  Equally, an improving skills profile will help to 
encourage new and expanding businesses to invest in 
the area.Policy CS3: Economic Development and 
Employment
1. Sustainable economic development will be 
promoted to strengthen the local economy and 
meet the employment needs of Blackpool and 
the Fylde Coast Sub-Region to 2027, with the 
focus on:
a.  Safeguarding around 180 hectares of 
existing industrial/business land for 
employment use; and enhancing these 
sites with new employment development 
on remaining available land and through 
opportunities for redevelopment
b.  Promoting office development, enterprise 
and business start-ups in Blackpool Town 
Centre including the Central Business District
c.  Promoting land in South Blackpool as 
a strategic priority, to help strengthen 
the Fylde Coast economy and make an 
important contribution towards meeting 
the future employment needs of Blackpool 
residents
2. To improve employment opportunities for   
Blackpool residents the focus will be to:
a.  Develop and deliver an effective skills 
agenda to ensure local people have the 
necessary skills; improve aspirations and 
opportunities for people to move into work; 
and retain skilled people in Blackpool 
b.  Secure inward investment into Blackpool 
including Public Sector and Government 
Department relocation opportunities 
c.  Nurture and support responsible 
entrepreneurship by facilitating a culture 
of enterprise and promoting Blackpool as a 
great place for start-up businesses 5. Core PoliciesPage 41Future Requirements for Employment 
Land
Fylde Coast Sub-Region
5.28 The economic functionality of the Fylde Coast 
is apparent in terms of travel to work patterns and 
employment, with a shared tourism and cultural 
offer; regionally and nationally significant advanced 
manufacturing; the Department for Work and Pensions; 
and a shared infrastructure including Blackpool 
Airport, coastal tramway and strategic highway and rail 
networks.  These strong links between the Fylde Coast 
authorities warrant the joint consideration of future 
employment development for the sub-region through 
the Duty to Co-operate, building on past co-operation.
5.29 The peripheral location of the Fylde Coast within 
the North West makes it critical to provide a portfolio 
of sustainable employment opportunities to improve 
economic performance.  The Fylde Coast authorities 
recognise the need to capitalise on the particular 
assets, strengths and opportunities of the sub-region as 
a whole to attract new investment in order to compete 
with, and support, the wider regional economy. Crucial 
to this is the need to work together with respect to 
the strategic priorities for land on the Fylde/Blackpool 
boundary, promote the sustainable development of 
key strategic sites and deliver the objectives of the 
Enterprise Zone at BAE Systems, Warton.   
5.30 A local Growth Accelerator Strategy for the Fylde 
Coast is being developed by Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre 
Economic Development Company (BFWEDC) to support 
the co-ordinated development of future employment 
across the sub-region.
Blackpool
5.31 The 2013 Blackpool Employment Land Study 
(published in June 2014) provides an overview of the 
local economy/property market; analyses existing 
employment land and available land supply; assesses how much employment land is needed to 2027; and 
identifies how this need will be met.
5.32 To determine future land requirements, the 
preferred approach in the Employment Land Study is 
based on applying long-term historical trends in land 
take-up within the Borough. Projecting forward an 
average annual take-up rate of 1.75ha and including 
a 20% flexibility allowance (to provide a margin 
of choice), the study recommends that 31.5ha of 
employment land is needed to 2027 15.
5.33 At July 2012 the baseline supply of available 
employment land in the Borough was 21.6ha. However, 
when considering the likelihood of development 
coming forward, the realistic supply is reduced to 
17.8ha (11ha of which is considered to have ‘very 
good’ or ‘good’ market attractiveness).  This suggests a 
shortfall in supply of 13.7ha.   
5.34 Blackpool is intensely developed and has a 
tightly constrained boundary, which means there is 
a demonstrable lack of future development land16. 
Opportunities for further employment expansion 
within the Borough are therefore extremely limited. 
In particular, the remaining shortfall cannot be 
accommodated on lands within the Blackpool 
boundary.  The outcome of co-operation between 
Blackpool and Fylde Councils on this issue means 
that Fylde will provide for this shortfall, which will be 
added to Fylde’s requirement over their Local Plan 
period to 2032. Meeting Blackpool’s longer term needs 
is therefore integrally linked with how it functions 
within the Fylde Coast and the joint consideration of 
future employment development for the sub-region, 
which would complement and support a strengthened 
Blackpool economy.
15  1.75ha x 15yrs + 20% = 31.5ha
16  This is discussed in the Employment Technical Paper5. Core PoliciesPage 425. Core Policies
Providing Quality Employment Land 
5.35 The lack of future development land within 
Blackpool makes it essential to provide better quality 
employment sites with new sustainable employment 
development and to capitalise more on other existing 
assets within the Borough. 
Existing Industrial/Business Land 
5.36 There are 13 main industrial/business areas 
within Blackpool (illustrated in Figure 12 and defined 
on the Proposals Map) which amount to 182.1ha of 
employment land in total.  These areas provide a range 
of employment related uses that make an important 
contribution to Blackpool’s employment offer and the 
local economy; and will be retained as safeguarded 
employment land.  
5.37 Some of the main employment areas present 
redevelopment opportunities for new employment 
development. This will strengthen Blackpool’s 
employment offer by helping to retain existing occupiers 
and attract new businesses. This redevelopment will be 
a particularly important element of supply going forward 
by helping to retain and improve existing employment 
land. It will also make available land within those areas 
more attractive to develop. Specific opportunities for 
redevelopment are identified in the Employment Land 
Review; this includes a number of estates within South 
Blackpool currently under occupied and in need of 
comprehensive improvement. 
5.38 In order to facilitate regeneration, redevelopment 
opportunities which introduce a suitable mixed-use 
development, including housing, will be considered 
where it is exceptionally and robustly justified as 
necessary to secure the future business/industrial use 
of the site. Any such enabling development should not 
conflict with wider plan objectives.Blackpool Town Centre
5.39 Whilst a strengthened visitor and retail economy 
will be a key focus for town centre investment and job 
growth (Chapter 7), developing the commercial and 
business sector will also be important to strengthen 
the town centre economy.  Blackpool Town Centre 
currently has low levels of office activity and quality 
space available, with much of this dispersed across 
the Borough.  There is therefore a need to provide a 
functional central business district for the town centre.
5.40 Work is ongoing to progress development 
opportunities and secure investment within the 
town centre, building on strengths in infrastructure, 
accessibility and land availability.  The Central 
Business District (Talbot Gateway) site forms a critical 
component of this, with the opportunity to deliver a 
high quality mixed use scheme, including new, modern 
office space, in the centre of Blackpool within walking 
distance of Blackpool North railway station. This 
scheme will help to support sustainable job growth 
and encourage further investment to help revitalise the 
town centre. Electrification of the Preston-Blackpool 
North line will improve connections with the strategic 
rail network and will be a crucial economic driver to 
employment opportunities within the Central Business 
District and wider town centre.  
South Blackpool
5.41 Complementing opportunities from existing 
industrial/business land and the town centre, lands 
on the Blackpool/Fylde boundary around Junction 
4 of the M55 and along Blackpool Airport corridor 
are identified as strategic locations for sustainable 
employment development to help strengthen the Fylde 
Coast economy whilst also helping Blackpool to meet 
its longer term employment needs.Page 435. Core Policies
5.42 Blackpool Airport is a considerable sub-regional 
asset and there is a need to ensure that its economic 
potential is realised.  Developing lands along the 
airport corridor, including the adjoining Blackpool 
Business Park and older existing employment estates 
nearby, to deliver sustainable development will be 
critical in capitalising on this major economic asset.
5.43 Lands around Junction 4 of the M55 on the 
Blackpool/Fylde boundary enjoy good strategic road 
access and are of a sufficient scale to attract major new 
economic development.  This is an important future 
growth hub to help strengthen the Fylde Coast economy.
5.44 Future development opportunities in South 
Blackpool are also detailed in Chapter 8.
Employment Opportunities
Securing inward investment
5.45 Blackpool relies on a high proportion of public 
sector employment (including local authority, NHS and 
civil service) although if recent trends in public sector 
decline continue, Blackpool must encourage sustainable 
investment and business growth in other sectors in 
order to strengthen the local economy.  Notwithstanding 
this, Blackpool is well placed to attract certain types 
of Government Department relocations and new 
Government Agencies, subject to the availability of 
suitable premises and sites.  BFWEDC is working with 
both the public and private sector to identify and facilitate 
development and investment opportunities, including 
business relocations.  The Council is also working with 
neighbouring authorities, Lancashire County Council, the 
Lancashire Enterprise Partnership and key employers, 
including British Aerospace, to ensure that investment 
secured for the region benefits Blackpool.
Developing an effective skills agenda
5.46 The Core Strategy sets the framework for 
sustainable economic development to support a 
strengthened local economy.  To improve employment prospects for Blackpool residents, it is important that 
local people have the necessary skills and aspirations 
to access future jobs.  Evidence shows there is an 
improving skills profile within the Blackpool resident 
base, which will need to continue in the future.  
Blackpool Council is working to develop strong links 
with schools, colleges, employment support services 
and key employers to support skills attainment and 
progression.  Blackpool has a significant Further 
Education presence and a small, but growing, Higher 
Education presence.  These education providers will 
have a key role to play in ensuring that local people are 
well equipped to meet the skills requirements of future 
job opportunities if Blackpool is to successfully improve 
unemployment and economic activity rates.  
5.47 Equally, Blackpool needs to make effective 
use of the existing skills base on the Fylde Coast, to 
prevent it from being a net exporter of skills.  Retaining 
these skills will help to attract new and more diverse 
businesses to the area and encourage existing 
businesses to grow.  
Promoting Entrepreneurship
5.48 Historically, Blackpool was renowned for 
innovative enterprise activity.  To regain this past 
strength, the Council is working to nurture and support 
responsible entrepreneurship at all levels by facilitating 
a culture of enterprise and providing an environment 
which supports start-up businesses.  
5.49 To support this policy approach, a Blackpool 
Local Economy Action Plan has been developed which 
identifies priorities and activities to grow the local 
economy and opportunities to improve employment 
prospects for Blackpool’s people.  The Council is 
also delivering a number of employment and skills 
programmes to help engage residents in the labour 
market, in partnership with key bodies including 
education providers. Page 44
t.  Unauthorised 
reproduc tion infringes Cr own c opyright and ma y lead t o pr osecution or civil pr oceedings .  Black pool Bor ough C ouncil Lic ence No . 100019178. 2012.Urban Ar ea
Emplo yment Sites
Blac kpool Boundary
Town Centr e Boundary
NKey5. Core Policies
Figure 12: Main Employment SitesPage 45Retail and Other Town Centre Uses 
5.50 Blackpool Town Centre is the sub-regional 
centre for the Fylde Coast and plays a pivotal role in 
driving the local economy and providing Fylde Coast 
residents and visitors with shopping facilities to meet 
a wide range of needs.
5.51 To protect the vitality and viability of the town 
centre and to successfully position it as the first choice 
shopping destination for Fylde Coast residents and 
an attractive place to visit to do business, Policy CS4 
identifies Blackpool Town  Centre as the focus for 
major new retail development and other town centre 
uses, whilst also recognising the supporting role that 
District and Local Centres have in meeting the needs 
of local communities.  Further measures to achieve 
a thriving town centre are dealt with in Policy CS17: 
Blackpool Town Centre.
Policy CS4:  Retail and Other Town Centre Uses
1. In order to strengthen Blackpool Town Centre’s 
role as the sub-regional centre for retail on 
the Fylde Coast, its vitality and viability will be 
safeguarded and improved by:
a.  Focusing new major retail development 
in the town centre to strengthen the offer 
and improve the quality of the shopping 
experience
b.  The preparation and implementation of 
a Town Centre Strategy and Action Plan, 
working with stakeholders to arrest decline 
and restore confidence in the town centre
2. For Town, District and Local Centres within the 
Borough, retail and other town centre uses will 
be supported where they are appropriate to 
the scale, role and function of the centre.   3. In edge of centre and out of centre locations, 
proposals for new retail development and 
other town centre uses will only be permitted 
where it can be demonstrated that:
a.  It is a tourism attraction located in the 
Resort Core in accordance with policy CS21; 
or
b. There are no more centrally located/ 
sequentially preferable, appropriate sites 
available for the development; and
c.  The proposal would not cause significant 
adverse impact on existing centres; and
d. The proposal would not undermine the 
Council’s strategies and proposals for 
regenerating its centres; and
e.  The proposal will be readily accessible by 
public transport and other sustainable 
transport modes
4. The Council, through the Site Allocations and 
Development Management DPD, will identify 
a range of sites for new retail development 
in Blackpool Town Centre to allow for new 
comparison goods floorspace over the plan 
period.5. Core PoliciesPage 465.52 The principal retail core of Blackpool Town 
Centre contains the main shopping streets and the 
majority of the large multiple retailers, focused on the 
main pedestrianised core of Church Street, Victoria 
Street, Bank Hey Street and the Houndshill Shopping 
Centre.  Redevelopment of the Houndshill in 2008 has 
strengthened the retail core, attracted new national 
retailers to the town and provided an improvement in the 
quality of the shopping experience.  However, the 2011 
Fylde Coast Retail Study identifies that the town centre is 
still underperforming.  
5.53 It is widely acknowledged that Blackpool Town 
Centre’s retail offer does not provide the quality or 
range that is necessary to reflect its sub-regional role.  It 
experiences notably low levels of expenditure on clothing 
and shoes, which is considered to be the most important 
comparison goods sub-category and one which should 
be properly catered for in the town centre.  The lack of a 
strong fashion offer has resulted in unsustainable levels 
of expenditure flowing out to out-of-centre retail parks 
and competing shopping destinations outside the Fylde 
Coast.  A strong ‘fashion’ offer is important to attracting 
the expenditure of the catchment area residents and is the 
main component of a strong town centre comparison offer.  
 5.54 There is a real need therefore to restore the town 
centre’s position as a strong sub-regional retail centre.  
Future investment is vital to retain and enhance the critical mass of retail and supporting town centre uses, 
reduce vacancy levels and attract higher-end retailers to 
improve the quality and range of offer.  
5.55 Major new retail development will be focused 
in Blackpool Town Centre.  The 2011 Fylde Coast Retail 
Study identifies capacity for additional retail growth of 
16,390 square metres of comparison goods floorspace to 
202117.  Beyond this, the Houndshill Phase II extension, 
and any retail components of the Leisure Quarter 
development and the Winter Gardens refurbishment 
provide the best opportunities for the enhancement 
of the comparison goods offer in Blackpool Town 
Centre, which will complement the improvement in 
quality to the existing retail stock. The Site Allocations 
and Development Management DPD will identify the 
proposed sites for new retail development. 
5.56 For convenience retail goods, the Fylde Coast 
Retail Study highlights that after taking into account the 
proposed supermarket at the Central Business District18, 
there is no overall need for further convenience goods 
floorspace in Blackpool in quantitative or qualitative 
terms up to 2021 and very limited capacity to 2026.
17  This Retail Study also identifies a requirement for 17,410 sqm of new comparison 
goods floorspace for the period 2021-2026.  This is an indicative figure due to 
uncertainties with future retail growth in the longer term. This evidence base will be 
updated periodically and the recommendations reviewed as appropriate.
18  Sainsbury’s supermarket.5. Core Policies
Page 475.57 The Council has prepared a Town Centre 
Strategy and Action Plan which identifies priorities for 
improvement and management of the town centre.  
The Council will work with various stakeholders 
including landlords and retailers with the aim to arrest 
decline and restore confidence in the town centre, 
encouraging quality investments from both the public 
and private sector.
5.58 The Core Strategy evidence recognises the 
town centre’s vulnerability to competing out-of-centre 
provision. The Retail Study highlights the priority to 
protect the vitality and viability of Blackpool Town 
Centre, and to protect the recent and proposed 
investment by focusing new major retail development 
in the town centre.
5.59 At the local level, the Borough is supported by 
various District and Local Centres (Figure 13) which play 
a vital role in providing the quality and range of shops 
and other services for the day to day needs of the local 
communities they serve.  
Figure 13: Retail Hierarchy 
Blackpool’s Retail Hierarchy
Town Centre Blackpool
District Centre South Shore  
Bispham  
Highfield Road  
Layton  
Whitegate Drive
Local Centre A number of local 
centres of various sizes 
located across the 
Borough.5.60 In determining development proposals, the 
Council’s objectives are to sustain and enhance the 
vitality and viability of Blackpool Town Centre and the 
supporting District and Local Centres. The majority 
of the town’s shopping floorspace is located in these 
centres and they are readily accessible by residents and 
visitors by various methods of transport.  
5.61 Figure 14 shows the location of Blackpool’s retail 
centres across the Borough. The Local and District 
Centres’ boundaries are to be reviewed in the Site 
Allocations and Development Management DPD.5. Core Policies
Page 48
Urban Ar ea
Blac kpool Town Centr e
District Cent res
Blac kpool Boundary
N
t.  Unauthorised 
reproduc tion infringes Cr own c opyright and ma y lead t o pr osecution or civil pr oceedings .  Black pool Bor ough C ouncil Lic ence No . 100019178. 2012.Local Cent resKey
Waterloo R oad
Highf ield R oadLaytonBispham
White gate Driv e
Town Centr e5. Core Policies
Figure 14: Blackpool’s Retail CentresPage 49Connectivity 
5.62 A sustainable and efficient transport network 
is vital for Blackpool’s economic prosperity and social 
and environmental well-being.  Transport infrastructure 
needs to support economic priorities and effectively 
integrate with future development to reduce the need 
to travel, making it convenient, affordable and safe for 
residents to access jobs and services.     
5.63 Fast, convenient access to the resort and high 
quality infrastructure and an efficient network within 
the town is also essential to support a sustainable 
economy, by encouraging visitors to access and enjoy 
the tourism and cultural offer as well as businesses 
to invest.  The quality of arrival, clarity of signage, 
ease and legibility of movement through the town 
is important in providing a positive experience for 
visitors, particularly in the town centre and resort 
core, whilst encouraging more sustainable travel.  
5.64 Blackpool Council works jointly with Fylde 
and Wyre Borough Councils and Lancashire County 
Council to address strategic challenges to improve 
the economic competitiveness of the sub-region.  The 
Local Transport Plan will play an important part in 
addressing these strategic challenges and delivering 
improvements to the strategic transport network. 
Policy CS5: Connectivity
A sustainable, high quality transport network for 
Blackpool and a quality arrival experience will be 
achieved by the following measures:
1. The provision of a modern, frequent, 
convenient and well-integrated public 
transport network by:
a.  Working with Network Rail and operators to:
i. facilitate increased rail capacity and 
frequency on the Blackpool – Preston – 
Manchester line and new services including 
direct services to major destinations;ii. upgrade the South Fylde line, increasing 
capacity and frequency of services; and
iii. provide major enhancement of all rail 
arrival points, particularly Blackpool 
North Station.
b. Providing a new tram link from the 
promenade to Blackpool North Station and 
maintain options to link the tram network to 
the South Fylde Line.
c.  Working with bus operators and developers 
to provide enhanced bus services with 
efficient, comprehensive routing served by 
high quality infrastructure, providing bus 
priority measures where appropriate to 
enable services to operate efficiently. 
d. Working with coach operators and 
developers to provide sufficient, high quality, 
conveniently located coach passenger 
facilities and coach parking.
2. Encouraging integration of Blackpool Airport  
with public transport modes, enabling efficient 
passenger connections and onward journeys 
to and from the town and wider airport 
catchment; and supporting improvements to 
airport parking and the expansion of routes.  
3. Improving interchange  between transport 
modes by providing improved high quality 
infrastructure including buildings, facilities and 
public realm, making transport interchange 
easy and convenient for all users.
4. Reducing road  congestion by eliminating 
identified ‘pinch-points’; providing long-term 
solutions to structural issues where these arise 
at bridges and other infrastructure assets; and 
providing advanced directional signage on all 
main routes.  5. Core PoliciesPage 505. Addressing parking  capacity issues by providing 
sufficient, high quality and conveniently located 
car parks, to support the town centre and 
resort economy and address wider issues of 
parking provision across the Borough.
6. Developing a safe, enhanced and extended 
network of pedestrian and cycle  routes to 
increase the proportion of journeys made on 
foot or bike by:  
a.  Connecting neighbourhoods with the 
town centre, district and local centres, 
employment sites and community facilities, 
green spaces and adjoining countryside;
b. Providing the town centre and resort 
core with new and improved convenient 
pedestrian and cycle links between main car 
parks, transport hubs, major attractions and 
development sites; and 
c.  Providing suitable levels of secure cycle 
parking at new developments and public 
transport hubs as well as links to existing 
networks, where feasible.
7. Providing improved, clear and co-ordinated 
signage  for all transport modes and visitor 
information, particularly within the town centre 
and resort core, to ease movement and provide 
a clear sense of orientation and direction.
8. Changing travel behaviour  by pro-actively 
working with developers and other 
organisations to increase the proportion of 
journeys that use sustainable transport, while 
working with residents and businesses to 
reduce the need for work related journeys 
where alternative means or technologies make 
this possible.  5.65 The overarching strategy focus on regeneration 
of the town centre and resort core will ensure future 
development comes forward in locations that improve 
opportunities for sustainable travel between homes 
and jobs and reduce regular car journeys, to help 
manage congestion and minimise future greenhouse 
gas emissions.  It will also provide opportunities to 
improve the quality of arrival and reduce cross town 
vehicle movements.
5.66 New development should prioritise ease of 
access to sustainable transport modes, including 
walking and cycling.  Opportunities to improve 
connectivity in South Blackpool, with supporting 
growth which promotes sustainable development and 
travel, are addressed in Policy CS27: South Blackpool 
Transport and Connectivity.   
5.67 With Blackpool’s compact urban form, this will 
enable closer integration of high quality air, bus, rail 
and tram services/infrastructure which, along with an 
enhanced pedestrian environment, will make travel by 
public transport, cycling and walking safer and more 
attractive to residents and visitors.  A sustainable 
transport system will integrate available modes of 
transport and make passenger transfer between them 
as simple and convenient as possible.  
5.68 Public transport should be frequent, good quality 
and convenient to be a realistic and preferred option 
over the car for both residents and visitors.  Achieving 
this will also require improvements to key transport 
interchanges including Blackpool North and South 
railway stations, the bus infrastructure, and Lonsdale 
Road Coach Station (or any replacement).   
5.69 With the low rate of car ownership in Blackpool 
a significant proportion of residents are dependent 
on public transport and there is a need to maintain 
and strengthen this service within the Borough.  
Neighbourhoods should also be connected by attractive 
and safe pedestrian and cycle routes to encourage 
walking and cycling.  5. Core PoliciesPage 51Rail
5.70 Blackpool benefits from two rail connections, 
one to Blackpool North station and the other to 
Blackpool South from the main line at Preston.  
5.71 Network Rail has committed to electrify the 
line between Blackpool North and Preston by 2016 as 
part of the Northern Rail Hub project.  This enables 
direct electrified services to Manchester, Liverpool and 
other major towns and cities including London and 
Birmingham.  This will help capitalise on the new high 
speed West Coast train service to support economic 
regeneration as well as planned links to HS2 phase 2.  
Electrification and related infrastructure improvements 
will reduce journey times and increase line capacity.  
5.72 The South Fylde line connects South Blackpool 
to Preston via Lytham St Annes.  Being single track the 
line has limited services and the capacity of the rail 
infrastructure needs to be increased to allow more 
frequent services and greater efficiency.  The Council 
and rail providers are actively exploring options to 
achieve this including tram/train technology and 
providing double-track or passing loops.  The Council 
will continue to support a Community Rail Partnership 
that promotes this line and includes the Council, 
Network Rail and Train Operating Companies. 
 
(CS3 Train approaching Blackpool.jpg)Tram 
5.73 A comprehensive renewal and upgrade of the 
Blackpool - Fleetwood Tramway was completed in 2012 
giving Blackpool a modern, fully accessible transport 
system, providing good connectivity from Starr Gate in 
south Blackpool to Fleetwood in the north.  The system 
helps Blackpool manage its congestion and improves 
transport for visitors.  The new system provides a 
viable alternative to car use for north-south journeys, 
however better integration with other transport modes 
is required for wider onward journeys.  Within the 
town centre better integration with the bus network 
will be developed using Better Bus Area Funding.  
Joint-ticketing with the bus and rail networks has the 
potential to increase usage.  
5.74 Further extensions to the tram network, 
including a link to Blackpool North rail station and to 
the South Fylde line, would develop the tramway’s 
strategic potential and connect settlements on the 
Fylde Coast within a sub-regional integrated transport 
network.  A number of extensions have been appraised 
and recommendations which support future growth 
in the region will be actively pursued.  The Council 
will work with neighbouring authorities to ensure 
development does not compromise the delivery of a 
connected service.  
Bus and Coach  
5. Core Policies
Photo:  R~P~M on FlickrPage 525.75 Bus travel is a key element of Blackpool’s 
transport network and a high quality bus network is 
particularly important for the town.  There is a need 
to enhance travel by making services faster and more 
reliable, easing congestion and improving comfort.  
This will be achieved using bus priority measures to be 
piloted in the town centre; improving infrastructure 
including stop and shelter upgrades; providing clear 
information that includes onward interchange to other 
public transport modes; and encouraging operators 
to provide a more modern bus fleet and to introduce 
easy-to-use ticketing systems.
5.76 New development in South Blackpool presents 
opportunities to extend bus routes and improve 
efficiency and connections between the urban area 
and the wider Fylde Coast.  There is a particular need 
to address provision in South Blackpool to support 
housing and employment growth (see Chapter 8).  
5.77 Coach travel is an important means of travel to 
the resort, making a major contribution to the resort 
economy as well as having a low-carbon footprint.  To 
capitalise on this mode of transport, there is a need 
for convenient and attractive passenger pick-up/drop-
off points and waiting facilities, as well as sufficient 
and accessible coach layover parking, which will be 
important to the future development of the resort.
Air
5.78 Blackpool Airport is important to the future 
economic growth of the sub-region and has the 
potential to provide enhanced travel opportunities for 
residents, visitors and businesses alike.  The Council 
and neighbouring authorities will work with the owners 
of the airport to develop a Master Plan and Surface 
Access Strategy.  This will include opportunities to 
improve parking and public transport access by bus and 
coach, with linkages to Blackpool North and nearby 
Squires Gate railway station.Road 
5.79 Whilst Blackpool benefits from good connections 
to the national motorway network via the M55, road 
access from the M55 to Fleetwood and Lytham St 
Annes is currently poor.  With increasing congestion 
on strategic routes through the town (including the 
promenade) and beyond, there is a need to improve 
north - south links to the wider Fylde Coast highway 
network from the M55.  Improvements to the A585 (T) 
as promoted in Wyre Council’s Local Plan (Fleetwood- 
Thornton Area Action Plan) will be supported as this 
would ease congestion and improve accessibility 
to the wider Fylde Coast, improving the economic 
competitiveness of the area.
Parking
5.80 Parking provision and management has a key 
part to play in ensuring Blackpool remains a tourist 
destination of choice and is also instrumental in 
determining where Fylde Coast residents choose to 
shop.  Good quality, well-planned and accessible car 
parking is therefore required to support the vitality 
and viability of Blackpool Town Centre, as well as the 
resort economy.  Whilst the town has significant parking 
provision overall, particularly along Central Corridor, 
some of these are in more peripheral locations meaning 
they can be underused at times.  With parking pressure 
in the town centre and limited opportunities to increase 
provision in more central areas, the Council will support 
measures that will help make this more peripheral 
parking more accessible to the town centre and resort 
whilst also seeking to ensure better provision overall. 
5.81 Blackpool’s inner area neighbourhoods suffer 
severe seasonal shortages of car parking for both 
residents and visitors.  Whilst streets are able to 
cope with residential parking, the additional demand 
from visitor parking means that solutions are needed 
with respect to new parking provision and through 
improved access to under-used provision nearby. 5. Core PoliciesPage 535.82 By locating car parks at main arrival points into 
the resort and the town centre, the Council aims to 
minimise cross town movements.  Further guidance, 
including a Car Parking Strategy, will be developed to 
ensure sufficient car and coach parking is provided in 
suitable locations which takes into account changes 
resulting from regeneration and new development to 
ensure that future demand is accommodated.  
5.83 The Council will seek to ensure better 
management of parking to enable the correct mix of 
shopper and visitor parking, together with good coach 
facilities; that vehicles are accommodated within 
reasonably priced, good quality and convenient car 
parks in the town centre and resort; and that visitors 
are clearly directed to the most appropriate coach and 
car parks on arrival (see details on signage below).  Walking and Cycling 
5.84 Walking and cycling are important for 
their effectiveness in reducing road traffic as well 
as improving health outcomes, an important 
consideration given the poor health statistics in 
Blackpool.  The Council will promote physical activity in 
line with the recommendations of NICE Public Health 
Guidance19.  Promotion of physical activity through 
urban and transport planning has been shown to be an 
effective way of improving health outcomes in urban 
areas.
5.85 The compact urban form of the resort, 
topography and the promenade provide considerable 
opportunity to encourage walking and cycling.  The 
Council will look at opportunities for further public 
realm enhancement and will promote cycle movement 
throughout the town, including promotion of cycle 
routes to provide a quality network of pedestrian and 
cycle routes which creates safe and pleasant routes for 
visitors and residents alike.  The Town Centre Strategy 
identifies opportunities for improving access and 
movement that builds on the improvements completed 
under the 2011 Promenade Movement Strategy.  
5.86 Promoting cycling, through marketing and 
improved cycling infrastructure, will contribute to 
increasing local accessibility within Blackpool and on 
the Fylde Coast.  Cycling Towns status, awarded in 
2008, allowed large areas of the town to be made more 
accessible by bike.  The ‘explorer’ and promenade 
routes will be integrated into the Strategic Cycling 
Network.  The Hire-a-Bike cycle rental scheme also 
improves access to resort attractions, supporting the 
visitor economy and improving the local environment.
19  NICE Public Health Guidance 8 Physical activity and the environment.  NICE 2008  
Nice Public Health Guidance 41 Walking and cycling: local measures to promote 
walking and cycling as forms of  avel or recreation. NICE 20125. Core Policies
Photo:  John KellyPage 545. Core Policies
5.87  As part of public realm improvements, there will 
be opportunities to improve the pedestrian network, 
upgrade pedestrian crossings delivered through PFI 
funding and provide more seating in the town centre 
and promenade.  Opportunities to improve public rights 
of way networks will also be considered to provide 
effective off-road links for pedestrians and cyclists.
Signage
5.88 Providing a co-ordinated network of signage 
and visitor information is a priority for the Council to 
support a quality arrival experience and ease/legibility 
of movement.  Effective traffic management, parking 
and way finding for motor vehicles, cycling and walking 
are recognised as particularly important to the tourism 
economy, especially within the town centre and resort 
core where pedestrian links between car parks and 
attractions and other destinations need clear and 
attractive sign-posting.  
5.89 Informed by the Blackpool Way Finding Strategy, 
the Council is implementing a comprehensive signage 
strategy to ensure way-finding and visitor information 
is made clearer.  This includes de-cluttering and the 
provision of new pedestrian signage throughout the 
resort core and town centre.  Changing Travel Behaviour
5.90 Implementing ‘Smarter Choices’ initiatives will 
help reduce emissions.  Innovative marketing and 
promotion will encourage people to change their 
travel behaviour.  Where sites are not located on 
existing sustainable transport routes developers should 
consider installing broadband infrastructure to enable 
more effective teleworking.
5.91 Blackpool has an effective Travel Plan Partnership 
and will work with developers and other partners to 
set up and monitor workplace, school and personal 
travel plans that aim to increase sustainable transport 
patterns and reduce car dependency and transport 
related emissions.      
Page 55Green Infrastructure
5.92 Green infrastructure is ‘the network of natural 
environmental components and green and blue 
spaces that lies within and between cities, towns and 
villages which provides multiple social, economic and 
environmental benefits’20. The physical components 
of green infrastructure can range from large-scale 
areas of public open space such as coastal habitats 
and countryside areas to smaller scale provision in 
the form of street trees, allotments and Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDs). Green infrastructure 
can also include hard-landscaped areas, such as 
Blackpool’s promenade, which forms an integral part 
of the town’s green infrastructure network.
5.93 Green infrastructure supports regeneration, 
adds to the attractiveness of the town as a place to 
invest, and makes a vital contribution to the health 
and well-being of residents and visitors. Networks of 
green infrastructure can safeguard valued landscapes, 
link habitat and biodiversity networks, protect and 
improve water quality (including bathing waters), and 
mitigate the impacts of climate change by reducing 
the urban heat island effect and attenuating flood 
risk. The following policy therefore aims to protect, 
enhance, expand and connect green infrastructure 
and ecological networks in Blackpool.
Policy CS6: Green Infrastructure
1. High-quality and well connected networks 
of green infrastructure in Blackpool will be 
achieved by:
a.  Protecting  existing green infrastructure 
networks and existing areas of Green Belt. 
The loss of green infrastructure will only 
be acceptable in exceptional circumstances 
where it is allowed for as part of an adopted  
Development Plan Document; or where
20  Taken from North West Green Infrastructure Guide (2008)provision is made for appropriate 
compensatory measures, mitigation or 
replacement; or in line with national 
planning policy. 
In terms of existing open space, sports and 
recreational buildings and land, including 
playing fields, these will be protected unless 
the requirements of paragraph 74 of the 
NPPF are met.
In terms of Green Belt areas, the Council 
will apply national policy to protect their 
openness and character, and retain the local 
distinctiveness. There is no planned strategic 
review of the existing Green Belt boundary 
during the plan period.
b. Enhancing  the quality, accessibility and 
functionality of green infrastructure and 
where possible providing net gains in 
biodiversity.  
c.   Creating new accessible green infrastructure 
as part of new development and supporting 
urban greening measures within the built 
environment.  
d. Connecting  green infrastructure with the 
built environment and with other open 
space including the creation, extension or 
enhancement of greenways, green corridors 
and public rights of way.
2. All development should incorporate new 
or enhance existing green infrastructure 
of an appropriate size, type and standard. 
Where on-site provision is not possible, 
financial contributions will be sought to make 
appropriate provision for open space and green 
infrastructure.5. Core PoliciesPage 563. International, national and local sites of 
biological and geological conservation 
importance will be protected having regard 
to the hierarchy of designated sites and the 
potential for appropriate mitigation. Measures 
that seek to preserve, restore and enhance 
local ecological networks and priority habitats/
species will be required where necessary. 
Protecting Green Infrastructure
5.94 The intensely urban nature of Blackpool 
and limited areas of open countryside increase the 
importance of balancing the requirement for new 
development with the need to protect valued landscapes, 
biodiversity and green infrastructure networks (as set 
out in Figure 7: Blackpool’s Existing Green Infrastructure). 
This also means opportunities to create new public open 
space in Blackpool are constrained. Therefore the focus 
of the policy is to protect, improve and enhance existing 
provision and where possible, support the creation of 
new green infrastructure, as well as the innovative use 
of space including the transformation of underused or 
derelict space. 
5.95 Due to the urban and compact form of the 
Borough, a number of important designations exist 
beyond the built-up area.  This includes Green Belt 
land, which has an important role in safeguarding the 
countryside from encroachment, preventing Blackpool 
merging with neighbouring settlements and assisting 
in urban regeneration. The current Green Belt land in 
Blackpool will therefore continue to be protected by 
restricting the type of development here to retain its 
open and locally distinctive character, in line with the 
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). There is no 
planned strategic review of the Green Belt boundary 
over the plan period. 
5.96 In terms of other Green Infrastructure assets, the 
starting point for future development plan documents will 
be to avoid the loss of these where possible.  However, this will need to be in the context of addressing the 
competing demands on Blackpool’s limited remaining 
developable land. A careful balance has to be struck which 
enables the provision of high quality networks of green 
infrastructure alongside the delivery of development 
to meet Blackpool’s wider housing, employment and 
infrastructure requirements. In some circumstances, 
this may require the development of greenfield sites. 
During the process of allocating land as part of the Site 
Allocations document, the Council will have regard to the 
requirement of the NPPF to ‘allocate land with the least 
environmental or amenity value’ (paragraph 110). 
5.97 The integration and protection of green 
infrastructure is particularly important in parts of the 
Borough where access to open space is more limited, this 
will help to address identified deficiencies and bring about 
environmental, social and economic improvements. Green 
infrastructure has an important role in ‘climate proofing’ 
urban areas by enabling communities to adapt to climate 
change by providing shade and cooling in the summer, 
insulation in the winter and by mitigating risks posed 
by flooding and air pollution. There are also clear links 
between green infrastructure and the health and well-being 
of communities. 
5.98 Easy access to good quality green space and 
infrastructure can provide benefits such as increased 
life expectancy and reduced health inequalities, 
improvements in levels of physical activity and health, and 
the promotion of psychological health and mental well-
being21. Furthermore, evidence suggests that investment 
in green infrastructure can also have a positive impact on 
economic regeneration, particularly in relation to inward 
investment, new business start-ups and job creation. The 
benefits of green infrastructure need to be harnessed 
across the Borough, but particularly in the most deprived 
neighbourhoods of Blackpool where there is a need to 
address the current concentrated levels of deprivation 
and health inequalities experienced in these areas. 
21  Report by Forest Research as part of the Urban Regeneration and Greenspace 
Partnership (2010), ‘Benefits of green infrastructure’5. Core PoliciesPage 57Enhancing Green Infrastructure
5.99 The Borough contains a number of high quality 
open spaces such as Stanley Park which has Grade 
II* status as a historically important garden, and the 
promenade which has been remodelled to create a 
unique and high quality public realm setting with new 
event space provided across five headlands. Whilst the 
standard of existing green infrastructure in Blackpool is 
generally good, it is important that this is maintained, 
enhanced and added to where possible.
5.100 In addition to the promenade, Blackpool’s 
coastline and foreshore is an integral asset to 
Blackpool’s green infrastructure network and are 
well used by local residents and intensively used for 
tourism and recreation. The Council wishes to protect 
and enhance the environment of the coast, with the 
resort’s large expanse of sandy beach and bathing 
water quality an essential part of the seaside holiday 
environment. This is further supported by the North 
West England and North Wales Shoreline Management 
Plan (SMP2), which seeks to sustain the existing 
Blackpool coastline and beaches for coastal defence, 
recreation amenity and environmental conservation.
5.101 The Blackpool Infrastructure and Delivery Plan 
identifies the need to reduce the risk of surface water 
flooding and improve the quality of bathing water in 
Blackpool. This in part can be addressed through green 
infrastructure and more directly through Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDs), which reduce surface water run-
off and facilitate the retention of rainfall to delay surface 
water from entering the combined sewer system which 
can limit overflows resulting from high rainfall events. 
The integration and potential retrofitting of SuDs will 
contribute to improving water quality, reducing surface 
water and climate change issues and can additionally 
provide attractive and valuable green infrastructure assets 
such as ponds, swales and wetlands. 
5.102 An intensive programme of wider improvement to 
open space has and continues to take place in Blackpool which is improving the quality, accessibility and quantity 
of green infrastructure. Recent initiatives have focused 
on improving children’s play space, upgrading sports 
pitch provision, expanding indoor and outdoor sports 
and recreation opportunities, achieving Green Flag 
Status, and improving provision of natural landscaping. 
Future enhancement of existing green infrastructure 
could include the improvement and appropriate 
remodelling of existing open spaces to maintain or 
enhance local distinctiveness and character, increased 
natural landscaping, enabling greenspaces to be multi-
functional and enabling community use of outdoor 
school sports and recreation facilities. 
Creating New Green Infrastructure
5.103 As noted above, opportunities to create new 
green spaces in Blackpool are limited by the dense 
urban nature of the area, therefore the focus for 
creating new green infrastructure is the integration 
of open spaces within new development and where 
possible encouraging the incorporation of green 
infrastructure within the existing built environment. 
5.104 Whilst the quality, variety and accessibility of 
existing provision is generally of a good standard, there 
are identified deficiencies in particular types of green 
infrastructure across Blackpool. Where opportunities 
arise, new provision should seek to address identified 
deficiencies, such as the limited access to green public 
spaces within parts of Blackpool’s inner area, the 
relative lack of larger parks to the south of the town, 
and the limited access to allotments and community 
gardens in the north of the Borough. 
5.105 More generally across Blackpool there is limited 
access to areas of natural landscape for informal and 
recreational use, therefore the creation of informal 
natural spaces or ‘wild space’ will be an important 
element of future provision. Natural landscaping can also 
be incorporated into existing green space and the built 
environment through simple measures such as leaving 
grassed areas uncut for longer periods to encourage the 5. Core PoliciesPage 58growth of natural vegetation, and reintroducing native 
species and habitats within green spaces.
5.106 Improving access to areas of natural or wild 
space will contribute towards achieving Natural 
England’s Accessible Natural Greenspace Standards22 
. These standards seek to improve the naturalness, 
connectivity, and access to natural sites and areas and 
recommends that everyone, wherever they live, should 
have access to natural greenspace.
5.107 Opportunities for urban greening, which is 
particularly important within Blackpool’s inner areas, 
should be explored and incorporated where possible. 
This could include the provision of green roofs, 
terraces and walls and private gardens as part of new 
developments or the introduction of green alleyways, 
street trees and planters, allotments, woodland and 
community gardens as part of wider improvement 
initiatives. Greening measures could also extend to the 
integration and potential retrofitting of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDs) as previously acknowledged.
Connecting Green Infrastructure
5.108 Opportunities should also be explored to 
extend public rights of way and to enhance or create 
new greenways and green corridors to connect 
green infrastructure with the built environment 
and with other areas of open space. Greenways 
are routes connecting people on foot or bike to 
facilities and open spaces in and around towns and 
the countryside, which can encourage people to 
travel sustainably. Green corridors provide vital links 
between open space sites for use by wildlife and 
can help to build resilience in ecological networks, 
support species diversity and prevent habitat 
fragmentation. Road and rail corridors, cycle routes 
and pedestrian paths can all provide important 
wildlife corridors connecting and contributing to local 
ecological and green infrastructure networks.
22  Natural England (2010) Nature Nearby – Accessible Natural Greenspace Guidance.Green Infrastructure and New 
Developments
5.109 Green infrastructure should form an integral 
part of any new development to maximise the 
benefits this can offer neighbourhoods. Green 
and public spaces can help to create stronger, 
inclusive and more sustainable neighbourhoods 
and communities by bringing people together and 
encouraging social inclusion by providing space for 
different social groups to engage with each other and 
creating opportunities for recreation in areas where 
new development comes forward.
5.110 New open space and green infrastructure, 
including areas of public realm, and more formal 
sports and play provision will need to be fully 
provided for in all new residential development 
in accordance with the Council’s approved 
standards (new guidance will be prepared to review 
requirements currently set out in SPG11: Open Space 
for New Residential Development). Non-residential 
development is also required to incorporate new 
or enhance existing green infrastructure where 
appropriate in order to maximise the related social, 
economic and environmental benefits. To provide a 
high-quality and well connected green infrastructure 
network it is vital to improve the overall quality, 
quantity and accessibility of open space, sport and 
recreational opportunities across Blackpool, which 
will be supported by funding from new development 
where appropriate.
Local Ecological Networks
5.111 The Council is also committed to maintaining 
the biodiversity and natural distinctiveness of sites 
of nature conservation interest, which specifically 
include the statutorily protected Marton Mere Site of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) (much of which is also 
designated as a Local Nature Reserve) and safeguarded 
Blackpool Biological Heritage Sites (BHSs).5. Core PoliciesPage 595.112 With respect to Natura 2000 sites, development 
within Blackpool would not directly impact upon the 
Morecambe Bay SPA/Ramsar or the Ribble and Alt 
Estuary SPA/Ramsar. However, the qualifying bird species 
of these sites (including whooper swan) are dependent 
upon the large areas of agricultural land on the edge of 
Blackpool which extend into Fylde and Wyre districts. 
Therefore, future development will need to ensure 
that there are no significant negative impacts upon the 
integrity of Natura 2000 sites (SPA/Ramsar sites).
5.113 The nationally protected 39 hectare Marton 
Mere SSSI is one of the few remaining freshwater 
lakes in Lancashire, located on the eastern edge of 
the Blackpool urban area. Marton Mere provides a 
tranquil refuge, important for nature conservation, 
environmental education and prized as an area for 
quiet recreation. The importance of such tranquil areas 
is recognised in the NPPF. CPRE’s work on ‘England’s 
Fragmented Countryside’ identifies that 100% of the 
Borough is disturbed by some level of noise and visual 
intrusion, despite this there are areas, such as Marton 
Mere, that provide important refuges from the urban 
area and are valued for their relative tranquillity. In 
addition to the SSSI, there are currently 13 BHSs within 
Blackpool identified to have local nature conservation 
value. Nearly all of these sites are within public open 
space or other areas of land allocated to remain open, 
many being ponds located on the periphery of the 
Borough along the town’s eastern boundary (identified 
on Figure 7). 
Managing and Monitoring Green 
Infrastructure
5.114 The management of green infrastructure will 
be achieved through the protection, enhancement, 
connection and creation of new green infrastructure 
and open space and through financial contributions 
sought, where required, as part of new development. 
Financial contributions will be sought (in circumstances 
where onsite open space is not provided as part of new 
development or as part of a Community Infrastructure Levy) to support the enhancement and management of 
green infrastructure and open space.
5.115 A Green Infrastructure Strategy for Blackpool will 
be prepared to map green infrastructure, biodiversity 
and local ecological networks, and to co-ordinate 
improvements, maintenance and investment in these 
networks. In addition to local strategies, it is important 
to consider green infrastructure holistically and at the 
landscape, local and individual sites scale. To achieve 
this Blackpool Council is working with neighbouring 
authorities to ensure that green infrastructure and 
biodiversity is planned for at a landscape-scale across 
shared boundaries as part of the Lancashire Ecological 
Framework (2015).
5. Core PoliciesPage 60Quality of Design 
5.116 High quality design is central to the creation of 
attractive, successful and sustainable places, which 
in turn has a positive effect on the health and well-
being of the communities who live there.  The Council 
expects high quality, well designed developments that 
contribute positively to the character and appearance 
of the local, natural and built environment. 
Policy CS7: Quality of Design
1. New development in Blackpool is required to be 
well designed, and enhance the character and 
appearance of the local area and should:
a.  Be appropriate in terms of scale, mass, 
height, layout, density, appearance, materials 
and relationship to adjoining buildings   
b. Ensure that amenities of nearby residents 
and potential occupiers are not adversely 
affected
c.  Provide public and private spaces that 
are well-designed, safe, attractive, and 
complement the built form
d. Be accessible to special groups in the 
community such as those with disabilities 
and the elderly
e.  Maximise natural surveillance and active 
frontages, minimising opportunities for anti-
social and criminal behaviour
f.  Incorporate well integrated car parking, 
pedestrian routes and cycle routes and 
facilities
g.  Provide appropriate green infrastructure 
including green spaces, landscaping and 
quality public realm as an integral part of 
the development
h. Be flexible to respond to future social, 
technological and economic needs.2. Development will not be permitted that causes 
unacceptable effects by reason of visual intrusion, 
overlooking, shading, noise and light pollution or 
any other adverse local impact on local character 
or amenity.
3. Contemporary and innovative expressions of 
design will be supported, where appropriate.
5.117 High quality design is integral to the success 
of Blackpool as a place to live, work, visit and invest.   
There is a clear need to promote high standards of 
design across the town.  Blackpool’s buildings, streets, 
and spaces must be attractive, safe and enjoyable.
5.118 Successful places have a well connected, 
visually interesting and varied network of buildings, 
streets and spaces.  These are vital in promoting 
community cohesion and civic pride.  It is important 
that all new development takes account of layout, 
density, appearance, materials and landscaping in 
order to be sympathetic to their location. 
5.119 The need to drive up standards in Blackpool 
is paramount.  New high quality landmark schemes 
provide positive reference points and promote further 
enhancement.  A number of recent developments 
have put design excellence first including the new 
Promenade, Festival House and St. Johns Primary 
School.  These have set a benchmark for high quality 
design.  The Council promotes the use of Design 
Review Panels to improve the design quality of major 
projects.5. Core PoliciesPage 615.120 The need for high quality design applies to 
all new buildings including small developments, 
which cumulatively can either uplift or undermine 
the image of a place or neighbourhood dramatically.  
New developments will need to set out how they 
will positively contribute to uplifting the quality and 
layout of the surrounding area in the accompanying 
design and access statements, where appropriate.  
The poor quality of past development should not be 
regarded as a precedent for similar proposals.
5.121 It is important that new development is well 
designed in order to prevent crime and antisocial 
behaviour.  The Council will therefore promote 
‘Secured by Design’ principles in new developments in 
order to create safer and secure environments.
5.122 New development must provide appropriate 
green infrastructure in conjunction with Policy CS6: 
Green Infrastructure and also promote the effective 
management of natural resources and address 
wider sustainable development and climate change 
issues through Policy CS10: Sustainable Design and 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy.
5.123 Design guidance to support this policy, including 
new build residential development and commercial 
street frontages, will be prepared by the Council as 
required.5. Core Policies
Page 62Heritage
Policy CS8:  Heritage
1. Development proposals will be supported 
which respect and draw inspiration from 
Blackpool’s built, social and cultural heritage, 
complementing its rich history with new 
development to widen its appeal to residents 
and visitors.
2. Proposals will be supported that:
a.  Retain, reuse or convert, whilst conserving 
and enhancing the significance of 
designated and non-designated heritage 
assets and their setting.
b. Enhance the setting and views of heritage 
assets through appropriate design and 
layout of new development and design of 
public realm
c.  Strengthen the existing townscape character 
created by historic buildings
3. Developers must demonstrate how any 
development affecting heritage assets 
(including conservation areas) will conserve 
and enhance the asset, its significance and its 
setting. 
5.124 Blackpool, as the world’s first seaside resort for 
the masses, has a rich and well recognised social and 
built heritage with the town’s past success founded on 
iconic and innovative Victorian landmarks.  Blackpool’s 
heritage assets include the Tower, Winter Gardens, 
Piers, Grand Theatre, Illuminations and Tramway.  At 
present, there are 40 listed buildings (designated 
heritage assets23), four conservation areas, a grade 2* 
listed Historic Park (Stanley Park) and numerous locally 
listed buildings (non-designated heritage assets24).
23  As defined in NPPF (Annex 2: Glossary)
24  As defined in NPPF (Annex 2: Glossary)5.125 The Illuminations are unique and differentiate 
Blackpool from other UK seaside resorts.  New 
innovative projects are being implemented to 
strengthen, update and capitalise on this offer, bringing 
contemporary and traditional light shows synonymous 
with Blackpool into the town centre and on the new 
promenade headlands.
5.126 The upgrade of the Victorian Tramway provides 
a fast and modern commuter route to better serve the 
residents as well as visitors.  Alongside provision of 
modern new vehicles and supporting infrastructure, 
the historic appeal of vintage trams has been 
consolidated and enhanced as part of the visitor 
experience.
5.127 The Council will support appropriate remodelling 
of heritage assets to secure their long term future 
and provide new reasons to visit.  In 2010, Blackpool 
Council purchased the Tower and Winter Gardens to 
facilitate their improvement and help secure their long 
term future.  Heritage led improvement schemes have 
been implemented for both of these attractions.  The 
Winter Gardens has been sensitively restored and has 
the potential to widen its range of uses in the future 
(see also policy CS18: Winter Gardens).  Blackpool 
Tower has been significantly improved and working in 
partnership with Merlin Entertainments is now home 
to the Blackpool Dungeon, Blackpool Tower Eye and 
Circus.
5.128 Any new development will be required to protect 
and enhance the character, quality and setting of 
conservation areas and heritage assets.  It is vital that 
these heritage assets are protected and enhanced to 
complement and strengthen the existing townscape 
character created by historic buildings.5. Core PoliciesPage 635.129 Features of buildings that make a contribution 
to historic character but are not specifically identified 
also have value and should be respected in new 
development.
5.130 Detailed information has been gained from 
characterisation studies recently undertaken for 
various parts of the town.  These studies have informed 
decisions to safeguard and protect local buildings of 
historic significance.  The Council has recently adopted a 
Local List of heritage assets, reflecting the commitment 
to protect locally important heritage assets and has 
commenced preparation of a Built Heritage Strategy for 
the future conservation and enhancement of the town’s 
historic environment in support of this policy.5.131 It is vital that Blackpool provides the quality 
desired by the modern visitor whilst cherishing and 
promoting the heritage assets, which have helped bring 
about the resort’s past success and provide a strong 
base for the town to reinvent itself to attract a new 
generation of families and visitors.5. Core Policies
Image Lorna_WilsonPage 64Water Management 
5.132 Blackpool is an area of relatively flat, low lying 
land that is protected from coastal erosion and tidal 
inundation by modern sea defences and a number of 
smaller inland defences. In general, risk of flooding 
from rivers (fluvial) and coastal waters (tidal) across 
the Borough is relatively low; however, there are 
known issues in relation to surface water flooding, the 
capacity of the combined sewer network and bathing 
water quality. 
5.133 The risk of flooding is influenced by physical 
factors such as the relief of the land, but also factors 
such as climate change and human activities. Rising 
sea levels and more frequent and intense storm 
events are increasing the risk of flooding, particularly 
in a coastal location such as Blackpool. It is important 
that any new development is appropriately flood 
resilient and resistant, provides necessary protection 
for existing and future users, and will not increase the 
overall risk of flooding.
Policy CS9: Water Management
1. To reduce flood risk, manage the impacts of 
flooding and mitigate the effects of climate 
change, all new development must:
a.  Be directed away from areas at risk of flooding, 
through the application of the Sequential 
Test and where necessary the Exception Test, 
taking account of all sources of flooding;
b. Incorporate appropriate mitigation and 
resilience measures to minimise the risk and 
impact of flooding from all sources; 
c.  Incorporate appropriate Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDS) where surface 
water run-off will be generated;
d. Where appropriate, not discharge surface 
water into the existing combined sewer 
network.  If unavoidable, development must 
reduce the volume of surface water run-off discharging from the existing site in to the 
combined sewer system by as much as is 
reasonably practicable; 
e.  Make efficient use of water resources; and  
f.  Not cause a deterioration of water quality.
2. Where appropriate, the retro-fitting of SuDS 
will be supported in locations that generate 
surface water run-off.
5.134 The National Planning Policy Framework and 
Planning Practice Guidance states new development 
should be directed away from areas at risk of flooding 
from all sources, including tidal, fluvial, surface water, 
sewer, groundwater flooding and reservoir failure. 
5.135 The main risks of flooding in Blackpool are from 
surface water and capacity constraints in the sewer 
network. The combined sewer system handles both 
rainwater and sewage and can be overloaded during 
periods of prolonged heavy rain causing the system 
to discharge excess rainwater and sewage into the 
sea.  Maintaining bathing water quality, while keeping 
the town safe from flooding, is a key priority for the 
council, who are working with other public and private 
sector organisations to ensure that this is the case. 
5.136 The European Union’s revised Bathing Water 
Directive (2006/7/EC) came into force in March 2006 
and will be implemented in England and Wales by the 
Bathing Water Regulations 2013.  It has the overall 
objective to protect public health and the environment 
by improving the quality of bathing waters. The revised 
directive has more stringent water quality standards, 
a stronger beach management focus and new 
requirements for the provision of public information.  It 
is therefore important that any new development does 
not cause deterioration in water quality which could 
impact on the Fylde Coast bathing waters. There are 
eight designated bathing waters along the Fylde Coast, 5. Core PoliciesPage 65with half of these located off the coast of Blackpool. 
The Fylde Peninsula Water Management Group, 
established in 2011 and chaired by Blackpool Council, 
has developed a 10-point action plan that sets out the 
work that is needed to deliver long term improvements 
to bathing water quality across the Fylde Peninsula. 
5.137 The Fylde Peninsula Water Management Group 
is a partnership comprising the Environment Agency, 
United Utilities, Blackpool Council, Wyre and Fylde 
Borough Councils, Lancashire County Council and Keep 
Britain Tidy. The partnership aims to improve coastal 
protection, improve the quality of the Fylde Coast’s 
bathing waters and beaches, and reduce the risk of 
surface water flooding.
5.138 Further information on the Fylde Peninsula 
Water Management Group, bathing water quality, 
water supply, and surface and wastewater is provided 
in the Blackpool Infrastructure and Delivery Plan.
5.139 Some areas of Blackpool suffer from flash 
flooding when heavy storms generate high volumes 
of surface water that can rapidly increase the flow 
in a combined sewer until the volume becomes too 
much for the local drainage network.  Combined sewer 
overflows act like safety valves, preventing flooding 
by releasing excess flows into streams, rivers or seas. 
These spills occur under wet conditions and can reduce 
the quality of bathing water. Such spills are one of a 
number of sources of pollution that have in the past 
contributed to the failure of bathing water quality 
standards along the Fylde Peninsula. 
5.140 The number of spills can in part be mitigated 
by reducing hard landscaping to enable rainwater 
to drain naturally into the ground through the use 
of appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) 
and by incorporating water efficiency measures in 
developments to reduce the amount of run-off and 
wastewater that enters the public sewerage system. SuDS are one of the most effective ways of preventing 
local sewers from becoming overloaded.  SuDS reduce 
the volume and peak flow of surface water in the sewer 
network by allowing rain water to drain into the ground 
(infiltration SuDS) and delaying the flow of water using 
ponds, swales, green roofs and vegetation (attenuation 
SuDS). Design measures may also help to reduce 
the risk of flooding, such as the layout and form of 
development and the inclusion of green infrastructure 
which can slow the rate at which water reaches the 
ground through infiltration and interception.
5.141 Some areas of Blackpool also have problems 
with high groundwater and so it is important that 
new development does not increase the water 
table in adjacent areas by preventing drainage or by 
incorporating inappropriate infiltration SuDs.
5.142 To reduce the risk of flooding it is important that 
new development does not add more surface water 
to the sewer network. Where possible, developers are 
also encouraged to go further by taking opportunities 
to reduce surface water run-off rates from previously 
developed sites by as much as is reasonably 
practicable. On greenfield sites, applicants will be 
expected to demonstrate that the current natural 
discharge solution from the site is at least replicated. 
On previously developed sites, applicants should target 
a reduction of at least 30% in surface water discharge, 
rising to a target of 50% in critical drainage areas.
5.143 Landowners and developers should investigate 
every option before discharging surface water into the 
sewerage network, however where necessary surface 
water should discharge in the following order of priority:
 ■A soakaway or some form of infiltration system 
(using sustainable urban drainage principles); or
 ■An attenuated discharge to the watercourse (a 
discharge to groundwater or watercourse may 
require consent of the Environment Agency); or5. Core PoliciesPage 66 ■As a last resort, an attenuated discharge to the 
combined sewer system. 
5.144 On greenfield sites, applicants will be expected 
to demonstrate that the current natural discharge 
solution from a site is at least mimicked.  On previously 
developed land, applicants should target a reduction 
of surface water discharge.  Surface water should be 
managed at source and not transferred.  Every option 
should be investigated before discharging surface 
water to the public sewer.  A discharge to groundwater 
or watercourse may require the consent of the 
Environment Agency.
5.145 Landowners and developers are encouraged 
to undertake early engagement with United Utilities 
and the Environment Agency to limit the impact of 
surface water on existing infrastructure and to most 
appropriately manage the impact of growth. To support 
applications landowners/developers should produce 
drainage strategies for each phase of the proposed 
development in agreement with the Local Planning 
Authority, Environment Agency and United Utilities, to 
ensure drainage infrastructure is delivered in a holistic 
and co-ordinated manner.
5.146 In addition to limiting discharges from new 
developments, there is also a need to reduce surface 
water run-off flows from existing development.  
Retrofitting SuDS is a priority of the Fylde Peninsula 
Water Management Group Action Plan, therefore 
measures to retrofit SuDS where appropriate will be 
supported by the Council.  5.147 The Council and its partners are preparing a 
number of strategies and plans to provide guidance 
on managing flood risk and the use of sustainable 
drainage systems, rain and grey-water storage and 
green infrastructure in conjunction with conventional 
drainage systems, to mitigate surface water run-off. 
This includes the Blackpool Surface Water Management 
Plan, Lancashire and Blackpool Flood Risk Management 
Strategy, and a Fylde and Blackpool Drainage Strategy. 5. Core Policies
Page 675. Core Policies
Sustainable Design and Renewable and 
Low Carbon Energy
5.148 The Climate Change Act (2008) introduced legally 
binding targets to reduce UK carbon emissions by at 
least 80% by 2050 compared to 1990 levels.  In order 
to help meet this target local authorities are required 
to reduce carbon emissions. These reductions are 
ambitious and building the infrastructure to deliver them 
will require taking an early lead to achieve the target in a 
cost effective way.  Sustainable design and construction 
and the use of renewable and low carbon energy are key 
to achieving a reduction in carbon emissions. 
5.149 To mitigate the impacts of climate change, 
renewable and low carbon energy will play an increasingly 
important role in the supply of energy. Furthermore, 
the generation of renewable and low carbon energy will 
reduce the effects of rising energy prices and reliance on 
imported and finite (non-renewable) fossil fuels, improve 
community health and well-being, create more desirable 
homes and places to live, and stimulate investment in 
new jobs and businesses. 
5.150 The Government’s Ministerial Statement 
dated 25th March 2015 announced the approach to 
energy performance requirements for new dwellings.  
This matter will be dealt with through the Building 
Regulations process.
CS10: Sustainable Design and Renewable and Low 
Carbon Energy
1. To mitigate the impacts of climate change, 
minimise carbon emissions and ensure 
buildings are energy efficient, non-residential 
developments must follow the principle of the 
energy hierarchy, which is to: 
a.  Reduce the need for energy by taking 
all reasonable steps to locate and 
orientate buildings to incorporate passive 
environmental design for heating, cooling, 
ventilation, and natural day-lighting;b. Minimise energy use by ensuring 
appropriate energy efficient measures are 
integral to development proposals; 
c.  Investigate opportunities to include 
renewable and low carbon energy provision. 
2. The development of renewable, low carbon, or 
decentralised energy schemes, excluding wind 
turbines will be supported where proposals: 
a.  Are located appropriately and do not cause 
an unacceptable impact on surrounding 
uses or the local environment, landscape 
character or visual appearance of the area, 
taking into account the cumulative impact of 
other energy generation schemes; and
b. Mitigate any potential noise, odour, traffic 
or other impacts of the development so as 
not to cause an unacceptable impact on the 
environment or local amenity.
3. For development involving one or more wind 
turbine, planning permission will only be 
granted  where:
a.  the development site is in an area identified 
as suitable for wind energy development 
in the Blackpool Local Plan Part 2: Site 
Allocations and Development Management 
Policies DPD and;
b. following consultation, it can be 
demonstrated that the planning impacts 
identified by affected local communities 
have been fully addressed and therefore the 
proposal has their backing.
4. All new non-residential development over 
1,000m2 will be required to achieve BREEAM 
‘very good’ (or any future national equivalent)Page 685.151 The sustainable design and construction of 
buildings is fundamental to achieving a reduction 
in carbon emissions, improving the environmental 
performance of buildings and increasing the resilience 
of communities by ensuring new developments are 
capable of adapting to the effects of climate change over 
their lifetime. To achieve this, Policy CS10 requires non-
residential developments to follow the principle of the 
energy hierarchy.  That is, to improve the efficiency of a 
building and reduce the need for energy through design.  
5.152 Reducing the energy requirements of new 
development can be achieved through all stages 
of design, from the site layout and the orientation 
of buildings to the efficient design of the buildings 
themselves. Careful design of a building and the design 
and specification of built elements can balance heat 
loss and overheating in new buildings.  Mitigation 
measures such as building orientation, external 
shutters, the correct shading of windows on south and 
west elevations, using passive stack or cross ventilation, 
green-roofs for thermal mass and the choice of 
materials and design of outer walls can all assist in 
reducing the need and use of energy.  
5.153 In addition to new development, opportunities 
to reduce energy use and carbon emissions in existing 
buildings and measures to improve the energy 
efficiency of such properties will be supported.
5.154 The Borough’s location and dense urban form 
provides three main opportunities to contribute to the 
national reduction in carbon emissions and increased 
supply of renewable and low carbon energy, which are:
 ■Improving the performance of existing buildings, 
through energy efficiency measures and inclusion 
of on-site low carbon and renewable energy 
technologies;
 ■Delivering energy efficient buildings as part of new 
development along with on-site low carbon and 
renewable energy technologies; and ■Wider community intervention for the 
development of renewable and low carbon energy 
systems on a strategic scale, such as the setting up 
of community-led district energy systems.
5.155 The UK’s energy supply currently relies heavily 
on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas which are 
finite resources and have a detrimental impact on the 
climate by releasing greenhouse gases. Renewable 
energy technology is powered by naturally occurring 
and naturally replenished energy and does not produce 
greenhouse gas emissions.  Examples include the 
movement of wind and water (wind turbines and 
hydropower), energy from sunlight (solar power), 
and fuel from organic material such as plants and 
waste (biomass). Low carbon technologies generate 
electricity but emit significantly less carbon dioxide 
than traditional fossil-fuelled power generation.  
Examples include heat pumps, district heating and 
combined heat and power (CHP) systems.
5.156 Reducing reliance on fossil fuels and increasing 
the supply of renewable and low carbon energy will 
ensure the UK has a secure and sustainable energy 
supply and will reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 
slow down climate change.    
5.157 The generation of renewable and low carbon 
energy combined with the incorporation of energy 
efficient measures as part of new developments is 
particularly important in Blackpool, which has the 
highest proportion of households in fuel poverty out 
of the 326 authorities across England (2013)25. It is 
therefore crucial that all developments incorporate 
measures that will address the significant levels of 
fuel poverty experienced in Blackpool to improve the 
health and well-being of communities and to meet the 
national requirements to reduce carbon emissions and 
increase the supply of renewable energy.
25 DECC (2013) Fuel Poverty Report5. Core PoliciesPage 695.158 Opportunities for renewable and low carbon 
energy generation and carbon reductions in the 
town are identified in the Blackpool Climate Change 
and Renewable Energy Study (2010) and as part of 
a Lancashire wide study (Renewable Energy Target 
Setting and Policy Development). These studies 
identify strategies and currently available technologies 
that would enable Blackpool to fulfil its potential for 
renewable and low-carbon energy generation, with 
the town being able to provide around 29MW energy 
by 2030.  For the case of wind turbine development, 
as outlined in the Ministerial Statement dated 18th 
June 2015, planning permission will only be granted 
where the development site is in an area identified as 
suitable for wind energy development and following 
consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning 
impacts identified by affected local communities have 
been fully addressed and therefore the proposal has 
their backing.  Where areas are deemed to be suitable 
for wind energy development they will be set out 
in the Blackpool Local Plan Part 2:  Site Allocations 
and Development Management Policies DPD which 
will be informed by the Council’s Climate Change 
and Renewable Energy Study (2010) and any further 
evidence base work undertaken.
5.159 The Energy Opportunities Map set out in the 
Blackpool Climate Change and Renewable Energy Study 
identifies significant potential to implement district 
heating across large areas of Blackpool due to the 
dense urban form of the Borough.  At present district 
heating systems can be made viable on a range of 
scales with most in the UK (85%) being classed as small 
scale, averaging 35 dwellings per network 26.  Therefore, 
where viable and feasible, developers should explore 
how district heating systems can be made to work on 
their site, considering community funding or the use of 
a local Energy Service Company to overcome the initial 
capital cost and realise longer term profits and other 
benefits.
26  DECC (2013) Summary Evidence on District Heating Networks in the UK5.160 Mixed-use developments often present the best 
opportunities for district heating and CHP as they can 
provide a more balanced heat and energy use profile 
enabling significant reductions in carbon emissions.  
Beyond reducing emissions, community energy systems 
also generate income from Feed-in-Tariffs, Renewable 
Heat Incentives as well as the sale of heat and/or 
power to households to generate an income. 
5.161 Blackpool’s dense urban form and high 
proportion of older buildings which are not energy 
efficient presents an opportunity for the retro-fit of 
district heating networks, forming an extension to 
a newly installed district heating system.  These can 
provide large areas of the town with highly efficient 
heating and hot water.  Whilst they involve significant 
infrastructure investment, high up-front costs can be 
turned into profits over the long-term and savings 
to those who are connected.  The Council will 
support retro-fitting measures where appropriate, as 
funding and opportunities arise.  On a smaller scale, 
the installation of solar panels and heat-pumps on 
buildings will also be supported where appropriate.  5. Core Policies
Page 70Planning Obligations
Policy CS11:  Planning Obligations
1. Development will only be permitted where 
existing infrastructure, services and amenities 
are already sufficient, or where the developer 
enters into a legal undertaking or agreement 
to meet the additional needs arising from the 
development.
2. Where appropriate, planning contributions will 
be sought in connection with a development to 
ensure that:
a.  The particular facilities required for the 
proposed development, including the 
provision of necessary infrastructure, 
services and community facilities are met
b. Any damaging impact on the environment 
or local amenity arising from the proposed 
development can be overcome.
5.162 The Council works with other infrastructure 
providers, including the Highways Agency, United 
Utilities and the Environment Agency, to develop an 
understanding of existing infrastructure provision 
and future requirements as well as funding sources 
and responsibility for delivery.  The most up-to-date 
position is reflected in the Infrastructure and Delivery 
Plan which accompanies the Core Strategy. In addition, 
the Council works with neighbouring authorities to 
take account of the need for/support the delivery of 
sub-regional infrastructure, particularly in relation to 
developments close to the Blackpool boundary.5.163 Infrastructure is key to the delivery of sustainable 
development, economic growth and the development 
needs of the Borough.  The Council will ensure that 
new developments provide the necessary physical, 
community and green infrastructure to meet local 
needs and achieve sustainable development, and do 
not result in infrastructure deficiencies or exacerbate 
other problems.  The impact of all development 
proposals will need to be fully assessed and where 
developments have potentially significant implications 
on infrastructure, applicants will be required to submit 
assessments in support of their development proposal.  
5.164 Where development proposals give rise to 
additional social, environmental and infrastructure 
costs, they will be subject to conditions attached to 
planning permissions and/or planning obligations 
as appropriate, to mitigate the impacts of the 
development and make it acceptable in planning terms.  5. Core Policies
Page 715.165 Examples of measures the Council may seek 
are set out in a number of policies throughout this 
document and are summarised below, although this is 
by no means an exhaustive list as the implications of 
individual planning applications can differ greatly: 
 ■Affordable housing
 ■Physical infrastructure - flood defences, highway 
works, pedestrian access, public transport 
facilities/infrastructure, district heating schemes, 
sustainable drainage systems (SuDS)
 ■Community infrastructure  - health and educational 
facilities, sports facilities, leisure and arts, recycling 
and other community facilities
 ■Green infrastructure  - ecology and nature 
conservation, environmental improvements, 
landscaping, play areas, parks and spaces, street 
furniture
5.166 A Supplementary Planning Document will be 
prepared by the Council to provide further guidance on 
contributions required from developments. 5. Core Policies
Page 72 of 144
Strengthening Community 
Well-beingChapter 6
Creating Community Gardens  with Groundwork
(Photo - Groundwork)
Page 72Page 73 of 144
Contents:
• CS12: Sustainable Neighbourhoods 74
• CS13: Housing Mix, Standards 79 
and Density 
• CS14: Affordable Housing 81
• CS15: Health and Education 84
• CS16: Traveller Sites 86
Page 73Page 74Sustainable Neighbourhoods
6.1 Sustainable communities contribute to a better 
quality of life for existing and future residents through 
the promotion of social cohesion and inclusion, 
the strengthening of economic prosperity and 
enhancement of the natural and built environment. 
Sustainable communities should comprise a mix 
of age groups, incomes and lifestyles within a safe, 
healthy and clean environment, with access to a full 
range of services and community facilities.
6.2 The focus of Policy CS12: Sustainable 
Neighbourhoods is to ensure future development 
and investment contributes to delivering sustainable 
communities, whilst focusing regeneration and 
improvement in a number of identified priority 
neighbourhoods. The improvement of these 
neighbourhoods is fundamental to creating more 
sustainable communities.
Policy CS12: Sustainable Neighbourhoods
1. To secure a better quality of life for residents 
and to deliver sustainable neighbourhoods, 
the Council will support development and 
investment which:
a.  Provides high quality housing with an 
appropriate mix of types and tenures to 
meet the needs and aspirations of existing 
and future residents and assists with 
rebalancing the housing market
b. Provides high quality community facilities 
accessible to all members of the community 
c.  Contributes to an efficient, multi-modal 
transport network to enable easy access to 
a range of jobs and services
d. Creates a healthy, safe, secure and attractive 
environment and public realm, which 
promotes local pride and a sense of placee.  Reflects the built heritage of the 
neighbourhoods and conserves and 
enhances the significance of heritage assets 
and their settings.
f.  Addresses the need for a balanced provision 
of resident and visitor parking alongside 
streetscape enhancement.
2. Neighbourhood regeneration and improvement 
will focus on:
a.  Neighbourhoods within the inner area , 
including the mixed holiday and residential 
neighbourhoods of North Beach, Foxhall 
and South Beach, and the predominantly 
residential neighbourhoods of Claremont, 
Talbot and Brunswick, Revoe and St Heliers
b. The outer estate priority neighbourhoods  
of Queens Park, Grange Park, Mereside, and 
Kincraig.
3. To support development and investment in 
these neighbourhoods the Council will address 
the problems and challenges associated 
with poor quality housing and unauthorised 
residential use through wider housing, planning 
and enforcement initiatives, including:
a.  Opportunities for selective intervention 
to improve the quality and mix of existing 
housing stock
b. Providing assistance with site assembly 
where required to facilitate major 
redevelopment schemes, including the 
selective or comprehensive redevelopment 
of key sites.6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 756.3 Much of Blackpool is residential in character, 
comprising a mix of mainly older terraced and semi-
detached housing as the town expanded during 
the 20th century, with the development of newer 
estates on the periphery of the town. Blackpool has 
a wide range of local shops, schools and supporting 
community facilities, as well as some large and 
high quality areas of parkland and open space. 
However, Blackpool’s neighbourhoods have a range 
of different communities living in widely contrasting 
local conditions and circumstances, with some 
neighbourhoods falling short of the ideal of a balanced, 
healthy and sustainable community and experiencing 
social, economic and environmental decline.  
6.4 To address these issues, neighbourhood 
regeneration will be focused on a number of identified 
priority neighbourhoods where development and 
investment is most urgently needed, with plans agreed 
with the community to redefine, reinvest and improve 
their neighbourhoods to create places where people want 
to live. Neighbourhood plans will form a key component 
in securing their comprehensive improvement, which will 
encompass a wide range of initiatives across a number of 
public agencies and services to reflect the specific needs 
of each area and the local community.
6.5 Whilst the scale of intervention required 
makes it necessary to focus on a number of priority 
neighbourhoods, the approach to achieving sustainable 
communities will be applied across the Borough.  
Elsewhere in the inner area, they will continue to 
benefit from the Council’s wider management, 
enforcement and improvement programme to tackle 
housing problems and uplift the quality of the built 
environment to create sustainable communities. 
Neighbourhoods within the Inner Area
North Beach, Foxhall and South Beach
6.6 The neighbourhoods of North Beach, Foxhall and 
South Beach were developed at the turn of the 20th 
century to accommodate large numbers of holiday makers and to support a residential population within 
compact streets in close proximity to the seafront. 
Today, they are characterised by problems caused by 
the decline in overnight visitors, which has resulted in 
a significant number of guest houses being converted 
and sub-divided into poor quality, privately-rented 
residential accommodation.  This has led to an 
unbalanced housing supply in these areas, with choice 
limited to predominantly small, poor quality bedsits 
and flats or Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs), 
which are unsuitable for families and undesirable for 
anyone who can afford to choose better. The high 
concentration of these properties, which are occupied 
by a high proportion of housing benefit claimants, 
undermines the quality of the environment and the 
social and economic sustainability of communities.
6.7 North Beach, Foxhall and South Beach will 
continue to support the tourism market; however 
current visitor numbers cannot sustain the number 
of guest houses within these neighbourhoods. The 
Council is therefore seeking to redefine their role to 
give them a viable future, with a high quality holiday 
accommodation offer whilst also becoming vibrant 
and exciting places to live. High quality holiday 6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 76accommodation will continue to be encouraged within 
the defined holiday accommodation areas in these 
neighbourhoods (Policy CS23: Managing Holiday 
Bed Spaces), supported by new investment in resort 
infrastructure, but outside these defined areas there 
will be flexibility for property owners wanting to 
introduce high quality residential uses.
6.8 Within these neighbourhoods, proposals for 
comprehensive improvement or redevelopment 
will be pursued to support a more balanced 
inner area housing offer.  These will be set out 
in neighbourhood plans where appropriate.  Key 
sites within and adjacent to the Foxhall and South 
Beach neighbourhoods, including the Rigby Road 
development sites, present opportunities for 
comprehensive redevelopment to introduce a wider 
housing offer close to the seafront. This opportunity 
will support neighbourhood regeneration by 
embracing the principles of sustainable development 
and high quality design and will improve the arrival 
experience into the town along Seasiders Way. 
6.9 To contribute towards providing a balanced 
and high quality housing offer, the Council is pursuing 
a range of measures to address the large numbers 
of poor quality and badly managed private rented 
sector housing in these neighbourhoods. This type of 
housing is affecting the social cohesion of communities, 
driving down the quality of the built environment and 
having an impact on the health, safety and well-being 
of residents and the wider community. In response, 
the Council is pursuing a selective licensing scheme 
to reduce anti-social behaviour and improve the 
management of private rented accommodation.
6.10 The first phase of this selective licensing scheme 
covers an extensive area of the South Beach and 
Foxhall neighbourhood, between the town centre 
(Chapel Street) and Blackpool Pleasure Beach (Balmoral 
Road) and inland from the Promenade to Seasiders 
Way. The scheme requires every privately rented flat, 
house or room to have a licence to operate in the area, which includes a series of conditions relating to the 
management of the property, fire safety and anti-social 
behaviour. The Council plans to roll out further phases 
in the inner area neighbourhoods.
6.11 The Council is also preparing to introduce an 
Article 4(1) Direction with respect to houses in the 
defined inner areas, which will prevent them from 
changing use to a HMO without the need to apply 
for planning permission. Whilst not all HMOs are 
problematic, issues can arise in terms of the quality 
and type of accommodation provided, the transient 
nature of occupants and their impact on the character 
and appearance of an area. Any further addition to the 
stock of HMO accommodation may encourage further 
in-migration of single person households, which would 
further distort the housing market in Blackpool and 
continue to contribute to unbalanced communities.
Other Inner Area Neighbourhoods
6.12 Whilst there is a distinct variation in character 
between the mixed holiday and residential 
neighbourhoods of North Beach, Foxhall and 
South Beach and the predominantly residential 
neighbourhoods further from the seafront (Figure 15), 
they share common problems in terms of unbalanced 
and unstable communities, a limited housing offer and 
the need for enhancement. The quality of the built 
environment within these neighbourhoods is poor 
and green infrastructure (including public open space, 
street landscaping and private gardens) is extremely 
limited. To address these issues, investment and 
development will be encouraged which introduces 
high quality family housing, alongside public realm 
improvements and new green infrastructure, to create 
more balanced and sustainable communities.
6.13 In addition to an unbalanced mix of poor quality 
housing, the inner area neighbourhoods similarly 
have limited areas of public open space, high levels 
of transience, low educational attainment, economic 
and social issues and vulnerable households, which 6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 776. Strengthening Community Wellbeing
have undermined their attractiveness as a place to 
live. It is vital that new development contributes 
to achieving more sustainable communities across 
Blackpool as a whole but particularly that development 
and investment takes place to improve the quality of 
the built and natural environment and to address the 
economic and social issues evident in these areas.
6.14 For all neighbourhoods within the inner area, 
the combination of various intervention measures, 
including selective licensing, the introduction 
of an Article 4 Direction and other regeneration 
initiatives, will contribute to achieving sustainable 
neighbourhoods across the inner area to provide a 
better quality of life for existing and future residents 
within an enhanced built and natural environment. 
Outer Estate Priority Neighbourhoods
6.15 The outer estate priority neighbourhoods 
differ in character to the inner area neighbourhoods, 
however they share similar issues relating to the 
limited housing offer as well as the social and economic 
challenges. These neighbourhoods are located within 
some of the most deprived areas in England 27 and 
require a co-ordinated approach to neighbourhood 
regeneration which combines environmental 
improvement alongside targeted intervention with 
communities in relation to social, economic, education 
and health issues.
6.16 Comprehensive redevelopment of the 
Queens Park estate illustrates the Council’s 
commitment to intervention in order to improve 
the quality and choice of the housing offer in these 
neighbourhoods. This will also provide a safe and 
attractive neighbourhood to encourage balanced and 
sustainable communities to form.  In consultation 
with the community, redevelopment will involve 
the demolition of five tower blocks and a number of 
lower rise blocks of predominantly one-bedroom flats, 
to be replaced with  homes more suited to family 
27   Source: Indices of Multiple Deprivation, 2010occupation, as well as enhanced public and private 
spaces and community facilities. 
6.17 Other initiatives are also planned that will 
improve the environment and community facilities 
on other Council housing estates. These include 
plans to improve the shops and community facilities 
on the Grange Park estate as well as environmental 
improvements at Mereside, with full consultation to 
take place between residents and the Council to make 
sure that the outcomes benefit the whole community.
image source (Groundworks)Page 78
Clar emont
North Beac hQueens P arkGrange ParkKincr aig
MeresideRevoeTalbot
& Brunswick
Foxhall
St. Helier sSouth Beac h
Urban Ar ea
Inner Ar ea Neighbourhoods
Blac kpool Boundary
Outer Esta te Priority Neighbourhoods
N
t.  Unauthorised 
reproduc tion infringes Cr own c opyright and ma y lead t o pr osecution or civil pr oceedings .  Black pool Bor ough C ouncil Lic ence No . 100019178. 2012.Key6. Strengthening Community Wellbeing
Figure 15: Location of Blackpool’s NeighbourhoodsPage 79Housing Mix, Standards and Density
6.18 It is essential for new housing developments 
to make a positive contribution towards Blackpool’s 
overall housing stock, by providing a sustainable mix 
of quality homes where people want to live. This will 
help to meet the future needs of residents by offering 
a wider choice of quality accommodation, rebalance 
Blackpool’s housing stock with more family homes, 
and create mixed and balanced communities across 
the Borough. It is also important for new housing to 
achieve a density appropriate to the characteristics of 
that particular area of the Borough.
6.19 Policy CS13 sets out the house types and sizes, 
design standards and density required from new 
developments, while Policy CS14: Affordable Housing 
addresses tenure mix.
Policy CS13: Housing Mix, Density and Standards
New residential development will be required to 
provide an appropriate mix of quality homes which 
help to rebalance Blackpool’s housing supply and 
support sustainable communities, by: 
1. Including a mix of house types and sizes, having 
regard to the specific character, location and 
viability of the site. The normal requirement is 
as follows: 
a.  On sites greater than 1 hectare, a maximum 
of 10% of all homes should be one bedroom, 
at least 20% of all homes should be two 
bedrooms; and at least 20% of homes 
should be three bedrooms or larger, in order 
to achieve a balanced mix of dwelling sizes 
within the development;
b. On sites between 0.2 and 1 hectare, a mix 
of dwelling sizes is required within the 
site, or the proposal should contribute 
towards a balanced mix of provision in the 
surrounding area;c.  On all sites, new flat developments will not 
be permitted which would further intensify 
existing over-concentrations of such 
accommodation and conflict with wider 
efforts for the comprehensive improvement 
of the neighbourhood.  Developments 
including more than 10 flats are unlikely 
to be acceptable on sites in the inner area 
away from the seafront and town centre.  
Where flat developments are permitted, at 
least 70% of flat accommodation should be 
2 bedrooms or more.
2. Providing quality living accommodation, which 
meets the relevant standards in place for 
conversions or new build development.
3. Making efficient use of land, with an optimum 
density appropriate to the characteristics of the 
site and its surrounding area. Higher densities 
will be supported in main centres and on public 
transport corridors.
Housing Mix 
6.20 The housing mix requirements are informed by 
the sizes and types of housing that the population is 
likely to need over the plan period, as evidenced in 
the Fylde Coast Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA), as well as the plan objective to provide 
a wider choice of quality homes in Blackpool and 
rebalance the housing stock.  
6.21 Blackpool’s existing housing stock comprises 
a high proportion of smaller, terraced properties 
and flats, particularly in the inner areas where flats 
account for half of the total housing stock.  Since 2001, 
around 1,500 additional flats have been delivered in 
Blackpool, representing three quarters of the total net 
growth in stock.  There is a smaller proportion of larger 
properties and detached housing across the Borough 
compared to elsewhere on the Fylde Coast. 6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 806.22 In projecting forward current trends, the SHMA 
suggests the greatest need for smaller properties, as 
well as a requirement for medium and larger properties 
to meet the needs of families and other households 
aspiring to occupy such stock.  However, due to the 
limited choice provided by the existing housing stock, 
in particular the lack of larger, family-sized homes, 
developments are required to provide an appropriate 
mix of house types and sizes which will make a positive 
contribution to the overall housing offer in that area 
of the Borough.  Larger schemes on sites greater than 
1ha will be required to achieve a balanced housing 
mix within the development and a limit on the level 
of one bedroom properties will apply. This will help to 
encourage sustainable communities to form and retain 
economically active households who may otherwise 
choose to live elsewhere in the Fylde Coast.  
6.23 Blackpool’s inner areas have a particularly high 
concentration of smaller flatted properties and bedsits 
occupied by single person and lone-parent households, 
as a result of the conversion and sub-division of a 
significant number of former holiday accommodation 
premises.  This housing stock has contributed to the 
socio-economic problems associated with the inner 
areas of Blackpool, which the Council and its partners 
are actively trying to address.  This includes housing 
intervention programmes to rebalance the stock and 
provide a wider choice of homes that will appeal to 
different households and support balanced and stable 
communities.  Therefore, new flatted developments 
(new build or conversions) that would intensify existing 
over-concentrations and conflict with efforts to deliver 
wider neighbourhood improvement, will be resisted.  
This includes larger developments in the inner areas, 
with the exception of sites on the promenade and in 
the town centre, where high quality flat developments 
have the opportunity to complement the existing built 
form and deliver regenerative benefits.  Where flat 
developments are permitted, the policy requires a 
minimum of 70% of the flat accommodation to be two 
bedrooms or more. Housing Standards 
6.24 In order to provide a choice of quality homes 
across the Borough and complement wider housing 
intervention programmes to improve the quality of 
Blackpool’s existing housing stock, it is essential that 
all new housing being delivered will provide quality 
accommodation where people would choose to live.  To 
ensure a consistent approach in achieving quality, new 
housing will be required to meet the relevant standards 
for conversions and new build developments. 
6.25 With respect to the conversion or sub-division 
of property for residential development, the space 
standards set out in the Council’s New Homes from 
Old Places SPD will be replaced with the Government’s 
Technical Housing Standards – nationally described 
space standards.  Other guidance in the SPD not related 
to the nationally described standards will still apply 
in the determination of applications.  With respect to 
‘new build’ residential development, consideration 
will be given to applying the nationally described 
space standards through the preparation of Part 2 of 
the Local Plan, the Site Allocations and Development 
Management document which will be subject to the 
required consultation process and viability assessment.  
Housing Density 
6.26 To promote efficient use of land, proposals 
will be expected to optimise density, whilst reflecting 
the characteristics of the site and surrounding area. 
Building at an optimum density is essential in Blackpool 
with its limited land resource and will help to sustain 
local facilities and services.  Higher densities are sought 
in more accessible locations, where the site is within 
walking distance of town, district or local centres or 
well-served by public transport.  Location, design and 
site configuration issues will need to be balanced with 
density considerations, particularly on small sites, in 
order to achieve the best possible development. 6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 81Affordable Housing 
6.27 Despite relatively low house prices and rents, 
affordability is a serious issue across the Borough 
because of the prevalence of households with very low 
incomes. Blackpool’s inner areas are characterised by 
an over-supply of small flats and Houses in Multiple 
Occupation (HMOs) for rent, which despite being easily 
accessible to people on low incomes through benefits 
payments, are often poor quality, undesirable, and 
unsuitable for many households.  As a result, there is 
significant need and demand for a choice of quality 
affordable housing across the Borough.
6.28 It is a priority for the Council, through its 
planning policies and wider housing strategy, to 
ensure there is an adequate supply of good quality 
affordable homes across the Borough, providing a 
choice of size, type and tenure that is suitable for 
family occupation in particular, and to help create 
mixed, balanced and stable communities.
6.29 Policy CS14: Affordable Housing sets out the 
requirements for affordable housing from new 
residential developments, informed by up-to-date 
evidence on local market conditions, levels of need 
and viability testing. Further detailed guidance will be 
provided in the Affordable Housing Supplementary 
Planning Document (SPD), being prepared alongside 
the Core Strategy 28.
Policy CS14: Affordable Housing
1. All market and specialist housing 
developments, including conversions, creating 
a net increase of three dwellings or more will 
be required to provide affordable housing 
(either on-site or off-site) or make a financial 
contribution towards affordable housing 
provision.  Developments within the defined 
inner area are exempt from this requirement.
28  A Draft SPD was consulted on in June 2012; the intention is to prepare and consult 
on a revised draft in 2016.2. Affordable housing should normally be 
provided as follows:
a.  Where developments would comprise 
15 dwellings or more, or on sites of 0.5 
hectares or more, the requirement is 30% 
of the total number of dwellings created.  
On-site provision will be sought where 
possible.  Off-site provision, or a financial 
contribution of broadly equivalent value, will 
be considered instead of on-site provision 
where the site is unsuitable for affordable 
housing, or where this would be more 
effective in delivering affordable housing to 
support Blackpool’s regeneration objectives;
b. Where developments are on sites less than 
0.5 hectares and would comprise 3-14 
dwellings, then a financial contribution 
towards off-site provision will be sought. 
This contribution level will be set out in the 
Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD), in accordance with the 
most recent viability assessment and the 
latest government guidance;
c.  Where the above requirements cannot 
be met in full as they would render a 
development unviable, and this has been 
robustly justified with the submission of a 
viability appraisal, then an alternative level 
of provision may be negotiated. 
3. Where affordable housing units are being 
provided for in a development, they will be 
expected to deliver a mix of homes that meet 
current housing needs, of similar size and 
quality to equivalent market housing.  The 
tenure mix will depend on the location of the6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 82site although the general requirement will be 
for a mix of social rented and intermediate 
housing for sale or for rent. Further guidance 
on dwelling size, type, design and tenure mix 
will be provided in the Affordable Housing SPD.
4. The Affordable Housing SPD will also provide 
guidance on the approach to:
a. Phasing 
b. Ensuring Affordability
c.  Calculating financial contributions
6.30 Affordable housing need 29 for Blackpool and its 
housing market area is evidenced in the Fylde Coast 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA). The 
most recent SHMA was published in March 2014 and 
contains housing need analysis from 2013.  A further 
addendum to the SHMA was published in November 
2014.  This calculates that the likely level of affordable 
housing required over the next 5 years is 272 new 
homes per year in Blackpool, within the inner areas 
and elsewhere, based on the number of current and 
newly forming households in need (and subtracting the 
available/committed supply) 30.
6.31 Meeting this need in full would require overall 
levels of housing delivery far in excess of what has 
been achieved over the last ten years and so it cannot 
be reasonably expected to be realised. However, in 
acknowledging this, the SHMA supports the need for 
planning policies to enable sufficient affordable housing 
delivery to avoid exacerbating affordability issues. This 
includes the need for new residential developments to 
make an appropriate contribution towards affordable 
housing provision, where this would not otherwise 
render them unviable. It is also important to note that 
29  This refers to households who lack their own housing or live in unsuitable housing 
and who cannot afford to meet their needs in the open market without public subsidy.
30  This figure compares to 140 new affordable homes per year calculated in the 
previous Fylde Coast SHMA (DTZ, 2008)the private rented sector 31 subsidised through housing 
benefit, as well as alternative means of delivery outside 
the planning system (such as grant funded schemes 
to improve social housing), will continue to play an 
important role in meeting Blackpool’s affordable 
housing need.
6.32 Residential developments required to make an 
affordable housing contribution include all new build 
and conversion schemes for market and specialist 
housing creating a net increase of three dwellings or 
more outside the defined inner area. The requirements 
are informed by the Blackpool Local Plan and 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Viability Study 
Report (URS, 2014).
6.33 The policy requires affordable housing provision 
equivalent to a minimum of 30% of the total number 
of dwellings for developments comprising 15 dwellings 
or more, or on sites of 0.5 hectares or more, including 
conversion schemes.  Where possible the Council will 
work with developers to provide this on-site, although 
there are some instances when off-site provision would 
be preferable.  For example, where sites are unsuitable 
to deliver the type of affordable housing needed in that 
area due to their size or configuration; or where off-site 
provision would be a more effective way to support 
regeneration and to help rebalance the housing stock. 
6.34 In Blackpool, a large proportion of new housing 
is expected to come forward from developments 
below the 15 dwellings threshold. These schemes 
are able to make an important contribution towards 
affordable housing provision and supporting evidence 
shows the requirements would not render them 
unviable. Specifically, developments comprising 3-14 
(net) dwellings, including conversions, will be required 
to make a financial contribution towards off-site 
affordable housing provision. The contribution required 
will be informed by, and compatible with, the most 
31  In calculating net need, the SHMA does not recognise the private rented stock in 
absorbing affordable need.6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 83recent viability assessment 32 undertaken by the Council 
and the latest government guidance. The specific 
contribution level will be set out in the Affordable 
Housing SPD, in order to provide sufficient flexibility 
to take account of Blackpool’s challenging market 
conditions and viability issues, and the possibility of 
emerging government guidance introducing minimum 
thresholds for affordable housing contributions.
6.35 Developments creating less than 3 net units are 
exempt from making an affordable housing contribution, 
as are sites within the defined inner area, including 
sites along the promenade which fall within the inner 
areas. Ensuring these schemes are viable will encourage 
conversions from modest guest houses into high 
quality homes to come forward, as well as regeneration 
schemes within the inner areas and along the seafront, 
which are an important element of future supply. This 
supports the Council’s housing strategy and is also 
informed by the recent Viability Study (URS, 2014). 
6.36 Evidence from the viability testing shows that 
the policy requirements do not render development 
outside the inner areas unviable.  Developers will 
therefore be expected to take these requirements 
into account in determining land values. Where issues 
with overall viability, site characteristics or abnormal 
costs beyond those assumed in the Viability Study 
are demonstrated, and these cannot be offset by 
depreciated land value or recouped in sale price, then 
a revised affordable housing contribution may be 
appropriate on specific sites. In each case, this would 
need to be justified with a robust viability appraisal 
prepared in accordance with an agreed methodology, 
which the Council will use as the basis to negotiate 
alternative contribution levels. 
6.37 In addition to the scale of affordable need, 
the SHMA also analyses the dwelling size and tenure 
mix required. This indicates greatest need for small 
properties of one bedroom only, as well as demand 
32  This is currently the Blackpool Local Plan and CIL Viability Study Report (URS, 2014)for larger properties to meet the needs of family 
households.  However, given the high concentrations of 
one bedroom properties in Blackpool, the policy requires 
a mix of affordable homes to be provided, with this mix 
reflecting the importance of family-sized affordable 
homes to help rebalance the housing stock. In terms 
of tenure, the SHMA considers that a large proportion 
of Blackpool’s affordable need can only be addressed 
through social housing for rent, although intermediate 
housing33 may also play a limited role. The policy 
recognises that different approaches are required across 
the Borough to support an appropriate tenure mix in 
order to create balanced and stable communities. 
6.38 The appropriate size, tenure and type of 
affordable housing required on individual sites will 
depend on the regeneration priorities, housing needs 
and market conditions of that particular area, and 
will also be informed by the wider housing strategy 
(including the need to rebalance the housing stock and 
delivery of housing development programmes) as well 
as viability considerations for individual sites. 
6.39 Further guidance on the affordable housing 
requirements will be provided in the Affordable 
Housing SPD.  This will be informed by up-to-date 
evidence on housing need, viability and strategy aims.
33  This is defined as homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above social rent, but 
below market levels.  These can include shared equity (shared ownership and equity 
loans), other low cost homes for sale and intermediate rent, but not affordable rented 
housing.6. Strengthening Community Wellbeing
Page 84Health and Education 
6.40 Improving the health and education of 
Blackpool’s population is a major challenge, with the 
gap in health and education inequalities between 
Blackpool and the rest of the UK continuing to widen.  
Access to quality health and education facilities is 
integral to raising educational achievement and 
improving the health and well-being of communities. 
Achieving wider social, health and lifestyle goals is 
also closely linked to delivering major physical change 
and the regeneration of the built environment. 
6.41 People’s health and education is influenced by 
the settings of their everyday lives – where they live, 
learn, play and work.  There is a strong relationship 
between social and economic factors such as low 
income and poor quality housing, with the state of 
health and levels of educational attainment in local 
communities.  Improved provision and access to 
quality public services, which Policy CS15 aims to 
address, has a direct positive effect on the health and 
well-being of residents. 
Policy CS15: Health and Education
1. Development will be supported that 
encourages healthy and active lifestyles and 
addresses the Council’s health priorities. This 
includes co-located, more integrated health 
and education facilities, increasing community 
access and participation, and reducing the need 
to travel.
2. In order to provide accessible healthcare 
to Blackpool’s communities, proposals will 
be supported that complement existing 
health care facilities currently concentrated 
at Blackpool Victoria Hospital, the three 
supporting primary care centres in south, 
central and north Blackpool and smaller local 
delivery primary care units.3. Contributions will be sought from developers 
towards the provision of health facilities 
where their development would impact on the 
capacity of existing healthcare provision.
4. Development will be supported that enables 
the provision of high quality new and improved 
education facilities.  This will include:
a.  The expansion, modernisation and 
enhancement of Blackpool’s higher and 
further education facilities, working closely 
with the relevant establishments; 
b. The remodelling, extension or rebuilding of 
schools in Blackpool.
5. Contributions will be sought from developers 
towards the provision of school places where 
their development would impact on the 
capacity of existing schools.
6.42 Major health and education facilities including 
Blackpool and the Fylde College, Blackpool Sixth Form 
College and Blackpool Victoria Hospital serve the Fylde 
Coast sub-region and are located across the Borough.   
More local health and education facilities are located 
in close proximity to the residential communities they 
serve.  To ensure future provision is located in the most 
sustainable and accessible locations, facilities should 6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 85be appropriately located in accordance with their scale 
and catchment.  This could include opportunities for 
co-location with existing facilities or on sites within 
existing centres where appropriate, as defined on the 
Proposals Map. 
Health 
6.43 Improvement of Blackpool’s health facilities will 
be focused on the continuing replacement of outdated 
facilities and the provision of new services within the 
existing main Blackpool Victoria Hospital site, with 
an ongoing long term programme for the phased 
redevelopment of the site.  In addition, a purpose built 
high quality mental health facility has been developed on 
the edge of the Blackpool urban area at Whyndyke Farm 
which replaces existing outdated facilities at the Hospital.  
It provides treatment and care for people with a variety 
of mental health problems.  Provision of health and 
supporting care facilities at a more local level is led by the 
provision of three multi-use Primary Care Centres;  Moor 
Park Health and Leisure Centre, Whitegate Health Centre 
and South Shore Primary Care Centre. 
6.44 These facilities bring together and enhance access 
to a much wider range and higher standard of health care 
and supporting community facilities which can support 
lifestyle changes under one roof. Moor Park Health and 
Leisure Centre provides an example of where health 
facilities are located alongside expanded sports facilities, 
the existing swimming pool and a relocated Bispham 
library to provide a new major concentration of facilities 
serving north Blackpool. The Council continues to work in 
partnership with health providers to encourage healthy 
and active lifestyles and explore opportunities for the 
further integration of sports and health facilities.
6.45 New housing development may create a need for 
new or expanded healthcare facilities. Blackpool Council 
will seek the advice of healthcare providers in establishing 
whether additional facilities are required to serve the 
development, and seek developer contributions where 
appropriate and viable.Education
6.46 Education is vital to the regeneration of 
Blackpool, to equip children, young people and 
adults with the necessary qualifications and skills 
to compete in the developing labour market.  An 
uplift in Blackpool’s level of educational attainment 
and skills at all levels is seen as essential to enhance 
the opportunities for the town’s children and young 
people, and to support inward investment and 
Blackpool’s longer term prosperity.
6.47 The town’s primary schools and high schools 
are well located across Blackpool’s residential 
neighbourhoods to meet existing community needs. 
Blackpool Gateway Academy has recently opened, 
close to the Central Corridor to address an identified 
need in inner Blackpool for an additional primary 
school.  Inner area regeneration will deliver further 
housing and this primary school is expected to cater for 
any additional need that arises from the development.
6.48 As part of the Duty to Co-operate, Blackpool 
Council is working with Lancashire County Council and 
Fylde Council to determine a site for a new primary 
school which will serve the needs arising from housing 
growth in South Blackpool which spans both Blackpool 
and Fylde Borough boundaries.
6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 866.49 The key to improving attendance and attainment 
is to provide a high quality learning environment which 
engages children and young people and drives up 
aspiration.  A programme is being progressed to rebuild 
Mereside Primary School, Unity College, St Mary’s 
Catholic College, Highfield Humanities College and the 
Mountford Centre; a facility for pupils with emotional, 
behavioural and social problems. This provides modern 
learning resources with interactive ICT, new classrooms, 
libraries and sporting provision. 
6.50 The Council will support new and improved 
educational facilities that build upon the existing 
improvements made and seek to open up and develop 
school facilities for wider community use.  This can 
increase accessibility, makes more efficient use of 
resources and strengthens community participation 
and local involvement.
6.51 New housing development may create a need 
for new or expanded education facilities. Blackpool 
Council will seek the advice of education providers in 
establishing whether additional facilities are required 
to serve the development, and seek developer 
contributions where appropriate and viable.
Traveller Sites 
6.52 Local planning authorities are required to make 
adequate provision for traveller 34 sites by working 
corroboratively with neighbouring authorities to 
develop fair and effective strategies to provide 
traveller sites to meet objectively assessed needs. To 
ensure that traveller sites are economically, socially 
and environmentally sustainable, the policy below 
sets out criteria to assess additional traveller sites, 
which may come forward as part of a Site Allocations 
document where there is an identified need or 
through individual planning applications. 
34  “Traveller” means “gypsies and travellers” and “travelling Showpeople” as defined in 
Annex 1 of the ‘Planning policy for traveller sites’ (CLG, 2015)Policy CS16: Traveller Sites
1. The target for new permanent and transit 
pitches and plots will be set out in the 
Blackpool Local Plan Part 2: Site Allocations 
and Development Management document, 
according to the most recent Gypsy and Traveller 
and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation 
Needs Assessment agreed by the Council. 
2. The following criteria will be used to guide land 
supply allocations and to provide the basis for 
determining planning applications that may 
come forward. Proposed sites should meet all 
the following criteria. A traveller site must:
a.  Be suitable in that it provides a good living 
environment for residents, including access 
to essential infrastructure and services 
and does not cause an unacceptable 
environmental impact;
b. Be appropriately located taking into account 
surrounding uses, with preference given to 
sites being located on brownfield land;
c.  Not cause demonstrable harm to the quality, 
character and appearance of the landscape 
taking account of the cumulative impact of 
other authorised sites in the vicinity;
d. Be of a size and scale appropriate to the size 
and density of the local settled community;
e.  Have good access to transport links, public 
transport and be close to shops, schools, 
jobs, health and local services and other 
community facilities;  
f.  Have safe and convenient vehicular and 
pedestrian access from the highway and 
provide adequate space for the provision of 
parking, turning, servicing, storage and land 
for associated livestock where appropriate;6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 87g.  Be well designed and landscaped to give 
privacy between pitches/plots, and between 
sites and neighbouring properties and 
to avoid harmful impacts by noise, light, 
vehicular movements and other activities; 
and
h. Provide soft landscaping and where 
appropriate communal recreational areas 
for children. 
3. The detailed design of the traveller site should 
take account of current best practice guidance
6.53 The national ‘Planning policy for traveller sites’  
(2015) document seeks to ensure fair and equal 
treatment for Travellers, in a way that facilitates their 
traditional and nomadic way of life while respecting the 
interests of the settled community. 
6.54 In Blackpool permanent accommodation for 
Gypsies and Travellers comprise the local authority 
site at Chapel Road and a number of privately owned 
sites. Together these sites provide a total of 44 pitches.  
In addition 3 transit pitches are also provided at the 
Chapel Road site.   All the sites are concentrated in 
one broad location in south east Blackpool, either 
surrounding or located within the Marton Moss 
Countryside Area.
6.55 Blackpool Council has worked with Fylde and 
Wyre Borough Councils (as part of the Duty to Co-
operate) to prepare the Gypsy and Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment 
(GTAA) (2014).  It provides an accommodation needs 
assessment to determine the likely permanent and 
transit needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople within the sub-region over each 
authority’s plan period. 6.56 Working collaboratively will enable the three 
authorities to provide for Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople across the Fylde Coast, helping 
to ensure a fair and effective strategy is in place to 
provide access to accommodation, services and 
facilities. This updated assessment was published in 
September 2014.
6.57 Any further potential for future growth and 
provision of all types of traveller sites in Blackpool will 
be reviewed in line with national policy; the findings of 
the updated accommodation needs assessment; the 
very specific circumstances and realities of Blackpool’s 
existing intensively built up urban area and other 
future development needs. 
6.58 To accommodate current and future need, the 
Council will identify suitable sites for pitches/plots as 
part of the future Site Allocations and Development 
Management Policies document, with potential 
additional provision within Blackpool taking into 
account best practice guidance and the inclusion of 
smaller family sites.
 6. Strengthening Community WellbeingPage 88 of 144
Regenerating Blackpool Town 
Centre and Resort CoreChapter 7
Showzam outside the Winter Gardens
(Photo - www.visitblackpool.com)
Page 88Page 89 of 144
Contents:
• Policy CS17: Blackpool Town Centre  91
• Policy CS18: Winter Gardens  95
• Policy CS19: Central Business District 96 
(Talbot Gateway)  
• Policy CS20: Leisure Quarter 98 
(Former Central Station Site) 
• Policy CS21: Leisure and 100 
Business Tourism  
• Policy CS22: Key Resort Gateways 102
• Policy CS23: Managing Holiday 104 
Bed Spaces 
Page 89Page 90
Clar emont
North Bea ch
RevoeFoxhall
St. Helier sSouth Bea ch
t
t
t
s
s
s
Centr al Business District
(Talbot Ga teway)
Winter Gar dens
Leisur e Quar terStrategic Sites
Talbot
T
 o
bo
al
o
 T
a
ot
t
o
 Ta
b
T
Ta
l
l
lb
o
t
b
o
bo
lb
lb
a
Ta
Ta
T
T
T
 o
o
o
o
o
t
t
t
t
t
oe
oe
oe
e
e
oe
e
e
oe
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
ers
r
rs
r
er
r
rs
er
rs
r
r
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
 Heli e
e
He
el
elie
l
l
ie
l
l
l
e
e
e
l
l
l
l
e
e
e
e
e
e
lie
lie
i
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
He
He
 e
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
 H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
St.
t
S
S
t
St
t
S
S
S
S
t
t.
St
t
St
S
H
R
R
Re
R
R
Revo
vo
ev
e
R
e
e
o
v
v
vo
o
ev
Re
o
o
v
v
o
o
o
e
e
v
v
v
v
v
ev
e
Blac kpool Nor th
Blac kpool South
Pleasur e Bea chUrban Ar ea
Inner Ar ea 
Resor t Cor e
Residential Neighbourhoods
Mixed Holida y and R esidential 
Neighbourhoods
Blac kpool T ower
Football Club
Stanle y Park
The Pleasu re Bea ch
Mainline R ailway
Railwa y Sta tion
Tramw ayTown Centr e Boundary
Strategic Site Boundary
Key Resor t Ga teways
 Key 
N
t.  Unauthorised 
reproduc tion infringes Cr own c opyright and ma y lead t o pr osecution or civil pr oceedings .  Black pool Bor ough C ouncil Lic ence No . 100019178. 2012.Key
& Brunswick7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Figure 16: Inner Area RegenerationPage 917.1   Blackpool’s future growth, development 
and investment will be focused on inner area 
regeneration, comprising Blackpool Town Centre, 
the Resort Core and neighbourhoods within the 
inner area (Figure 16).  A regeneration focus is crucial 
to strengthening the economy, rebalancing the 
housing market and targeting investment to address 
decline and deprivation whilst ensuring that new 
development takes place in the most sustainable 
locations.
7.2 The focus of this Chapter is on regenerating 
Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core, which 
contains the majority of resort accommodation, 
attractions and facilities and major points of 
arrival.   However, in recognition that some holiday 
accommodation and attractions lie outside these 
areas, some policies in this Chapter (i.e. Policy CS21: 
Leisure and Business Tourism and CS23: Managing 
Holiday Bed Spaces) have a wider spatial focus.
Blackpool Town Centre
7.3 Blackpool Town Centre is the main retail and 
service centre in the Fylde Coast sub-region and is 
identified in the overarching spatial strategy as a 
key focus for economic growth, development and 
investment.  Three town centre strategic sites are 
proposed: the Central Business District, Winter 
Gardens and Leisure Quarter (Core Strategy policies 
CS18, CS19 and CS20).  It is proposed to amend the 
town centre boundary so that all three strategic sites 
are included within the town centre.  This proposed 
amendment is shown in Figure 17.  Including these 
sites will help drive economic growth in the town 
centre, strengthen its vitality and viability, and enable 
the sites to integrate more closely with the town 
centre.Policy CS17:  Blackpool Town Centre 
1. To re-establish the town centre as the first 
choice shopping destination for Fylde Coast 
residents and to strengthen it as a cultural, 
leisure and business destination for residents 
and visitors, new development, investment and 
enhancement will be supported which helps to 
re-brand the town centre by:
a.  Strengthening the retail offer with new 
retail development, with the principal retail 
core being the main focus for major retail 
development 
b. Introducing quality cafes and restaurants to 
develop a café culture 
c.  Conserving and enhancing key heritage 
and entertainment assets within the town 
centre and complementing these with new 
innovative development
d. Growing an office sector to create an 
attractive centre to do business
e.  Enhancing the quality of buildings, streets 
and spaces and connecting the different 
areas of the town centre, including the 
seafront, to improve pedestrian movement 
and improve connections with adjoining 
resort and residential areas
f.  Improving access to the town centre 
with vibrant and welcoming multi-modal 
transport gateways
g.  Introducing a high quality residential offer in 
the longer term
2. Assistance will be provided to assemble sites 
and properties where required to facilitate 
major redevelopment.7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort CorePage 927.4 To successfully position Blackpool Town Centre 
as the first choice shopping destination for Fylde Coast 
residents and an attractive place to visit and do business, 
the town centre needs to carve out a high quality retail 
offer and combine this with a wider positive leisure, 
cultural and social experience during the day and into 
the evening.  Exploiting key assets within the town 
centre - heritage, coastal frontage and popular tourist 
attractions - and aligning these with new innovative 
developments will help define a distinguishing offer to 
achieve an attractive, thriving centre.
7.5 Blackpool Town Centre will be the focus for 
new major retail development in the Borough (Policy 
CS4: Retail and Other Town Centre Uses).  Within 
the town centre, the principal retail core will be the 
main focus for this development.  The principal retail 
core is defined in Figure 17.  It contains the main 
shopping streets and the majority of the large multiple 
retailers, focused on the main pedestrianised core 
of Church Street, Victoria Street, Bank Hey Street 
and the Houndshill Shopping Centre.  Whilst recent 
redevelopment of the Houndshill Shopping Centre has 
helped to strengthen the retail core, future investment 
is vital to improve the quality and range of offer.  This 
includes the introduction of higher-end retailers and 
quality eating establishments.  Opportunities for future 
development of the principal retail core include further 
phased development of the Houndshill Shopping 
Centre and the introduction of a complementary 
specialist retail offer within the Winter Gardens.  The 
Winter Gardens is adjacent to the principal retail core 
and would complement the retail offer and form part 
of the retail circuit.
7.6 Improved connectivity is central to the success 
of the town centre, including a more cohesive 
pedestrian layout and an obvious retail circuit which is 
easier to navigate.  Measures are needed to enhance 
movement between the principal retail core, seafront 
and three strategic sites.  This will be achieved by 
integrating the retail core and Winter Gardens with 
surrounding streets and spaces, with opportunities for improved signage/information boards and public 
realm improvements. St. John’s Square, Cedar Square 
and Abingdon Street are centrally located to connect 
these areas.  Recent environmental enhancement 
and remodelling of St. John’s Square has created an 
attractive space for hosting events and festivals and 
for growing a café culture.  The vibrancy created in this 
central area will also benefit more peripheral streets to 
the east by helping to increase footfall.  7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Page 937.7 The contribution made by tourists to the vitality 
and viability of Blackpool Town Centre is vital and the 
provision for tourists within its core is part of what 
makes the town centre unique.  Leisure uses are 
largely accommodated along the promenade frontage 
between Springfield Road and New Bonny Street.  
This will continue to be promoted as the main town 
centre location for visitor attractions, leisure retail 
and drinking establishments.  This frontage includes 
Blackpool Tower at the heart of Blackpool’s Golden 
Mile and is a key gateway to the town centre from 
the seafront.  Despite significant recent investment 
in buildings, spaces and public realm along this 
stretch, there are still poor quality buildings and 
uses, including low-end seasonal and transient uses.  
These create a negative image of the town centre 
and discourage visitors entering the town centre.  To 
address this, the Council will support comprehensive 
enhancement and appropriate redevelopment 
which introduces quality buildings and higher-end 
leisure uses, which would also complement wider 
regeneration efforts along the promenade.  
7.8 The Winter Gardens and Blackpool Tower 
are iconic heritage and entertainment assets in the 
Council’s ownership.  These have either recently 
undergone, or are currently undergoing, major 
programmes of refurbishment to introduce quality 
leisure, entertainment and business tourism uses into 
the heart of the town centre.  There is the opportunity 
to exploit these unique assets to facilitate quality 
new investment on key development sites within the 
town centre, including development of the Central 
Business District and Leisure Quarter site.  Delivering 
these strategic sites will help to create attractive arrival 
points into the town centre from the north and south, 
and create significant new job opportunities, as well as 
acting as a catalyst to further regeneration within the 
town centre and resort.
7.9 In the longer term, once the town centre has 
begun to re-establish itself as a thriving sub-regional 
centre for Fylde Coast residents and a renowned cultural, leisure and business destination for residents 
and visitors, this will help to create a demand for high 
quality residential uses within the town centre.
7.10 A Town Centre Strategy was published in March 
2013.  This provides a detailed supporting framework 
to this policy by identifying priorities for improvement 
and management of the town centre and developing a 
five-year action plan, with delivery mechanisms to be 
monitored on a regular basis.  
7.11 A Wayfinding Strategy and a Parking Strategy 
are also being developed, which will help to deliver the 
objectives of this policy.  They will ensure co-ordinated 
improvements to traffic and pedestrian signing leading 
into, and within, the town centre; and maximise the 
effectiveness and efficiency of Blackpool’s existing 
parking resources. 7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Page 947. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
TALBOT ROAD
COOK
SON S
TREET
CLIFT ON S TREET
BIRLEY S TREET
CHURCH STREETDEANSGATE
CHURCH STREET
CHUR CH S TREETABINGDON
 STREETTOPPING 
STREETKING 
STREET
ADELAIDE STREET
PR
OMENADE
CHAPEL STREETEDANEMORPPR
OMENADE
QUEEN STREETSPRINGFIELD ROADHIGH S
TREET
ALBERT ROAD
HORNBY ROAD
VANCE ROADCORPORA
TION CTREET MARKET S
TREETTALBO T
SQU ARE
HAVELOCK STREETREAD’S AVENUECHARNLEY ROAD
HULL ROADBANK HEY S
TREET
CENTRAL DRIVEVICTORIA STREET
WINTER GARDENS
N
Key
Blac kpool T ower
Grundy Ar t Gallery
The Gr and T heatre
Festiv al House
Comedy Ca rpet
The Winter Ga rdens
WINTER GARDENS
RepRepRepRepRepRepeppR rodrodrodrodrodrodroddouceuceuceuceuceuceuceced fd fd fd fd fd ffdromromromromomroromom OrOrOrOrOrOrOrrdnadnadnadnadnadnadnand ncencencencencencncenceSuSuSuSuSuSuSuurververvrrververveey my my my my my my mmappappappappappappappppingingingnginginginggwwwiwiwiwwwithththththtththethethethethethethehepepeppepepermirmirmirmirmmrmiiinnnononnofofof of of ofofothethethethetheththethe n  U r Ma orised wn c ty ti t.  U na c d row gh e r r eere UU orisedorised  c c t. t. tt UnUn wnwn UUU tt ana cc ee e yy riggri Co authhorishorisehh ajesajes e © Cre © Cr or y’s Sy’s SS e©e© missimissi oneone ypycopcopopyopycopycopyco ownownowwCrCrCownown OO CC StaStaatat y y perper ryry atat ryry CoCo yryrryryr OO rrr OO ntroller of ntroller of ffff ’S
n copyright and ma y lead t o pr osecution or civil pr oceedings .  Black pool Bor ough C ouncil Lic ence No . 100019178. 2012.
 reprepreprepreprepreprodrodrodrodrodrodroductuctuctuctuctuctuctionioniononioniononinininininnnfrifrifrifrifrifrifringengengengengengenge s Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs CsCrowrowrowrowowowrow n cn cn cncn cncn copyopyopyopyopyopyrigrigrigiriggght ht hththt hthtandandandandandandand mamamamamamamaylylylylylylyleadeaeaeaeade 91 s.  B kp o ncil Licence N un gh C ouun gg eN un g ssggsg 1199 BB   NN oo ncil Licence ncil Licence n kk uuuu gggghCo ghCo g enceencee pp ggggg nnnn NNN ggggg n icic ououuouou ee ggggggg nnnn 00 2012.2012.2 copyrig  copyrig copyrig copyrig to p to p ghght lacklacklacklack ilLi ncil Lice poolpool l top to p o. 1010 NoNoNo. 1No. 1 ncil Lincil Lncil Liii nn NN onorc onorc .2. rourou oopoop CCo enen CC ll cce BB osecosec  Bol Bo ououooo rourou d md m
dm BoBo ghgh propro NoNo 22 iviv iciciii oopoop cc dd
d hh eececeeeccenn mm eenn  l ayay
ayaa
amama
a NN l proceedin l proceedin
Town Centr e Str ategic Sites
Main R etail Co re
Town Centr e Boundary
Mainline R ailway
Tramw ay
Railway Sta tion (Blac kpool Nor th)Leisur e Quar terWinter Gar densCentr al Business 
DistrictFigure 17: Blackpool Town CentrePage 95Winter Gardens 
7.12 The Winter Gardens is the world’s most 
complete Victorian all weather complex of theatres 
and conference facilities.  However, the complex is 
currently on the Heritage at Risk Register, has suffered 
from a lack of investment and has significant levels 
of under-used floorspace.  It is struggling to compete 
with larger, more modern conference venues across 
the UK. A clear strategy and business plan is needed 
to re-model and enhance its future contribution to 
the town centre and resort.
Policy CS18: Winter Gardens 
1. Major refurbishment will be promoted and 
encouraged to enhance the appeal and 
status of the Winter Gardens as a year round 
entertainment, leisure and conference venue.
2. Proposals must be presented in the context 
of a comprehensive approach, sustain and 
enhance the significance of the Grade 2* Listed 
Building and conform to the Winter Gardens 
Conservation Management Plan.
3. The following will be supported:
a.  Improved theatre, conference and exhibition 
facilities including maintenance of existing 
venues
b. Leisure and entertainment uses which 
could include cinema, casino, museum, 
restaurants and cafes
c.  Limited retail uses that complement the 
role of the Winter Gardens and functionally 
integrate with the adjacent town centre 
retail core
d.  Hotel/Serviced Apartments
e.   Improved car and cycle parking7.13 In recognition of the strategic importance of 
the Winter Gardens to the town centre and resort, in 
particular its potential to grow the business tourism 
market, the Council purchased the complex in March 
2010.   The Council is actively looking to secure 
medium-long term investment to facilitate major 
refurbishment and re-establish the Winter Gardens 
as a mid-size, multi-purpose conferencing venue 
with a national profile, as well as being the main 
entertainment heart of the town for residents and 
visitors.  The future role of the Winter Gardens will 
capitalise on its historic legacy but make a positive 
contribution to a new 21st century Blackpool. 
7.14 The Winter Gardens has great potential to 
strengthen and widen its range of uses through 
sensitive remodelling and enhancement.  It offers 
exceptional opportunities to locate year round leisure 
uses in the heart of Blackpool Town Centre.  A number 
of retail uses currently exist along the Church Street 
and Coronation Street facades.  The policy supports 
additional limited retail uses that complement the role 
of the Winter Gardens and physically and functionally 
integrates Blackpool’s principal retail core with 
Abingdon Street and the north of the town centre.
(CS17 Floral Hall.jpg)7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Page 96Central Business District
7.15 The Central Business District (CBD) is an 
important strategic development site for a new 
gateway development at the north-east part of the 
town centre, providing a catalyst for town centre 
regeneration and supporting economic growth.  
Policy CS19: Central Business District  
(Talbot Gateway)
1. Comprehensive redevelopment of the Central 
Business District will be promoted and 
encouraged for mixed-use development which 
will become an important anchor for the north 
of the town centre; providing a welcoming 
arrival experience, connecting with the wider 
town centre and complementing its retail offer.
2. The following uses will be supported:
a.  A public transport interchange around a 
re-modelled railway station and enhanced 
pedestrian environment
b. Retail development that supports the 
existing major foodstore, including cafes and 
restaurants
c.  Offices
d. Police Headquarters
e.  Law Courts
f.  Improved public car park provision for the 
wider town centre 
g.  Hotels
h. Residential
3. In addition to new development, proposals to 
improve the appearance of existing buildings 
will be supported.7.16 This site is a key arrival point for residents and 
visitors entering the town centre, accommodating 
Blackpool North Railway Station, a large portion of the 
town centre’s car parking and the former bus station on 
Talbot Road.  However, the arrival experience was poor, 
the area was fragmented, under-utilised and disparate, 
and the existing transport infrastructure outdated and 
poorly integrated. 
7.17 Redevelopment and enhancement of the area is 
central to Blackpool’s ambition of creating an attractive 
Central Business District which promotes office 
development within the town centre and improves the 
arrival experience from the railway station and Talbot 
Road.  The development is anchored by new Blackpool 
Council offices and a major new foodstore (completed 
summer 2014) along with Blackpool North railway 
station.  Other complementary uses will be supported.  
Any new retail development must complement and 
not compete with the retail offer within the principal 
retail core. There will be an overall improvement of 
the built environment, with new and improved high 
quality buildings, attractive spaces and good pedestrian 
connectivity within the site and beyond linking to the 
wider town centre.  The area will be a greatly improved 
transport gateway, with integrated transport modes 
and the potential for a future tram interchange.  
7.18 Proposals must be presented in the context of a 
comprehensive approach, although the development 
is likely to come forward in phases.  As a major 
landowner, Blackpool Council will assist with bringing 
subsequent phases of development forward and use 
its compulsory purchase powers, where necessary, 
to enable land assembly.  Delivery of the Police 
Headquarters and Law Courts will be dependent on 
successful relocation of existing services currently 
located on the Leisure Quarter site.7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort CorePage 977.19 The adopted Planning Brief Supplementary 
Planning Document for the site will continue to be 
instrumental in guiding future development proposals.7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Page 98Leisure Quarter
7.20 The Leisure Quarter is one of Blackpool’s 
most strategically important development sites 
to maximise regeneration and provide supporting 
economic growth.  The site has the potential to 
deliver something as iconic as Blackpool Tower and 
the Winter Gardens.  
7.21 Redevelopment of the site is central 
to Blackpool’s ambition of developing a new, 
exciting and unique tourist destination and is an 
important catalyst for wider resort and town centre 
regeneration.  With the lack of readily available 
deliverable sites in the resort core, it is crucial that the 
potential of this site to broaden the resort appeal and 
revitalise the visitor economy is exploited.
Policy CS20: Leisure Quarter
1. Comprehensive redevelopment of the entire 
site will be promoted and encouraged for 
major leisure development of national 
significance; where the cumulative impact of 
a single or group of leisure uses will provide a 
compelling new reason to visit Blackpool.
2. The development must:
a.  Demonstrate the highest design quality, 
through creative architecture, urban design 
and public realm that creates a landmark 
attraction which responds to Blackpool’s 
historic townscape and character
b. Integrate with and support, whilst not 
undermining  existing resort core uses and 
attractions
c.  Provide ease of access, good vehicular and 
public transport connections, quality arrival 
points and adequate parking facilities (to 
serve the development and town centre)d. Improve pedestrian permeability by creating 
strong active connections through the site, 
and between the site and the town centre, 
seafront, central corridor and surrounding 
resort neighbourhoods
e.  Promote sustainable development through 
design, access, energy conservation and 
operational management.
3. Complementary leisure uses, hotel 
development, ancillary retail, parking and 
servicing that would add value and support the 
major leisure development will be permitted.
4. Development proposals may be phased 
but must not be piecemeal in approach.  If 
all reasonable measures have been taken 
to redevelop the entire site, and this is not 
possible, the retention and improvement of 
existing buildings will be allowed provided the 
scheme meets the development objectives set 
out in the supporting Development Brief.
7.22 The Leisure Quarter site incorporates the former 
Central Station site and adjoining promenade frontage.  
It occupies a prime seafront location on Blackpool’s 
Golden Mile, lies on the southern edge of the town 
centre, and is the main arrival point for the town centre 
and resort, enjoying direct connection with the M55 
motorway via Central Corridor. 7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort CorePage 997.23 The site has long been at the heart of ambitious 
plans for a new leisure development, most recently for 
a new national conference/exhibition centre alongside 
a regional casino.  Intense competition from modern 
purpose-built conference centres and the desire for 
large city venues means that without the financial 
support of the casino, this is no longer a realistic option 
for the site.  A distinctive conference and events offer 
at key sites elsewhere within the town centre, including 
the Winter Gardens, would be more suited to the 
national conference market.  
7.24 The site is largely under-utilised and the 
central portion is dominated by surface car parks.  Its 
promenade frontage comprises large amusement 
arcades and well-known Blackpool attractions, including 
the Sealife Centre and Madame Tussauds, as well as 
some incidental retail provision.  There is an outside 
market and coach drop-off/pick-up point at the northern 
end of Bonny Street; and law courts, police headquarters 
and multi-storey car park to the south. 7.25 Blackpool Council, as a major landowner on the 
site, will seek to establish a development agreement 
with other landowners, public sector partners and 
selected developer(s), to assist with bringing the site 
forward for development; and will use its compulsory 
purchase powers to assist with land assembly where 
required.
7.26 An adopted Development Brief Supplementary 
Planning Document supports this policy and will be 
instrumental in ensuring proposals for the site deliver 
a landmark attraction of the highest quality, which 
transforms the visitor economy and resort appeal and 
supports the long term future of Blackpool. 7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Page 100Leisure and Business Tourism
7.27 If Blackpool is to build on its status as Britain’s 
favourite seaside resort it needs to provide new high 
quality attractions and accommodation, which will help 
to broaden the resort’s appeal alongside investment in 
key existing leisure and entertainment landmarks.  These 
together will create more repeat visits and encourage 
new visitors to the resort year round, revitalising the 
visitor economy and positioning Blackpool at the 
forefront of the tourism market.
Policy CS21: Leisure and Business Tourism
1. In order to physically and economically 
regenerate Blackpool’s resort core and town 
centre, the focus will be on strengthening the 
resort’s appeal to attract new audiences year 
round.  This will be achieved by supporting:
a.  Proposals for new high quality tourism 
attractions focused on the town centre and 
resort core, including major development 
opportunities which have the potential to 
become wider catalysts for regeneration to 
improve the visitor experience
b. Proposals for new visitor accommodation 
focused on the town centre, resort core 
and defined holiday accommodation areas, 
unless exceptional circumstances justify a 
peripheral location outside these areas
c.  The improvement and enhancement of 
important existing tourist attractions
d. The improvement of existing holiday 
accommodation and giving marginal, 
lower quality guesthouses the opportunity 
to convert to high quality residential 
accommodation outside the defined holiday 
accommodation areas.e.  New development along the promenade’s 
built frontage which complements the high 
quality public realm investment along the 
promenade to enhance the appearance of 
Blackpool’s seafront
f.  The enhancement of existing and promotion 
of new venues and events spaces which can 
accommodate a year round programme of 
events, festivals and conferences.
2. Elsewhere, outside the resort core and town 
centre, the Council will support new tourism 
investment that is predominantly focused on 
existing outdoor leisure and recreation facilities 
which strengthens the wider resort offer and 
does not undermine resort regeneration.
7.28 There is an overriding need to raise quality in all 
aspects of the visitor experience in Blackpool, focusing 
investment and development within the established resort 
core and town centre, where regeneration and positive 
change is most needed.
7.29 Opportunities for major new high quality leisure 
development drawing large numbers of visitors and 
making a strong contribution to resort regeneration are 
key to developing an exciting and unique year round resort 
destination and supporting a sustainable economy.
7.30 This policy seeks to target leisure tourism investment 
and development in the resort core and town centre.  
Proposals for resort attractions elsewhere will generally 
not be permitted.  In terms of new hotel accommodation, 
development of peripherally located hotels has 
prospered in many areas in recent years but in Blackpool, 
unless there is a specific identified need for ancillary 
accommodation to other facilities, there is no basis to 
justify further accommodation outside the defined holiday 
accommodation areas, resort core and town centre.7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort CorePage 1017.31 Blackpool has a number of well-known visitor 
attractions which make an important contribution 
to the overall resort offer.  Proposals for high quality 
tourism related development including ancillary retail 
and food and beverage uses (A3 and A5) specifically 
related to marketing the existing tourism offer will be 
supported which complements and reinforces the role 
of these existing important attractions, securing their 
long term future.
7.32 Another dimension of tourism is the holiday 
accommodation offer.  There is an identified need 
to reduce the amount of poor quality holiday 
accommodation whilst continuing to support high 
quality holiday accommodation to meet the needs of 
the 21st century visitor.  The Resort Core remains the 
general focus for holiday accommodation, although 
more detailed areas concentrated around existing 
strong holiday area clusters are defined in Policy 
CS23 and the accompanying Holiday Accommodation 
SPD.  Elsewhere, the Council will support conversion 
of holiday accommodation to residential use to 
create more balanced neighbourhoods (Policy CS12: 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods).
7.33 The promenade is one of Blackpool’s key visitor 
assets and is considered to be the ‘shop window’ of 
the resort.  Recent multi-million pound investment 
has transformed the promenade seafront, including a new seawall, new headlands, enhanced public 
realm, improved access onto the beach and a new 
tramway.  It now provides many outdoor leisure and 
recreation opportunities including walking and cycling.  
To complement this recent investment, the Council 
will support new high quality development that builds 
upon the success of the seafront.
7.34 Conferences, events and festivals are vital to 
Blackpool’s visitor economy and year round appeal.  
Recent improvements to the promenade, including 
the new Tower Festival Headland, provide a new 
opportunity to host outdoor events and festivals.  The 
Winter Gardens will play an important role in hosting 
conferences, events and festivals (Policy CS18) and larger 
hotels in the resort will continue to provide supporting 
conference and exhibition facilities. The Core Strategy 
supports continued investment in these facilities with 
proposals being supported that re-establish Blackpool’s 
role as a nationally recognised conference venue.
7.35 Away from the Resort Core, leisure development 
opportunities should focus on the enhancement of 
existing facilities which largely meet outdoor leisure 
and recreation need, including Blackpool Zoo, Stanley 
Park and Marton Mere Holiday Village.  These provide 
important leisure facilities for quieter enjoyment which 
are different to the Resort Core, but complementary to 
Blackpool’s leisure and tourism offer as a whole.7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Page 102Key Resort Gateways 
7.36 Blackpool has a number of key resort gateways 
leading into the town centre and resort core, 
presenting many visitors with their first impression of 
the resort.  Improvement and enhancement of these 
key visitor routes will help to create a positive resort 
arrival experience, complement regeneration efforts 
elsewhere within the resort and stimulate further 
investment in the adjoining holiday and residential 
areas.  Creating a positive arrival experience is also 
dealt with in Policy CS5: Connectivity.
Policy CS22: Key Resort Gateways 
1. Proposals will be promoted and pursued 
for further improvement, remodelling and 
environmental enhancement of Central 
Corridor as a key strategic gateway to Blackpool 
and attractive point of arrival, including:
a.  Redevelopment of land within and adjoining 
the Corridor which creates attractive 
development frontages viewed from the 
Corridor; 
b. Improved vehicular, pedestrian and cycling 
linkages through the Corridor and extending 
the network of green infrastructure;
c.  Improved parking and reception facilities;
d. Enhanced landscaping, signage, lighting and 
security.
2. Proposals for improvement and development 
will be supported to regenerate Central Drive, 
Lytham Road, Dickson Road and Talbot Road as 
prominent and attractive gateways to the resort 
and town centre, including:
a.  Replacing existing poor quality, seasonal 
and transient uses with more viable uses, 
including quality residential uses on those 
frontages outside a defined retail centre;b. Improvements to buildings and shop 
frontages; 
c.  High quality public realm, landscaping, 
signage, lighting and security;
d. Traffic calming and improved public 
transport, pedestrian and cycling provision.
3. To facilitate major redevelopment schemes 
assistance will be provided to assemble sites 
and properties where appropriate.
4. Any change in parking provision as a result of 
major redevelopment must not undermine the 
resort’s ability to accommodate visitor trips.
7.37 Central Corridor (including Seasiders Way and 
Yeadon Way) is the key strategic gateway to the resort 
for car and coach-borne visitors, providing direct access 
from the M55 motorway.  It is flanked by the main 
visitor car and coach parks, Blackpool South Railway 
Station, Blackpool Football Club and the Festival Leisure 
Park (accessed from Rigby Road).  Major projects 
between Blackpool Football Club and Waterloo Road 
bridge (completed in phases between 2006 and 2009) 
have introduced new network remodelling, public 
realm improvements, public open space and new 
car parks, which have greatly improved the arrival 
experience.  However, the remaining sections of the 
Corridor provide a visually poor and bland environment 
and similar treatment is required north of Sands Way 
roundabout and South of Waterloo Road Bridge to 
create the quality of ‘arrival experience’ needed and 
improve connections through the Corridor and beyond.   7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort CorePage 1037.38 Central Drive, Lytham Road, Dickson Road and 
Talbot Road are key gateways to the town centre or 
promenade, which have suffered as a consequence of 
falling visitor numbers and a declining town centre.  
The overprovision of commercial uses has resulted in 
vacant premises, seasonal and transient uses occupying 
buildings in need of maintenance and investment.  
A rationalisation of poor quality commercial uses, 
alongside significant new investment and development 
to improve the built environment, is needed if these 
key routes are to become attractive visitor gateways, 
and assist in resort and community regeneration.  
There are opportunities for high quality residential 
development on gateway frontages outside of the 
defined town centre, district or local centres.7.39 A number of key development sites are 
located within or adjacent to resort gateways.  These 
include the Central Business District (Talbot Road 
gateway) and the Leisure Quarter and Rigby Road 
sites (Central Corridor and Central Drive gateways).  
Major redevelopment of these sites will provide a 
catalyst for further intervention and investment along 
the respective resort gateways.  The sites contain 
a significant portion of resort/town centre car park 
provision.  Any change in parking provision as a result 
of major redevelopment must not undermine the 
resort’s ability to accommodate visitor trips recognising 
the peaks and troughs of demand for car parking.  To 
facilitate major redevelopment the Council will provide 
assistance to assemble sites and properties where 
appropriate.  7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
Page 104Managing Holiday Bed Spaces 
7.40 Holiday accommodation continues to be an 
integral part of Blackpool’s tourism offer and is vital 
to the resort’s visitor economy. However, over the 
years tourism has changed.  Whilst there has been an 
upturn in resort visitor numbers in recent years, this is 
not reflected in the number of staying visitors, which 
has declined significantly.  These changes have left 
Blackpool with too many holiday bed spaces
7.41 The Fylde Coast Visitor Accommodation Study 
(2009) assesses the supply of bed spaces in serviced 
hotel and self-catering accommodation in relation to 
demand from staying visitors.  In 2008, there were 
around 57,000 serviced accommodation bed spaces 
in Blackpool, while staying visitors accounted for 
almost a quarter of visits to the resort.  Even with a 
small increase in staying visitors as a result of resort 
regeneration, the study indicates an over-supply of 
around 14,000 bed spaces when compared against 
average British occupancy rates.  Furthermore, it 
indicates that Blackpool’s holiday accommodation 
stock is generally of a poor quality, below the level 
expected by the modern day visitor.  
7.42 To reduce the number of bed spaces, Policy 
CS23: Managing Holiday Bed Spaces allows more 
hotels and guest houses to change to residential use 
than before, encouraging a better balance of quality 
homes and guest houses.  In order to successfully 
manage this reduction, and retain a suitable level of 
holiday accommodation in sustainable locations with 
easy access to the resort facilities and key transport 
routes, restrictions on change of use will continue to 
apply to properties located within the main holiday 
accommodation areas.  These areas are defined in 
the Holiday Accommodation SPD, which also provides 
further detail of the Council’s approach to managing 
holiday accommodation.Policy CS23: Managing Holiday Bed Spaces
To achieve an economically viable level of quality 
holiday accommodation, the following approach 
will be adopted to manage a reduction in the 
oversupply of poor quality holiday bed-spaces:  
1. Within the main holiday accommodation 
areas  defined in the SPD:
a.  Existing holiday accommodation use will be 
safeguarded and new or refurbished holiday 
accommodation will be supported 
b.  Change of use from holiday accommodation, 
or the loss of sites used, or last used, as holiday 
accommodation, will be resisted unless:
i. Exceptional circumstances are demonstrated 
in accordance with the SPD, or
ii. In relation to a promenade frontage, 
the proposal would provide high quality 
holiday accommodation alongside a 
supporting new residential offer.  Such 
proposals would need to comply with the 
requirements of the SPD. 
2. Outside the main holiday accommodation areas:
a.  Where existing holiday accommodation 
is viable its retention will be supported, 
including measures to improve the quality of 
accommodation
b. Change of use from holiday accommodation 
to permanent residential use will be 
permitted where proposals provide high 
quality homes which comply with the 
Council’s standards for conversions or new 
build, and relate well in use, scale and 
appearance to neighbouring properties. 7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort CorePage 1053. Within the key promenade hotel frontages  
defined in the SPD, holiday accommodation use 
will be safeguarded and appropriate measures to 
enhance the character and appearance of existing 
hotel buildings and frontages will be supported, to 
help sustain the long term future of the resort.
7.43 In managing the supply of holiday bed spaces, 
the policy recognises the importance of good quality 
holiday accommodation focused in areas which are 
generally well-related to resort facilities and key 
transport routes; meeting the needs of modern 
visitors looking for quality accommodation with 
easy access to the facilities of a major tourist resort 
and complementing the wider tourism offer.  It also 
responds to the need to manage a reduction in the 
amount of bed spaces to achieve an economically 
viable level of quality holiday accommodation which 
can be realistically supported by staying visitors to 
the resort now and in the future, by providing more 
flexibility for change of use. 
7.44 To ensure suitable levels of quality holiday 
accommodation are provided in the most sustainable 
locations, the policy approach is to identify main 
holiday accommodation areas where existing 
hotels and guest houses cannot normally change to 
alternative uses including residential.  These areas will 
generally be focused within the defined Resort Core, as 
shown on the Key Diagram, although may include some 
areas beyond this boundary as appropriate.
7.45 Within these areas, the focus is to safeguard 
existing holiday accommodation use and support 
new or refurbished holiday accommodation, to 
improve the overall quality of supply and enhance 
the holiday character and appeal of these areas to 
support their long-term future.  Change of use of 
holiday accommodation to alternative uses, including 
residential, or the redevelopment of sites in use, or 
last used, as holiday accommodation for alternative 
uses, will generally be resisted unless very exceptional circumstances around character and economic viability 
are demonstrated.  Details of the defined holiday 
accommodation areas (including precise boundaries) 
and demonstrating exceptional circumstances are set 
out in the Holiday Accommodation SPD.  
7.46 Sections of the promenade are included within 
the main holiday accommodation area in recognition 
of its important contribution to Blackpool’s holiday 
accommodation offer.  It is the resort’s shop window 
and many of Blackpool’s largest hotels are located 
here.  Despite past decline in visitor numbers and 
some underinvestment in businesses and properties, 
the promenade remains the prime location for holiday 
accommodation.  It also presents an opportunity 
for high quality residential accommodation on the 
seafront, which will help to support/complement 
investment in quality holiday accommodation, enhance 
the appearance of the promenade and improve 
Blackpool’s housing offer. Therefore, within the main 
holiday accommodation areas on the promenade, 
whilst the focus is to support new or refurbished 
holiday accommodation, the policy also allows 
appropriate mixed-use developments providing high 
quality holiday accommodation/residential uses.  Such 
developments would need to meet high standards 
of design and deliver clear regeneration benefits (full 
details of these requirements are set out in the Holiday 
Accommodation SPD).7. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort CorePage 1067. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
7.47 The approach to having areas where holiday 
accommodation cannot change to alternative uses is 
consistent with past policy approaches in Blackpool.  
However, with too many holiday bed spaces, the 
previously defined areas were drawn too wide and 
retained too many guest houses that are no longer 
fit for purpose.  To allow the reduction of holiday 
bed spaces, the main holiday accommodation areas 
as defined in the Holiday Accommodation SPD have 
been made smaller to include the strongest clusters 
of holiday accommodation when assessed against a 
number of criteria based on land use, location and 
quality characteristics (further details of the criteria 
used are set out in the Holiday Accommodation SPD)
7.48 Having smaller areas means that a greater 
number of hotels and guest houses are now located 
outside the main holiday accommodation areas.  This 
holiday accommodation remains part of the resort 
offer and the retention of viable businesses will be 
supported, including measures to enhance the quality 
of existing accommodation. However, the policy gives 
property owners the option to change to residential 
use should they no longer want to remain as a hotel or 
guest house.  Enabling more hotels and guest houses 
to change to residential use will encourage a better 
balance of quality homes and guest houses, providing 
that future change of use proposals are properly 
managed and create good quality housing for Blackpool 
residents.  Therefore, all new residential uses must 
meet the quality standards set out in design guidance 
for residential conversions and sub-divisions (the 
‘New Homes from Old Places SPD’).  This will help to 
improve Blackpool’s housing offer and transform these 
neighbourhoods into successful communities.
Page 1077. Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and Resort Core
7.49 The policy approach also identifies key 
promenade hotel frontages (defined in the Holiday 
Accommodation SPD), which include a number of the 
resort’s larger and best known hotels where existing 
holiday accommodation use will be safeguarded. Many 
of these hotels are listed buildings. In recognition 
of their architectural character and the important 
contribution which they make to the vitality of the 
promenade and the resort’s heritage, the policy also 
seeks to ensure that future development within these 
frontages is sensitively undertaken; in order to enhance 
the character and appearance of these key hotel 
buildings, whilst supporting their continuing use as 
holiday accommodation. 
7.50 In developing this policy, alternative options 
were considered, including having no policy restriction 
on change of use of existing holiday accommodation 
(removing the defined holiday accommodation areas 
and having a market driven approach to sort out the 
oversupply of holiday bed spaces), as well as a criteria-
based policy focusing on safeguarding the strongest 
clusters of holiday accommodation. However, retaining 
smaller holiday accommodation areas allows the 
Council to successfully manage the reduction of supply 
with the resources available, compared to the option 
of allowing all guest houses to change to residential 
use.  Being able to successfully manage the number of 
new properties that come forward for change of use 
through robust monitoring and enforcement is vital 
to achieve quality neighbourhoods. Identifying areas 
also provides more certainty compared to a criteria-
based policy which was considered to be difficult to 
implement.7.51 The areas defined in the Holiday Accommodation 
SPD can be revised through a formal review of the SPD.  
This provides flexibility in order to respond to changes 
in the leisure sector market in Blackpool. When the 
Council comes to review the SPD, if the evidence shows 
some areas are not working, there is an opportunity 
to change or even remove the boundaries of an area.  
An SPD review would involve appropriate consultation 
with those properties affected. Page 108 of 144
Enabling South Blackpool 
Growth and EnhancementChapter 8
South Blackpool, land North of Chapel Road 
Page 108Page 109 of 144
Contents:
• CS24 : South Blackpool 112 
Employment Growth  
• CS25: South Blackpool Housing Growth 114
• CS26: Marton Moss  115
• CS27: South Blackpool Transport 117 
and Connectivity 
Page 109Page 110
Fylde B.C.
Fylde B
.C
.
5
Fylde B.C.
FFyFFyFyFylde B.C.
FyyBde BB.C
yyylyldyldylBBC.C.
ylylyyC.C.C.BBBBBdddyldyyldylylyldeBdeBFF
Fylde B
.C
.
5
N
Key
Mainline R ailway
Railway Sta tion
Tramw ayM55
Blac kpool Air portRoadt.  Unauthorised 
reproduc tion infringes Cr own c opyright and ma y lead t o pr osecution or civil pr oceedings .  Black pool Bor ough C ouncil Lic ence No . 100019178. 2012.
Emplo yment Gr owth
Blac kpool Air port Cor ridor
Land a t M55 Junction 4Squir es Ga te Industrial Esta tes
Blac kpool Business P ark
Preston Ne w Road1
2
Clifton R oad Sites
Whitehills (Fylde)4
53Blackpool B.C
Blac
kpool B
.C
Moss House R oad
Whyndyk e Farm
Mar ton Moss
(Neighbourhood Planning Appr oach)A
BHousing Gr owth
MM
A
4
1
23
B
M55
Junction 4
8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and Enhancement
Figure 18: South Blackpool Growth and EnhancementPage 1118.1 In delivering the Core Strategy Vision, 
South Blackpool has an important role to play in 
strengthening the local economy and contributing to 
rebalancing the housing offer.
8.2 In economic terms, the employment sites in 
South Blackpool (Figure 18) present opportunities 
for quality employment development to help meet 
Blackpool’s future employment needs and support 
sub-regional growth.  In housing terms, Moss House 
Road and lands at Whyndyke Farm south of Mythop 
Road will provide around 750 additional dwellings 
towards meeting Blackpool’s future housing needs 
and improving the choice of quality homes across the 
Borough.  
8.3 In wider strategic terms, Blackpool Council 
and neighbouring authorities are co-operating over 
the future development of lands on the Blackpool/
Fylde boundary around junction 4 of the M55, as well 
as key sites along Blackpool Airport corridor and at 
Whyndyke Farm35.  This is to ensure that development 
in this area will support the strategic objectives set 
out in each authority’s Local Plan and provide the 
necessary supporting infrastructure, in order to deliver 
a strong and distinctive sustainable urban extension 
to Blackpool which is closely integrated with the 
surrounding area.
8.4 It has been highlighted through ongoing 
consultation with the Environment Agency and 
United Utilities that there are issues in this area with 
surface water management and the capacity of the 
existing sewage network, with a resulting impact 
on bathing water quality.  Any future housing in 
this area will therefore need to be informed by a 
comprehensive drainage plan. Further guidance on 
surface water management is provided in Policy CS9: 
Water Management. The Council is also working with 
neighbouring authorities on surface water and waste 
water management through the Duty to Co-operate.
35  Duty to Co-operate Memorandum of Understanding between the Fylde Coast 
authorities and Lancashire County Council (2013)8.5 This area of South Blackpool includes Marton 
Moss, the only major area in the Borough which 
remains largely undeveloped (Figure 18).  Located on 
the southern edge of Blackpool, the Moss has a semi-
rural character with a mix of horticultural, equestrian, 
residential and other uses, as well as a network of 
lanes, hedgerows, ditches and verges all of which 
contribute to its distinctive character.
8.6 There has been a longstanding range of diverse 
views on the future of the Moss.  Previous Core 
Strategy consultations have highlighted the recognition 
by residents in the area of some need for change but 
that this change should reflect and embrace as far as 
possible the open and semi rural distinctive character 
and appearance of the Moss.  Responding to this, a 
neighbourhood planning approach is being promoted 
in this area to enable the local community to develop 
a shared vision and to shape and direct development 
which recognises and appropriately responds to this 
distinctive character.8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and Enhancement
Page 112South Blackpool Employment Growth
8.7 The Core Strategy evidence base identifies lands 
at South Blackpool on the Blackpool/Fylde boundary 
as the most appropriate location to attract major new 
economic development, providing sustainable jobs 
for Fylde Coast residents and supporting sub-regional 
employment growth.  This includes redevelopment 
opportunities on existing employment sites within 
Blackpool as well as new development on wider land 
in neighbouring Fylde. 
8.8 Due to Blackpool’s limited land availability, 
the overarching policy for economic development 
(Policy CS3) also identifies lands at South Blackpool 
as being important to meet the future employment 
needs of Blackpool residents to help strengthen 
and grow the local economy, complementing 
employment development within Blackpool Town 
Centre and existing employment sites elsewhere 
in the Borough.  Lands at South Blackpool will be 
essential in attracting significant inward investment 
providing the opportunity for larger, more attractive 
development for businesses which cannot be readily 
accommodated elsewhere.  
8.9 Therefore, Blackpool Council will work jointly 
with neighbouring authorities to promote sustainable 
locations within South Blackpool to support business 
and industrial growth for Blackpool and the Fylde 
Coast sub-region.  The following policy provides detail 
on which locations are considered most sustainable 
for new employment development and which are 
in line with the strategic priorities being pursued 
through the Duty to Co-operate.Policy CS24:  South Blackpool Employment Growth
The Council will support:
1. Redevelopment of existing employment sites 
within South Blackpool to provide high quality 
modern business/industrial facilities (Class B 
uses) 
2. Proposals for major new business/industrial 
development (Class B uses) in principle at 
sustainable locations within wider lands at 
South Blackpool to support sub-regional 
economic growth, including:
a.  Blackpool Airport Corridor
b. Lands close to Junction 4 of the M55
Blackpool Airport Corridor
8.10 Blackpool Airport Corridor forms an important 
southern gateway to Blackpool, and includes 
Blackpool Business Park, Squires Gate Industrial Estate 
and Sycamore Trading Estate within the Blackpool 
boundary.  Parts of Blackpool Business Park are within 
neighbouring Fylde, along with Blackpool Airport 
which also forms part of the Airport Corridor.  With 
direct links to the M55 via Progress Way, the sites have 
been a prime location for much of Blackpool’s recent 
industrial and business development. 8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and EnhancementPage 1138.11 Blackpool Business Park is a 40 hectare 
employment site with 6.9 hectares of land remaining 
available for development (as at July 2012).  There 
has been a range of new development providing 
modern business space which meets the needs of local 
businesses wanting to relocate or expand as well as 
attracting new inward business development.  
8.12 Alongside opportunities to develop remaining 
land at the Business Park, there is potential for major 
redevelopment and enhancement of the older, 
longstanding Squires Gate and Sycamore Trading 
estates.  This would also present opportunities to 
improve the Squires Gate Lane frontage, site access 
and traffic circulation/connectivity to the adjoining 
employment areas.  In order to facilitate regeneration, 
redevelopment opportunities which introduce a 
suitable mixed use development will be considered 
where this would secure the future business/industrial 
use of the site.  Any enabling development would need 
to be robustly justified and not conflict with wider plan 
objectives.
8.13 Beyond the Blackpool boundary, Blackpool 
Airport is an important sub-regional asset and will be 
a key driver in supporting economic growth across 
the Fylde Coast.  It is important that its position is 
maintained as a regional airport with the potential to 
provide strong business connections, supporting both 
tourism and business aspects of the economy.  Lands 
around the airport will be critical in capitalising on 
this asset.  Blackpool and Fylde Councils are working 
with the airport owners and other stakeholders to 
identify opportunities for appropriate future growth 
and development, the integration of the airport with 
adjacent developments and supporting infrastructure 
requirements.  Ancillary business/ industrial 
development of lands at the airport will therefore be 
supported which reinforces its role and function.  Lands close to Junction 4 of the M55
8.14 Lands close to Junction 4 of the M55 have 
excellent access to the strategic transport network and 
are a desirable location for employment development.  
There are a range of attractive sites capable of meeting 
the development and expansion needs of the Blackpool 
and Fylde Coast business economy.  
8.15 Existing employment sites within Blackpool 
present opportunities to support employment growth.  
In particular, redevelopment of lands within the Clifton 
Road Estate and the Preston New Road site will provide 
further scope for new employment development to 
support a modern business/ industrial offer in the 
future.  In order to facilitate regeneration of these sites, 
some enabling development will be considered where 
this would secure the future business/industrial use 
of the site, be robustly justified and would not conflict 
with wider plan objectives.
8.16 Beyond the Blackpool boundary, the Council will 
continue to support the allocation of sufficient land 
close to Junction 4 of the M55 in neighbouring Fylde 
for employment growth of sub-regional importance, 
with a continued focus for new investment at 
Whitehills Business Park and Whyndyke Farm.  The 
Fylde Local Plan identifies around 14ha of additional 
employment land to accommodate Blackpool’s 
employment land shortfall (in addition to Fylde’s own 
employment land requirement).8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and EnhancementPage 114South Blackpool Housing Growth
Policy CS25:  South Blackpool Housing Growth
1. Land is identified at Whyndyke (Mythop Road) 
and Moss House Road to provide around 750 
new dwellings.  Development will be required to 
provide quality housing of a type and mix that 
complements rather than competes with the form 
of housing being delivered in the inner areas.
2. The Council will work with Fylde Borough 
Council, the Environment Agency and 
utility providers to ensure that any housing 
development on adjoining lands around Junction 
4 of the M55 most appropriately manages the 
impact on the existing surface water and waste 
water network within Blackpool.
8.17 Planning permission for residential development 
comprising around 600 dwellings on land at Moss 
House Road (between Bennetts Lane and Progress 
Way) will provide a substantial level of new housing 
towards Blackpool’s future requirement.  An 
application has also been submitted to Fylde Borough 
Council with respect to developing lands at Whyndyke 
Farm adjacent to/north of Junction 4 of the M55.  
The site, which is mainly on lands in Fylde, is likely 
to accommodate up to 1,500 new homes although it 
includes around 150 dwellings south of Mythop Road 
on land within the Blackpool boundary.  Whilst a small 
area of the overall site lies within Flood Zone 2, the 
scale of development proposed can be accommodated 
without impinging on the flood zone. 
8.18 It is essential that the pace and form of housing 
development in South Blackpool complements and 
supports progress on housing delivery within Blackpool’s 
inner areas in order to achieve the overarching strategy 
focus for regeneration and to rebalance the housing 
market with a better choice of quality homes across 
the Borough.  This also includes the development of 
adjoining lands in Fylde, which are identified as being important to establish a more balanced and wider 
housing choice in the Fylde Coast Housing Market Area.  
8.19 With respect to lands on the Blackpool/Fylde 
boundary in neighbouring Fylde, Blackpool Council 
supports in principle a mixed residential/employment 
development at Whyndyke Farm, provided that 
the wider development will deliver a range of new 
quality homes and employment sites that support 
the objectives of the Blackpool Core Strategy and will 
contribute towards addressing the imbalance in the 
sub-regional housing and employment markets.
8.20 The release of further lands for housing at 
Whyndyke Farm will need to be fully informed as 
part of a wider comprehensive assessment of needs 
to determine the optimal approach to accommodate 
planned growth.  The Fylde Local Plan will further 
inform the way forward.
8.21 Infrastructure limitations in South Blackpool with 
respect to surface water and waste water management 
have been highlighted by the Environment Agency 
and United Utilities.  Public sewers within South 
Blackpool which provide combined foul and surface 
water drainage have inadequate capacity to cater 
for substantial new development.  The provision 
of sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) to ensure 
surface water is managed and released naturally 
back into the water system is an essential part of the 
future development and future drainage is one of 
the key capacity issues which must be addressed in a 
supporting detailed plan.  The policy requirements for 
surface water management are set out in Policy CS9.
8.22 Any housing development must not have a 
significant impact upon the foraging/roosting habitat 
of any of the ‘Annex 1’ listed bird species that visit 
‘Natura 2000’ sites (Morecambe Bay and Ribble and 
Alt estuaries).  Any proposals may require licensed 
mitigation in accordance with existing best practice and 
legislative requirements to protect wildlife.8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and EnhancementPage 115Marton Moss
Policy CS26: Marton Moss 
1. The character of the remaining lands at Marton 
Moss is integral to the local distinctiveness 
of Blackpool and as such is valued by the 
local community.  A neighbourhood planning 
approach will be promoted for this area 
to develop neighbourhood policy which 
supports the retention and enhancement of 
the distinctive character, whilst identifying in 
what circumstances development including 
residential may be acceptable. 
2. Prior to developing a local policy framework 
through the neighbourhood planning process 
development on the remaining lands of the 
Moss will be limited to:
a.  Conversion or change of use of existing 
buildings for agricultural or horticultural 
purposes 
b. Outdoor recreational uses appropriate to a 
rural area
c.  New homes that meet the requirements of 
NPPF paragraph 55
d. Extensions or replacement dwellings in 
keeping with the scale and character of 
the area and not exceeding 35% of the 
original ground floor footprint of the existing 
dwelling.
8.23 The distinctive character of the Moss reflects its 
historic past and its importance in more recent times 
as a market gardening area.  Alongside remaining 
glasshouses, the lands are now used for a mix of horse 
grazing, other animal welfare, garden centres and 
dwellings set in large gardens, with other land in need 
of enhancement.  The Moss lands are criss-crossed by 
lanes and tracks with scattered dwellings and small 
businesses.  While more development exists along the main highway frontages, the lands behind these 
frontages retain an essentially rural character, although 
very different from typical more open countryside. 
8.24 Whilst there is support to safeguard the 
essentially green open nature of the Moss, at the same 
time there is the view that the Countryside Policy 
in the current Blackpool Local Plan (2006) is overly 
restrictive.  Proposing a neighbourhood planning 
approach therefore provides the community with the 
opportunity to directly determine the future for their 
area improving the interest and value of the Moss 
lands.  Policy CS26 does not propose any housing 
development on the remaining lands on the Moss 
unless this emerges through the neighbourhood 
planning process from the community, in which case 
it will be set out in a Neighbourhood Plan or a Site 
Allocations Development Plan Document.   
8.25 In advance of the neighbourhood planning 
process, no development will be permitted in the 
area unless it accords with the criteria set out in part 
2 of the policy.  The provisions of part 2 essentially 
restrict development to agricultural or horticultural 
purposes or outdoor recreational uses appropriate to 
a rural area; and extension and replacement proposals 
to no greater than 35% of the original ground floor 
footprint of the existing dwelling.  This restriction is 
proposed so as not to undermine the outcome of the 
neighbourhood planning process for the enhancement 
of the Moss.
8.26 A comprehensive characterisation study and 
a Phase 1 Habitats Survey have been undertaken to 
inform the future approach on Marton Moss and the 
built and natural environment characteristics and 
features of the area that need to be considered in 
planning its future. 8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and EnhancementPage 1168.27 The survey highlights that while much of the 
area is a mix of residential/smallholdings use, particular 
areas of interest identified include marshy grassland 
and the dyke system, as well as the network of gardens, 
hedgerows, verges and associated habitats.  There are 
some original buildings typical of the historic origins 
of the Moss, with a wide variety of building types and 
ages.  Although there is no defining architectural style, 
it is this variety together with the hedgerows, trees and 
lanes which defines much of the Moss land character.  
Allotments and community gardens provide continuing 
opportunities to grow fruit and vegetables locally, as 
well as having clear benefits in terms of community 
cohesion, health, heritage and the environment.
8.28 The neighbourhood planning process will need 
to conserve and enhance the existing natural features 
and habitats.  In particular, any future development 
must not have a significant impact upon the foraging/ 
roosting habitat of any of the “Annex 1” listed bird 
species that visit ‘Natura 2000’ sites (Morecambe Bay 
and Ribble and Alt estuaries).  A biodiversity strategy 
for Marton Moss will be required to ensure that 
consideration is given to biodiversity throughout the 
development process, including appropriate ecological 
surveys and mitigation measures.  In addition, 
any proposals may require licensed mitigation in 
accordance with existing best practice and legislative 
requirements to protect wildlife.8.29 Access to existing leisure facilities, such as 
the South Shore Lawn Tennis Club, Squires Gate and 
Blackpool Wren Rovers Football Clubs and the range 
of equestrian uses, remain important to the area.  The 
enhancement of the Moss could provide improved 
local leisure and recreational opportunities whilst 
retaining the rural character in parts of the area.  
Beyond the existing lanes and tracks, public access 
into the open lands is currently limited and some 
development may also enhance recreational access and 
potentially improve the ecological value of the Moss.8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and Enhancement
Page 117South Blackpool Transport and 
Connectivity
8.30 To ensure new residential and employment 
development within South Blackpool is sustainable, it 
will require integration with the wider area through 
the provision of a network of pedestrian, cycle and 
public transport routes.  This provision will enable 
effective connections and encourage sustainable 
travel for local journeys to schools, shops, jobs and 
community facilities located within these areas.
Policy CS27: South Blackpool Transport and 
Connectivity
1. Development proposals in South Blackpool will 
be required to prioritise sustainable modes of 
transport between homes, jobs and supporting 
community facilities.
2. Convenient access to public transport and 
improved pedestrian and cycle infrastructure 
are required to support major housing and 
employment growth in this area.  This includes:
a.  linking to and extending the existing network 
of routes within and to/from the area;
b. creating direct rapid transport connections 
with the town centre and employment 
areas;
c.  preparing, implementing and monitoring 
Travel Plans;
d. improved access and parking for Blackpool 
Airport and improved links between the 
airport and sustainable modes of transport.
8.31 The South Blackpool employment and housing 
growth areas (Figure 18) have convenient access to 
the M55 and Blackpool Airport.  However, access 
to and from the wider Blackpool area can be poor 
and lacks sustainable travel connections.  There is 
potential for significant improvements to promote 
sustainable travel movements and enable sustainable 
growth in South Blackpool. 8.32 The strategy focus on supporting growth in 
South Blackpool provides opportunities for improved 
connectivity. Development on lands close to Junction 
4 of the M55 and along the Airport Corridor would 
improve the viability of sustainable transport links and 
drive investment, reducing congestion in the area and 
reliance on car use.
8.33 A network of cycle/pedestrian routes is needed 
to integrate new developments to adjoining areas of 
Blackpool and surrounding districts.  Several bus routes 
already serve the area, but services are poor to and 
from the main employment areas on the Blackpool/ 
Fylde boundary and within Marton Moss.  More 
frequent, reliable and extended services are needed 
to maximise bus patronage to and from these areas.  
There is the potential to promote sustainable travel 
patterns for residents with high speed public transport 
links to Blackpool Town Centre and Lytham St Annes.  
There are also opportunities to upgrade the South 
Fylde rail line and integrate this with the tram network, 
creating a direct, convenient and efficient transport link 
between South Blackpool and the Fylde Coast area.  
8.34 Any development that will generate significant 
amounts of transport movement will require a Travel 
Plan, setting out a continuing process for promoting 
and increasing use of sustainable transport modes.  
8.35 Lands in South Blackpool present opportunities 
to improve access, parking and public transport links 
to Blackpool Airport to encourage its integration with 
the wider area.  The Council will also work with the 
airport owners to support the expansion of routes 
(Policy CS5).  
8.36 Blackpool Council continues to work with 
neighbouring authorities on strategic transport issues 
through the Duty to Co-operate. The Fylde Coast 
Transport Masterplan is being prepared by Lancashire 
County Council in association with Blackpool, Fylde 
and Wyre Councils and sets out the sub-regional 
transport priorities over the plan period.8. Enabling South Blackpool Growth and EnhancementPage 118 of 144
Appendices
The Italian Garden - Stanley Park
(Photo - www.visitblackpool.com)
Page 118Page 119 of 144
Contents:
• Appendix A: Evidence Base documents  120
• Appendix B: Schedule of “Saved” 121 
Blackpool Local Plan Policies 
• Appendix C: Monitoring and  124 
Implementation Plan 
• Appendix D: Glossary 137
Page 119Page 120Appendix A: Evidence Base Documents*
Date Evidence Base Documents
2014 Blackpool Core Strategy Proposed Submission Sustainability Appraisal
2014 Blackpool Council Response to the Sustainability Appraisal
2014 Blackpool Core Strategy Proposed Submission Habitat Regulations Assessment
2014 Annual Monitoring Report
2013 Duty to Co-operate Fylde Coast Authorities’ Memorandum of Understanding
2014 Duty to Co-operate Statement of Compliance
2014 Blackpool Local Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Study
Sustainable Development
2012 Blackpool Climate Change and Renewable Energy Study
2014 Blackpool Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Housing 
2014 Housing Requirement Technical Paper
2013 Housing Monitoring Report
2008 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) (with 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013 SHLAA updates)
2013 Fylde Coast Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) (Published February 2014)
2014 Fylde Coast Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment
2014 Analysis of Economic and Housing Forecasts
2014 Analysis of Housing Need in light of the 2012 Sub-National Population Projections (SHMA Addendum)
Retail
2011 Fylde Coast Retail Study
Employment and Economic Development
2014 Employment Land Technical Paper
2013 Blackpool Employment Land Study (Published June 2014)
Holiday Accommodation
2011 Holiday Accommodation Supplementary Planning Document
2009 Fylde Coast Visitor Accommodation Study
Transport
2014 Draft Fylde Coast Highways and Transport Masterplan
2011 Local Transport Plan Strategy 2011-2016
South Blackpool
2011 Marton Moss/M55 Hub Transport Impact Assessment
2009 Marton Moss Characterisation Study
2009 Marton Moss Background Paper
2009 M55 Hub Habitat Survey (Extended Phase 1 Report)
Environment
2014 Draft Built Heritage Strategy for Blackpool
2014 Blackpool Surface Water Management Plan
2009 Blackpool Heritage Characterisation Studies
2008 Blackpool Nature Conservation Statement (Updated 2012)
2014 Lancashire and Blackpool Local Flood Risk Management Strategy
2011 Central Lancashire & Blackpool Outline Water Cycle Study
2011 Draft Playing Pitch Strategy (2011-2016)(Updated 2014)
2014 Blackpool Open Space, Sport & Recreation Audit and Position Statement
Infrastructure
2014 Infrastructure and Delivery Plan
* This list includes documents which will be need to be updated accordingly as new information emerges.Page 121Local Plan PolicyTo be superseded by 
adopted Core Strategy PolicyTo continue to be a Saved 
Local Plan Policy
Reshaping the Resort
RR1 Visitor Attractions Saved
RR2 Visitor Accommodation CS21, CS23
RR4 Amusement Arcades and Funfairs Saved
RR7 Promenade Frontages within the Resort Core CS17, CS21, CS23
RR8 Resort Neighbourhoods CS12, CS22, CS23
RR9Resort Neighbourhoods - Development Proposals Involving the Loss 
of Holiday AccommodationCS12, CS22, CS23
RR10 Resort Neighbourhoods - Change of Use to Holiday Accommodation CS12, CS23
RR11 Central Promenade and Seafront Saved
RR12 Other Promenade Areas Saved
RR13 Central Corridor CS5, CS22
RR14Lytham Road/Bloomfield Road, Chapel Street, Central Drive and 
Dickson RoadCS5, CS22
RR15 Blackpool Zoo Saved
RR16 Norbreck Castle CS23
Establishing a Thriving Sub-Regional Centre
SR1 Hounds Hill Saved
SR2 Winter Gardens CS18
SR3 Blackpool North Transport Development Area CS19
SR3A New Car Park Deleted
SR4 Cookson Street/King Street Deleted
SR5 Principal Retail Core Saved
SR6 Retail / Cafe Zone Saved
SR7 Mixed Use Zone Saved
SR8 Leisure Zone Saved
SR9 Use of Upper Floors Saved
SR10 Town Centre Traffic Distribution and Access to Car Parking CS5
SR11 Pedestrian, Cyclist and Public Transport Priority CS5
Lifting Quality in the Built Environment
LQ1 Lifting the Quality of Design Saved
LQ2 Site Context Saved
LQ3 Layout of Streets and Spaces Saved
LQ4 Building Design Saved
LQ5 Public Realm Design Saved
LQ6 Landscape Design and Biodiversity Saved
LQ7 Strategic Views Saved
LQ8 Energy and Resource Conservation CS10
LQ9 Listed Buildings Saved
LQ10 Conservation Areas Saved
LQ11 Shopfronts Saved
LQ12 Security Shutters Saved
LQ13 Advertisements and Signs Saved
LQ14 Extensions and Alterations Saved
LQ15 Telecommunications Development SavedAppendix B: Schedule of “Saved” Blackpool Local Plan PoliciesPage 122Local Plan PolicyTo be superseded by 
adopted Core Strategy PolicyTo continue to be a Saved 
Local Plan Policy
Homes for Every Need
HN2 New Housing Allocations CS2, CS25
HN3 Phasing CS2
HN4 Windfall Sites Saved
HN5 Conversions and Sub-divisions Saved
HN6 Housing Mix CS13
HN7 Density CS13
HN8 Affordable and Specialist Needs Housing CS14
HN9 Gypsies and Travelling Showmen CS16
Balanced and Healthy Communities
BH1 Neighbourhoods CS12
BH2 Talbot and Brunswick Priority Neighbourhood Saved
BH3 Residential and Visitor Amenity Saved
BH4 Public Health and Safety Saved
BH5 Protection of Public Open Space Saved
BH6 New Open Space Provision Saved
BH7 Playing Fields and Sports Grounds Saved
BH8 Open Land Meeting Community and Recreational Needs Saved
BH9 Allotments Saved
BH10 Open Space in New Housing Developments Saved
BH11 Shopping and Supporting Uses - Overall Approach CS4
BH12 Retail Development and Supporting Town Centre Uses CS4
BH13 District Centres Saved
BH14 Local Centres Saved
BH15 Change of Use of Premise Outside the Defined Centres Saved
BH16 Shopping Development Outside Existing Frontages Saved
BH17 Restaurants, Cafes, Public Houses, Hot Food Take-Aways Saved
BH18 Amusement Centres Saved
BH19 Neighbourhood Community Facilities Saved
BH20 Provision of New Community Facilities CS11, CS12, CS15
BH21 Protection of Community Facilities Saved
BH22 Victoria Hospital Saved
BH23 Blackpool and Fylde College Saved
BH24 Residential Institutions and Community Care Residential Use Saved
Diversifying the Local Economy
DE1 Industrial and Business Land Provision Saved
DE2 Industrial Improvement Zones Saved
DE3 Mixed Use Industrial Zones Saved
DE4 Outside the Defined Industrial/Business Estates Saved
Conserving the Natural Environment
NE1 Development within Green Belt Saved
NE2 Countryside Areas Saved
NE3 Replacement Dwellings and Extensions in the Countryside Saved
NE4 SSSIs Saved
NE5 Other Sites of Nature Conservation Value SavedAppendix B: Schedule of “Saved” Blackpool Local Plan PoliciesPage 123Local Plan PolicyTo be superseded by 
adopted Core Strategy PolicyTo continue to be a Saved 
Local Plan Policy
NE6 Protected Species Saved
NE7Sites and Features of Landscape, Nature Conservation and 
Environmental ValueSaved
NE8 Urban Greenspace Saved
NE9 The Coast and Foreshore Saved
NE10 Flood Risk CS9
Accessibility and Safe Journeys for All
AS1 General Development Requirements Saved
AS2 New Development with Significant Transport Implications Saved
AS3 Provision for Walking and Cycling Saved
AS4 Provision for Public Transport CS5
AS5 Traffic Management Saved
AS6 Road Schemes Deleted
AS7 Aerodrome Safeguarding Saved
Planning Obligations
PO1 Planning Obligations CS11Appendix B: Schedule of “Saved” Blackpool Local Plan PoliciesPage 124Appendix C: Monitoring and Implementation Plan
1. The purpose of the Monitoring and 
Implementation Plan is to determine whether the 
Blackpool Local Plan Part 1: Core Strategy is effective 
in meeting its spatial vision, goals and objectives 
and that it can deliver its intended outcomes. It 
sets out key indicators, targets or intended policy 
outcomes, potential risks to delivery, contingencies to 
address changes or shortfalls, and also identifies the 
implementation and delivery mechanisms and partners 
that will help to achieve the Core Strategy Spatial 
Vision to 2027.   
Monitoring  
2. It is important that the effectiveness of the Core 
Strategy can be monitored to establish if the policies 
contained within it are achieving the intended spatial 
vision, goals and objectives. The performance and 
effects of the Local Plan policies will be monitored 
and reported on annually as part of an Authority 
Monitoring Report.
3. Blackpool Council and its partners are 
committed to creating a new Blackpool that truly 
lives up to its claim to be a great place to live.  
Blackpool’s transformation will not be delivered unless 
appropriate objectives and targets are defined and 
the right planning policies are drawn up, effectively 
implemented and regularly reviewed. In this context 
effective monitoring is vital.
4. The Core Strategy identifies 4 goals and 21 
objectives. The following table (Table 1) identifies the 
Core Strategy policies that will contribute to delivering 
each of the goals and objectives. To monitor the 
effectiveness of policies, a number of indicators have 
been identified to measure the impact of the Core 
Strategy and demonstrate how things are changing. 
The Monitoring and Implementation Plan sets out 
appropriate targets and policy outcomes to establish if 
the policies are achieving their intended effect. 5. For each policy a number of potential risks and 
contingencies have also been identified to demonstrate 
how the Core Strategy can deal robustly with changing 
circumstances. Where necessary the Authority 
Monitoring Report may identify any actions or 
contingencies that need to be taken to address issues 
identified as part of the monitoring process in order 
to improve the implementation and delivery of the 
Core Strategy. It may be the case that the process of 
monitoring may highlight the need for a timely partial 
or full review of the Core Strategy. 
6. A review of the indicators monitored for the 
Blackpool Local Plan adopted in 2006 has been 
undertaken to inform which indicators should be 
included in the Monitoring and Implementation 
Plan. The indicators have been selected based on 
their appropriateness and the availability of data. 
Throughout the plan period, the indicators and targets 
will be reviewed to assess if they remain appropriate. 
It is recognised that in relation to some indicators the 
impact of the Core Strategy and its individual policies 
can only be determined after a number of years, 
therefore these will only be reported on at appropriate 
timescales. 
7. At some point during the plan period, the Core 
Strategy will need to be reviewed, either to roll it 
forward beyond its current end-date, to deal with 
any serious shortfalls or unintended consequences 
identified through monitoring, or if it becomes 
inconsistent with national policy. It is expected that a 
roll-forward of the Plan will be commenced roughly 
mid-way through the Plan period, unless triggered 
earlier by monitoring or other substantial external 
changes. Smaller-scale allocations and adjustments 
to policy can be made through the production of 
the Blackpool Local Plan Part 2: Site Allocations 
and Development Management document or a 
Neighbourhood Plan.Page 125Appendix C: Monitoring and Implementation Plan
Implementation
8. The Core Strategy must be capable of being 
implemented, to do so it is important that a clear and 
concise framework is established to provide a steer on 
the mechanisms for delivery and who is responsible. 
This will give greater confidence that the Core Strategy 
can be achieved. 
9. A separate document, the Infrastructure and 
Delivery Plan (IDP), seeks to establish what additional 
infrastructure and service needs are required to 
support the projected increases in new homes and jobs 
in the Borough during the plan period. The IDP will help 
ensure that the required infrastructure and services are 
identified and delivered in a timely, co-ordinated and 
sustainable way. The intention of the IDP is to provide 
more detail on the delivery of the spatial strategy and 
policies contained in the Core Strategy.  It identifies 
those particular issues, in relation to infrastructure 
requirements, which need to be addressed within 
the Borough to ensure the Core Strategy can deliver 
sustainable communities and economic growth in 
Blackpool. 
10. The IDP is also a key piece of evidence that will 
provide a robust basis on which the Council will seek 
to influence public, private and agency funding and 
priorities. The document establishes a framework to 
demonstrate the deliverability of policies set out in 
the Core Strategy, identifying the key programmes and 
projects that will support the delivery of the spatial 
objectives ad priorities of the Core Strategy. The 
delivery of new infrastructure and improvements to 
infrastructure is necessary to ensure that development 
does not place an unacceptable strain upon existing 
infrastructure and communities. 11. The IDP is a ‘live’ document reflecting the 
current information available on infrastructure 
requirements and will be reviewed and updated on an 
ongoing basis.  The IDP will be monitored and subject 
to timely reviews to ensure there is a flexible and 
effective approach to delivering the priorities of the 
Core Strategy. 
12. The Council has worked with key delivery 
partners to develop the Core Strategy and IDP and to 
identify what infrastructure will be required, when 
it should be delivered, and the funding necessary to 
deliver the policies and proposals. Where possible the 
costs and funding for the delivery of infrastructure 
have been identified along with the lead and partner 
delivery authorities. Whilst some of the cost of such 
infrastructure will be borne by the public and third 
sectors, equally some of it must be delivered by the 
developer. Not all infrastructure identified as necessary, 
will have allocated funding and it will be necessary 
for development to contribute to the delivery of this 
infrastructure and assist in plugging the funding gap. 
13. All development, regardless of size and scale, 
places additional demands on services and facilities, 
impacting on their ability to meet the needs of the 
community.  Section 106 agreements will be used in 
accordance with the requirements of NPPF paragraph 
204.
14. Planning obligations are a key delivery tool 
in providing the opportunity to secure financial 
contributions that will mitigate against the localised 
impacts of development which would otherwise render 
the proposal unacceptable in planning terms. Page 126Table 1: Delivering the Core Strategy spatial vision, goals and objectives    
 
Goal  
Objective  Key Delivery Policies  CS1 
CS2 
CS3 
CS4 
CS5 
CS6 
CS7 
CS8 
CS9 
CS10  
CS11  
CS12  
CS13  
CS14  
CS15  
CS16  
CS17  
CS18  
CS19  
CS20  
CS21  
CS22  
CS23  
CS24  
CS25  
CS26  
CS27  
GOAL 1: Sustainable 
regeneration, diversification and 
growth  1                            
2                            
3                            
4                            
5                            
6                            
7                            
GOAL 2: Strengthen community 
well -being to create sustainable 
communities and reduce 
inequalities in Blackpool’s most 
deprived a reas  8                            
9                            
10                            
11                            
12                            
13                            
GOAL 3: Regeneration of the 
town centre, resort core and 
inner areas to addres s economic, 
social and physical decline  14                            
15                            
16                            
GOAL 4: Supporting growth and 
enhancement in South B lackpool 
to meet future housing and 
employment needs for 
Blackpool and the F ylde Coast  17                            
18                            
19                            
20                            
21                            Page 127
Place heading here 
  Page 131 of 146Table 2: Monitoring  and Implementation  of Chapter 5 ‐ Core Policies 
Monitoring   ImplementationPolicy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target / Policy  Outcome   Potential  Risk  Contingency  Implementation  / Delivery 
Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners CS2: Housing Provision  
1, 2, 18, 19 Number  of net completions  per annum  
against the phased housing requirement  1,250 net completions  in 1‐5yrs; 1,400 in 
6‐10yrs; 1,550 in 11‐15yrs Shortfall in number of 
completions  against 
annual requirement  
Continued  slow recovery 
of the housing market  
Developments  not 
implemented  or built‐out 
as planned due to issues 
relating to viability, access 
to finance  or unidentified  
site constraints  etc. 
 Review  reason for shortfall including planning 
permissions,  lapsed / implemented  permissions   
Engage with applicants/developers  to find out 
why sites are not being implemented  
Work with key delivery  partners / stakeholders  
to manage the delivery of development;  and 
help to overcome  any barriers and constraints  
Review  S106  agreements  / contributions  and 
re‐negotiate  with developers  as appropriate  
Regular SHLAA  updates and consider a ‘call for 
sites’ exercise to identify additional  land 
Development  of Council initiatives  / funding 
mechanisms  to help bring forward additional  
housing supply and encourage  investment  
Consider a timely policy review  and whether it 
is appropriate  to change the phasing  supply  Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Selective  housing  intervention  and 
asset management  programmes  
Fylde Coast Housing Strategy 
Strategic Housing  Land Availability  
Assessment  (SHLAA) 
Holiday Accommodation  SPD and 
New  Homes  from Old Places SPD 
(both adopted 2011)  
Sustainable  Homes SPD (new build) 
Developer  Contributions  
Housing  Implementation  Strategy 
NHB / Growing Places Fund / LIP Blackpool  Council 
Blackpool,  Fylde + 
Wyre Economic 
Development  
Company  (BFWEDC)
Housing  Developers 
Landowners  
Blackpool  Coastal 
Housing/Registered 
Providers  
Homes and 
Communities  
Agency (HCA) 
Lancashire 
Enterprise  
Partnership  (LEP) Amount of housing  provided in the existing 
urban  area 1950 net completions  over the plan 
period  
Amount of housing  provided in South 
Blackpool  750 net completions  over the plan 
period (including  Moss House Road, 
Whyndyke  & Runnell Farm sites) 
Number  of net completions  on windfall sites 1500 net completions  on windfall sites 
over the plan period  
Proportion  of net completions  on previously  
developed  land and Greenfield  sites Continue to prioritise the reuse  of 
previously  developed  land 
5year land supply including amount of 
committed  development  (with  planning 
permission/  awaiting a S106 agreement)   Identify and update annually a supply of 
deliverable  sites to provide  5years  worth 
of housing (and a 5%/ 20% buffer in line 
with the requirements  of NPPF)  CS3:  Economic  Development  and Employment  
1, 3, 17 Amount of existing industrial/  business land 
within the defined main  employment  areas 
redeveloped  (or permitted  for 
redevelopment)  for new B1, B2, B8 
employment  and non‐employment  uses  Safeguard  around  180 ha of existing 
industrial  / business land in the 13 main 
employment  areas  for employment  use  
 
Secure qualitative  improvements  and 
improve occupancy  levels of underused  
sites ‐ in particular  in South  Blackpool  to 
help strengthen  the Fylde Coast economyLoss of B1, B2, B8 land / 
premises in the main 
employment  areas  to non‐
employment  uses and 
increase in vacancy rates  
Take‐up of land supply for 
non‐employment  uses 
Slow  economic  recovery 
making new investment  
more difficult to secure 
Businesses  wanting to 
locate / relocate outside 
Blackpool   
Pressure for employment  
development  on other  sites 
in Blackpool  
Loss of B1 use business 
space  as a result of new 
regulations  allowing more 
flexible permitted  
development  (PD) rights  
No change in labour 
market participation  and 
employment  levels 
Mismatch  in skills supply 
and demand profiles so 
local residents  not in a 
position to compete for 
new jobs created  Identify reasons for any loss of allocated land / 
floorspace  for non‐employment  uses and the 
impact (negative  or positive) on the site 
affected and on overall employment  provision 
Monitor employment  land supply v demand to 
ensure it meets market requirements;  and 
consider a review of existing employment 
allocations  or policy if necessary  
Discuss with landowners  and developers  the 
likely delivery prospects  of available sites and 
help to overcome  any barriers / constraints  to 
manage  the delivery  of new development  
Identify any barriers to business investment  / 
growth in Blackpool  and consider incentives  to 
encourage  businesses  to locate and/or  remain  
Identify key growth sectors to target and 
engage with potential investors / new 
businesses  accordingly  
Engage with the LEP/Fylde  Coast authorities  to 
monitor the sub‐regional economy  and develop 
measures  to encourage  sub‐regional growth 
and inward investment   
Monitor the local skill base and the gap 
between demand and supply profiles; and work 
with key delivery partners to address this by 
targeted programmes  to equip local people  with 
the skills necessary  to access future jobs  Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Blackpool  Local Economy Action 
Plan (2011) 
Blackpool  Town  Centre Strategy 
(2013) 
Lancashire  Growth Plan 2013/14 
(2013) and complementary  Fylde 
Coast Local Growth  Accelerator  
Strategy (to be developed)  
Lancashire  Strategic  Economic  Plan 
(2014) and Local Growth Deal  (to 
be developed)  
Fylde Coast Transport  Masterplan  
(to be developed)  
Skills Programmes   
Enterprise  pathways  to support 
start‐up businesses  e.g. Get Started 
Fylde Coast Investment  Plan 
Developer  Contributions  Blackpool  Council 
BFWEDC 
LEP 
Fylde Borough 
Council 
Wyre Borough 
Council 
Commercial  
Developers  
Landowners  
Key Employers  
Education  providers  
e.g. Blackpool  and 
the Fylde College 
Marketing  
Blackpool   
Blackpool  Town 
Centre BID Take‐up of undeveloped,  allocated  industrial  
/business  land for B1, B2, B8 employment  
and non‐employment  uses; and total  amount 
of available land (supply) remaining   Around 17.8ha  of land developed  for 
new employment  uses; with the 
remaining  baseline supply expected to 
deliver enabling development  
Number  of vacant units and non‐employment  
uses on allocated employment  sites Improve occupancy  levels and safeguard  
employment  uses within the defined 
main  employment  areas 
Amount (sqm) and percentage  of completed  
office development  in Blackpool  Town Centre Promote offices,  enterprise  and business 
start‐ups in Blackpool  Town Centre 
Amount (sqm) of employment  floorspace  lost 
to non‐employment  uses on non‐allocated  
employment  sites  Non‐employment  uses to come  forward 
in accordance  with Saved Policy DE4 and 
to meet wider strategic objectives   
Economic  activity / Employment  rates of 
Blackpool  residents Increase in the number of residents in 
employment  or actively  looking  for work 
Skills, qualifications  and GCSE performance  of 
Blackpool  residents  Improve local skill base,  higher level 
qualifications  and GCSE attainment  
Levels of young people  not in employment,  
education  or training (NEET) Reduce NEET levels 
Number  of new business starts and 
associated  survival rates Increase the number of and survival rate 
of start up businesses  in Blackpool  t
h
e
r8Amount (sqm) of completed  retail  Focus new major retail  development  in Further downturn  in the Work closer with key partners  Site Allocations  and Development  Blackpool  CouncilTable 2: Monitoring and Implementation of Chapter 5 - Core PoliciesPage 128
 
  Page 132 of 146 Monitoring  Implementation  Policy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target / Policy Outcome  Potential Risk  Contingency  Implementation / Delivery 
Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners  CS4: Retail and Other Town Centre Uses  
3, 8, 15  Amount (sqm) of completed retail 
development (A1 use class) and percentages 
completed in the defined Town Centre, 
District Centres, and Local Centres  Focus new major retail  development in 
Blackpool Town Centre. Support retail / 
other town centre uses ( as appropriate) 
in the Town, District and Local Centres   Further downturn in the 
economy may make new 
investment difficult to 
secure  
 Limited availability of 
suitable sites or units to 
accommodate future 
requirements  
 Pressure for out -of-centre 
development  
 Expenditure captured by 
competing destinations 
(including  out -of-centre) 
and online shopping  
 Loss of retail  space due to 
new regulations allowing 
more flexible  PD rights   Work closer with key partners  
 Analyse cause of vacancies and identify 
measures  to reduce the proportion of vacancies  
 In consultation with agents review the supply 
and demand for retail space and other uses in 
the Town Centre, District and Local Centres  
 Consider  a review of the Blackpool Town Centre 
Strategy  
 Consider a review of policy  
  Site Allocations and Development 
Management document  
 Blackpool Town Centre Strategy 
(2013)  
 Individual planning applications and 
development management process  
 Developer Contributi ons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Blackpool Council  
 Town Team  
 Blackpool Town 
Centre Business  
Improvement 
District (BID) 
 Town Centre 
Steering Group 
 BFWEDC  
 Commercial 
Developers / 
Agents  
 Property 
Landlords  
 Retailers and 
occupiers of units  Amount (sqm) of completed other town 
centre uses35 (by use class) and percentages 
completed in the defined Town Centre, 
District Centres, and Local Centres  Support other town centre uses (where 
appropriate to the scale, role and 
function of the centre) in Town, District 
and Local Centres  
Amount (sqm) of retail and other town centr e 
use development completed in out -of-
centre36 locations  Focus new major retail development in 
Blackpool Town Centre  
Position of Blackpool Town Centre in the 
National (UK) retail rankings (linked to the 
number of national multiple retailers ) Positive movement in the retail rankings  
/increase the number of higher end 
national multiple retailers  
Composition of units/ floorspace in the town 
centre (convenience/comparison/service)  Allow for new compari son goods 
floorspace of up to 16,390 sqm to 2021  CS5: Connectivity  
1, 4, 8, 11, 21  Proportion of major developments receiving 
planning permission  with an agreed travel 
plan  Reducing car use, c hanging travel 
behaviour   Reduction in developer 
contributio ns 
 Reduction in public 
transport usage  
 Reduction in rail 
infrastructure spending  
 Reduction in Local 
Authority funding  
 
 
  Review at next revision of the Blackpool Local 
Transport Plan and if necessary review policy  
 Identify additional potential sources of funding  
 Review the implementation and effectiveness 
of travel plans submitted with major 
applications  
 Consider a review of policy  
  Blackpool Local Transport Plan 
2011- 2016 (2011) and 
Implementation Plan  
 Site Allocations and Development 
Management document  
 Individual planning applications and 
development management process  
 Developer Contributions  
 Blackpool Town Centre Strategy  
(2013)  
 Parking  Strategy  
 Promenade Movement Strategy  
 Blackpool Wayfinding Strategy  
 Emerging Fylde Coast Transport 
Masterplan  Blackpool Council  
Lancashire County 
Council  
Public Transport 
Operators  
Network Rail  
Developers  
Highways Agency  Effectiveness of travel plans submitted with 
major applications post completion  Reducing car use, c hanging travel 
behaviour  
Percentage of new res idential development 
within 30 minutes public transport time of a 
GP, primary  school,  secondary school, major 
health centre and employment area/site  New developments should be in 
locations that are easily accessible by 
sustainable transport modes. 
Number and type of t ransport improvements, 
including extensions and enhancements to 
cycle and pedestrian routes  (length of new 
dedicated routes)  Providing high quality convenient, safe 
and pleasant cycle and pedestrian routes  CS6: Green Infrastructure  
5, 8, 11, 20  Number of green spaces managed to ‘Green 
Flag Award’ standard  Provide good quality and well-managed  
green spaces   Significant unmitigated 
loss of public  open space 
to other uses.  
 Reduction in Local 
Authority and other 
public agency funding  
 Reduction in developer 
contributions for off -site  
provision of open space 
for new development   Review reason(s) for any loss of open space 
and where appropriate understand why 
exceptions have been made 
 Investigate potential additional funding 
streams to provi de new or to maintain 
/enhance existing open space  
 Review supply and demand of open space  
 Review policy requirements for new 
development and effectiveness of securing 
financial contributions towards off- site 
provision of open space  
 Review policy and if nec essary amend to  Site Allocations and Development 
Management document  
 Individual plann ing applications and 
development management process  
 Developer Contributions  
 Standards for open space provision 
for new residential development  
 Green Infrastructure Framework  (to 
be developed)  
 The North West England and North 
Wales  Shoreline Management Plan  
(SMP2) (2010)  Blackpool Council  
Developers  
Neighbouring 
authorities  Amount (sqm) of public  open  space  and 
playing fields lost to other uses  Protect existing green infrastructure 
(including  open space and playing fields)  
Amount (£) inve sted in existing green 
infrastructure and where   Secure qualitative improvements to 
existing green infrastructure provision  
Commuted sum payments received and spent  Secure qualitative improvements to 
existing green infrastructure provision  
Percentage of new d evelopment providing 
open space  (or developer contributions for 
off-site provision)  in accordance with the 
Council’s approved standards  All development to incorporate new or 
enhance existing green infrastructure of 
an appropriate size, t ype and standard  
                                                           
35 As stated in the NPPF, main town centre uses refer to “ retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment facilities the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, r estaurants, drive -through restaurants, bars and pubs, night -clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor 
bowling centres, and  bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities ” (page 53).  
36 As stated in the NPPF, “unless they are identified as centres in Local Plans, existi ng out -of-centre developments, comprising or including main town centre uses, do not constitute town centres” (page 57).  Page 129 
  Page 133 of 146Monitoring   ImplementationPolicy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target / Policy  Outcome   Potential  Risk  Contingency  Implementation  / Delivery 
Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners 
Area  (ha)  designated  as Green Belt  Protect the current Green Belt 
boundaries  in Blackpool  strengthen  protection  
If negative impact is demonstrated  asses  and 
improve the role  of key stakeholders  in the 
development  management  process  
Consider a review of policy Surface  Water Management  Plan  
Park Management  Plans (including  
the Stanley Park Management  Plan 
2013‐18) 
Blackpool  Sport  and Physical 
Activity Strategy  2013‐2018 
Blackpool  Playing Pitch Strategy 
‘Woodlands  from Waste’ 
Programme  
Lancashire  Biodiversity  Action Plan Number  of developments  approved  in the 
Green Belt Protect the openness  and character  of 
the Green Belt, local distinctiveness  and 
the physical separation  of settlements  
Change in areas and populations  of 
biodiversity  importance  including:  
i.Change in the priority habitats and species  
by type and; 
ii.Changes in areas  designated  for their 
intrinsic environmental  value including 
sites of international,  national, regional or 
sub‐regional  significance   Protect international,  national and local 
sites of biological  and geological  
conservation  importance  and enhance 
local ecological  networks  and priority 
habitats/species.  
Condition  of Sites of Special Scientific  Interest   Maintain the ‘100% favourable’  
condition  of the Marton Mere SSSI CS7: Quality  of Design 
5, 9 Number  of planning permissions  refused on 
poor design grounds High  quality, well  designed 
developments  that contribute  positively  
to the character  and appearance  of the 
local, natural and built environment  Significant  number of 
planning applications  fail 
to meet the required 
standards  and/or are 
refused on poor design 
grounds Work closer with applicants  to improve the 
quality of schemes 
Identify reasons and if necessary  review 
implementation  of policies  
Consider preparing  development  briefs 
incorporating  design guidance for key sites 
Consider a review of policy 
 Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Sustainable  Homes SPD  
Commercial  Street Frontages  SPD  
New  Homes  from Old Places SPD 
(2011) 
Development  Briefs (e.g. Talbot 
Gateway  and Leisure  Quarter) 
Developer  Contributions  
 Blackpool  Council 
Developers  
 
 
Amount of public realm improved  (ha)  Provide public (and private) spaces that 
are well‐designed,  safe,  attractive,  and 
complement  the built form CS8:  Heritage 
5, 14Number  and size (ha) of Conservation  Areas  Safeguard  heritage  assets from 
inappropriate  development  An increase in the 
number of listed 
buildings on the  Heritage 
at Risk Register  due to 
issues of viability/lack  of 
funding 
Reduction  in Local 
Authority  funding 
Proposals  for 
inappropriate  
development  that  would 
affect   a listed or locally 
listed  building 
 
 
 Review  reasons and possible interventions  
Prioritise conservation  advice and provide 
assistance  where  appropriate  
Investigate  potential additional  funding 
streams (e.g. English Heritage, Heritage  Lottery 
Funding, CIL)  
Consider  mitigation  measures  and if necessary  
review policy and strengthen  protection  
Consider a review of policy Blackpool  Conservation  Areas 
Blackpool  Local List of Buildings of 
Architectural  and/or  Historic 
Interest 
Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process Blackpool  Council 
English Heritage 
Blackpool  Civic 
Trust 
Developers  Number  of: 
i.Listed  buildings 
ii.Locally listed buildings of architectural 
and/or  historic interest Conserve  buildings of architectural  
and/or  historic interest and identify and 
adopt a local list of heritage assets 
Number  of listed buildings on the Heritage at 
Risk Register No increase 
Number  of applications  for Listed Building 
Consent per annum  Safeguard  heritage  assets from 
inappropriate  development  ter 
Ma
na
6 Number  of planning permissions  granted  
which incorporate  Sustainable  Drainage Minimise  surface water flood risk  Physical constraints  (e.g. 
ground conditions)  may  Identify reasons, and if necessary  review 
guidance  available  to applicants  Sites Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  Blackpool  Council 
(SuDS Approval Page 130
 
  Page 134 of 146 Monitoring  Implementation  Policy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target / Policy Outcome  Potential Risk  Contingency  Implementation / Delivery 
Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners  CS9: Water Management  
6 Number of planning permissions granted  
which incorporate Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (SuDS)  Minimise surface water flood risk   Physical constraints (e.g. 
ground conditio ns) may 
make certain sites 
inappropriate for S uDS 
 Significant number of 
planning applications 
failing to minimise surface 
water run -off or address 
flood risk issues    Identify reasons, and if necessary review  
guidance available to applicants  
 Work closer with applicants  and key delivery 
partners to improve the quality of development  
schemes  and where possible provide further 
guidance on incorporating or retrofitting SuDs  
 Consider a review of policy  
  Sites Allocations and Development 
Management document  
 Indiv idual planning applications and 
development management process  
 The North West England and North 
Wales Shoreline Management Plan  
(SMP2) (2010)  
 Lancashire & Blackpool Flood Risk 
Management Strategy  
 Surface Water Management Plan  
 SPD for Sustainable Drainage  
  Blackpool Council  
(SuDS Approval 
Body)  
 Fylde Peninsula 
Water 
Management 
Group  
 Environment 
Agency  
 United Utilities  
 Developers  Number and type of sustainable drainage 
systems ( SuDS ) approved by the SuDS 
Approval Body (including retro -fitted SuDS)  Minimi se surface water flood risk  
Number of planning permissions granted 
contrary to the advice of the Environment 
Agency either on flood defence grounds or 
water quality.  None granted in order to minimise 
surface water flood risk and improve the 
quality of Blackpool’s bathing water  
Compliance with the mandatory standards of 
the EU Bathing Water Directive  Achieve compliance with the EU Bathing 
Water Directive’s Guideline Standards at 
all monitoring points  - maintain annually  CS10: Sustainable  Design and 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  
6 Number of new non -residential development 
over 1,000m2 completed to  BREEAM ‘very 
good’ standard  or above . All n ew non -residential development 
over 1,000m2 should achiev e the 
BREEAM ‘very good’ standard.   Lack of  viability in 
development  schemes  
may make  the policy 
difficult to implement  
 Spatial characteristics of 
the Borough may limit the 
scope for some types of 
energy generation 
schemes (e.g. wind 
turbines and biomass)    Investigate potential additional funding s treams 
to support schemes such as community based 
energy generation.  
 Work with key delivery partners  and applicants 
to identify barriers to delivery and understand 
what further guidance or assistance could be 
provided by the authority to assist delivery  
 Review reasons and assess the impact of 
requirements on the viability of development 
schemes and if necessary review policy   Sites Allocations and Development 
Management document  
 Individual planning applications and 
development management process  
 Sustainable  Homes SPD  
 Building Regulations  
 BREEAM Standards  
  Blackpool Council  
 Developers  
 Renewable and low 
carbon energy 
providers  
 
 Number of planning permissions granted  for 
developments incorporating renewable and 
low-carbon energy into their design  
 Minimis e carbon dioxide emissions from 
new developments  and support the 
generation of energy from renewable 
and low carbon energy sources  
Number of renewable and low carbon energy 
generation schemes installed and operational  Minimise carbon dioxide emissio ns from 
new developments  and support the 
generation of energy from renewable 
and low carbon energy sources  CS11: Planning Obligations  
7, 18, 21  Planning appeals dismissed for development 
not demonstrating adequate infrastructure 
capacity to serve the development  100% of appeals dismissed   Reduction in S106 (and CIL 
if applicable) 
infrastructure funding  
 S106 agreements (and CIL 
if applicable)  may make 
some developments 
unviable but overall should 
not threaten delivery of 
the Plan  
 Additional infrastructu re 
requirements arising   Identify the reasons for a decrease in s106/CIL 
(if applicable) monies  
 Work closer with key partners, developers and 
landowners to better manage the delivery of 
development  
 Review viability and implementation of policy 
and CIL (if applicable)  
 Consider a review of the CIL Charging Schedule 
(if applicable)  
 Consider introducing a Development 
Management policy to prioritise delivery  
 Consider a review of policy   Developer Contributions  
 Individual planning applications and 
development manag ement process 
 Site Allocations and Development 
Management document  Blackpool Council  
Developers  
Service and 
infrastructure 
providers  List of infrastructure projects identified in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)  that have 
been committed, commenced  or completed 
annually  To achieve delivery of infrastructure in 
line with the Blackpool IDP  
Value of developer contributions collected 
from new development (and spent on 
infrastructure priorities)  Regular monitoring of Section 106 ( S106) 
agreements (and monies from CIL  if 
applicable)  
 Page 131Table 3: Monitoring and Implementation of Chapter 6: Strengthening Community Wellbeing 
  Page 135 of 146Table 3: Monitoring  and Implementation  of Chapter 6: Strengthening  Community  Well‐ being 
Monitoring   ImplementationPolicy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target / Policy  Outcome   Potential  Risk  Contingency  Implementation  / Delivery 
Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners CS12:  Sustainable  Neighbourhoods  
2, 8, 16, 19 Amount (sqm) of new local services and 
community  facilities37 provided in each 
neighbourhood  Provide high quality local services and 
community  facilities accessible  to all 
members  of the community Availability  of finance/ 
funding to deliver 
housing investment  in 
existing stock 
Limited  use, lack of 
viability or review of 
asset management  
properties/sites  may 
result in the loss of 
community  facilities and 
local services 
Later phases of major 
housing development  
schemes do not come 
forward as planned 
Introduction  of HMOs 
through relaxed 
Government  regulations  
on PD rights 
Availability  of 
enforcement  resources Review  viability and implementation  of policies 
Consider introducing  development  
management  polices to prioritise retention  of 
community  facilities (in the case of viability) or 
improve policy  implementation  
Review  supply and demand  of facilities 
Continue to work with developers,  residents 
and other  stakeholders  to manage  the delivery 
of redevelopment  schemes;  and help  to 
overcome  any barriers and constraints  
Review  the use of Article 4 Directions  as 
appropriate  
Continue to monitor enforcement  activity and 
resources 
Consider a review of policy Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Selective  housing  intervention  and 
asset management  programmes  
Selective  licensing scheme 
Major housing developments  (e.g. 
Rigby Road and Queens Park) 
Article 4 Direction  controlling  the 
change of use from a house to a 
HMO  
Developer  Contributions  
Fylde Coast Housing Strategy 
Fylde Coast Local Investment  Plan 
Housing  Implementation  Strategy 
Growing Places Fund 
New  Homes  Bonus 
Lancashire  Strategic  Economic  Plan Blackpool  Council 
Housing  developers  
and sub‐contractors  
Private sector 
providers  
HCA 
BCH 
LEP Number  of dwellings  completed  from major 
housing developments,  including Rigby Road 
and Queens Park  Around 410 new dwellings  at Rigby Road 
and 198 (gross) new dwellings  at Queens 
Park, providing  high quality  housing with 
an appropriate  mix of types and tenures 
to meet the needs and aspirations  of 
existing and future residents 
Number  of de‐conversions,  empty homes 
brought back into use and Council homes 
improved  by other housing investment   Rebalance  the existing housing stock by 
creating more high quality family homes.  
Reduce the number of vacant properties  
and single bed flats. 
To bring all Council homes up to meet the 
Decent Homes Standard 
Number  of Houses in Multiple Occupation 
(HMOs) in the inner  areas  removed from the 
housing stock  Reduce the number of HMOs in order to 
address the problems  and challenges  
associated  with their occupation  
Number  of unlawful residential  uses subject 
to successful  enforcement  action Continue to investigate  unauthorised  
uses and take appropriate  action   CS13:  Housing Mix, Standards  and Density 
2, 5, 9, 16, 19 New  build completions  by density i.e. less 
than 30 dwellings  per ha (dph); between 30‐
50 dph; and above 50 dph Make efficient use of land, seeking to 
achieve an optimum density appropriate 
to the character  of the locality Slow  recovery of the 
housing market may 
delay achieving  a more 
balanced housing  stock  
Planning applications  not 
meeting  the required 
housing mix or adopted 
minimum  standards  e.g. 
citing viability reasons 
 Larger  flatted 
developments  proposed  
across  the inner area 
Having  no specific density 
targets may result in 
inefficient  use of land  Analyse why target mix or minimum  standards  
have not been  proposed;  negotiate  with 
developers  as appropriate;  and in the event of 
exceptions  being made to permit such 
developments  analyse why this was  the case 
Work with key stakeholders  to identify 
development  constraints   
Review  evidence base on viability, housing 
market conditions  and future population  need 
to ensure it remains appropriate  and update if 
necessary  
Consider a review of policy including the 
supporting  SPDs  on minimum  standards   
Review  densities achieved and introduce  
appropriate  targets in the Site Allocations/  
Development  Management  DPD  if necessary  
 Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
New  Homes  from Old Places 
Residential  Conversion  and Sub‐
division SPD (2011) 
Sustainable  Homes SPD (new build) 
 
 Blackpool  Council 
Housing  developers
Private sector 
providers  
BCH 
 Number  of new homes meeting the relevant 
standards  for conversions38 or new build39  New  developments  (conversions  and new 
build)  should meet the adopted minimum  
standards  to provide  quality homes 
New  build completions  by dwelling type i.e. 
detached,  semi‐detached,  terraced and 
flatted properties  New  developments  to include a mix of 
house types/sizes  to rebalance  the stock 
and provide more family homes. On sites 
> 1ha there should be a maximum  of 10% 
1 bed units and at least 20% 2 bed/20% 
3+ bed units. On smaller sites a mix of 
sizes is required or it should contribute  
towards a balanced mix in the wider area.
 
Developments  of > 10 flats in the inner 
area should be directed to the town 
centre or seafront; and at least 70% of 
the flats should be 2bed units or more. New  build and conversion  completions  by 
dwelling size i.e. 1/2/3/4+ bedrooms  
                                                            
37 The NPPF suggests that community  facilities can include local shops, meeting places, sports venues, cultural buildings,  public houses and places  of worship (paragraph  70) 
38 As set out in the National Technical  Housing Standards  and in part  ‘New Homes from Old Places Residential  Conversion  and Sub‐division’  Supplementary  Planning Document  (SPD) 
39 To bet set out in a forthcoming  Sustainable  Homes  Supplementary  Planning Document  (SPD)  (relating to new build residential  development)Page 132
 
  Page 136 of 146Monitoring   ImplementationPolicy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target / Policy  Outcome   Potential  Risk  Contingency  Implementation  / Delivery 
Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners CS14:  Affordable  Housing 
2, 10, 19 Number  of affordable  housing  completions  
(new build and conversion)  in relation to 
permitted  new housing stock Maximise  affordable  housing  delivery to 
help address Blackpool’s  assessed need 
(264 new affordable  units per annum in 
the next five years) 
 
Developments  creating 15+ net dwellings  
required to provide 30% affordable  units 
 Slow  recovery of the 
housing market may 
reduce ability to help 
address short‐term 
affordable  housing need
Availability  of finance  to 
acquire existing stock / 
create affordable  units 
Reduced viability in 
development  schemes 
making policy targets 
difficult to achieve  
Renegotiation  of s106 
agreements  may reduce 
developer  contributions  
committed   
Reliance  on private 
housing rental market 
to meet affordable  needReview  reasons for under delivery against 
identified  need  (may involve reviewing  targets 
achieved by individual  developments/S106  
agreements/developer  contributions/viability  
of sites with planning permission)   
Work with key stakeholders  to secure finance 
to maximise  the delivery of affordable  homes 
from acquisitions;  and identify potential 
additional  funding streams  e.g. New Homes 
Bonus and Growing Places Fund 
Continue to negotiate  with developers  on S106 
agreements  and encourage  pre‐application  
discussions  
Work with registered  providers  to align 
affordable  housing provision  with future  need 
Council and its partners to explore  improving  
the stock of affordable  homes though other 
alternative  sources   
Consider a review of policy Affordable  Housing SPD 
Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Developer  Contributions  
Fylde Coast Local Investment  Plan 
Fylde Coast Housing Strategy 
Housing  Implementation  Strategy 
Growing Places Fund 
New  Homes  Bonus 
Lancashire  Strategic  Economic  Plan 
 
 
 Blackpool  Council 
Housing  developers
Registered  
Providers  (RSL) 
BCH 
HCA 
Private sector 
providers  
 Number  of additional  affordable  housing 
units as a result of change in tenure of 
existing housing  stock (acquisitions)  
Number  of committed  affordable  units (i.e. 
with extant planning permission)  
Affordable  housing  completions  by dwelling 
size i.e. 1/2/3/4+ bedrooms  A mix of affordable  homes which reflects 
the importance  of family sized units to 
help rebalance  the stock 
Affordable  housing  completions  by tenure   General requirement  is for a mix of social 
rented and intermediate  housing  for sale 
or for rent (dependent  on location) 
Developer  contributions  to affordable 
housing i.e. financial contributions  from 
planning obligations  (s106); or amount of 
discounted  or free land received (ha) Off‐site contributions  from developments  
creating 3‐14 net dwellings  (as a % of the 
open market value of the dwellings)  and 
from larger developments  as appropriate 
(equivalent  to 30% on‐site provision)  CS15:  Health  and Education  
8, 11, 12 Amount (sqm) of additional  health and 
education  facilities completed  Provide new/enhance  existing facilities to 
meet identified  health/education  needs Reduction  in developer 
contributions  may limit 
the delivery  of health 
and educational  
facilities 
No change in skill levels 
or educational  
attainment  
No change or decline in 
the overall health and 
well‐being  of residents 
 Examine potential additional  funding streams 
Work with education  and health providers  to 
establish reasons and address if necessary  
If necessary,  identify sites for additional  
education/health  provision  in partnership  with 
providers/developers  
Consider a review of policy Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Developer  Contributions  
Blackpool  Joint  Health and Well‐
being Strategy 
 Blackpool  Council 
Blackpool  and the 
Fylde College 
Blackpool  Sixth 
Form College 
Education  and 
Training providers  
NHS  England 
Blackpool  Clinical 
Commissioning  
Group 
 Male  and female life expectancy   Improve the health and well‐being  of 
Blackpool’s  residents 
Number  of Lower  Super Output Areas  in the 
bottom  10% for health deprivation  and 
disability Reduce number of  Lower Super Output 
Areas  in the bottom  10% for health 
deprivation  and disability 
Percentage  of pupils in local authority  
schools achieving  five or more GCSEs at 
grade A* ‐ C or equivalent  Improve the overall education  of 
Blackpool’s  population  
Percentage  of working age people with no 
qualifications  Improve the overall education  of 
Blackpool’s  population  CS16:  Traveller  Sites 
13 Total number of traveller  pitches/plots  
available (Gypsy and traveller  pitches, 
Travelling  Showpeople  plots and transit 
pitches) Meet locally set pitch and plot targets 
(according  to the most recent Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling  Showperson   
Accommodation  Needs Assessment  
agreed by the Council) Shortfall in provision  
against identified  need 
Limited  availability  of  
suitable and affordable 
land/sites  to meet 
identified  need 
Unauthorised  
encampments  and 
developments  Identify reasons for any shortfall in plot/pitch  
provision  against need, including delivery 
constraints  
Review  effectiveness  of policy implementation  
Consider identifying  further sites for 
accommodating  additional  pitches/  plots  
Consider a review of policy and amendment  of 
assessment  criteria for traveller  sites 
Work with neighbouring  authorities  to deliver 
the identified  Fylde Coast need for Gypsy and 
Travellers  and Travelling  Showpeople  Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Duty to Co‐operate Blackpool  Council 
Neighbouring  
Authorities  
Land Owners 
Gypsy and 
Travellers  and 
Travelling 
Showpeople  
 Net additional  traveller  pitches/plots  
completed  per annum  (Gypsy and Traveller) 
Number  of planning applications  for new 
sites or extensions  to existing sites that are 
refused for not meeting the Policy criteria  Make adequate  site provision  of traveller 
sites that are sustainable  economically,  
socially, and environmentally  
Number  of unauthorised  encampments  or 
developments  and enforcement  actions 
carried out in relation to traveller sites Meet identified  need and provide 
adequate  traveller  sites that are 
sustainable  economically,  socially, and 
environmentally  Page 133 
  Page 137 of 146Table 4: Monitoring  and Implementation  of Chapter 7: Regenerating  Blackpool  Town Centre and the Resort 
Monitoring   ImplementationPolicy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target / Policy  Outcome   Potential  Risk  Contingency   Implementation/Delivery  Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners CS17:  Blackpool  Town  Centre 
3, 15 Diversity  of main  town centre uses (by 
number,  type and amount of floorspace)  as 
identified  from Town Centre Health 
Checks/GOAD  surveys  Introduce  a more diverse town centre 
offer,  including quality cafes/restaurants,  
leisure, cultural  and entertainment 
activities and offices Further downturn  in the 
economy  making new 
investment  difficult to 
secure/causing  increased  
vacancy levels 
Configuration  of units not 
attractive  to potential 
town centre investors 
Loss of town centre uses 
due to new regulations  
allowing more flexible PD 
rights  
National chain operators  
scaling‐back  investment  
Availability  of finance  to 
secure environmental 
improvements  
Limited  demand for town 
centre residential  uses  Engagement  with key stakeholders/businesses  
including public  and private sector bodies 
Analyse footfall and develop  appropriate 
measures/incentives  for improvement   
Analyse vacancy levels,  including any 
concentrations,  and consider appropriate  
measures  e.g. scope for redevelopment  
Work with commercial  agents to review  the 
supply and demand for retail  space and other 
town centre uses  
Identify potential additional  funding 
streams/developer  contributions  
Consider the need for an Article 4 Direction  
Town centre marketing/promotional  material  
Consider a review of policy including the Town 
Centre Strategy Blackpool  Town  Centre Strategy 
(2013) 
Town Centre Steering Group 
Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Developer  Contributions  Blackpool  Council
Town Team 
Blackpool  Town 
Centre BID  
BFWEDC 
LEP 
Marketing  
Blackpool  
Commercial  
developers  / 
agents 
Landlords  
Town centre 
businesses  Proportion  of ground floor vacancy rates  Reduce vacancy rates  within the town 
centre and the Principal Retail  Core 
Number  of residential  completions  within 
Blackpool  Town  Centre Introduce  a high quality residential  offer 
in the longer term 
Town Centre pedestrian  flows (footfall)  Increase in footfall 
State of the Town Centre environmental  
quality Enhance the quality of buildings,  streets 
and spaces 
Presence  of national operators   Increase in the number of higher end, 
national  retail,  leisure, entertainment,  
cafe, restaurant  and hotel chains in the 
town centre CS18:  Winter 
Gardens 
14, 15 Additional  uses brought  forward in the Winter 
Gardens  Re‐establish  the Winter Gardens as a key 
leisure, entertainment  and conferencing  
venue for the resort in accordance  with 
an agreed business plan/model  Availability  of public sector  
finance / funding 
Further downturn  in the 
economy  making new 
investment  difficult to 
secure 
 Maximise  engagement/buy‐in  to the business 
model  from primary and secondary  
stakeholders  
Identify potential additional  funding streams 
(e.g.  CIL (if applicable),  English Heritage, 
Heritage Lottery Funding) or develop 
contingency  methods 
Consider a review of policy/business  model Winter Gardens Strategy and 
Business Plan 
Three  year  repair programme   
Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process Winter Gardens 
Project Board 
Blackpool  Council
English Heritage 
Use providers  
Marketing  
Blackpool  ‘At risk’  status of the Winter Gardens  Secure the future of the Winter Gardens  
so that it is no longer identified  ‘at risk’ 
Number  of events held  per year  Increase use of the Winter Gardens  CS19:  Central 
Business District 
(Talbot Gateway)  
3, 15 Type (Use Class) and amount (sqm) of 
completed  development  in the Central 
Business District  
 Comprehensive  redevelopment  of the 
Central  Business District with mixed‐use 
development   Further downturn  in the 
economy  making new 
investment  to deliver 
further phases  difficult to 
secure Engagement  with key delivery partners to re‐
examine constraints  to development  and 
develop  contingency  methods  
Identify potential additional  funding streams/ 
use of developer  contributions  
Consider a review of policy including the SPD Talbot Gateway Planning Brief  SPD 
(2006) 
Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process Project Board 
Blackpool  Council
Muse 
Developments  
Transport  
operators  
Developers/ 
businesses  CS20:  Leisure Quarter
(Former Central Station
Site)
14, 15 Amount (sqm) of leisure development40 
completed  on the site Comprehensive  redevelopment  of the 
entire site for major  leisure developmentFurther downturn  in the 
economy  making new 
investment  to deliver 
comprehensive 
redevelopment  difficult to 
secure  Work closer with key partners to re‐examine 
constraints  to development  and develop 
contingency  methods 
Market the site to an international  audience 
Consider a review of policy including the SPD  Leisure  Quarter Development  Brief 
SPD (2011) 
Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process Blackpool  Council
Developers  and 
key leisure 
operators/ 
investors 
Existing 
operators  on site Type (Use Class) and amount (sqm) of 
complementary  development  completed  on 
the site  Complementary  uses,  including leisure, 
hotel, ancillary  retail  and parking, that 
would add value/support  the major 
leisure  development,  and deliver 
comprehensive  redevelopment  of the 
entire site 
                                                            
40 Leisure development  defined as per use class order  D2 Table 4: Monitoring and Implementation of Chapter 7: Regenerating Blackpool Town Centre and the ResortPage 134
 
  Page 138 of 146Monitoring   ImplementationPolicy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target / Policy  Outcome   Potential  Risk  Contingency   Implementation/Delivery  Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners CS21:  Leisure and Business 
Tourism 
14  Amount (sqm) of completed  leisure 
development41 over 500m2 by location i.e. % 
completed  in Blackpool  Town  Centre and the 
Resort Core Tourism  attractions  focused on the town 
centre  and resort core  Further downturn  in the 
economy  making new 
investment  difficult to 
secure  
Pressure for non‐leisure 
uses within the town 
centre and resort core 
Pressure for major  new 
leisure  development  
outside the resort core  Engagement  with key stakeholders/businesses  
including public  and private sector bodies 
Review  resort marketing/promotion   
Consider a review of policy 
 Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  process  
Leisure  Quarter Development  Brief 
SPD (2011) 
Holiday Accommodation  SPD (2011) Blackpool  Council
Key resort 
operators   
Visitor  
accommodation  
providers  
Marketing  
Blackpool  Amount (sqm) of new visitor  accommodation  
by location i.e. % completed  in the town 
centre, resort core and adjacent holiday 
accommodation  areas Visitor accommodation  focused on the 
town centre, resort core and holiday 
accommodation  areas  
Number  of visitors to the resort per year  Increase in visitor  numbers due to a 
stronger  resort appeal  CS22:  Key Resort Gateways 
2, 4, 14, 16 Amount (sqm) of completed  development  on 
land within and adjoining  Central  Corridor Redevelopment  of land within  and 
adjoining  Central Corridor to support 
further improvement/enhancement  Availability  of funding/ 
developer  contributions  to 
deliver improvements  and 
enhancements  Review  at next revision of the Blackpool  Local 
Transport  Plan 
Identify additional  potential sources of funding 
Consider a review of policy 
 Blackpool  Local Transport  Plan 2011‐
2016 (2011) 
Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Developer  Contributions  Blackpool  Council
Developers  
Transport  
providers   Amount (sqm) of improved  vehicular, 
pedestrian  and cycling linkages through 
Central  Corridor Improved  linkages through the Corridor 
and extending  the network of green 
ways to support further enhancement  
Number  and type  of improvements  made to 
parking and reception  facilities Improved  parking and reception  facilities 
Number  and type  of improvements  made to 
landscaping,  signage, lighting and security Enhanced  landscaping,  signage, lighting 
and security CS23:  Managing  Holiday Bed Spaces 
2, 8, 14, 16 Number  of planning permissions/refusals  for 
change of use from holiday accommodation  
within the main holiday accommodation  areas  Retain existing holiday accommodation  
unless exceptional  circumstances  are 
demonstrated  as set out in policy  Continued  fall in staying 
visitor numbers 
Pressure for change  of use 
from holiday 
accommodation  to 
residential  use within the 
main  holiday 
accommodation  areas 
Planning permission  not 
required for change  of use 
in some  instances   
Change of use proposals  
not in line with the New 
Homes from Old Places 
SPD Analyse planning  permissions  to understand  
reasons behind pressure for change of use 
including any concentrations  
Engagement  with key stakeholders/  
businesses  including accommodation  
providers  and market agents 
Review  wider resort marketing/promotion  
Identify additional  potential sources of 
funding e.g. to encourage  accreditation  or 
complementary  public realm improvements  
Consider a review of policy including the main 
holiday accommodation  areas  defined in the 
Holiday Accommodation  SPD and the 
minimum  standards  set out in the New 
Homes from Old Places SPD  Holiday Accommodation  SPD (2011) 
New  Homes  from Old Places SPD 
(2011) 
Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process Blackpool  Council
Holiday 
accommodation  
providers   
Stay  Blackpool  
Developers/ 
commercial 
agents 
Marketing  
Blackpool  Number  of planning permissions/refusals  for 
change of use from holiday accommodation  
outside the main holiday accommodation  areas Encourage  change of use from holiday 
accommodation  to high quality homes 
Number  of net new dwellings  completed  as a 
result of change of use from holiday 
accommodation  Encourage  change of use from holiday 
accommodation  to high quality homes 
Number  of staying visitors to the resort per 
year Increase in staying visitors 
                                                            
41 Leisure development  defined as per use class order  D2 Page 135 
  Page 139 of 146Table 5: Monitoring  and Implementation  of Chapter 8: Enabling South Blackpool  Growth  and Employment  
Monitoring   ImplementationPolicy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target/Policy  Outcome   Potential  Risk   Contingency   Implementation/Delivery  Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners CS24:  South Blackpool  Employment  Growth 
3, 17 Amount of new employment  development  
(Class B uses) completed  in South Blackpool  at 
Blackpool  Airport Corridor and lands close to 
Junction 4 of the M55 (including  take‐up of 
available land supply and redevelopment  of 
existing sites) Support major  new business/industrial  
development  at sustainable  locations in 
South Blackpool  Further downturn  in the 
economy  making new 
investment  difficult to 
secure  
Planning permissions  not 
implemented  due to issues 
relating to viability/access  
to finance 
Loss of allocated  industrial/  
business land (including  
undeveloped  land) to non‐
employment  uses 
Employment  development  
attracted  elsewhere   
 Identify reasons for lack of take‐up and 
monitor employment  land supply v demand to 
ensure it meets market requirements  
 Analyse any loss of allocated  land for non‐
employment  uses and the impact on 
employment  provision  in South Blackpool 
(including  regenerative  benefits of enabling 
development)  
Engage with landowners/developers  on the 
likely delivery prospects  of sites and help to 
overcome  any barriers/constraints  to manage 
the delivery  of new development   
Engage with the LEP/Fylde  Coast authorities  to 
develop  measures  to encourage  inward 
investment  in this location to support sub‐
regional growth 
Consider a review of policy including the 
flexibility given to enabling  development  and 
the existing employment  allocations   Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Fylde Coast Investment  Plan 
Whitehills  Development  Brief 
Blackpool  International  Airport 
Masterplan  (currently  being 
prepared)  
Duty to Co‐operate 
Local Growth Accelerator  Strategy Blackpool  Council 
BFWEDC 
Fylde Borough 
Council 
Lancashire 
County Council  
LEP 
Blackpool  Airport 
Existing 
businesses/ 
landowners  Amount of existing employment  land 
redeveloped  to provide  business/industrial  
facilities (Class B uses) in South Blackpool Support the redevelopment  of existing 
employment  sites within South 
Blackpool  CS25:  South Blackpool  Housing Growth 
2, 18, 19, 20 Net dwellings  completed  per annum  in South 
Blackpool   
 750 net completions  over the plan 
period (including  Moss House Road, 
Whyndyke  and Runnell Farm sites) Shortfall in number of 
completions   
Slow  recovery of the housing 
market  
Planning permissions  not 
implemented  or built‐out as 
planned due to issues 
relating to viability, access to 
finance or unidentified  
constraints  etc 
Developments  not meeting 
the required housing mix  
 Review  reason for shortfall including planning 
permissions,  lapsed permissions  etc 
Engage with applicants/developers  to find out 
why sites are not being implemented  
Work with key delivery  partners and other 
stakeholders  to manage the delivery of 
development  and help to overcome  any 
barriers and constraints  
Review  S106  agreements/contributions  and 
re‐negotiate  with developers  as appropriate  
Review  why an appropriate  housing mix has 
not been  achieved  and understand  why 
exceptions  have been made 
Regular SHLAA  updates and consider a ‘call 
for sites’ exercise to identify additional  land 
Consider a timely policy review  and whether it 
is appropriate  to change the phasing  supply Site Allocations  and Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Strategic Housing Land Availability  
Assessment  (SHLAA) 
Sustainable  Homes SPD (new build) 
Developer  Contributions  
Housing  Implementation  Strategy 
Duty to Co‐operate Blackpool  Council 
Housing 
Developers  
Landowners  
Fylde Borough 
Council 
Lancashire 
County Council 
 New  build completions  by dwelling type in 
South Blackpool  i.e. detached,  semi‐detached,  
terraced and flatted properties  Dwelling type mix complements  (rather 
than competes  with) new housing being 
delivered  in the inner  area  
New  build completions  by dwelling size in 
South Blackpool  i.e. 1/2/3/4+ bedrooms Dwelling size mix complements  (rather 
than competes  with) new housing being 
delivered  in the inner  area CS26:  Marton Moss 
5, 20 Development  of neighbourhood  policy 
supporting  the retention  and enhancement  of 
the distinctive  character  of Marton Moss 
 Pursue  a neighbourhood  planning 
approach  for Marton Moss to retain and 
enhance  the character  of the Moss 
whilst  identifying  acceptable  
development.    
 
 Limited  support  or resources 
to bring forward a 
Neighbourhood  Plan 
Pressure for development  
that is not in accordance 
with the CS26 criteria If the Marton Moss community  do not wish to 
prepare a Neighbourhood  Plan, the local 
planning policy for the area will be developed  
as part of the Site Allocations  and 
Development  Management  document  
Identify alternative  sources of funding to assist 
with the neighbourhood  planning approach  
Consider a review of policy Neighbourhood  Plan/Site Allocations  
and Development  Management  
document  
  Blackpool  Council 
Marton Moss 
community  
(including  
residents and 
businesses)  Number  of applications  received and % 
approved/  refused in line with part 2 of Policy 
CS26 Table 5: Monitoring and Implementation of Chapter 8: Enabling South Blackpool Growth and EmploymentPage 136
 
  Page 140 of 146Monitoring   ImplementationPolicy 
Objective  
Indicator  Target/Policy  Outcome   Potential  Risk   Contingency   Implementation/Delivery  Mechanism  Key Delivery 
Partners CS27:  South Blackpool  Transport  
and Connectivity 
4, 21 Projects that have helped to improve 
connectivity  in South  Blackpool  
 A comprehensive  public transport,  
pedestrian  and cycle improvement  
strategy  for South Blackpool Availability  of funding / 
developer  contributions  Review  at next revision of the Blackpool  Local 
Transport  Plan and if necessary  review policy 
Consider a review of policy Blackpool  Local Transport  Plan 2011‐
2016 (2011) and  Implementation  
Plan 
Blackpool  Airport Masterplan  
(currently  being prepared)  
Fylde Coast Transport  Masterplan  
Site Allocations  and  Development  
Management  document  
Individual  planning applications  and 
development  management  process 
Developer  Contributions  
Duty to Co‐operate Blackpool  Council 
Public Transport  
Operators  
Developers  
Key businesses  in 
the area including 
Blackpool  Airport 
Fylde Borough 
Council 
Lancashire 
County Council Developments  permitted  in South  Blackpool  
with green travel plans Major new housing  and employment  
development  to incorporate  Green 
Travel Plans 
 
 Additional  monitoring  
The Authority  Monitoring  Report will also  monitor additional  information  which will help to assess the 
effectiveness  of the Core Strategy  policies  in achieving  the vision, goals  and  objectives  track changes, trends 
and  improvements,  and assist with  future reviews of the Blackpool  Local Plan. The information  that  is 
monitored  may change over time, but could include:  
Permitted  development  rights and  new use classes ‐ Records  of applications  made to the local planning 
authority  by a developer  for determination  as to whether  prior approval of the authority  is required for 
permitted  development  rights (as set out in The Town and  Country Planning (General Permitted  
Development)(Amendment)(England)  Order 2014),  and  other additional  use classes that  may be 
introduced.  
Duty to Co‐operate regulations  state that  Council’s need to report how the Duty to Co‐operate is being 
taken forward on an ongoing basis  through the Authority  Monitoring  Report.   
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Page 137Appendix D: Glossary
Affordable housing
Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate 
housing, provided to eligible households whose needs 
are not met by the market. Eligibility is determined 
with regard to local incomes and local house prices. 
Affordable housing should include provisions to remain 
at an affordable price for future eligible households or 
for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable 
housing provision.
Social rented housing is owned by local authorities 
and private registered providers (as defined in section 
80 of the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008), for 
which guideline target rents are determined through 
the national rent regime. It may also be owned by 
other persons and provided under equivalent rental 
arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local 
authority or with the Homes and Communities Agency.
Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities 
or private registered providers of social housing to 
households who are eligible for social rented housing. 
Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require 
a rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent 
(including service charges, where applicable).
Intermediate housing is homes for sale and rent 
provided at a cost above social rent, but below 
market levels subject to the criteria in the Affordable 
Housing definition above. These can include shared 
equity (shared ownership and equity loans), other low 
cost homes for sale and intermediate rent, but not 
affordable rented housing.
Air Quality Management Areas
Areas designated by local authorities because they are 
not likely to achieve national air quality objectives by 
the relevant deadlines.Archaeological interest
There will be archaeological interest in a heritage asset 
if it holds, or potentially may hold, evidence of past 
human activity worthy of expert investigation at some 
point. Heritage assets with archaeological interest are 
the primary source of evidence about the substance 
and evolution of places, and of the people and cultures 
that made them. The evidence may be contained in 
the fabric of a built structure such as blocked openings 
or timbers and stonework capable of dating, or it may 
be held in surface earthworks or buried layers such as 
ditches, debris from construction or rubbish pits.
Authority Monitoring Report
An annual yearly report showing how the Council are 
keeping to their timetable and the effects of their 
plans.
Birds and Habitats Directives
European Directives to conserve natural habitats and 
wild fauna and flora. 
BREEAM
A widely used means of reviewing and improving the 
environmental performance of buildings. BREEAM 
assessment methods generally apply to commercial 
developments.
Brownfield Site
Land that has been previously developed.
Climate change adaptation
Adjustments to natural or human systems in 
response to actual or expected climatic factors or 
their effects, including from changes in rainfall and 
rising temperatures, which moderate harm or exploit 
beneficial opportunities.Page 138Appendix D: Glossary
Climate change mitigation
Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the 
climate system, primarily through reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions.
Conservation 
The process of maintaining and managing change 
to a heritage asset in a way that sustains and where 
appropriate, enhances its significance.
Conservation Area
An area of special architectural interest, the character 
or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or 
enhance. Conservation areas are designated by the 
local planning authority and will often be accompanied 
by a conservation area appraisal, setting out the main 
features and points of interest.
Community Forest
An area identified through the England Community 
Forest Programme to revitalise countryside and green 
space in and around major conurbations.
Community Infrastructure Levy
A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from 
owners or developers of land undertaking new building 
projects in their area. 
Community Right to Build Order
An Order made by the local planning authority (under 
the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) that grants 
planning permission for a site-specific development 
proposal or classes of development. 
Decentralised energy
Local renewable energy and local low-carbon energy 
usually but not always on a relatively small scale 
encompassing a diverse range of technologies. Designated heritage asset
A heritage asset which is a World Heritage Site, 
Scheduled Monument, Listed Building, Protected 
Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, Registered 
Battlefield or Conservation Area designated under the 
relevant legislation. Designated heritage assets enjoy 
more protection under the planning process than 
non-designated sites. At present there are no World 
Heritage Sites, Scheduled Monuments, Protected 
Wrecks or Registered Battlefields in Blackpool
Development plan
This includes adopted Local Plans and neighbourhood 
plans and is defined in section 38 of the Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.
Economic development
Development, including those within the B Use Classes, 
public and community uses and main town centre uses 
(but excluding housing development).
Ecological networks
These link sites of biodiversity importance.
Edge of centre
For retail purposes, a location that is well connected 
and up to 300 metres of the primary shopping area. 
For all other main town centre uses, a location within 
300 metres of a town centre boundary. For office 
development, this includes locations outside the town 
centre but within 500 metres of a public transport 
interchange. In determining whether a site falls within 
the definition of edge of centre, account should be 
taken of local circumstances.
Environmental Impact Assessment
A procedure to be followed for certain types of project 
to ensure that decisions are made in full knowledge of 
any likely significant effects on the environment.Page 139Appendix D: Glossary
European site
This includes candidate Special Areas of Conservation, 
Sites of Community Importance, Special Areas of 
Conservation and Special Protection Areas, and is 
defined in regulation 8 of the Conservation of Habitats 
and Species Regulations 2010. 
Green infrastructure
A network of multi-functional green space, urban and 
rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of 
environmental and quality of life benefits for local 
communities. 
Heritage asset
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape 
identified as having a degree of significance meriting 
consideration in planning decisions, because of its 
heritage interest. That interest may be archaeological, 
architectural, artistic or historic. Heritage assets 
include designated heritage assets, assets identified 
by the local planning authority (including local listing) 
and sites noted on the county’s Historic Environment 
Record, a list of known sites in Lancashire which is 
currently maintained by Lancashire County Council.
Historic environment
All aspects of the environment resulting from the 
interaction between people and places through time, 
including all surviving physical remains of past human 
activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and 
landscaped and planted or managed flora. 
Inclusive design
Designing the built environment, including buildings 
and their surrounding spaces, to ensure that they can 
be accessed and used by everyone.
International, national and locally designated sites of 
importance for biodiversity
All international sites (Special Areas of Conservation, 
Special Protection Areas, and Ramsar sites), national sites (Sites of Special Scientific Interest) and locally 
designated sites including Local Wildlife Sites. 
Listed Buildings
A listed building is a building that has been placed on 
the Statutory List of Buildings of Special Architectural 
or Historic Interest. It is a widely used status, applied 
to around half a million buildings in the UK and offers 
protection against unnecessary and/or damaging 
development by means of a system of Listed Building 
Consent in addition to the normal planning consent 
process. The statutory body maintaining the list in 
England is English Heritage. Grade I buildings are of 
exceptional interest, sometimes considered to be 
internationally important. Grade II* buildings are 
particularly important buildings of more than special 
interest. Grade II buildings are nationally important 
and of special interest; 92% of all listed buildings are 
in this class and it is the most likely grade of listing for 
a home owner. Listing covers all part of the building 
both interior and exterior and often also applies to 
related features such as boundary walls and ancillary 
structures within the property boundary.
Local Enterprise Partnership
A body, designated by the Secretary of State for 
Communities and Local Government, established for 
the purpose of creating or improving the conditions for 
economic growth in an area. 
Local List
Buildings, sites and landscapes on a Local List are 
offered a degree of protection against unnecessary 
and/or damaging development owing to their local 
interest. They will not enjoy the full protection of 
those buildings of national interest which are likely to 
feature on the Statutory Register of Listed Buildings. 
A local list is normally compiled by a local authority in 
consultation with residentsPage 140Appendix D: Glossary
Local Nature Partnership
A body, designated by the Secretary of State for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, established for 
the purpose of protecting and improving the natural 
environment in an area and the benefits derived from it.
Local Planning Authority
The public authority whose duty it is to carry out 
specific planning functions for a particular area. All 
references to local planning authority apply to the 
district council, London borough council, county 
council, Broads Authority, National Park Authority 
and the Greater London Authority, to the extent 
appropriate to their responsibilities. 
Local Plan
The plan for the future development of the local 
area, drawn up by the local planning authority in 
consultation with the community. In law this is 
described as the development plan documents 
adopted under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase 
Act 2004.
Main town centre uses
Retail development (including warehouse clubs and 
factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment facilities 
the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including 
cinemas, restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars 
and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and fitness 
centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); 
offices; and arts, culture and tourism development 
(including theatres, museums, galleries and concert 
halls, hotels and conference facilities).
Mineral Safeguarding Area
An area designated by Minerals Planning Authorities 
which covers known deposits of minerals which are 
desired to be kept safeguarded from unnecessary 
sterilisation by non-mineral development. Neighbourhood plans
A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood 
Forum for a particular neighbourhood area (made 
under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004). 
Older people
People over retirement age, including the active, 
newly-retired through to the very frail elderly, whose 
housing needs can encompass accessible, adaptable 
general needs housing for those looking to downsize 
from family housing and the full range of retirement 
and specialised housing for those with support or care 
needs.
Open space
All open space of public value, including not just land, 
but also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes 
and reservoirs) which offer important opportunities for 
sport and recreation and can act as a visual amenity.
Out of centre
A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre but 
not necessarily outside the urban area.
People with disabilities
People have a disability if they have a physical or 
mental impairment, and that impairment has a 
substantial and long-term adverse effect on their ability 
to carry out normal day-to-day activities. These persons 
include, but are not limited to, people with ambulatory 
difficulties, blindness, learning difficulties, autism and 
mental health needs. 
Planning condition
A condition imposed on a grant of planning permission 
(in accordance with the Town and Country Planning Act 
1990) or a condition included in a Local Development 
Order or Neighbourhood Development Order.Page 141Appendix D: Glossary
Planning obligation
An obligation entered into under section 106 of the 
Town and Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the 
impacts of a development proposal.
Playing field
The whole of a site which encompasses at least one 
playing pitch as defined in the Town and Country 
Planning (Development Management Procedure) 
(England) Order 2010.
Pollution
Anything that affects the quality of land, air, water or 
soils, which might lead to an adverse impact on human 
health, the natural environment or general amenity. 
Pollution can arise from a range of emissions, including 
smoke, fumes, gases, dust, steam, odour, noise and light.
Previously developed land
Land which is or was occupied by a permanent 
structure, including the curtilage of the developed land 
(although it should not be assumed that the whole of 
the curtilage should be developed) and any associated 
fixed surface infrastructure. This excludes: land that 
is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry 
buildings; land that has been developed for minerals 
extraction or waste disposal by landfill purposes where 
provision for restoration has been made through 
development control procedures; land in built-up areas 
such as private residential gardens, parks, recreation 
grounds and allotments; and land that was previously-
developed but where the remains of the permanent 
structure or fixed surface structure have blended into 
the landscape in the process of time.
Priority habitats and species
Species and Habitats of Principle Importance included 
in the England Biodiversity List published by the 
Secretary of State under section 41 of the Natural 
Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006. Public Realm
‘The parts of a village, town and city (whether publicly 
or privately owned) that are available, without charge, 
for everyone to use or see, including streets, squares 
and parks’ (Source of definition: By Design).
Ramsar sites
Wetlands of international importance, designated 
under the 1971 Ramsar Convention. 
Registered Parks and Gardens
The English Heritage ‘Register of Historic Parks 
and Gardens of special historic interest in England’ 
established in 1983 currently identifies over 1,600 
sites assessed to be of national importance. A park or 
garden is a deliberately designed landscape, but can 
be the result of more than one stage of construction 
and development and subject to significant changes 
in management during its life. Like Listed Buildings, 
Historic Parks and Gardens are categorized as Grade I, 
Grade II* or Grade II by assessing their importance and 
interest.
Renewable and low carbon energy
Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as 
generating electricity. Renewable energy covers those 
energy flows that occur naturally and repeatedly in 
the environment – from the wind, the fall of water, 
the movement of the oceans, from the sun and also 
from biomass and deep geothermal heat. Low carbon 
technologies are those that can help reduce emissions 
(compared to conventional use of fossil fuels).
Setting of a heritage asset
The surroundings in which a heritage asset is 
experienced. Its extent is not fixed and may change as 
the asset and its surroundings evolve. Elements of a 
setting may make a positive or negative contribution 
to the significance of an asset; they may also affect 
the ability to appreciate that significance or may be 
neutral.Page 142Appendix D: Glossary
Shoreline Management Plans
A plan providing a large-scale assessment of the risk 
to people and to the developed, historic and natural 
environment associated with coastal processes. 
Significance (Heritage)
 The value of a heritage asset to this and future 
generations because of its heritage interest. That 
interest may be archaeological, architectural, artistic or 
historic. Significance derives not only from a heritage 
asset’s physical presence, but also from its setting. 
Not all parts of a heritage asset may have the same 
significance and there may be parts which are of low 
significance or indeed which detract from the overall 
significance of the asset.
Special Areas of Conservation
Areas given special protection under the European 
Union’s Habitats Directive, which is transposed into 
UK law by the Habitats and Conservation of Species 
Regulations 2010. 
Special Protection Areas
Areas which have been identified as being of 
international importance for the breeding, feeding, 
wintering or the migration of rare and vulnerable 
species of birds found within European Union 
countries. They are European designated sites, 
classified under the Birds Directive.  Site investigation 
information includes a risk assessment of land 
potentially affected by contamination, or ground 
stability and slope stability reports, as appropriate. 
All investigations of land potentially affected by 
contamination should be carried out in accordance 
with established procedures (such as BS10175 (2001) 
Code of Practice for the Investigation of Potentially 
Contaminated Sites). The minimum information that 
should be provided by an applicant is the report of a 
desk study and site reconnaissance.Site of Special Scientific Interest
Sites designated by Natural England under the Wildlife 
and Countryside Act 1981. 
Strategic Environmental Assessment
A procedure (set out in the Environmental Assessment 
of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004) which 
requires the formal environmental assessment of 
certain plans and programmes which are likely to have 
significant effects on the environment. 
Supplementary planning document
Documents which add further detail to the policies in 
the Local Plan. They can be used to provide further 
guidance for development on specific sites, or on 
particular issues, such as design. Supplementary 
planning documents are capable of being a material 
consideration in planning decisions but are not part of 
the development plan.
Sustainable transport modes
Any efficient, safe and accessible means of transport 
with overall low impact on the environment, including 
walking and cycling, low and ultra-low emission 
vehicles, car sharing and public transport. 
Town centre
Area defined on the local authority’s proposal map, 
including the primary shopping area and areas 
predominantly occupied by main town centre uses 
within or adjacent to the primary shopping area. 
References to town centres or centres apply to city 
centres, town centres, district centres and local 
centres but exclude small parades of shops of purely 
neighbourhood significance. Unless they are identified 
as centres in Local Plans, existing out-of-centre 
developments, comprising or including main town 
centre uses, do not constitute town centres. Page 143Appendix D: Glossary
Transport assessment
A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out 
transport issues relating to a proposed development. 
It identifies what measures will be required to 
improve accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, 
particularly for alternatives to the car such as walking, 
cycling and public transport and what measures will 
need to be taken to deal with the anticipated transport 
impacts of the development. 
Transport statement
A simplified version of a transport assessment 
where it is agreed the transport issues arising out of 
development proposals are limited and a full transport 
assessment is not required. 
Travel plan
A long-term management strategy for an organisation 
or site that seeks to deliver sustainable transport 
objectives through action and is articulated in a 
document that is regularly reviewed.
Wildlife corridor
Areas of habitat connecting wildlife populations.
Windfall sites
Sites which have not been specifically identified as 
available in the Local Plan process. They normally 
comprise previously-developed sites that have 
unexpectedly become available.Contact us
Blackpool Council, Built Environment  
PO Box 17, Corporation Street,  
Blackpool, FY1 1LZT: (01253) 477477  
E: development.plans@blackpool.gov.uk  
W: www.blackpool.gov.uk
J107575   0116