Pre-Submission Brac knell 
Forest Local Plan 
Bracknell F orest Local Plan (Consultation v ersion) 
www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/dr aft-br acknell-f orest-local-plan 
March 2021 How to comment 
10 0 How to comment  
Introduction 
12 1 Acronyms 
15 2 Introduction  
17 3 Conte xt 
Part 1 - Strategic issues 
24 4 Vision and objectives  
24 4.1 Vision  
26 4.2 Plan objectiv es 
28 5 Spatial strategy  
39 6 Sustainability principles  
39 6.1 Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples  
43 6.2 Sustainab le locational pr inciples  
45 7 Housing  
45 7.1 Provision of housing  
52 7.2 Sites allocated f or residential/mix ed use de velopment  
57 7.3 Land at Beauf ort Park, Nine Mile Ride , Bracknell 
66 7.4 Land East of Wokingham Road and South of Duk es Ride (Derb y Field), 
Crowthor ne 
76 7.5 Land at Jealott's Hill, Warfield  
98 7.6 The P eel Centre and The P oint, Skimped Hill Lane , Bracknell 
107 7.7 Forms of residential accommodation  
108 7.8 Affordab le housing  
113 7.9 Specialist housing f or older people and people with disabilities  
115 7.10 Self b uild, custom b uild and gypsy and tr avellers and tr avelling sho wpeople  
117 8 Economic de velopment  8.1 Provision of economic floorspace  117 
125 8.2 Hierarchy of centres  
129 9 Infrastructure  
130 9.1 Secur ing local infr astructure and f acilities  
134 9.2 Transpor t principles  
137 10 Climate c hang e and b uilt and natural en vironment  
137 10.1 Climate change  
139 10.2 Built en vironment  - design pr inciples  
144 10.3 Green infr astructure  
149 10.4 Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area  
154 10.5 Flooding and dr ainage  
158 10.6 Strategic Gaps and Wedges  
161 10.7 Green Belt villages  
Part 2 - Non-Strategic issues 
166 11 Introduction  
166 11.1 Development Management P olicies  
167 12 Housing  
167 12.1 Protection of e xisting housing stoc k 
169 12.2 Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings  
172 12.3 Specialist housing f or older people and people with disabilities  
175 12.4 Housing mix  
178 12.5 Gypsies , travellers and tr avelling sho wpeople  
182 13 Economic de velopment  
182 13.1 Designated Emplo yment Areas  
186 13.2 Emplo yment de velopment outside designated Emplo yment Areas  
189 13.3 Smaller b usinesses  
193 13.4 Bracknell Town Centre  
197 13.5 Development proposals in centres  
201 13.6 Development of main to wn centre uses outside centres  14 Local infrastructure and comm unity uses  205 
205 14.1 Protection of comm unity f acilities and ser vices  
208 14.2 Play, open space and spor ts pro vision  
213 14.3 Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic Value 
218 15 Development aff ecting the countr yside and Green Belt  
218 15.1 Development in the countr yside  
223 15.2 Green Belt  
228 15.3 Landscape char acter (outside of defined settlement)  
231 15.4 Separ ation of settlements  
233 15.5 Dwellings f or rural workers and occupancy conditions  
238 15.6 Equestr ian uses  
241 16 Character and design  
241 16.1 Design  
248 16.2 Tall buildings  
253 16.3 Advertisements and shop fronts  
255 17 Historic en vironment  
255 17.1 Protection and enhancement of the histor ic en vironment  
259 18 Natural en vironment  
259 18.1 Biodiv ersity  
264 18.2 Designated Nature Conser vation and Geological  
267 18.3 Trees and hedgero ws 
272 19 Climate c hang e and en vironmental sustainability  
272 19.1 Sustainab le constr uction  
276 19.2 Rene wable and lo w carbon energy  
278 19.3 Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)  
282 19.4 Pollution and hazards  
289 19.5 Development of land potentially aff ected b y contamination  
293 20 Transpor t 
293 20.1 Assessing tr anspor t impacts and requirements  
295 20.2 Transpor t infrastructure pro vision  20.3 Travel Plans and par king 298 
Appendices 
302 1 Housing Trajector y 
310 2 Site pr ofiles f or allocated sites  
343 3 Defined Centre maps  
359 4 Green Belt villa ges 
364 5 Tall building vie wpoints maps  
377 6 Existing policies to be replaced b y the Brac knell Forest Local Plan  
386 7 Glossar y 
386 Glossar y 
List of P olicies 
40 Policy LP 1 Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples  
43 Policy LP 2 Sustainab le locational pr inciples  
48 Policy LP 3 Pro vision of housing  
52 Policy LP 4 Sites allocated f or residential/mix ed use de velopment  
58 Policy LP 5 Land at Beauf ort Park, Nine Mile Ride , Bracknell 
67 Policy LP 6 Land East of Wokingham Road and South of Duk es Ride (Derb y Field), 
Crowthor ne 
77 Policy LP 7 Land at Jealott's Hill, Warfield  
99 Policy LP 8 The P eel Centre and The P oint, Skimped Hill Lane , Bracknell 
109 Policy LP 9 Aff ordab le housing  
119 Policy LP 10 Designated Emplo yment Areas  
122 Policy LP 11 Sites allocated f or economic de velopment/mix ed use  
126 Policy LP 12 Hier archy and e xtent of centres  
131 Policy LP 13 Infr astructure  
135 Policy LP 14 Transpor t principles  
139 Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples  
145 Policy LP 16 Green infr astructure  
150 Policy LP 17 Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area  
155 Policy LP 18 Flood r isk 
159 Policy LP 19 Identification of str ategic gaps and w edges  
161 Policy LP 20 Identification of Green Belt villages  
167 Policy LP 21 Protection of e xisting housing stoc k and land  
169 Policy LP 22 Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings  
173 Policy LP 23 Specialist housing f or older people and people with disabilities  175 Policy LP 24 Housing mix  
179 Policy LP 25 Gypsies , travellers and tr avelling sho wpeople  
183 Policy LP 26 De velopment within designated Emplo yment Areas  
187 Policy LP 27 Emplo yment de velopment outside designated Emplo yment Areas  
190 Policy LP 28 Smaller b usinesses  
194 Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre  
197 Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres  
202 Policy LP 31 De velopment of main to wn centre uses outside of designated centres 
205 Policy LP 32 Protection of comm unity f acilities and ser vices  
209 Policy LP 33 Pla y, open space and spor ts pro vision  
213 Policy LP 34 Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic Value 
219 Policy LP 35 De velopment in the countr yside  
223 Policy LP 36 Green Belt  
228 Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined settlements)  
231 Policy LP 38 Separ ation of settlements  
234 Policy LP 39 Dw ellings f or rural workers  
235 Policy LP 40 Occupancy conditions  
238 Policy LP 41 Equestr ian uses  
242 Policy LP 42 Design  
249 Policy LP 43 Tall buildings  
253 Policy LP 44 Adv ertisements and shop fronts  
255 Policy LP 45 Protection and enhancement of the histor ic en vironment  
260 Policy LP 46 Biodiv ersity  
264 Policy LP 47 Designated nature conser vation and geological sites  
268 Policy LP 48 Protection and enhancement of trees and hedgero ws 
273 Policy LP 49 Sustainab le constr uction  
276 Policy LP 50 Rene wable and lo w carbon energy  
279 Policy LP 51 Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)  
283 Policy LP 52 P ollution and hazards  
290 Policy LP 53 De velopment of land potentially aff ected b y contamination  
293 Policy LP 54 Assessing tr anspor t impacts and requirements  
295 Policy LP 55 Transpor t infrastructure pro vision  
298 Policy LP 56 Travel plans  
299 Policy LP 57 P arking 
List of Figures 
60 Figure 1 Beauf ort Park Illustr ative Concept Plan  
69 Figure 2 Derb y Field Illustr ative Concept Plan  
83 Figure 3 Jealott's Hill Illustr ative Concept Plan  
101 Figure 4 The P eel Centre and The P oint Illustr ative Concept Plan  
309 Figure 5 Dr aft Local Plan Trajector y 2019/20 - 2036/37  List of Maps 
19 Map 1 Br acknell F orest Conte xt Map  
21 Map 2 P arish boundar ies, defined settlements and designated emplo yment areas 
within Br acknell F orest  
30 Map 3 K ey Constr aints  
37 Map 4 K ey Diag ram 
46 Map 5 Neighbour ing Local A uthor ities and West Ber kshire and East Ber kshire Housing 
Market Areas  
345 Map 6 Br acknell Town Centre  
346 Map 7 Cro wthor ne 
347 Map 8 Sandhurst  
348 Map 9 Bagshot Road  
349 Map 10 Binfield  
350 Map 11 Birch Hill & Bullbrook  
351 Map 12 College Town 
352 Map 13 Cro wn Wood & Cro wthor ne (Station P arade) 
353 Map 14 Easthampstead & F orest P ark 
354 Map 15 Great Hollands  
355 Map 16 Hanw orth & Har mans Water 
356 Map 17 Mar tins Heron & Nor th Ascot  
357 Map 18 Owlsmoor , Priestw ood & Sandhurst (East of Sw an Lane)  
358 Map 19 Sandhurst (Old Mill), Whiteg rove & Wildr idings  
359 Map 20 Green Belt Village - Cr anbour ne 
360 Map 21 Green Belt Village - Church Road  
361 Map 22 Green Belt Village - Nor th Street  
362 Map 23 Green Belt Village - Cheapside  
363 Map 24 Green Belt Village - Maidens Green  
376 Map 25 Tall Buildings Viewpoints  
List of Tables 
12 Table 1 Acron yms 
26 Table 2 Br acknell F orest Local Plan Objectiv es  
45 Table 3 Calculation of Local Housing Need f or Br acknell F orest  
47 Table 4 Calculating the housing pro vision f or the plan per iod 
49 Table 5 Outstanding commitments f or housing de velopment at 31st March 2020  
50 Table 6 Outstanding need f or land to meet the housing requirement o ver the plan 
period 
53 Table 7 Large sites (more than 1ha and 5 [net] dw ellings or more) are allocated f or 
residential/mix ed use de velopment and are defined on the P olicies Map  
53 Table 8 Medium sites (less than 1ha and with 5 [net] dw ellings or more) are allocated 
for residential/mix ed use de velopment and are defined on the P olicies Map  54 Table 9 Total b y Designated Neighbourhood Area  
111 Table 10 P ercentage split betw een ten ures 
113 Table 11 Need f or specialist older person housing 2020 - 2037  
122 Table 12 Sites allocated f or economic de velopment/mix ed use  
162 Table 13 Rationale f or defining Green Belt villages  
214 Table A OSPV Standards  
215 Table B Plus One Pr inciple r atings (based on Green Flag A ward cr iteria) 
216 Table C OSPV Accessibility Standards  
285 Table 14 Noise Standards  
377 Table 15 P olicies to be replaced b y the Br acknell F orest Local Plan  
386 Table 16 Glossar y How to comment 0 Ho w to comment 
0.1 The Pre-Submission consultation runs fr om 10am on Tuesda y 23r d Mar ch until 
5pm on Tuesda y 11th Ma y 2021 
0.2 This is the final oppor tunity f or you to ha ve your sa y on the legal compliance and 
soundness of the Local Plan bef ore it is submitted to the Go vernment f or examination b y an 
independent Planning Inspector .  
0.3 Representations made dur ing this consultation  per iod will be sent to the Planning Inspector 
for consider ation through the e xamination process .  
0.4 The definition of soundness is set out in the National Planning P olicy F ramework. The 
Pre-Submission Local Plan m ust be: 
Justified:  Is the Local Plan an appropr iate de velopment str ategy , based on a propor tionate , 
logical and credib le evidence base? 
Effective: Can the Local Plan deliv er what it sets out to do , and with the ag reement of 
neighbour ing author ities? 
Positiv ely prepared:  Will the Local Plan meet the area’ s objectiv ely assessed needs as a 
minim um, and sho w that homes , jobs , services , and infr astructure , can be sustainab ly 
delivered? 
Consistent with National P olicy:  Does the Local Plan accord with the National Planning 
Policy F ramework?  
0.5 The Plan and associated documents including the Sustainability Appr aisal, are a vailab le 
to vie w and do wnload from the Local Plan Consultation por tal. 
0.6 Guidance has been included in the response f orm to assist completion.   
0.7 You can respond in one of the f ollowing w ays, but the pref erred method is through the 
online consultation por tal: 
https://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/por tal/planning/pre_submission_bflp 
https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/dr aft-br acknell-f orest-local-plan 
By email - do wnload the representation f orm, completing it and emailing it to the Planning 
Policy Section (clear ly mar ked “Pre-Submission consultation ”) at: 
development.plan@br acknell-f orest.go v.uk   
By post - to Planning P olicy ( Pre-Submission consultation ), Bracknell F orest Council, 
Time Square , Mar ket Street, Br acknell RG12 1JD . 
0.8 In addition to placing documents on its w eb site , the Council w ould nor mally mak e them 
availab le for inspection at Time Square , local libr aries and par ish council offices .  Due to 
COVID-19, this is not possib le at the moment although the situation will be re viewed, following 
any adjustments made to pub lic health guidance . If you are unab le to vie w online , please contact 
us via Development.plan@br acknell-f orest.go v.uk or 01344 352000. 
10 Introduction 1: Acron yms 
Table 1 Acr onyms 
Appropr iate Assessment AA 
Author ity Monitor ing Repor t AMR 
Air Quality Management Area AQMA 
Biodiv ersity Action Plan BAP 
Bracknell F orest Borough Local Plan BFBLP 
Bracknell F orest Local Plan BFLP 
Business , industr y, distr ibution and stor age BIDS 
Biodiv ersity Oppor tunity Area BOA 
Biodiv ersity Net Gain BNG 
Building Research Estab lishment En vironmental Assessment Method BREEAM 
Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy CIL 
Comprehensiv e Local Plan CLP 
Core Str ategy De velopment Plan Document CSDPD 
Environment Agency EA 
Economic De velopment Needs Assessment EDNA 
Functional Economic Mar ket Area FEMA 
Flood Risk Assessment FRA 
Fibre to the Premises FTTP 
Gross Exter nal Area GEA 
Green Infr astructure GI 
Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment GTAA 
Histor ic En vironment Record HER 
Housing Implementation Str ategy HIS 
Housing Land Supply HLS 
Housing Mar ket Area HMA 
Habitats Regulations Assessment HRA 
Infrastructure Deliv ery Plan IDP 
Local Area f or Pla y LAP 
Landscape Char acter Assessment LCA 
Local De velopment Scheme LDS 
12 Locally Equipped Area f or Pla y LEAP 
Local Geological Site LGS 
Local Housing Need LHN 
Local Nature Reser ve LNR 
Local Planning A uthor ity LPA 
Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment LVIA 
Local Wildlif e Site LWS 
Multi-Use Games Area MUGA 
Neighbourhood De velopment Plan NDP 
Neighbourhood Equipped Area f or Pla y NEAP 
Natur al En vironment and Rur al Comm unities NERC 
National Planning P olicy F ramework NPPF 
National Planning Pr actice Guidance NPPG 
Objectiv e Assessment of (housing) Need OAN 
Office of National Statistics ONS 
Open Space of Pub lic Value OSPV 
Previously De veloped Land PDL 
Permitted De velopment Rights PDR 
(Planning) P ermission in Pr inciple PIP 
Play Open Space and Spor ts Study POSS 
Planning Pr actice Guidance PPG 
Playing Pitch Str ategy PPS 
Planning P olicy f or Traveller Sites PPTS 
Public Right of Way PRoW 
Sustainability Appr aisal SA 
Special Area of Conser vation SAC 
Site Allocations Local Plan SALP 
Strategic Access Management and Monitor ing SAMM 
Suitab le Alter nativ e Natur al Greenspace SANG 
Statement of Comm unity In volvement SCI 
Strategic En vironmental Assessment SEA 
South East Plan SEP 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment SFRA 
Strategic Housing and Economic Land A vailability Assessment SHELAA 
13 Strategic Housing Mar ket Assessment SHMA 
Special Protection Area SPA 
Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area TBHSP A 
Supplementar y Planning Document SPD 
Source Protection Zone SPZ 
Site of Special Scientific Interest SSSI 
Strategic Suitab le Alter nativ e Natur al Greenspace Strategic SANG 
Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems SuDS 
Transpor t Assessment / Transpor t Accessibility Assessment TA 
Tree Preser vation Order TPO 
14 2: Introduction 
2.1 The Br acknell F orest Local Plan (BFLP) is the principal planning policy document f or the 
Borough and  will guide de velopment in the Borough up to 2037.   In par ticular the BFLP:   
sets out the str ategy f or the le vel and distr ibution of de velopment in the Borough; 
allocates sites f or specific uses , including housing and economic de velopment;  and  
includes  policies used to deter mine planning applications . 
2.2 The BFLP will replace the Br acknell F orest Borough Local Plan (2002) and the Core 
Strategy De velopment Plan Document (2008).  Some of the policies in the Site Allocations Local 
Plan (2013) (SALP) are still rele vant and will not be replaced since it includes sites allocated 
for de velopment that are still to be de veloped.  Policy NRM6 of the South East Plan which deals 
with the Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area will also remain.  Policies that are to be 
superseded and retained are set out in Appendix 6:  'Existing policies to be replaced b y the 
Bracknell F orest Local Plan' 
2.3 Currently , saved policies in the Replacement Miner als and Waste Plan (2001) and the 
Waste Local Plan (1998) apply where the y are consistent with national policy . The Council is 
in the process of de veloping a ne w Joint Miner als and Waste Local Plan with Reading Borough 
Council, The Ro yal Borough of Windsor & Maidenhead and Wokingham Borough Council.  It 
covers the per iod up to 2036 and on its adoption should be read with this Plan.    
2.4  The Council's De velopment Plan documents are a vailab le to vie w on the Br acknell F orest 
website(1) 
Structure of the document  
2.5 Part 1 of the document includes the vision, objectiv es and str ategic policies that set out 
the o verall str ategy and le vels of need f or ne w development in the Borough.  Part 2 of the 
document includes the more detailed de velopment management policies which are used to 
assess planning applications along with rele vant polices in P art 1.  Link ed policy bo xes ha ve 
been included to cross ref er closely related policies in both par ts of the BFLP .  However, all 
policies should be read together . 
Policies Map 
2.6 The P olicies Map has been updated and can be vie wed on the consultation por tal (2).  
 Inset maps are a vailab le in the appendices . 
Neighbourhood planning 
2.7 Local comm unities ha ve the po wer to prepare their o wn neighbourhood plans and directly 
influence ne w development in their local area.  Once ‘made’  a neighbourhood plan f orms par t 
of the De velopment Plan. 
2.8 Neighbourhood plans m ust be in gener al conf ormity with the str ategic policies in a local 
plan b ut can identify more housing and emplo yment than a local plan, pro vided that the proposals 
satisfy national policy and en vironmental requirements .  
1 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan 
2 https://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/por tal/planning/pre_submission_bflp 
15 2.9 Paragraph 66 of the National Planning P olicy F ramework (NPPF), mak es it clear 
that str ategic policies should set out a housing requirement f or each designated neighbourhood 
area that tak es into account the o verall spatial str ategy and scale of de velopment and an y 
relevant allocations .  Section 7.2 'Sites allocated f or residential/mix ed use de velopment'  theref ore 
provides a breakdo wn of the o verall plan requirement f or each designated area.   
2.10 Policies in neighbourhood plans w ork alongside , and where appropr iate replace , 
non-str ategic policies in a local plan where the y overlap. The policies within a neighbourhood 
plan will only apply to the specific area co vered b y that plan. 
16 3: Conte xt 
3.1 The Local Plan m ust ha ve regard to local, regional and national plans and str ategies 
which relate to the future de velopment of the Borough, and other rele vant e vidence . 
National Planning P olicy and Regulations 
3.2 The most recent v ersion of the NPPF (3) was pub lished in F ebruary 2019.  It explains 
that the pur pose of the planning system is to contr ibute to the achie vement of   sustainab le 
development', which compr ises economic , social, and en vironmental aspects . Policies in the 
NPPF are suppor ted b y more detailed guidance in Planning Pr actice Guidance (PPG)(4). 
3.3 A Local Plan should be aspir ational, y et realistic , and set out str ategic policies to deliv er 
the following: 
The homes and jobs needed in the area. 
Retail, leisure and other commercial de velopment. 
Infrastructure f or transpor t, waste management, w ater supply , waste w ater, flood r isk, and 
the pro vision of miner als and energy . 
Comm unity and cultur al infr astructure and other local f acilities , including health pro vision. 
Climate change mitigation and adaptation, conser vation and enhancement of the natur al 
and histor ic en vironment, including landscape . 
3.4 A Local Plan m ust meet legal requirements(5)and be consistent with the pr inciples in the 
NPPF . 
Evidence Base 
3.5 The Local Plan m ust be suppor ted b y up to date e vidence . An o verview of the e vidence 
prepared to inf orm the local plan is pro vided on the BFLP w ebsite (6) .  Glossar y and acron yms 
are included 1: 'Acron yms'and Appendix 7:  'Glossar y'.  
Sustainability Appraisal and Habitat Regulations Assessment 
3.6 Sustainability Appr aisal (SA), incor porating Str ategic En vironmental Assessment 
(SEA), has been under taken alongside the prepar ation of the Local Plan.  This appr aisal tests 
the o verall planning str ategy and diff erent policy approaches and allocations against social, 
economic and en vironmental objectiv es to identify which options are the most sustainab le. It 
sets out the lik ely significant economic , environmental and social eff ects and suggests measures 
to minimise an y negativ e effects and maximise the positiv e ones . A Habitats Regulation 
Assessment of the BFLP has also been prepared.  This assessment identifies an y aspects of 
the BFLP that ha ve the potential to cause lik ely significant eff ects on the integ rity of habitats 
sites (Special Areas of Conser vation (SA Cs), Special Protection Areas (SP As) and Ramsar 
sites), either in isolation or in combination with other plans and projects , and to ag ree an 
appropr iate a voidance and mitigation str ategy where such eff ects are identified.   
3 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/national-planning-policy-fr amework--2 
4 http://planningguidance .comm unities .gov.uk/ 
5 Local Planning Regulations:  http://www .legislation.go v.uk/uksi/2012/767/regulation/18/made 
6 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base 
17 Other Plans and Strategies 
3.7 The Council m ust ha ve regard to other plans and str ategies produced b y itself and others . 
These include the Council Plan (7) which sets the Council’ s priorities up to 2023, and the Thames 
Valley Local Enter prise P artnership (LEP) Str ategic Economic Plan (8)which identifies economic 
growth pr iorities across Ber kshire . 
Cross Boundar y Issues and P artnership Working 
3.8 In prepar ing the Local Plan, the Council has w orked with the required bodies to co-oper ate 
on planning related issues that cross administr ative boundar ies (kno wn as the ‘duty to 
co-oper ate’).   Some of the e vidence has also been prepared jointly with other Ber kshire 
Author ities. The Council produced a Duty to Co-oper ate F ramework(9)setting out the bodies it 
would engage with and on which issues . Repor ting on the Duty to Co-oper ate process occurs 
through the production of a monitor ing repor t (10).   
Development Plan 
3.9 The BFLP replaces  a n umber of e xisting planning policies (details of which policies will 
be replaced can be f ound in Appendix 12).  The Council's current De velopment Plan documents 
are a vailab le to vie w on the Br acknell F orest w ebsite (11).   
3.10 By the time this plan is adopted, it is en visaged that the De velopment Plan will compr ise 
the following documents:    
Bracknell F orest Local Plan (prog rammed f or adoption Spr ing 2022)  
Retained policies in the Site Allocations Local Plan (2013)  
South East Plan - P olicy NRM6 that deals with the Thames Basin Heaths SP A  
Centr al and Easter n Ber kshire Joint Miner als and Waste Local Plan (prog rammed f or 
adoption Winter 2022)  
Made (adopted) Neighbourhood De velopment Plans prepared b y local comm unities . 
3.11 Together , policies in these plans , will address the str ategic issues listed in par agraph 
above. 
Portrait of Brac knell Forest 
3.12 Bracknell F orest lies 40km w est of London, in the hear t of the Thames Valley, within 
the County of Ber kshire . The Borough ab uts a n umber of other local author ities. It benefits from 
good tr anspor t connections , with direct access to both the M3 and M4.   It has direct r ail 
connections to London Waterloo/Reading (from Br acknell and Mar tin's Heron stations), and to 
Reading/Redhill/Gatwic k (from Cro wthor ne and Sandhurst stations). 
7 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/council-and-democr acy/str ategies-plans-and-policies/council-plan/about-council-plan   
8 Availab le to do wnload at http://www .thamesv alleyberkshire .co.uk/documents?f older=192 
9 Availab le to do wnload at https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/comprehensiv e-local-plan/e vidence-base 
10 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/monitor ing/other-monitor ing-and-data 
11 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan   
18 Map 1 Brac knell Forest Conte xt Map 
3.13 The Borough is fully par ished and contains six par ish/to wn councils . These are sho wn 
on 'Map 2 P arish boundar ies, defined settlements and designated emplo yment areas within 
Bracknell F orest', together with the e xtent of the defined settlements .  These include Cro wthor ne 
and Sandhurst in the south, Winkfield Ro w, Cha vey Down and Nor th Ascot in the nor th/east, 
Binfield and Warfield in the nor th and Br acknell Town in the centre of the Borough.  Parts of the 
northern and easter n par ishes lie within the Metropolitan Green Belt.  The souther n par t of the 
Borough contains a n umber of institutions (Broadmoor Hospital, Cro wthor ne; Wellington College , 
Crowthor ne; and the Ro yal Militar y Academ y, Sandhurst).    
3.14 Bracknell is the main urban area in the Borough.   Following its Ne w Town designation 
in 1949, it de veloped r apidly in the 1950s and 1960s str uctured on a n umber of neighbourhoods 
each with its o wn centre including shops , a pr imary school, a comm unity centre , a pub lic house 
and in some instances a church.  Great impor tance w as attached to the pro vision of open space . 
The Town Centre and emplo yment areas w ere seg regated from the residential neighbourhoods . 
While Br acknell has e xpanded fur ther o ver the y ears, its Ne w Town or igins are still e vident.   
3.15 Until the regener ation of Br acknell Town Centre commenced with the constr uction of a 
new super market and The Le xicon, there had been little de velopment since the 1980s , when 
Princess Square Shopping Centre w as completed.  The mix of uses , urban en vironment and 
floorspace did not meet moder n requirements and aspir ations . Work on The Le xicon scheme 
began in 2013 and w as completed in the autumn of 2017.  It pro vides retail and leisure f acilities , 
including ne w pub lic spaces . In addition to the retail off er in Br acknell Town Centre , Cro wthor ne 
19 and Sandhurst fulfil roles as small to wn centres , suppor ted b y other distr ict and local centres 
across the Borough.    There are also three main emplo yment areas located around Br acknell 
Town and tw o in the souther n par t of the Borough (see Map 2). 
3.16 Bracknell F orest has a r ich and v aried landscape , containing a wide r ange of habitats , 
which suppor t a div ersity of plants and animals and o ver 20 per cent of the Borough is protected 
by designations , including European and nationally designated sites including the Thames 
Basin Heaths SP A and and Windsor F orest and Great P ark SAC.  The Borough also has a 
diverse r ange of her itage assets including Listed Buildings , Scheduled Mon uments and Histor ic 
Parks and Gardens . 
20 Map 2 P arish boundaries,  defined settlements and designated emplo yment areas within 
Brac knell Forest 
21 Key Facts about the Bor ough 
3.17 The 2011 Census identified the f ollowing: 
113,205 people w ere per manent residents in the Borough. 
The population w as younger than the national a verage (a mean age of 37.4 y ears compared 
to 39.3 in England) b ut with an increasing propor tion of older people in the borough (12% 
aged o ver 65 compared with 11% in 2001). 
There w ere 47,039 households with an a verage siz e of 2.41 people (2.46 in 2001). 
A relativ ely high propor tion of proper ties w ere o wner-occupied (68% compared to a national 
average of 63%) 
Terraced housing w as the most common type of accommodation (32%) although 
flats/apar tments/maisonettes had increased from 16% in 2001 to 19%. 
Car o wnership w as high with 86% of households o wning one or more cars (compared to 
a national a verage of 74%). 
78.3% of the 16-74 age g roup w ere economically activ e (compared to 69.9% nationally). 
There w as a higher than a verage propor tion of managers , directors , senior officials and 
professional occupations and a lo wer than a verage propor tion of elementar y occupations , 
machine oper ators and skilled tr ades . 
The health of residents w as gener ally good, with 87% of people judging their o wn health 
to be ‘very good’  or ‘good’  (compared to the national figure of 81%). 
22 Part 1 - Str ategic issues 4: Vision and objectiv es 
4.1 Vision 
Brac knell Forest Local Plan Vision 
4.1 By 2037 the Borough will ha ve positiv ely and sustainab ly embr aced the need to b uild 
new homes , create ne w jobs and impro ve and de velop ne w infr astructure , services and 
facilities . 
4.2 New development will ha ve been f ocused on Br acknell, optimising the use of a vailable 
brownfield sites , suppor ting the contin ued regener ation of the Town Centre and enab ling 
it to thr ive as a destination f or retail, leisure and cultur al activities .  Significant prog ress will 
have been made on the creation of an e xemplar lo w carbon Garden Village at Jealott's 
Hill.  This will ha ve introduced a dynamic hub of economic activity in the nor thern par t of 
the Borough based on the legacy and reputation of an e xisting compan y and will ha ve 
created  a world-leading Science and Innovation  Park at the f orefront of ne xt gener ation 
agricultur al technology research and disco very accommodat ing existing and ne w third 
party occupiers looking to cluster to access all necessar y capabilities to deliv er 
acceler ated innovation to mar ket.  This will ha ve mar ked a new phase in the evolution  of 
the e xisting compan y allowing it to maintain and fur ther enhance its global role in helping 
to solv e increasingly comple x global  problems through the de velopment of inno vative 
solutions f or sustainab le ag riculture , food secur ity and climate change .  Exemplar 
contempor ary homes will ha ve been deliv ered in tandem with ne w emplo yment floorspace 
and infr astructure .  These will ha ve met a v ariety of needs and aspir ations (including f or 
affordab le homes).   The b uildings will ha ve been  constr ucted to high standards of 
sustainability and design within an e xceptional en vironment incor porating and enhancing 
existing landscape f eatures and pro viding outstanding leisure , recreational and sustainab le 
travel oppor tunities .   
4.3 Elsewhere , a range of ne w homes (including aff ordab le homes) b uilt to high 
environmental and design standards , will ha ve been pro vided that will ha ve met the needs 
of a g rowing and ageing population, with some smaller sites ha ving been de veloped as 
extensions to the Borough’ s other to wns and villages .  
4.4 New developments will ha ve been designed to sustain a strong sense of comm unity, 
inclusiv eness , identity and local distinctiv eness .  Residents around the Borough will ha ve 
been suppor ted to influence the char acter of local de velopment through neighbourhood 
plans . 
4.5 Existing k ey emplo yment areas will ha ve been protected and suppor ted to adapt to 
changes in ho w people w ork and ne w business models .  The Borough’ s econom y will be 
dynamic and thr iving with specialised sectors contr ibuting to the wider area.   The Borough 
will benefit from a w ell-educated, skilled and fle xible labour f orce with high le vels of 
emplo yment. 
4.6 New and impro ved infr astructure will ha ve been planned and deliv ered alongside 
new developments in par tnership with other organisations .  
24 4.7 The g reen and b lue infr astructure netw ork will ha ve been enhanced, impro ving its 
connectivity and increasing the pro vision of accessib le green spaces (including f ormal and 
informal recreational oppor tunities), encour aging people to ha ve health y and activ e lifestyles . 
 The Borough’ s distinctiv e, varied mix of f orested open landscapes and v alued countr yside 
(including Green Belt) will ha ve been respected. 
4.8 A positiv e approach to adapting to and mitigating against the eff ects of climate change 
will ha ve been tak en by; 
promoting sustainab le transpor t;  
encour aging sustainab le building design; 
avoiding de velopment in areas at g reatest r isk of flooding;   
promoting sustainab le drainage and challenging w ater efficiency standards;  and  
protecting and enhancing g reen netw orks. 
4.9 There will ha ve been a net gain in biodiv ersity and an y adv erse en vironmental impacts 
of de velopment will ha ve been pre vented or mitigated.   Designated and non-designated 
heritage assets and their settings will ha ve been eff ectively saf eguarded f or future 
gener ations . 
25 4.2 Plan objectiv es 
4.10 The Local Plan objectiv es outline ho w the Council will seek to deliv er the Vision, and 
give direction to planning policies . 
Table 2 Brac knell Forest Local Plan Objectives 
Objective Issue   
To tak e a positiv e and proactiv e approach   to development 
proposals which accord with the De velopment Plan. Positiv e / proactiv e A 
To manage change in a w ay that ensures that the 
Borough’ s valued natur al and histor ic en vironment is 
proper ly protected, enhanced, supplemented and managed 
as appropr iate to its significance .  This will include 
countr yside (including the Green Belt), landscapes , 
woodlands , open spaces , heritage assets (including their 
settings), w ater, air and soil en vironments , and areas of 
nature conser vation/ecological v alue (including habitats 
sites and Ancient Woodland). Protect / 
enhance existing assets 
and create ne w assets B 
To promote clean g rowth par ticular ly in inno vative and high 
value emplo yment sectors .  To suppor t local b usinesses 
including those f orming clusters of activity b y ensur ing that 
suitab le sites and  b uildings are pro vided in a fle xible form 
that allo ws a r apid response to changes in economic 
circumstances and needs . Suppor t 
economic growth and 
resilience C 
To allocate  suitab le, availab le and well located  land to 
meet all  identified development  needs  (including  affordab le 
housing)  sustainab ly.  This will include: 
using land effectively,  
minimising pollution,  
addressing the eff ects and causes of climate change , 
including flood r isk and suppor ting the mo ve towards 
 net z ero carbon. Level of development / 
land supply D 
To plan f or the contin ued regener ation of Br acknell Town 
Centre to accommodate  a range  of uses  to suppor t and 
expand  its role as the main retail, leisure and cultur al centre 
for the Borough, and to maintain the vitality  and viability  of 
all other identified  retail  centres within  the Borough. Town centres E 
26 To suppor t and create strong,  health y and self-reliant 
comm unities  where the identities  of existing  settlements 
are maintained,  the quality  of life for all will be protected 
and where possib le enhanced.   To ensure comm unities 
have access  to the social, recreational  and cultur al facilities 
and services  they need to thr ive and  g row sustainab ly.  
To impro ve health, social and cultur al well being  for all, 
including  minimising  crime and the fear of crime. Strong comm unities F 
To ensure  that new development  is designed  to a high 
standard  that meets the Borough’ s needs and mak es a 
positiv e contr ibution to maintaining and enhancing local 
character , distinctiv eness and an attr active built and natur al 
environment, whilst saf eguarding the amenity of e xisting 
and future residents . Achie ving high 
quality development G 
To promote a w ell designed and sustainab le transpor t 
system which enab les reliab le, safe access to ser vices and 
facilities , and pro vides choices about the need to tr avel, 
and tr anspor t modes (including encour aging activ e and 
health y lifestyles).   To ensure the impacts of ne w 
development on the highw ay netw ork are mitigated. Transpor t H 
To ensure that the Borough’ s future infr astructure needs 
(including interconnected m ulti functional g reen and b lue 
infrastructure) are proper ly assessed, planned f or and 
delivered at the r ight time dur ing the de velopment process . Infrastructure I 
These are not listed in pr iority order . 
27 5: Spatial str ategy 
Conte xt 
Purpose and e volution of strategy 
5.1 A spatial  strategy  is needed  to set out how the Plan’ s visionand objectiv es will be achie ved. 
It has been inf ormed by: 
National planning policy 
Other plans and str ategies  
Key pieces of e vidence 
Views expressed b y organisations and individuals dur ing the prepar ation of this Plan. 
National planning polic y 
5.2 The NPPF sa ys that local plans should contr ibute to achie ving sustainab le de velopment 
and include positiv e plans f or the de velopment and infr astructure required in an area in 
co-oper ation with neighbour ing author ities.  It highlights the need to create the conditions in 
which b usinesses can in vest, e xpand and adapt;  and the requirement to maximise the 
contr ibution from pre viously de veloped land together with using land more eff ectively. 
Other plans and strategies 
5.3 Key Council str ategies are reflected in the Council Plan which contains 6 str ategic themes 
based upon pledges made to residents in the 2019 local election.  These include economic 
resilience , comm unities and protecting and enhancing our en vironment .  In de veloping the 
overall approach to g rowth and ho w this is to be distr ibuted across the Borough, regard has 
been paid to these themes and the str ategies and plans of other organisations . 
Key pieces of e vidence 
5.4 The scale of g rowth that is required dur ing the plan per iod is inf ormed b y a n umber of 
studies including the f ollowing. 
The Local Housing Need (LHN) conducted using the standard method in national planning 
guidance and the Housing Needs Assessment  (12) which set out the housing needs 
including the o verall number , scale of aff ordab le housing needed, siz e and type of dw ellings 
and the needs of specific g roups .  
The Emplo yment Land Needs Study (13) which sets out the scale of pro vision needed f or 
future b usiness , industr ial and stor age floorspace . 
The Str ategic Housing and Economic Land A vailability Assessment (SHELAA)  (14) which 
identifies potential land f or de velopment and assesses its suitability , availability and 
achie vability . 
The SA (15) is also a k ey piece of e vidence .  The SA process has included identifying a 
number of policy options f or ho w the Borough should de velop, and in par ticular where 
development should happen. 
12 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/5819854 
13 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/5643472 
14 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base   
15 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base   
28 Constraints 
5.5 The Borough  contains a  number  of physical  and environmental  constr aints which influence 
the location of de velopment, including the k ey constr aints sho wn in  Map 3.  These include , 
areas liab le to flood, habitats sites (the Thames Basin  Heaths  SPA and Windsor  Forest  and 
Great  Park SAC) and the  Metropolitan Green Belt. 
29 Map 3 K ey Constraints 
30 The strategy 
5.6 The k ey components of the str ategy are stim ulating economic g rowth, meeting future 
housing needs and deliv ering  infr astructure and ser vices whilst protecting the natur al and 
histor ic en vironment.   
5.7 The f ollowing section considers the approach tak en on a par ish basis .  For each area, 
the justification and reasoning f or the approach is giv en.  The o verall str ategy tak en in the Plan 
is set out at the end. 
Brac knell Town 
5.8 The pr incipal settlement in the Borough is Br acknell Town which contains most of the 
Borough’ s population.  It has e xpanded r apidly since being designated as a Ne w Town and 
further residential and economic de velopment is already planned on a r ange of sites , primarily 
through changes of use and rede velopment proposals . It is the  most  sustainab le area in the 
Borough  being the  most  accessib le and containing  the greatest r ange  of facilities  and services . 
5.9 The rede velopment of large par ts of Br acknell Town Centre to create The Le xicon has 
resulted in substantial impro vements in the o verall shopping and leisure e xperience and has 
stimulated the e vening econom y.  There has also been a significant increase in the amount of 
residential accommodation in the Town Centre as a result of the rede velopment and con version 
of lower quality office b uildings .  These de velopments ha ve been suppor ted b y impro vements 
to the pub lic realm and tr anspor t infrastructure including the enhancement of f ootpaths , 
cycle ways and car par ks together with major highw ay impro vements to roads such as Millennium 
Way.  
5.10 Further de velopments are planned in and around Br acknell Town Centre on sites 
allocated f or residential/mix ed use de velopment.  Most in volve pre viously de veloped land and 
provide oppor tunities to impro ve linkages and supplement the current off er with complementar y 
and inno vative forms of floorspace .  They will help Br acknell Town Centre respond to contin uous 
changes and the need to ha ve a char acter and off er that distinguishes it from other competing 
centres .  Most of these sites are allocated f or mix ed use de velopment.   It is en visaged that this 
will include some office floorspace in accordance with national policy which treats offices as a 
main to wn centre use .  Whilst the appeal of the area as a location f or office de velopment has 
declined in recent y ears, this has been pr imarily due to the poor en vironment which has no w 
been addressed through the regener ation scheme .   
5.11 In order to broaden the r ange of housing planned in Br acknell Town, a g reenfield site 
to the south w est of the e xisting concentr ation of de velopment in the to wn is allocated f or 
comprehensiv e well-designed de velopment, and will f orm an urban e xtension .  It is en visaged 
that this will be aimed at pro viding f amily-or ientated housing. 
5.12 There are also three estab lished concentr ations of emplo yment floorspace  to the w est, 
east and south w est of the Town Centre that are designated as emplo yment areas .  The function 
of these areas is protected with an Ar ticle 4 Direction.  They are impor tant in pro viding space 
for more e xtensiv e industr ial, stor age and distr ibution uses . They are accessib le from both the 
strategic road netw ork and local residential neighbourhoods whilst being  sufficiently seg regated 
from them to minimise the possibility of conflict betw een uses . Due to the dated nature of some 
of the b uildings , it is lik ely that there will be oppor tunities to intensify the use of these areas , 
which already include some clusters of similar acitivities . 
31 5.13 In spite of the de velopment that has tak en place o ver the last f ew years, the la yout of 
Bracknell still f ollows the pr inciples that guided its de velopment as a Ne w Town in that it 
compr ises a ser ies of residential neighbourhoods arr anged around a netw ork of local centres 
that contain v alued comm unity f acilities and shops together with good access to e xtensiv e 
greenspaces .  Responses to consultations dur ing the prepar ation of this Local Plan highlighted 
the impor tance of retaining these f eatures . 
Binfield,  Warfield and Winkfield (the nor thern parishes) 
5.14 A number of sites w ere allocated through the SALP in this area, including str ategic sites 
at Amen Cor ner South, Binfield;  Amen Cor ner North, Binfield;  Blue Mountain, Binfield;  and 
Land at Warfield.   Three of these are no w under constr uction resulting in significant e xtension 
of the b uilt up area of Br acknell into the souther n par ts of the par ishes of Warfield and Binfield, 
primarily with f amily housing.   A number of these sites will contin ue to deliv er housing dur ing 
this plan per iod and cum ulativ ely will ha ve a significant impact on e xisting comm unities . 
5.15 Despite the de velopment that has already occurred and the sites that are planned to 
be de veloped (including some smaller sites being allocated through this Plan), there is a 
significant amount of unde veloped countr yside in these par ishes .  A large propor tion of this 
countr yside , falls within the Green Belt.   Villages located within the Green Belt are  identified on 
the P olicies Map . Limited infilling will be per mitted in these villages in accordance with national 
policy . There are also  a f ew villages and hamlets in the countr yside outside the Green Belt.  A 
few are identified as defined settlements on the P olicies Map .  They are also impor tant as 
“service hubs”  for other smaller villages and hamlets .  
5.16 National policy aff ords the Green Belt strong protection.   Green Belt boundar ies should 
only be altered where e xceptional circumstances are fully e videnced and justified through the 
prepar ation or updating of plans .  As par t of the e vidence base f or this Plan, the Council 
commissioned a Green Belt re view. This tested land in the Green Belt against the fiv e pur poses 
set out in national policy . It concluded that all land within the Green Belt in Br acknell F orest 
makes at least a ‘contr ibution’  to one or more of the fiv e Green Belt pur poses . Irrespectiv e of 
this, lando wners are entitled to submit an y areas of land f or consider ation f or de velopment 
through the SHELAA.  Nineteen of the sites submitted in connection with the prepar ation of this 
Plan w ere located in the Green Belt.  All b ut one of these sites w ere of a limited scale and 
capacity . 
5.17 The e xception is a site of appro ximately 240ha  on land at Jealott's Hill (in the par ish of 
Warfield).   The e xisting b uilt en velope on the site co vers some 18 hectares and has been used 
for research into ag ricultur al technology f or man y years.  The f acility has de veloped into one 
of national and global impor tance .  Agricultur al technology is a sector that is identified b y the 
Government in its Industr ial Str ategy as off ering substantial oppor tunities . National planning 
policy also affir ms that planning policies and decisions should recognise and address the specific 
locational requirements of diff erent sectors . This includes making pro vision f or clusters or 
netw orks of kno wledge and data-dr iven, creativ e or high technology industr ies at a v ariety of 
scales and in suitab ly accessib le locations .  
5.18 The pace of change means  that it is imper ative for the e xisting compan y to collabor ate 
even more intensiv ely with e xternal sources of e xpertise.The status quo is not considered a 
viable long-ter m option in its ability to win major projects and funding.  It will also struggle to 
retain and attr act specialist talent, and lose its top-tier status as a global research and 
development location.  Research oper ations are lik ely be mo ved oversees to better suited 
32 facilities . It is theref ore intended to de velop a world-leading  Science and Inno vation 
Park with state-of-the-ar t science and inno vation f acilities that will appeal to local, national and 
international occupiers . It will be capab le of accommodating e xisting and ne w demand from 
third par ty occupiers who are looking to cluster to access all necessar y capabilities to deliv er 
acceler ated innovation to mar ket.  
5.19 Estimates of the de velopment costs and projections of potential re venues from the 
Science and Inno vation P ark indicate a significant viability gap aff ecting the initial phases of the 
development, with re venues e xpected to co ver costs in subsequent phases . On this basis , the 
Science and Inno vation P ark requires cross-subsidy from residential development to enab le 
the delivery of this component of the vision. 
5.20 In consider ing whether or not e xceptional circumstances e xist, the NPPF ref ers to the 
need to demonstr ate that all other reasonab le options f or meeting the identified need f or 
development ha ve been fully e xamined.   In this case the e xceptional circumstances relate to 
the in vestment required to retain and de velop a globally impor tant b usiness on its e xisting site 
and the oppor tunity this creates to stim ulate the local econom y through the creation of the 
Science and Inno vation P ark and and an outstanding, sustainab le, mixed use Garden Village . 
5.21 The Council suppor ts the case f or alter ing the Green Belt boundar y to create a ne w 
mixed-use Garden Village of a scale that pro vides a sufficient cr itical mass to be sustainab le.  
  Due to the timescale required f or such a de velopment, deliv ery will e xtend be yond this plan 
period and will theref ore pro vide a long ter m approach. 
5.22 Through the de velopment of a Science and Inno vation P ark, moder n flexible emplo yment 
floorspace w ould be pro vided to accommodate the latest scientific needs including the ability 
to work collabor atively with allied b usinesses to help solv e increasingly comple x prob lems and 
create inno vative solutions f or sustainab le ag riculture .  This accords with the Go vernment’ s 
recognition of the substantial oppor tunities off ered b y the ag ricultur al technology sector and 
suppor ts growth in the wider and local econom y, especially in the nor thern par t of the Borough 
where there are f ewer concentr ations of emplo yment.  The de velopment will also help meet 
local housing needs including specialist needs and pro vide a r ange of comm unity infr astructure 
in a w ell designed g reen en vironment.   
5.23 The rest of the Green Belt and countr yside will be protected, commensur ate with national 
policy and other local policies , with par ticular attention being giv en to maintaining the char acter 
and distinctiv eness of the area. 
Crowthorne and Sandhur st (the southern parishes) 
5.24 These settlements do not ha ve as wide a r ange of ser vices and f acilities as Br acknell 
Town, b ut, are still sustainab le locations . It is impor tant that  the viability and vitality of their 
centres (especially the District Centres of Cro wthor ne and Sandhurst) are suppor ted. to help 
maintain the functionality of the area.  Whilst options f or growth in these centres are limited , 
there ma y be small scale oppor tunities f or intensification and e xtensions where appropr iate. 
This w ould assist in ensur ing that suitab le floorspace is a vailab le to allo w centres to adapt and 
meet the changing needs of local comm unities . Other Local Centres are also impor tant in 
helping to meet the da y to da y needs of local residents . Some include v alued comm unity 
facilities . They are within w alking distance of man y residents and theref ore help reduce the 
need to tr avel. 
33 5.25 Two strategic allocations w ere identified f or growth as urban e xtensions to Cro wthor ne 
through the SALP . The f ormer Transpor t Research Labor atory Site (no w kno wn as Buc kler’s 
Park) is under constr uction pro viding a full r ange of house types and siz es including a care 
home . This site and land at Broadmoor will pro vide a significant amount of housing dur ing the 
plan per iod. 
5.26 Locally , there are en vironmental and ph ysical constr aints that impact on possib le locations 
for fur ther g rowth. For example , land in the south easter n par t of the Borough f orms par t of the 
Thames Basin Heaths , which is an SP A. There is also an 'e xclusion z one' restr icting 
residential development within 400m of the SPA. No fur ther sites w ere submitted in the par ish 
of Cro wthor ne through the SHELAA although one g reenfield site (in the par ish of Sandhurst) 
adjoins the b uilt up area of Cro wthor ne, to the w est. This is is allocated f or a comprehensiv e 
well-designed de velopment since it is located in a highly sustainab le location adjacent to the 
railway station.   It is also near Wellington Business P ark (which is designated as an emplo yment 
area as sho wn on the P olicies Map in vie w of its impor tance in pro viding local emplo yment 
oppor tunities), a Local Centre (Station P arade) and other ser vices . In order to pro vide smaller 
sites in this area, tw o small g reenfield sites are allocated f or residential de velopment fur ther 
south in Sandhurst.    
5.27 In the past, a v ariety of unallocated sites ha ve also come f orward in this area as ‘windf alls’ 
and it is lik ely that this trend will contin ue. 
34 Spatial Strategy 
In order to contr ibute to wards the deliv ery of sustainab le de velopment and meet the vision 
and str ategic objectiv es of this Local Plan, g rowth will be accommodated as set out belo w. 
The scale of de velopment will reflect:   
the need to deliv er homes and jobs dur ing the plan per iod and be yond; 
the need to maintain or enhance local ser vices and f acilities , including comm unity 
facilities; 
the capacity of infr astructure within the defined settlement and the timescale f or an y 
necessar y investment and impro vement; 
the settlement’ s role , char acter and setting;  and, 
environmental and policy constr aints . 
Brac knell Town 
Development will be f ocused on pre viously de veloped sites in and around Br acknell Town 
Centre to help the contin ued re vitalisation of the area.   This should pro vide it with the 
flexibility to respond to contin ually changing retail, leisure and other ‘main to wn centre’ 
floorspace needs in a w ay that enab les it to de velop its char acter and off er that distinguishes 
it from other competing centres .  
Emplo yment de velopment will be concentr ated in Br acknell Town Centre (as appropr iate) 
and the designated Emplo yment Areas suppor ting e xisting and ne w businesses through 
the encour agement of schemes to rede velop sites or e xtend premises and use land more 
efficiently . 
An urban e xtension will be de veloped in the south w ester n area of the par ish predominantly 
with f amily housing and an integ rated netw ork of g reenspace , to balance the pro vision of 
smaller dw ellings in the centr al area.   
The estab lished patter n of residential neighbourhoods arr anged around a netw ork of local 
centres will be retained. 
Binfield,  Warfield and Winkfield (the nor thern parishes) 
A new Garden Village will be de veloped based on the site of an e xisting local b usiness at 
Jealott’ s Hill.  The pace of change means  that it is imper ative for the e xisting compan y to 
collabor ate e ven more intensiv ely with e xternal sources of e xpertise.The status quo is not 
considered a viab le long-ter m option in its ability to win major projects and funding.  It will 
also struggle to retain and attr act specialist talent, and lose its top-tier status as a global 
research and de velopment location.   It is theref ore proposed to de velop a Science and 
Innovation P ark It will be capab le of accommodating e xisting and ne w demand from third 
party occupiers who are looking to cluster to access all necessar y capabilities to deliv er 
acceler ated innovation to mar ket.  
Estimates of the de velopment costs and projections of potential re venues from the 
Science and Inno vation P ark indicate a significant viability gap aff ecting initial phases so 
it will requires cross-subsidy from residential  development  to enab le the delivery of this 
35 component of the vision.    It represents an oppor tunity to deliv er a significant cluster of 
high v alue research and de velopment activities whilst maximising oppor tunities to deliv er 
new infr astructure and create sustainab le de velopment. 
Whilst maintaining their identity and integ rity, small scale g rowth will occur within the defined 
settlement areas of cer tain villages to suppor t their ser vice role .  
Crowthorne and Sandhur st (the southern parishes) 
An urban e xtension will be de veloped on the w ester n edge of Cro wthor ne (including 
additional  parking for the railway station)  and two smaller  sites in south  west Sandhurst.   
These will add to the r ange of sites and help meet local needs in this par t of the Borough. 
Further e xpansion  through small scale de velopments , rede velopments and e xtensions  within 
the settlement will also help suppor t the role and function  of the District Centres  of 
Crowthor ne and Sandhurst. 
Emplo yment  development  will be directed to two designated Emplo yment Areas reinf orcing 
the impor tance of their role in pro viding suitab le locations f or small to medium siz ed 
enter prises and emplo yment oppor tunities f or local residents . 
 The Council also respects and suppor ts the role that local comm unities can pla y in 
developing their areas through the production of neighbourhood plans .   
36 Map 4 K ey Dia gram 
37   
5.28 The k ey diag ram summar ies the Spatial Str ategy in g raphical f orm 
5.29 The pr inciples set out abo ve will guide the distr ibution of g rowth.  Other de velopment 
proposals will be submitted f or consider ation dur ing the plan per iod through the de velopment 
management process . 
5.30 The Spatial  Strategy outlined  above will contin ue to be pursued  in the assessment of 
planning  applications against the locational elements of the str ategic policies , particular ly Policy 
LP2 – Sustainab le locational  principles . 
38 6: Sustainability pr inciples 
6.1 Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples 
6.1 The NPPF pro vides a guide to sustainab le de velopment at the national le vel and the 
Local Plan demonstr ates what this means f or the Borough.  This is impor tant due to the le vel 
of growth that m ust be deliv ered and the need to ensure that it addresses economic , 
environmental and social consider ations . The f ollowing policy reflects the vision and objectiv es 
of the Local Plan and sets out the conte xt for the more detailed policies in the remainder of the 
Plan. 
Objectives 
B – Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
C – Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
D – Le vel of de velopment/supply 
E – Retail centres 
F – Strong comm unities 
G – Achie ving high quality de velopment 
H – Transpor t 
I – Infrastructure 
39 Policy LP 1 
Sustainab le de velopment principles 
As appr opriate to their nature , proposals f or de velopment will be permitted that: 
1. provide suitab le land/b uildings to help meet de velopment needs; 
2. make efficient use of land/b uildings; 
3. create a high quality b uilt en vironment,  enhance and maintain local c haracter 
and landscapes,  and reduce and pre vent crime; 
4. protect and enhance the natural en vironment and the significance of herita ge 
assets inc luding their settings; 
5. minimise the use of natural resour ces, minimise and mana ge waste and respond 
to climate c hang e; 
6. protect e xisting and pr ovide necessar y new infrastructure , services and facilities, 
and enhance the green infrastructure netw ork; 
7. promote health y lifestyles and maximise health and wellbeing; 
8. are located so as to reduce the need to tra vel; and, 
9. offer a c hoice of modes of tra vel with minimal reliance on the priv ate car . 
6.2 Paragraph 7 of the NPPF advises that the pur pose of the planning system is to contr ibute 
to the achie vement of sustainab le de velopment.   No single de velopment proposal is lik ely to 
deliver benefits equally in ter ms of economic , social and en vironmental impacts .  However, 
setting out the e xpectations f or all de velopment will ensure that all three aspects are tak en into 
account.  The pr inciples in P olicy LP 1 should be balanced through the de velopment process 
and in pr actice could contr ibute as descr ibed belo w. 
6.3 Economic: 
By ensur ing that sufficient land and b uildings come f orward to meet local needs f or housing 
and as f ar as possib le, for emplo yment uses , particular ly through the suppor t given to the 
creation of a Garden Village at Jealotts Hill.  This will pro vide a r ange of local job 
oppor tunities . 
By ensur ing that the r ight type and siz e of b uildings are deliv ered to help meet the  needs 
of local businesses and  new investors .  This includes suppor ting proposals that: 
add to the div ersity of jobs , 
help f orm clusters of adjacent technologies and industr ies, and  
encour age main to wn centre uses (par ticular ly comm unity, cultur al and leisure uses) 
in town centre locations to strengthen the local econom y and help secure their vitality 
and viability . 
By ensur ing that the density of proposals is appropr iate and that land is used in an efficient 
way, taking account of the char acter of the area.  This will include seeking higher densities 
in and around Br acknell Town Centre as par t of the contin uing regener ation project. 
By identifying the need f or ne w infr astructure and w orking to ensure that it is pro vided in 
a co-ordinated w ay at appropr iate times . 
40 6.4 Social: 
By pro viding a supply of housing, including aff ordab le homes of an appropr iate mix and 
type to meet the needs of e xisting and future residents . This will include the pro vision of 
specialist accommodation f or the increasing propor tion of older people , where appropr iate. 
By protecting e xisting and pro viding essential ne w infr astructure , services and f acilities 
that meet the needs of e xisting and future residents .  This could include additional health 
facilities , educational f acilities , footpaths/cycle ways, open space and recreational f acilities , 
all of which can mak e an impor tant contr ibution to the health and w ellbeing of comm unities . 
6.5 Environmental: 
By creating a high-quality distinctiv e built en vironment that tak es account of the char acter 
of urban and r ural landscapes . 
By protecting and enhancing the significance of b uildings , sites and f eatures of 
archaeological and histor ic interest, together with their settings . 
By the pr udent use of natur al resources and minimising carbon or energy impacts 
associated with de velopment.  This might include giving consider ation to the juxtaposition 
of uses and the appropr iate siting,  orientation  and design  of new buildings together with 
the use of renewable energy . 
By ensur ing better integ ration of tr anspor t and land use planning to reduce the need to 
travel. 
By promoting de velopment in locations that minimise the need to tr avel and maximise 
oppor tunities to tr avel by the most sustainab le modes . This might be sought through 
impro vements to infr astructure f or walking, cycling and pub lic transpor t. 
By encour aging the efficient use of land and the re-use of pre viously de veloped land, as 
far as possib le. 
By mitigating and adapting to climate change through careful planning and design of 
development, including reducing the r isk of flooding from all sources . 
By pre venting pollution through the pro vision of adequate w astewater infr astructure and 
mitigation where there is a r isk of a reduction in air quality , increased le vels of noise or 
intrusion from ar tificial lighting. 
By protecting areas of impor tance f or nature conser vation and taking oppor tunities to 
extend the netw orks of g reen infr astructure and pro vide a net gain in biodiv ersity . 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicies 
All Part 2 Non Str ategic P olicies 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par as 7-9) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
6.6 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
41 6.7 Monitor ing 
Through the collectiv e analysis of data relating to other issue specific policies 
42 6.2 Sustainab le locational pr inciples 
6.8 The spatial  strategy  explains  the approach  that has been taken to deter mining  the location 
of sites allocated in the Local Plan and pro vides a fr amework for other de velopment proposals 
that will come forward during the plan per iod.  
Objectives 
A – P ositiv e/proactiv e 
B – Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
C – Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
E – Retail centres 
F – Strong comm unities 
H – Transpor t 
I – Infrastructure  
Policy LP 2 
Sustainab le locational principles 
Development will be permitted in settlements as defined on the P olicies Map,  whic h 
include the de velopab le areas of allocated sites.  Development will be permitted 
whic h is consistent with the c haracter of the settlement,  and with its le vel of 
accessibility to ser vices and its infrastructure . 
6.9 Settlement boundar ies are defined on the Policies Map and delineate the boundar y 
betw een areas  of built/urban  development  (settlements)  and non-urban  or rural development 
(the countr yside/Green Belt).   
6.10 Although the r ange of uses within a defined settlement will v ary with the siz e of the 
settlement, the y typically include a v ariety of residential, comm unity and commercial/emplo yment 
uses together with tr anspor t facilities . 
6.11 Land outside settlement boundar ies is defined as countr yside or Green Belt on the 
Policies Map . It is predominantly used f or ag riculture , woodland and outdoor recreational uses . 
It can also assist in the separ ation of adjacent comm unities and help retain individual identities . 
6.12 It is impor tant that de velopment is directed to defined settlements (which include the 
developab le areas of allocated sites) where there is better access to f acilities and ser vices . 
This also helps reduce the need to tr avel and encour ages the use of more sustainab le modes 
of transpor t. 
43 6.13 Other policies in this plan pro vide fur ther guidance on  the location of par ticular types of 
development within defined settlements , such as retail and emplo yment de velopment.  Whilst 
the pr iority is to locate  development  within  defined settlements  there  may be some  forms of 
development that m ust be located in the defined countr yside and Green Belt.  Criteria-based 
policies are used to assess such  proposals . 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicies 
All Part 2 Non Str ategic P olicies 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par as 7 - 9) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
6.14 Deliver y  
Deter mination of planning applications 
6.15 Monitoring 
Permissions g ranted inside and outside the defined settlement boundar ies each y ear. 
44 7: Housing 
7.1 Pro vision of housing 
Housing need 
7.1 The NPPF states that ‘to deter mine the minim um n umber of homes needed, str ategic 
policies should be inf ormed by a LHN assessment, conducted  using  the standard  method in 
national  planning guidance (16).  It adds that ‘in addition to the local housing need figure , any 
needs that cannot be met within neighbour ing areas should also be tak en into account in 
estab lishing the amount of housing to be planned f or. 
7.2 Details of the standard method f or estab lishing the LHN are set out in the Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment section of the Planning Pr actice Guidance (PPG).   Using the 
2014-based household projections  (17)and an uplift based on the r atio of house pr ices to 
workplace-based ear nings  (18) the LHN f or Br acknell F orest is 614 dw ellings per ann um, using 
a baseline of 2020 . 
Table 3 Calculation of Local Housing Need f or Brac knell Forest 
MHCLG Standar d Method Housing Need Calculation 
1. Setting the baseline (based on 2014 household projections)  
51,588 Households 2020 
56,191 Households 2030 
4,603 Change in households 
460.3 Projected household g rowth (o ver 10 y ear per iod) 
2. Adjusting to tak e account of aff ordability 
9.33 Local aff ordability r atio (2019) 
(19)  
0.333 Affordability uplift to household g rowth  
[(Local aff ordability r atio-4)/4]x0.25 
614 3.Minim um Ann ual Local Housing Need (dw ellings per ann um)   
[(1+aff ordability uplift) x projected house g rowth] 
Housing Bac kground P aper (Figure 1) (20) 
7.3 Bracknell F orest  is adjacent to  four author ities, these  being  Surre y Heath  Borough, Har t 
District, Wokingham Borough and the Royal Borough of Windsor & Maidenhead (RBWM) as 
shown on map 5 below. 
16 Reference ID:  2a-004-20190220 
17 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/536731/Household_Projections_Pub lished_T ables.xlsx 
18 https://www .ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcomm unity/housing/datasets/r atioofhousepr icetoworkplacebasedear ningslo werquar tileandmedian 
19 2019 Aff ordability r atio, Table 5c:  (pub lished 19 March 2020) 
www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcomm unity/housing/datasets/r atioofhousepr icetoworkplacebasedear ningslo werquar tileandmedian 
20 www .bracknell- 
forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-br acknell-f orest-local-plan/e vidence-base 
45 7.4 The Har t Local Plan Str ategy and Sites 2032 (2020)  (21)addresses an unmet housing 
need in Surre y Heath through an addition of 41 homes per ann um to its objectiv ely assessed 
housing need.  Hart and Surre y Heath are par t of the Har t/Rushmoor/Surre y Heath Housing 
Market Area. 
7.5 RBWM’ s Borough Local Plan (2013-2033) is at Examination.  The Council has stated that 
it is committed to meeting its full housing needs and will contin ue to use a housing target of 
712 dw ellings per ann um for the plan per iod which equates to an o verall target of 14,420 net 
new dw ellings o ver the plan per iod(22). 
7.6 Wokingham Borough Council is currently updating its Local Plan to 2036.Consultation 
on the Dr aft Local Plan took place betw een F ebruary and Apr il 2020 and included a housing 
requirement figure that w as less than that resulting from the use of the standard method. 
However, it was also stated that the Local Plan had been tested to ensure that the str ategy 
incor porated sufficient fle xibility to meet the minim um local housing need o ver time .  
Map 5 Neighbouring Local A uthorities and West Berkshire and East Berkshire Housing 
Market Areas 
7.7 Although the NPPF no longer ref ers to ‘Housing Mar ket Areas’  (HMAs), the PPG provides 
a definition  of a housing mar ket area which refers to the impor tance  of key functional linkages 
betw een places where  people  live and work.The  Berkshire  (including  South  Bucks) Str ategic 
Housing Mar ket Assessment (SHMA, F ebruary 2016) included w ork on functional relationships . 
This f ound that Br acknell F orest had a strong functional relationship with Wokingham Borough, 
Reading Borough and West Berkshire .  As a result, there has been m uch collabor ative working 
21 https://www .hart.gov.uk/plans-and-policies 
22 RBWM Housing Topic P aper (October 2019)  https://rbwm.objectiv e.co.uk/file/5512077 
46 between these A uthor ities on housing matters and associated infr astructure .  Under the standard 
method f or calculating local housing need, there is currently no unmet need that needs 
addressing.    
7.8 A housing need of 614 dw ellings per ann um is a significant uplift o ver the pro vision made 
 in the pre vious adopted Local Plan (557 dw ellings per ann um) and accords with the 
Government’ s objectiv e of significantly boosting housing supply . 
7.9 The LHN applies from 2020 and theref ore the base date of the Plan is 1st April 2020. 
Furthermore , national policy requires str ategic policies to co ver a minim um of 15 y ears from 
the date of adoption.  As the estimated date of adoption of this Plan is 2022, the housing need 
must be calculated f or the per iod 2020/21 to 2036/37 (17 y ears).  This results in a local need 
for a minim um of 10,438 (net) additional homes o ver the plan per iod. 
7.10 In order to incor porate some fle xibility f or non-deliv ery or under-deliv ery of sites in the 
event of changing circumstances , an additional 10% of the local need figure ref erred to abo ve 
has been added to the housing need.  This amounts to a fur ther 1,044 (net) homes . 
Table 4 Calculating the housing pr ovision f or the plan period 
614 Local housing need (dw ellings per ann um) 
17 Plan per iod (no . of years) 
10,438 Local housing need o ver plan per iod 
1,044 Flexibility allo wance (10% of total local housing need) 
11,482 LHN with 10% fle xibility b uffer over the plan period 
7.11 Taking account of e xisting commitments , the Plan theref ore identifies fur ther sites 
(including a windf all allo wance) to meet the requirement f or 11,482 additional homes (675 per 
annum), as set out in P olicy LP 3.  Provision of Housing. 
Objective 
D - Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
47 Policy LP 3 
Provision of housing 
Provision will be made in Brac knell Forest f or the period 2020/21 to 2036/37 f or: 
1. sufficient land to accommodate at least 10,438 homes to meet the Bor ough’ s 
Local Housing Need,  and, 
2. an ad ditional suppl y of land f or 1,044 homes (amounting to a b uffer of 10%) to 
allow for fle xibility . 
Meeting the housing requirement 
Existing planning commitments inc luding retained SALP allocations 
7.12 Since the requirement applies from 1st April 2020, it is necessar y to tak e account of 
outstanding commitments f or de velopment.  This includes:   
Sites with a v alid planning per mission. 
Sites which ha ve no f ormal planning per mission b ut which ha ve been identified in pr inciple 
as being suitab le for de velopment.   This is divided into tw o further categor ies: sites with 
a resolution to g rant per mission subject to a S106 legal ag reement and sites in an adopted 
Local Plan (i.e . those accepted in pr inciple , but that do not y et ha ve a formal planning 
permission). 
7.13 A number of the commitments in volve sites allocated through the SALP - P olicies 
SA3-SA9.  Whilst some of these sites ha ve already been completed, others are currently under 
constr uction, ha ve outstanding planning per mission or are subject to negotiations . These 
allocations are retained and theref ore the rele vant policy cr iteria still apply including to sites 
that are under constr uction to co ver events such as re vised schemes being submitted or a 
planning per mission lapsing. 
7.14 As the plan per iod runs from 2020/21 to 2036/37 it o verlaps with the pre vious plan per iod 
(2006/07 – 2025/26).  Account is theref ore tak en of sites already being brought forward as the y 
are likely to  contr ibute a significant  number  of dwellings dur ing the first half of this plan  period 
Windfall Sites 
7.15 These include small and medium sites that ha ve not y et been identified (windf alls) b ut 
that will come f orward through the de velopment management process in accordance with the 
policies set out in the Local Plan and through the use of per mitted de velopment r ights . 
7.16 The Council has assessed the contr ibution lik ely to be made b y ‘windf all’ sites based 
on past trends (o ver a 10 y ear per iod) and lik ely changes to those trends . It is clear that windf all 
sites ha ve consistently pla yed an impor tant role in the housing supply of the Borough.  An 
allowance of 24 dw ellings (net) per y ear has been included f or small sites as the SHELAA does 
not include sites of less than 5 dw ellings (net).  Although some medium sites are being allocated, 
histor ic data suggests that it is justified to include an allo wance f or medium site windf alls. Whilst 
an allo wance of 77 dw ellings (net) per y ear has been included f or the per iod 2023/24 to 2036/37; 
to avoid doub le counting, no allo wance has been included f or the first 2 y ears of projected 
48 completions and 50% of the allo wance has been tak en for the third y ear of the projections .  
This approach ac knowledges the time required to deliv er housing on medium sites f ollowing 
the g rant of per mission. 
7.17 Whilst no allo wance has been made f or large windf all sites , if deliv ered, the y will be 
repor ted through the monitor ing process .  
Table 5 Outstanding commitments f or housing de velopment at 31st Mar ch 2020 
Number of homes Type of commitment 
3,705 Homes with planning per missions (large and medium sites)  
(23) 
3,019 Large and medium sites already allocated, b ut without per mission 
(2,429)  
and homes appro ved subject to legal ag reements (590). 
1,524 Windf all allo wance 
Small sites: 
24 homes per y ear for the per iod 2020/21 to 2036/37 i.e . 17yrs . 
Small sites total = 408 homes . 
Medium sites: 
77 homes per y ear for the per iod 2023/24 to 2036/37 i.e . 14yrs 
Total = 1,078 
38 homes f or 2022/23 i.e . 1yr Total = 38 
Medium sites total = 1,116 homes 
8,248 TOTAL 
7.18 Deducting the outstanding commitments from the requirement, lea ves a need to identify 
sites f or a fur ther 3,234 ne w homes , as set out in tab le belo w. 
23 C3 (including C3 specialised) and C2 Use Class . C2 figures adjusted b y applying the nationally set r atio set out on page 
11 Housing Deliv ery Test: 2019 Measurement Technical Note Book F ebruary 2020 (MHCLG) to con vert comm unal 
accommodation to  dwelling 
49 Table 6 Outstanding need f or land to meet the housing requirement o ver the plan period 
No of homes 
11,482 Requirement as set out in P olicy LP3 (T able 4) 
8,248 MINUS Outstanding commitments (T able 5) 
3,234 Outstanding need 
New sites allocated in this Plan 
7.19 The NPPF  requires  local planning author ities to prepare a SHELAA  to estab lish realistic 
assumptions about the availability , suitability and viability of land to meet housing needs . This 
was updated dur ing the plan prepar ation process f ollowing f ormal ‘Calls for Sites’  and 
consultation e xercises . A ne w updated  version  of the SHELAA w as published to suppor t this 
version of the Plan.  The SHELAA  follows government  guidance  on potentially suitab le sites 
and co vers all sites with a capacity for 5 net dw ellings or more . Most of the sites that w ere 
submitted ha ve been promoted f or housing.   
Site selection pr ocess 
7.20 The Council’ s overall approach to identifying land f or allocation is set out in the spatial 
strategy . The process f ollowed w as set out in a ‘Site Selection Methodology' document(24).  
Various technical assessments of individual sites w ere carr ied out to help identify the most 
suitab le locations f or de velopment and the appro ximate capacity of sites .  Sustainability 
Appr aisal  (25)  helped inf orm the iter ative site selection process b y assessing the sites against 
the en vironmental , social and economic objectiv es.  All results w ere brought together in a 
Housing Bac kground P aper (26). 
Housing Trajector y 
7.21 The NPPF requires local planning author ities to illustr ate the e xpected r ate of housing 
delivery over the plan per iod through a ‘Housing Trajector y’. In prepar ing the Local Plan’ s 
Housing Trajector y the Council engaged with lando wners , developers and stak eholders and 
gave detailed consider ation to lik ely star t dates , build-out r ates on diff erent types of sites and 
the lead-in times required f or suppor ting infr astructure . The Housing Trajector y (27) shows the 
timeline f or the deliv ery of hosing de velopment (28)  across the 
plan per iod in relation to the ann ual a verage requirement.  It is ho wever a snapshot in time and 
is updated ann ually as par t of the ann ual monitor ing e xercise when it is also used to calculate 
the fiv e-year housing supply . 
7.22 The f ollowing sources of supply are included: 
Sites with planning per mission 
Sites accepted in pr inciple subject to a S106 Ag reement 
Retained SALP allocations 
24 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/4653109 
25 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base 
26 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base   
27 Appendix 1:  'Housing Trajector y' 
28 Use Classes C2 and C3 
50 Sites allocated f or de velopment in this Local Plan 
A small and medium site windf all allo wance . 
7.23 Where the timescale f or the deliv ery of a de velopment is projected to e xtend be yond 
the plan per iod, this is noted in the Housing Trajector y 
Five-y ear housing suppl y 
7.24 The NPPF ref ers to the need f or a fiv e-year supply of deliv erable housing sites against 
the housing pro vision.  This has to be updated on an ann ual basis . The Planning Pr actice 
Guidance  states that rob ust evidence is needed to ensure that the fiv e year housing land supply 
is sound and that that the plan m ust identify a 5 y ear housing land supply from its date of 
adoption. 
7.25 For Br acknell F orest, this means that at 1st Apr il 2022, there will be a need to identify 
sites which pro vide 675 homes per y ear plus an appropr iate b uffer, dependent on a r ange of 
circumstances set out in the NPPF (29).   
7.26 The ability to demonstr ate a fiv e year land supply plus appropr iate b uffer is impor tant 
in the decision making process . If the supply f alls belo w the required amount, the presumption 
in favour of sustainab le development applies (30), which means that alter nativ e unplanned sites , 
including those in the countr yside (including the Green Belt) ma y be per mitted.  The Council is 
keen to follow a plan-led approach in accordance with the NPPF to prevent this happening.   
This is wh y further land is being allocated through the local plan process with the aim of ensur ing 
that a fiv e-year supply contin ues to be demonstr ated when the position is re viewed each y ear. 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy 
Policy LP 21 'Protection of e xisting housing stoc k and land' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par agraphs 59 - 76) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Housing and Economic Needs Assessment Section;  Plan 
Making:  Reference ID:  61-018-20190315) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
7.27 Deliv ery  
Deter mination of planning applications 
7.28 Monitor ing  
Number of dw ellings (net) per mitted and completed each y ear 
29 para. 73 of NPPF 
30 para 11 of NPPF 
51 7.2 Sites allocated f or residential/mix ed use de velopment 
7.29 This section deals with the allocation of sites f or housing which include allocations on 
previously-de veloped and g reenfield land and a r ange of siz es of sites . There is  an emphasis 
on pre viously de veloped sites in and around Br acknell Town Centre which is the most sustainab le 
area of the Borough. 
7.30 The NPPF requires substantial w eight to be giv en to the use of suitab le bro wnfield land, 
especially where there are oppor tunities to remediate contaminated land and suppor t the 
development of under utilised land and b uildings .   
7.31 A Garden Village is also proposed in the nor th of the Borough on land at Jealotts Hill. 
Although this in volved the remo val of land from the Green Belt, it helps secure the future of an 
existing site as a centre f or scientific research of national and inter national impor tance . Significant 
investment is needed in the f acility and enab ling de velopment is required to help fund the future 
operation of the site and pro vide accommodation f or co-location and collabor ation.  Due to the 
histor y of the site and nature of the e xisting campus , the local and national economic benefits 
of this proposal are unlik ely to be achie vable else where in the UK to the same le vel and there 
is a r isk that the y could be lost if not realised on this site .  
7.32 The scale of de velopment proposed and mix of uses will pro vide the cr itical mass to 
help achie ve a sustainab le comm unity and benefit the local and wider econom y. 
7.33 Further details are outlined in a specific policy and suppor ting te xt at 7.5 'Land at Jealott's 
Hill, Warfield' . 
Objective 
D - Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
Policy LP 4 
Sites allocated f or residential/mix ed use de velopment 
The f ollowing sites,  as sho wn on the P olicies Map,  are allocated and should be 
developed in accor dance with the rele vant policies within this plan and site-specific 
requirements ( Appendix 2:  'Site pr ofiles f or allocated sites' ). 
52 Table 7 Lar ge sites (more than 1ha and 5 [net] d wellings or more) are allocated f or 
residential/mix ed use de velopment and are defined on the P olicies Map 
Suggested d welling capacity (No. 
of aff ordable dwellings)1 Address Site ref (as used in 
the SHELAA) 
40  (14) Land south of Forest Road and east of Chene y 
Close BIN5 
100  (35) Land pre viousl y reser ved f or Park and Ride , 
Peacoc k Farm  BIN20 
226 (79) Land at Beauf ort Park, Nine Mile Ride (South 
Road) BRA4* 
69  (24) Cooper s Hill Youth and Comm unity Centre , 
Crowthorne Road Nor th BRA13 
900 (315) The P eel Centre and The P oint BRA18*and** 
of whic h 600 (210) to be delivered 
within the plan period.   
217  (76) Land east of Wokingham Road and south of 
Dukes Ride (Derb y Field) SAND5* 
2,000  (700) Land at Jealott's Hill WAR3*and** 
of whic h 1,350 (473) to be delivered 
within the plan period  
33 (12) Land Nor th of Her schel  Grang e WAR9 
42  (15) Whitegates,  Mushr oom Castle , Cha vey Do wn 
Road WINK15 
3,627 (1,270) Total   
2,677  (938) TOTAL TO BE DELIVERED IN PLAN PERIOD 
Table 8 Medium sites (less than 1ha and with 5 [net] d wellings or more) are allocated 
for residential/mix ed use de velopment and are defined on the P olicies Map 
Suggested d welling 
capacity (No. of aff ordable 
dwellings)1 Address 
  Site ref (as used in the 
SHELAA) 
13  (5) Land opposite P opes Manor , Murrell Hill Lane BIN10b 
10  (3) Land south of London Road (Eastern Field) BIN12 
27  (9) Land between Cain Road and Turnpike Road (3M 
Recreational Land) BIN16 
213  (75) Town Square , The Ring BRA7** 
141  (49) Former Bus Depot,  Market Street BRA12** 
100  (35) Jubilee Gar dens,  The Ring BRA14** 
267  (93) Land east of Station Way and nor th of Chur ch Road 
(Southern Gate way)  BRA15** 
234  (82) Bus Station,  Station Road BRA17** 
23 (8) Land adjacent to L ych Gate Close , Lower Chur ch Road, 
Sandhur st SAND9 
15 (5) Land adjacent to Swallo w Cotta ge, Lower Chur ch Road, 
Sandhur st SAND10 
6  (0) Land to the rear of Forest View and Oriana,  Longhill 
Road and west of Fern Bungalo w, London Road 
(extension of site allocated thr ough P olicy SA3 of the 
SALP) WINK34 
1,049 (364) Total   
53 Suggested d welling 
capacity (No. of aff ordable 
dwellings)1 Address 
  Site ref (as used in the 
SHELAA) 
(1) 
1. Capacities in bold are the total suggested dw elling capacity .  The figures in br ackets relates to the n umber of aff ordab le 
dwellings based on 35% of the total suggested dw elling capacity on sites with an increase of 10 or more dw ellings 
(net). 
**Mix ed use sc heme 
* Strategic site - policies LP5-8 
Table 9 Total b y Designated Neighbourhood Area 
Suggested d welling capacity (net)  Designated Neighbourhood Area 
190 Binfield  
2,150 Brac knell  
of whic h 1,850 to be delivered in plan period 
0 Crowthorne  
255 Sandhur st 
2,033  Warfield  
of whic h 1,383 to be delivered in plan period 
48 Winkfield  
4,676 TOTAL  
of whic h 3,726 to be delivered in the plan period 
7.34 The estimated capacity  of the sites listed in  Policy LP 4 is 4,676  new homes .  However, 
this figure includes homes on Land at Jealott's Hill and at The P eel Centre and The P oint that 
are lik ely to be deliv ered be yond the end of the plan per iod due to the scale and comple xity of 
these de velopments . To ensure a comprehensiv e approach to the de velopment of Land at 
Jealott's Hill, the Council is remo ving sufficient land from the Green Belt to accommodate the 
full potential b uilt up area of the ne w settlement, through this plan.  This approach pro vides a 
greater  certainty to comm unities , lando wners and de velopers about the location of g rowth 
including that required to help meet long-ter m needs .  
7.35 It is estimated that 3,726 of the ne w homes on sites listed in P olicy LP 4 are lik ely to be 
delivered in the plan per iod. This is reflected in the Housing Trajector y and means that the 
overall supply will e xceed the requirement b y 492 ne w homes . 
7.36 Policy LP 4 lists the sites that are being allocated according to siz e of site and then 
parish. The indicativ e quantum of de velopment f or each site is based on an initial assessment 
of its potential capacity and is neither a maxim um nor a minim um. There will be a need to tak e 
54 into account fur ther detailed e vidence on constr aints , design consider ations and the need to 
ensure the most efficient use of land, at the planning application stage .  The inclusion of a site 
as an allocation does not remo ve the need f or planning per mission. 
7.37 The Local Plan's approach to density is not to be o verly prescr iptive, but to let the 
purpose of the de velopment, the conte xt of the site and the defining char acter istics of the 
surrounding area guide the appropr iate density . In calculating the quantum of de velopment, 
average densities ha ve been applied depending on site typology and densities achie ved on 
similar schemes that ha ve recently been completed or that ha ve planning per mission.  The 
highest densities ha ve been used to calculate the capacities of sites in and around accessib le 
locations such as Br acknell Town Centre and other tr anspor t hubs and the lo west for smaller 
edge of settlement sites on the fr inge of b uilt-up areas . The larger sites ma y offer scope to 
achie ve higher densities than assumed where there is the ability to  design a r ange of 
environments with v arying char acter istics .  
7.38 A significant n umber of the dw ellings allocated in this plan f orm par t of mix ed-use 
schemes on sites in and around Br acknell Town Centre Policy LP 11 'Sites allocated f or economic 
development/mix ed use' .  These proposals will suppor t the contin ued regener ation of the area, 
building on impro vements made through the completion of The Le xicon and its suppor ting 
infrastructure . The Council has reconfir med its commitment to e xtend the regener ation of 
Bracknell Town Centre through pub lishing the Br acknell Town Centre Vision 2032 (31). 
7.39 This identifies  key sites in and around Bracknell Town Centre and  discusses  their 
potential  and how their  redevelopment  can be achie ved.  Due to the consider able collectiv e 
capacity of these sites and the need  to ensure that  development  suppor ts and complements 
existing and committed  development,  master plans will  need to be produced   to estab lish an 
overall vision and str ategy f or de velopment that demonstr ate a high quality , comprehensiv e 
approach to design.   Master plans will need to be agreed with the Council, ideally , prior to the 
submission of an y planning applications f or Town Square De velopment Area, and, the Souther n 
Gate way Development Area (including J ubilee Gardens (BRA14), the Bus Station (BRA17) 
and Land east of Station Way and nor th of Church Road (BRA15)) . Once ag reed, the 
master plans  will be impor tant mater ial planning consider ations in the deter mination of planning 
applications . They will pro vide a fr amework aimed at encour aging and coordinating the eff orts 
and in vestment of par tners in the fur ther re vitalisation of the area and pro vide fur ther details 
on placemaking, connectivity , relationship of uses , access and ser vicing, par king, pro vision of 
greenspace and phasing. 
7.40 Specific policies ha ve been included f or four str ategic sites listed in the policy in Table 
7 (BRA4, BRA18, SAND5 and WAR3), which ha ve comple x constr aints and requirements . 
Development proposals should enab le comprehensiv e schemes to be deliv ered on these 
allocations to create sustainab le developments that suppor t and complement the role of nearb y 
settlements and comm unities .  These sites are suppor ted b y illustr ative concept plans sho wing 
the possib le arr angement of uses . 
7.41 For other  sites listed  in Policy LP4, a list of requirements  is set out in each  site’s profile 
in Appendix 2:  'Site profiles f or allocated sites' .  Maps have been  included sho wing developab le 
areas , as these do not necessar ily coincide with site boundar ies due to the need to tak e into 
account site specific constr aints and requirements . For sites in volving settlement e xtensions , 
the re vised settlement boundar y is also sho wn in order to pro vide a deg ree of cer tainty  to 
developers  and the comm unity. Allocated  sites will be subject  to all relevant policies within 
the development plan . Development  Briefs may be produced  for some  sites at a later stage . 
31 https://br acknell-f orest-jointv enture .co.uk 
55 For summar ies on the e vidence that has been obtained in relation to each site (including the 
Sustainability Appr aisal), and ho w this e vidence has inf ormed each site’ s Site Suitability 
Assessment, Developab le Area Assessment and Site Specific Requirements see the Housing 
Background Paper (32). 
7.42 The major ity of ne w homes brought f orward on sites through the SALP are on sites of 
more than 500 dw ellings . Due to long lead-in times caused b y the amount of infr astructure 
required and site prepar ation w orks, man y of these will be deliv ering housing o ver much of this 
plan per iod. In recognition of this , the Council has included some smaller sites which suppor t 
the Go vernment’ s aim of div ersifying the mar ket and suppor ting medium and small 
houseb uilders .  
7.43 Small sites will also help meet an y shor t-term housing requirements . Windf all sites will 
also add to the supply and will e xpand the mar ket to other houseb uilders . 
7.44 Para. 65 of the NPPF states that str ategic policies should identify a housing requirement 
for designated neighbourhood areas within the o verall requirement.  This should reflect the 
overall str ategy f or the patter n and scale of de velopment and an y rele vant allocations . Only 
one of the neighbourhood plans currently under prepar ation includes a possib le site allocation 
- this is the Warfield Neighbourhood Plan which is currently at Examination.  The site proposed 
for allocation is Land at Ha yley Green f or 235 dw ellings .  The Council suppor ts the pr inciple of 
development on this site , and the dw ellings proposed, w ould be additional  to the homes being 
planned in this document.   
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par agraphs 20, 65 and 67) 
Strategic Housing and Economic Land A vailability Assessment (SHELAA) 
Bracknell F orest Local Plan e vidence base . 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
7.45  Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications . 
7.46 Monitor ing 
Number of dw ellings (net) per mitted and completed each y ear 
Build out r ates and data from de velopers . 
32 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base 
56 7.3 Land at Beauf ort Park, Nine Mile Ride , Bracknell 
7.47 The site compr ises a parcel of land in single o wnership that is predominantly conif erous 
and broadlea ved w oodland including w oodland plantations and areas of g rassland and 
heathland.   
7.48 The souther n boundar y of the site adjoins Nine Mile Ride which is an impor tant east-w est 
pedestr ian, cycle and v ehicular route in the borough.   The souther n par t of the site is an 
estab lished g reen str ategic landscape b uffer which pro vides a w oodland setting to Nine Mile 
Ride.  The w ester n boundar y of the site adjoins w oodland and spor adic de velopment.   The 
former Transpor t Research Labor atory site lies to the south, m uch of which is currently being 
developed as an e xtension to the settlement of Cro wthor ne.  To the east of the site is Great 
Hollands Recreation g round and the settlement of Br acknell.    
7.49 This site w ould f orm an e xtension to the settlement of Br acknell.  The comprehensiv e 
development of the land is essential to maximise the site's potential and deal eff ectively with 
the constr aints (in par ticular g round and surf ace w ater flood r isk, ecology , and pro ximity to the 
Thames Basin Heaths SP A) that aff ect the site . 
57 Policy LP 5 
Land at Beauf ort Park, Nine Mile Ride , Brac knell 
1. Land at Beauf ort Park as sho wn on the P olicies Map and Illustrative Concept 
Plan is allocated f or a comprehensive well-designed de velopment inc luding the 
following: 
i. Appr oximatel y 226 residential units (inc luding 79 aff ordable homes and pr ovision 
of an element of specialist accommodation f or older people),  located outside 
of the Thames Basin Heaths Special Pr otection Area (SP A) 400m zone of 
influence . 
ii. Up to 5% of d wellings as ser viced plots f or sale to self and custom b uilder s. 
iii. This site has been identified in Policy LP 15 'Design principles'  as requiring the 
submission of a masterplan and design code , to ensure a design led appr oach 
to the de velopment of this site .   Once a greed b y the Council,  they will be an 
impor tant material planning consideration in the determination of subsequent 
planning applications. 
iv. Provision of Green Infrastructure . 
v. On-site Open Space of Pub lic Value (OSPV). 
vi. Measures to a void and mitigate the impact of de velopment upon habitats sites, 
in agreement with the Council and Natural England.   This will inc lude pr ovision 
in perpetuity of: 
a. A bespoke on-site Suitab le Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) of at 
least 8ha per 1,000 ne w population (there are tw o options f or the SANG in 
the nor th or south of the site) ;  
b. A financial contrib ution to wards the Thames Basin Heaths SP A Strategic 
Access Mana gement and Monitoring measures;   
c. Any other measures that are required to satisfy Habitats Regulations,  the 
Council's Thames Basin Heaths SP A Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy 
and rele vant guidance;  and 
d. Provision of green leisure r outes whic h link fr om the on-site SANG to other 
local SANGs. 
vii. Maintenance of a gap between Brac knell,  Wokingham and Cr owthorne 
(comprising on-site SANG and/or OSPV). 
viii. Provision of a strategic landscape b uffer along Nine Mile Ride . 
ix. The saf eguar ding of the pipeline (along the southern boundar y of the site). 
x. On- and off-site infrastructure , including in-kind pr ovision,  required to suppor t 
this de velopment (as set out in the Infrastructure Deliver y Plan) comprising 
(but not limited to): 
a. A primar y vehicular access r oute onto Nine Mile Ride , served b y the 
Transpor t Resear ch Laborator y Roundabout,  with secondar y access off 
South Road;   
58 b. Provision of pedestrian r outes and c ycleways thr ough the de velopment 
whic h link to adjacent comm unities in the settlements of Brac knell and 
Crowthorne;  and 
c. Other transpor t impr ovements,  education facilities,  comm unity facilities, 
waste rec ycling, draina ge impr ovements,  open space and utility 
connections. 
xi. Technical in vestigation and assessment of all sour ces of flooding (inc luding 
surface water and gr ound water) to determine flood risk mana gement measures 
to ensure sustainab le de velopment,  and pr ovision of on-site sustainab le 
draina ge systems (SuDS). 
xii. Provision of an ecological netw ork inc luding retaining,  protecting,  enhancing, 
creating and b uffering ecological f eatures and a minim um 10% biodiver sity net 
gain tog ether with a site mana gement plan f or the lif etime of the de velopment. 
xiii. Protection and enhancement of trees. 
59 Figure 1 Beauf ort Park Illustrative Concept Plan 
60 Housing 
7.50 The site is allocated f or appro ximately 226 dw ellings , of which 35% (79 dw ellings) are 
to be aff ordab le.  An element of specialist accommodation f or older people is to be included 
within the 226 dw ellings .  Up to 5% of the dw ellings will be sought as ser viced plots f or sale to 
self or custom b uilders .  It is also e xpected that the de velopment will incor porate a mix of 
dwelling types .  This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 9 'Aff ordab le housing' 
and Policy LP 24 'Housing mix' . 
Masterplan 
7.51 Proposals f or the site should be design-led.   Master plans and design codes will be 
required f or larger , comple x or more sensitiv e developments to ag ree an o verall vision and 
strategy f or a de velopment that demonstr ates a high quality , comprehensiv e approach to design.   
There should be a coordinated and integ rated approach to g reen infr astructure from the outset.   
Consider ation should also be giv en as to ho w the site can link with adjoining sites .  The 
master plan m ust be ag reed with the Council, ideally pr ior to the submission of an y planning 
applications f or the site .  Design codes will be required as par t of an y Full or Reser ved Matters 
applications f or sites with a master plan, and these will be ag reed with the Council, ideally pr ior 
to submission.   Once ag reed b y the Council, the y will be an impor tant mater ial planning 
consider ation in the deter mination of subsequent planning applications .  This policy should be 
read in conjunction with Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' . 
Green Infrastructure 
7.52 In de veloping a site-wide master plan, a holistic approach is required protect, enhance 
and pro vide ne w green infr astructure (in line with Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' ).  
Consider ations f or the master plan include:   
the la yout of OSPV and SANG within the site; 
provision of SuDS; 
how biodiv ersity connectivity will be achie ved, including a g reen corr idor netw ork with 
access routes within and adjoining the site; 
protection and enhancement of trees , including restor ation within the str ategic landscape 
buffer; and 
landscaping of the site . 
Mitigation f or habitats sites 
7.53 Mitigation will be required to a void and mitigate the impact of residential de velopment 
on the habitats sites in ag reement with the Council and Natur al England.  This will include 
provision in per petuity of on-site bespok e SANG at a minim um of 8ha per 1,000 ne w population 
which is link ed to Buc kler’s Park SANG;  a financial contr ibution to wards Str ategic Access 
Management and Monitor ing; and an y other measures that are required to satisfy Habitats 
Regulations , the Council's Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area Str ategy and rele vant 
guidance .  A bespok e SANG m ust be in place and a vailab le for use b y the occupants of the 
new development bef ore the first ne w dw elling is occupied.     The final la yout of the SANG will  
be influenced, amongst other matters , by a project le vel Habitats Regulations Assessment. 
7.54 This P olicy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths 
Special Protection Area' , and Policy LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and geological 
sites' 
61 Separation of settlements ,  strategic landscape b uffer and open space 
7.55 The par t of the site allocated f or housing w ould f orm an e xtension to the settlement of 
Bracknell.   The remainder of the allocation (compr ising open space and SANG) is located 
outside the defined settlement, which also f orms par t of the gaps betw een Br acknell-Cro wthor ne, 
and Br acknell-W okingham.    
7.56 The Landscape Char acter Assessment (LUC , 2015) states that one of the v alued 
attributes of the landscape char acter within the site is the w ooded area betw een Cro wthor ne 
and Br acknell.   Theref ore, it is essential to retain a str ategic landscape b uffer along the souther n 
part of the site , to preser ve the visual and ph ysical separ ation betw een Cro wthor ne and 
Bracknell, and also retain the w ooded char acter of Nine Mile Ride .  This should be reinf orced 
with additional tree planting.   
7.57 Subject to maintaining the gap betw een Br acknell-Cro wthor ne, and maintaining the 
character of Nine Mile Ride , the landscape b uffer ma y be ab le to incor porate recreational leisure 
paths .  A single v ehicular and pedestr ian/cycle link betw een the de veloped area of the site and 
Nine Mile Ride (the pr imary access route) will pass through the landscape b uffer.  This route 
will need careful design to preser ve the char acter and function of the landscape b uffer.  There 
may also be an oppor tunity to enhance the b uffer's function as a g reen corr idor. 
7.58 The on-site OSPV and SANG also pla ys an impor tant role in maintaining the gaps 
betw een Br acknell-Cro wthor ne, and Br acknell-W okingham, b y keeping the area open and 
unde veloped.   A site-wide master plan and landscape str ategy , should demonstr ate ho w the 
Landscape Char acter Assessment (LUC , 2015) has been tak en into consider ation, including 
how identified landscape f eatures and functions relating to the separ ation of settlement will not 
be compromised.   This should include measures as to ho w a strong ph ysical boundar y betw een 
the defined settlement and str ategic gap will be achie ved, and consider ation of appropr iate 
boundar y features within the site .   This policy should be read in conjunction with  Policy LP 
37 'Landscape char acter (outside of defined settlements) ' , Policy LP 38 'Separ ation of 
settlements' , Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' , and Policy LP 48 'Protection and enhancement 
of trees and hedgero ws'. 
Pipeline 
7.59 A pipeline is located in the souther n par t of the site .  This includes an easement which 
should be k ept clear of de velopment.   Access to the pipe area should be retained, in order that 
any future maintenance can tak e place . (33) 
Transpor t 
7.60 The proposal will result in additional tr affic mo vements to and from the site .  Transpor t 
modelling w ork developed as par t of the Local Plan has identified that capacity impro vements 
to nearb y road junctions (Br acknell Road/F oresters Way, Easthampstead Road/Old Wokingham 
Road and Cro wthor ne High Street) will be required. 
7.61 The pr imary vehicular access point into the site will be via a f ourth arm off the TRL 
roundabout.   The design of the access route onto Nine Mile Ride , should be sensitiv e to the 
role of this par t of the site as a str ategic landscape b uffer.  South Road will act as a secondar y 
33 ‘Linesearch’  (www .lsbud.co .uk) must be under taken in relation to the pipeline .   All de velopment in pro ximity to the CLH-PS 
pipeline m ust ha ve the consent of CLH-PS and be in accordance with the Pipeline Saf ety Regulations 1996, Health and 
Safety at Work Act 1974. 
62 minor access .  Measures should be incor porated to reduce the attr activeness of South Road 
as a pr imary point of access .  A Transpor t Assessment will be required to demonstr ate impact 
of the proposal, and an y mitigation measures . 
7.62 Impro vements to f ootw ays along Old Wokingham Road and Nine Mile Ride will 
be required, to allo w shared use , and should also link to the wider cycle tr ack/footpath netw ork, 
to the nor th and east into the Br acknell Town urban area and south to wards Cro wthor ne and 
the recent TRL de velopment (Buc kler’s Park).  Leisure routes ma y also be required to link the 
on-site SANG to other SANG in the vicinity of the site .  This P olicy should be read in conjunction 
withPolicy LP 14 'T ranspor t principles' . 
Other infrastructure requirements  
7.63 On and off-site infr astructure , in accordance with the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan, will 
be required to suppor t the de velopment.   Infrastructure required to suppor t the de velopment 
may be secured through in-kind pro vision and/or through de veloper contr ibutions .  On-site 
waste recycling f acilities will also need to be pro vided.   This policy should also be read in 
conjunction with Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' . 
Flooding and SuDS 
7.64 Part of the site is at r isk of surf ace w ater flooding, with high g round w ater le vels occurr ing 
across a large propor tion of the site .  Some areas at r isk of surf ace w ater flooding also coincide 
with areas of high g round w ater le vels.  The e xtent and location of these areas ha ve informed 
the identified de velopab le area and the settlement boundar y.  Development of the site should 
avoid areas at r isk of flooding and high g roundw ater le vels, and pro vide suitab le sustainab le 
drainage systems to mitigate the impact of the de velopment (that is shallo w surf ace le vel SuDS 
as opposed to b uried tr aditional systems).   Off-site dr ainage impro vements ma y be required.   
The e xtensiv e loss of trees across the de veloped area is lik ely to result in an increase in 
baseflo ws from the site .  It is imper ative that the loss of large areas of w oodland is tak en into 
consider ation when consider ing the unde veloped h ydrological and h ydrogeological situation to 
ensure mitigation is fully pro vided.   
7.65 When de veloping a site wide master plan, technical in vestigation and assessment of all 
sources of flooding should be under taken to deter mine the flood r isk management measures , 
and SuDS f eatures required (including OSPV and SANG areas), in order to achie ve sustainab le 
development.   This should meet the requirements f or the site identified in the Le vel 2 Str ategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (JBA, 2019).   This policy should be read in conjunction with P olicy LP 
16 'Flood Risk' and Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' .   
Biodiver sity 
7.66 The site is predominantly conif erous and broadlea ved woodland with w oodland plantations 
covering the souther n half of the site .  It also contains areas of acid g rassland, acid heath, 
deciduous w oodland and conif erous par kland/scattered trees .  There is potential at this site f or 
ground-nesting birds to be present (the same as those f ound within the wider Thames Basin 
Heaths SP A).  Theref ore, a detailed ecological impact assessment will be required to identify 
and assess potential impacts on the habitats and species present at the site .  Overall, the site 
layout will need to be designed sensitiv ely to balance e xisting biodiv ersity with the needs of the 
development.   A site management plan f or the lif etime of the de velopment is also required to 
set out the prog ramme of w orks needed to achie ve restor ation and enhancements to the site .   
63 7.67 The heathland and acid g rassland in the nor thern par t of the site are UK pr iority habitats , 
and this has inf ormed the e xtent of the de velopab le area and settlement boundar y.  Existing 
heathland, g rassland and trees also pro vide impor tant habitat connections from east to w est, 
and f orm par t of the wider Green Infr astructure netw ork.  There is an oppor tunity to impro ve 
the quality of these habitats , in order to ensure a net biodiv ersity gain of at least 10% is pro vided 
to mitigate the de velopment.   The council will also consider the use of a conser vation co venant 
to secure the long-ter m future of these habitats .  This policy should be read in conjunction with  
Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity' . 
Trees  
7.68 An area of plantation w oodland will need to be remo ved in order to accommodate 
development on the site .  A tree sur vey and arbor icultur al impact assessment, in accordance 
with Br itish Standard 5837 ‘Trees in relation to design, demolition and constr uction’  (as ma y 
be amended or substituted) will be required.   Any trees of notab le interest (such as ancient or 
veteran) should be incor porated into the design of the proposal.    
7.69 Development of the site should not compromise the long-ter m health of retained trees , 
which will need to be appropr iately saf eguarded dur ing constr uction (including the root protection 
areas).   Careful consider ation will also need to be giv en to the dr ainage of the site , and placement 
of utilities . 
7.70 New tree planting (which ma y be individual or g roups of trees to pro vide natur alistic 
features) as par t of the landscaping of the site will be required, including at gate way locations 
such as the pr imary access into the site , and f ocal areas within the site . 
7.71 The str ategic landscape b uffer to Nine Mile Ride will need to be enhanced and restored 
with additional tree planting, in order to saf eguard the w oodland setting and char acter of the 
area.   This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 48 'Protection and enhancement 
of trees and hedgero ws'. 
Other Matter s 
7.72 In addition to the abo ve, there are other matters which will need to be tak en into account 
in the consider ation and assessment of the site: 
Due to pro ximity of the site to a w ater pollution control centre , under take and tak e account 
of an odour impact assessment, 
Due to pro ximity of the site to a main road, under take and tak e account of an acoustic 
repor t,  
Due to location of the site within a proposed Miner als and Waste Saf eguarding Area, a 
further re view is required to deter mine the suitability and viability f or prior extraction of 
miner als.  
Due to the potential f or archaeological remains on the site , be inf ormed b y an appropr iate 
desk-based archaeological assessment, and where necessar y, a field e valuation in order 
to avoid and mitigate an y impacts , and 
Due to the under lying geology , and presence of an aquif er, demonstr ate there is adequate 
wastewater capacity both on and off site to ser ve the de velopment;  that it w ould not lead 
to prob lems f or existing or ne w users;  and w ould protect e xisting w ater quality . 
64 7.73 As the De velopment Plan should be read as a whole , regard will need to be had to all 
relevant adopted planning policies (including an y in the Br acknell Town Neighbourhood Plan, 
and Miner als and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementar y Planning Guidance , in the 
consider ation of this site .  It is recommended that a pre-application proposal is submitted f or 
consider ation pr ior to the submission of a planning application.    
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (Chapter 5 deliv ering a sufficient supply of homes;  Chapter 8 Promoting health y 
and saf e comm unities;  Chapter 12 Achie ving w ell-designed places). 
PPG (Housing needs of diff erent g roups;  Design:  process and tools). 
Housing Bac kground P aper (BFC)  (This pro vides an o verview of the rele vant e vidence 
base f or the site). 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
7.74 Deliv ery: 
Whilst the major ity of the area to be de veloped is g reenfield, e xtensiv e investigations and 
prepar atory works will be required due to flooding and biodiv ersity issues . 
Provided that an acceptab le scheme can be negotiated, including suitab le mitigation and 
SANG can be pro vided in a timely manner , it is en visaged that housing could star t to be 
delivered in 2027/2028.  Depending on mar ket conditions and other f actors , it is estimated 
that the de velopment will tak e 4 y ears to complete (see Appendix 1:  'Housing Trajector y'). 
7.75 Monitor ing: 
Deter mination and monitor ing of planning applications and appeals . 
Number of dw ellings (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Number of aff ordab le homes (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Number of specialist homes f or older people (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Number of self b uild /custom b uild dw ellings per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Habitat monitor ing for biodiv ersity net gain to achie ve target habitat type and condition. 
65 7.4 Land East of Wokingham Road and South of Duk es 
Ride (Derb y Field), Cro wthor ne 
7.76 The site compr ises a parcel of land in single o wnership that is currently used as pr ivate 
school pla ying fields pro viding cr icket and r ugby pitches .  There is a pa vilion b uilding in the 
north east cor ner. The site boundar ies consist of hedging and trees . To the east and nor th is 
a mix of residential and commercial uses and to the w est and south is spor adic residential 
development amidst w oodland.   The Reading to Redhill/ Gatwic k Airport railway line r uns along 
the easter n boundar y.  The site borders Wokingham Borough and is in close pro ximity to 
Crowthor ne Rail Station which has a small car par k. The site w ould f orm an e xtension to the 
settlement of Cro wthor ne.  
66 Policy LP 6 
Land East of Wokingham Road and South of Dukes Ride (Derb y Field),  Crowthorne 
1. Land East of Wokingham Road and South of Dukes Ride (Derb y Field) as sho wn 
on the P olicies Map and Illustrative Concept Plan is allocated f or a comprehensive 
well-designed de velopment inc luding the f ollowing: 
i. Appr oximatel y 217 residential units (inc luding 76 aff ordable homes;  and 
provision of an element of specialist accommodation f or older people). 
ii. Up to 5% of d wellings as ser viced plots f or sale to self or custom b uilder s. 
iii. This site has been identified in Policy LP 15 'Design principles' as requiring a 
masterplan and design code .  Proposals f or this site should be design-led and 
informed b y a masterplan.   Once a greed b y the Council,  they will be an impor tant 
material planning consideration in the determination of subsequent planning 
applications. 
iv. Provision of Green Infrastructure . 
v. On-site Open Space of Pub lic Value (OSPV) inc luding a Multi-use games area, 
skate bo wl and a pla y area. 
vi. Provision of alternative replacement pla ying pitc hes to replace those currentl y 
provided on site whic h will be secured f or Wellington Colleg e and comm unity 
use. 
vii. Provision of appr oximatel y 45 ad ditional car parking spaces f or Cr owthorne 
Rail Station. 
viii. Measures to a void and mitigate the impact of residential de velopment upon 
habitats sites,  in agreement with the Council and Natural England.  This will 
include pr ovision in perpetuity of: 
a. A Suitab le Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) of at least 8ha per 1,000 
new population and a financial contrib ution to wards Strategic Access 
Mana gement and Monitoring;  and; 
b. Any other measures that are required to satisfy Habitats Regulations,  the 
Council's Thames Basin Heaths Special Pr otection Area (SP A) Avoidance 
and Mitigation Strategy and rele vant guidance . 
ix. Maintaining a gap between Cr owthorne and the linear de velopment to the south, 
including pr ovision of a landscape b uffer. 
x. On and off site infrastructure , including in-kind pr ovision,  required to suppor t 
this de velopment (as set out in the Infrastructure Deliver y Plan) comprising 
(but not limited to): 
a. Provision of pedestrian and leisure r oute connections thr ough and be yond 
the site;  and 
b. Other transpor t impr ovements,  travel planning,  education facilities, 
comm unity facilities,  draina ge impr ovements,  waste rec ycling, green 
infrastructure inc luding OSPV and biodiver sity net-gain (inc luding 
hedg erows, trees,  tiny forests etc.),  and utility connections. 
67 xi. Technical in vestigation and assessment of all sour ces of flooding (inc luding 
surface water and gr ound water) to determine flood risk mana gement measures 
to ensure sustainab le de velopment,  including on-site sustainab le draina ge 
systems (SuDS) and off-site draina ge impr ovements where necessar y. 
xii. Provision of an ecological netw ork inc luding retaining,  protecting,  enhancing, 
creating and b uffering ecological f eatures and a minim um 10% biodiver sity net 
gain tog ether with a site mana gement plan f or the lif etime of the de velopment. 
xiii. Protection and enhancement of trees. 
68 Figure 2 Derb y Field Illustrative Concept Plan 
Residential
Settlement boundary
Allocation site boundary
Retained / new woodland
Strategic landscape buffer
Station parking
MUGA/skate bowl/play area
Proposed SANG
Main access point (vehicles)
New pedestrian link
Leisure route
Borough boundary
© Crown copyright and database rights 2020 Ordnance Survey 100019488
69 Housing 
7.77 The site is allocated f or appro ximately 217 dw ellings of which 35% (76 dw ellings) are 
affordab le. An element of specialist accommodation f or older people is to be included within 
the 217 dw ellings . Up to 5% of the dw ellings will be sought as ser viced plots f or sale to self or 
custom b uilders , subject to demand f or plots . It is also e xpected that the de velopment will 
incor porate a mix of dw elling types .  This P olicy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 
9 'Aff ordab le housing'  and Policy LP 24 'Housing mix' . 
Masterplan 
7.78 Proposals f or the site should be design-led.   Master plans and design codes will be 
required f or larger , comple x or more sensitiv e developments to ag ree an o verall vision and 
strategy f or a de velopment that demonstr ates a high quality , comprehensiv e approach to design.   
Due to the site's siz e and the comple xity of its de velopment (including the need f or replacement 
pitches and associated mitigation) a master plan is required.  There should be a coordinated 
and integ rated approach to g reen infr astructure from the outset.  Consider ation should also be 
given as to ho w the site can link with the adjoining area.   The master plan m ust be ag reed with 
the Council, ideally pr ior to the submission of an y planning applications f or the site .  Design 
codes will be required as par t of an y Full or Reser ved Matters applications f or sites with a 
master plan and these will be ag reed with the Council, ideally pr ior to submission.   Once ag reed 
by the Council, the y will be an impor tant mater ial planning consider ation in the deter mination 
of subsequent planning applications .  This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 
15 'Design pr inciples' . 
Green Infrastructure 
7.79 In de veloping a site wide master plan, a holistic approach is required to protect, enhance 
and pro vide ne w green infr astructure (in line with  Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' ). 
Consider ations f or the master plan include:   
the la yout of OSPV and access to nearb y SANG; 
provision of SuDS; 
how biodiv ersity connectivity will be achie ved including a g reen corr idor/leisure route , as 
part of a netw ork/ grid with access routes within and adjoining the site; 
protection and enhancement of trees , including along the boundar y with Wokingham Road; 
and 
landscaping of the site . 
Open space 
7.80 The on-site OSPV should include the on-site pro vision of a Multi-use Games Area 
(MUGA) and skate bo wl for older children and teenagers , and a pla y area f or younger children. 
It ma y be necessar y to pro vide financial contr ibutions to wards off-site pro vision where 
development cannot pro vide the full amount on-site . OSPV will also pla y an impor tant role in 
maintaining the gap betw een Cro wthor ne and Sandhurst b y keeping the area open and 
unde veloped f or housing. 
70 Replacement pla ying pitc hes 
7.81 Development of the site will result in the loss of pla ying pitches . The NPPF states that 
existing open spaces should not be b uilt on unless the loss resulting from the proposed 
development w ould be replaced b y equiv alent or better pro vision in a suitab le location (par a. 
97).  It is proposed to replace the pitches else where in the Wellington College estate and deliv er 
qualitativ e impro vements to pro vision.  The e xisting pla ying pitches are currently in pr ivate use 
for the school.  The ne w pitches will be a vailab le for Wellington College and also secured f or 
comm unity use thereb y increasing local pro vision of spor ts facilities in the area.   
Station car parking 
7.82 Crowthor ne station is located on a popular comm uter route , but the station car par k 
does not ha ve enough capacity , resulting in par king issues in the surrounding area.  To ensure 
that this does not adv ersely aff ect ne w residents , additional car par king f or the station will be 
required.  It is proposed that some of the site is utilised and the e xisting car par k ‘squared off ’ 
to increase the capacity from 42 (including 2 disab led) to appro ximately 87 spaces (including 
10 disab led); an increase of appro ximately 45 car par king spaces . This is sho wn on the 
Illustr ative Concept Plan.   
Mitigation f or habitats sites 
7.83 Mitigation will be required to a void and mitigate the impact of residential de velopment 
upon the habitats sites in ag reement with the Council and Natur al England.  The de velopment 
should pro vide SANG capacity to ser ve it. This should be on the w ooded area of land kno wn 
as Silv erdene . A connection to this land should be made from the south of the site . Should 
further SANG capacity be required a financial contr ibution should be made to purchase Council 
owned str ategic SANG f or the balance of SANG capacity required.  A financial contr ibution 
towards SAMM should also be secured.  This P olicy should be read in conjunction with Policy 
LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area'  and Policy LP 47 'Designated nature 
conser vation and geological sites' .  
Separation of settlements and landscape b uffer 
7.84 The par t of the site f or housing will f orm an e xtension to the settlement of Cro wthor ne.  
The remainder of the allocation (compr ising a landscape b uffer, OSPV and the boundar y along 
Wokingham Road) is located outside of the defined settlement.   This area also f orms par t of 
the gap betw een Cro wthor ne-Sandhurst.  Development of the site should maintain a gap betw een 
Crowthor ne and the linear de velopment to the south of the site b y pro viding a landscape b uffer, 
which includes open space within the souther n end of the site and supplementar y tree planting 
along the boundar y with Wokingham Road.    This should also include measures as to ho w a 
strong ph ysical boundar y betw een the defined settlement and str ategic gap will be achie ved, 
and consider ation of appropr iate boundar y features within the site . 
7.85 The Landscape Char acter Assessment (LUC , 2015) sets out that one of the v alued 
attributes of the area is the intr icate mosaic of heathland, w oodland and g rasslands which 
provide a sense of natur alness , visual div ersity and a setting f or recreation and enjo yment of 
the landscape . Subject to consider ation to maintaining the gap betw een Crowthor ne and 
Sandhurst, the landscape b uffer could theref ore enhance these attr ibutes and incor porate 
recreational leisure paths and OSPV . There ma y also be an oppor tunity to enhance the 
71 functionality of g reen corr idors .  This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 
37 'Landscape char acter (outside of defined settlements) ' , Policy LP 38 'Separ ation of 
settlements' , and  Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' . 
Transpor t 
7.86 The proposal will result in additional tr affic mo vements to and from the site .  Transpor t 
modelling has identified the need f or capacity impro vements to junctions including Cro wthor ne 
High Street, impro ving w alking and cycling connections to Cro wthor ne Rail Station and impro ved 
cycle par king and w aiting f acilities .  
7.87 Necessar y additional highw ay impro vements include , but are not limited to: 
Impro vements to the f ootw ays along Duk es Ride to allo w shared use pro viding better 
accessibility f or pedestr ians and cyclists to Cro wthor ne High Street;   
Upgrading of the e xisting Pub lic Footpath linking Che viot Road to Duk es Ride;   
Impro ving w alking and cycling links to educational f acilities including Edgbarro w School 
and possib ly the proposed pr imary school on the TRL site;   
Impro vements to pub lic transpor t links to Br acknell Town Centre and links to wider area, 
including the TRL de velopment and Cro wthor ne Rail Station.   
Other infrastructure requirements 
7.88 On and off-site infr astructure , in accordance with the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan, will 
be required to suppor t the de velopment.   Infrastructure required to suppor t the de velopment 
may be secured including in-kind pro vision and/or through de veloper contr ibutions .  Connectivity 
to, from and across the site should be pro vided f or pedestr ians and f or leisure activities . These 
should include adopted routes f or example to access the shops and r ail station and unlit leisure 
routes to access the PRoW netw ork, open space and SANG. 
7.89 On-site w aste recycling f acilities will need to be pro vided.  This P olicy should also be 
read in conjunction with Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' . 
Sustainab le draina ge systems 
7.90 Part of the site is at r isk of surf ace w ater flooding which is a mater ial consider ation and 
needs to inf orm the la yout of the site from the outset.  Development of the site should a void 
these areas and pro vide suitab le open SuDS , rather than b uried tr aditional systems . 
Oppor tunities to integ rate these with wider g reen infr astructure impro vements should be 
estab lished in the master plan.  This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 
51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' . 
Biodiver sity 
7.91 The de velopment of both Derb y Field pla ying fields (and the replacement pitches) will 
need to achie ve at least 10% biodiv ersity net gain.  This will require habitat restor ation and 
creation on land within the Wellington College estate to create heathland and broadleaf 
woodland.  The Council will secure b y S106 ag reement management and monitor ing for the 
lifetime of the de velopment, and will consider of the use of a conser vation co venant to ensure 
protection of the area in per petuity .  
72 7.92 The trees and hedgero ws around the per imeter of the site and other identified habitats 
of value on the site should be retained and the e xisting ecological netw ork impro ved.  
7.93 The de velopment should also include g reen corr idors through the de velopment parcels 
forming a g reen g rid to connect natur al features and pro vide access to the on-site OSPV . Within 
the de velopment parcels f eature trees , hedgero ws and tin y forests should be planted.  This 
policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity'  Policy LP 47 'Designated 
nature conser vation and geological sites'  and Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' . 
Trees 
7.94 There are a n umber of trees around the per imeter of the site , particular ly along 
Wokingham Road and the boundar y of the r ailway line which should be retained and 
supplemented with additional planting to enhance the landscape and screening of the 
development.   A tree sur vey and arbor icultur al impact assessment, in accordance with Br itish 
Standard 5837 ‘Trees in relation to design, demolition and constr uction’  (as ma y be amended 
or substituted) will be required.   
7.95 Development of the site should not compromise the long-ter m health of the trees , which 
will need to be appropr iately saf eguarded dur ing constr uction (including the root protection 
areas).   Careful consider ation will also need to be giv en to the dr ainage of the site , and placement 
of utilities . 
7.96 New tree planting (which ma y be individual or g roups of trees to pro vide natur alistic 
features) as par t of the landscaping of the site will be required, including at gate way locations 
such as the pr imary access into the site , and f ocal areas within the site . This policy should be 
read in conjunction with Policy LP 48 'Protection and enhancement of trees and hedgero ws'.  
Additional mitigation 
7.97 The current proposed location of the replacement pitches else where on the Wellington 
College estate requires additional mitigation.  This should include enhancements that result in 
net biodiv ersity gain of at least 10% (f or both Derb y Field and the replacement pitches – see 
Biodiv ersity abo ve), SuDS and consider ation of landscape impacts , including the loss of trees .  
7.98 The la yout of the replacement pitches will need to consolidate spor ts pro vision as m uch 
as possib le to ensure that an y gaps betw een pitch areas and other associated uses are 
minimised, to a void creating small islands of habitat that are isolated and vulner able to intensiv e 
landscape management. 
7.99 Locally rele vant and histor ic drains should be treated as a constr aint; these will need to 
be retained and the la yout of the pitches designed around them.  Additional technical in vestigation 
and assessment will be necessar y to ensure proposals accord with the Land Dr ainage Act and 
the Council’ s Local Flood Risk Management Str ategy (or an y subsequent update).  Any loss of 
plantation conif erous w oodland f or the replacement pitches is lik ely to result in an increase in 
baseflo ws from the site . It is imper ative that an y such loss of trees is tak en into consider ation 
when consider ing the unde veloped h ydrological and h ydrogeological situation to ensure 
mitigation is fully pro vided.  This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 18 'Flood 
risk' and Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' . 
73 Other matter s 
7.100  In addition to the abo ve, there are other matters which will need to be tak en into 
account in the consider ation and assessment of the site: 
Due to pro ximity of the site to a main road and a r ailway, under take and tak e account of 
an acoustic repor t;  
Due to the potential f or archaeological remains on the site , be inf ormed b y an appropr iate 
desk-based archaeological assessment, and where necessar y, a field e valuation in order 
to avoid and mitigate an y impacts;   
Due to the under lying geology , and presence of an aquif er, demonstr ate there is adequate 
wastewater capacity both on and off site to ser ve the de velopment;  that it w ould not lead 
to prob lems f or existing or ne w users;  and w ould protect e xisting w ater quality;  and 
Crowthor ne Station (b uilding), a local listing, is located to the nor th east of the site on the 
opposite side of the r ailway line . Whilst inter vening moder n station impro vements are 
present betw een the site and the station b uilding, the significance of this her itage asset 
will be protected from har m and oppor tunities will be sought to sustain and, if appropr iate, 
enhance its significance in line with Policy LP 45 'Protection and enhancement of the 
histor ic en vironment' . A Her itage Statement will be required to suppor t development 
proposals and demonstr ate a clear understanding of the significance of the setting of the 
station b uilding and ho w its significance w ould be aff ected, as w ell as pro viding clear 
mitigation f or an y har m caused. 
7.101 As the De velopment Plan should be read as a whole , regard will need to be had to all 
relevant adopted planning policies (including an y Neighbourhood Plans , and the Miner als and 
Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementar y Planning Guidance , in the consider ation of 
this site .  It is recommended that a pre-application proposal is submitted f or consider ation pr ior 
to the submission of a planning application.    
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (Chapter 5 deliv ering a sufficient supply of homes;  Chapter 8 Promoting health y 
and saf e comm unities;  Chapter 12 Achie ving w ell-designed places) 
PPG (Housing needs of diff erent g roups;  Housing f or older and disab led people;  Design: 
process and tools) 
Housing Bac kground P aper (BFC) (This pro vides an o verview of the rele vant e vidence 
base f or the site) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
7.102 Deliv ery 
The site is currently a pla ying field.  Although it is not currently pub licly accessib le it will be 
necessar y to pro vide alter nativ e pla ying pitches , to replace those currently pro vided on 
site, prior to de velopment. 
Provided that an acceptab le scheme can be negotiated, including suitab le mitigation and 
SANG can be pro vided in a timely manner , it is en visaged that housing could star t to be 
delivered in 2027/2028.  Depending on mar ket conditions and other f actors , it is estimated 
that the de velopment will tak e 4 y ears to complete (see Appendix 1:  'Housing Trajector y'). 
7.103 Monitor ing 
74 Deter mination and monitor ing of planning applications and appeals . 
Number of dw ellings (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Number of aff ordab le homes (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Number of self b uild /custom b uild dw ellings per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Number of specialist homes f or older people (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Habitat monitor ing for biodiv ersity net gain to achie ve target habitat type and condition.   
75 7.5 Land at Jealott's Hill, Warfield 
7.104 This 240 hectare site has a long-estab lished use as a research f acility f or a m ulti-national 
agricultur al technology compan y. The site currently contains a n umber of b uildings of v arying 
ages , sizes and constr uction and a large amount of f armland.  The e xisting b uilt en velope on 
the site co vers some 18 hectares of the 240 hectare site and is in single o wnership . 
7.105 It is allocated f or a sustainab le mix ed-use settlement based on Garden Village pr inciples . 
It includes the creation of a Science and Inno vation P ark based around the e xisting f acility 
operated b y Syngenta.  Comprehensiv e development is essential to achie ve the aims of 
sustainab le development.  The par t of the site allocated f or built de velopment (pr imarily residential 
and emplo yment uses) has been remo ved from the Green Belt and is defined on the P olicies 
Map as a settlement.  The allocation is a long-ter m de velopment, the constr uction of which will 
contin ue w ell be yond the per iod of this plan with a projected completion date of 2044. 
7.106 The w ork carr ied out at the site is of global impor tance and represents a significant 
propor tion of the research under taken nationally in this field.  The w ay in which research and 
development in the ag ricultur al technology industr y tak es place is changing with increasingly 
collabor ative approaches to research and de velopment being adopted which means that 
companies (including those in volved in adjacent sectors) need to br ing their talent and f acilities 
together in order to deliv er ne w technologies and products more efficiently and eff ectively to 
the mar ket. A critical mass of par tners or collabor ators is required to enab le this model to 
function.  Without the de velopment of a Science and Inno vation P ark at Jealott’ s Hill, the site 
will lose its top-tier status as a global research and de velopment location and a process of 
staged decline will be instigated. 
7.107 The proposal represents an unr ivalled oppor tunity to b uild on the site’ s legacy and 
create a w orld-leading destination at the f orefront of ne xt gener ation ag ricultur al technology , 
disco very and inno vation.  With Syngenta as the long-estab lished anchor occupier of the 
development, the vision is to create a balanced ecosystem of national and inter national 
companies at all stages of matur ity forming a suitab ly scaled cluster of b usinesses that will 
respond to an identified mar ket oppor tunity in the UK ag ricultur al technology mar ket. It will also 
help b uild on e xisting links with univ ersities and other research organisations , within the region 
and fur ther afield together with f oster ing links to schools and b usinesses within the Borough. 
7.108 The vision f or the site requires cross-subsidy from the land v alue created through the 
residential de velopment as par t of an e xceptional Garden Village . Beyond acting as 
across-subsidy , the residential component of the de velopment will also contr ibute to placemaking 
and create an attr active live-work-play environment aligned to the e volving needs of the occupiers 
and their emplo yees. 
7.109 Bracknell F orest’ s Green Belt boundar ies w ere first defined in the Green Belt Local 
Plan f or Ber kshire in 1985 and ha ve been retained through subsequent Local Plans . Green 
Belt boundar ies can only be altered in e xceptional circumstances . It is the national and 
international impor tance of contin uing this w ork that pro vides the e xceptional circumstances 
necessar y to justify the proposed changes to the Green Belt boundar y. The remo val of land 
from the Green Belt is accompanied b y compensator y impro vements to the remaining Green 
Belt. At Jealott’ s Hill these impro vements will include significant enhancements to g reen 
infrastructure , new woodland, biodiv ersity and access f or sustainab le travel modes linking the 
site with the Town Centre and recreational f acilities . 
76 Policy LP 7 
Land at Jealott's Hill,  Warfield 
1. Land at Jealott’ s Hill,  as sho wn on the P olicies Map and Illustrative Concept 
Plan is allocated f or a e xemplar lo w carbon mix ed use de velopment based on 
Garden Village principles with associated housing,  emplo yment and social and 
physical infrastructure . 
Emplo yment 
2. The site is allocated f or a Science and Inno vation P ark of 132,800 
m2 gross emplo yment floor space .  Within this,  72,200 m2 will be net ad ditional 
emplo yment floor space and 14,300 m2 will be replacement floor space f or the 
existing anc hor occupier who will also retain 46,300 m2 of existing floor space . 
3. The 72,200 m2 additional emplo yment floor space will be delivered in tandem 
with ne w housing and other facilities to ensure that a sustainab le comm unity 
is created.  A phasing strategy will be secured as par t of legal a greements linked 
to rele vant planning application(s).  The legal a greement will be structured to 
deliver a minim um of 38,750m2 of emplo yment floor space tog ether with 1,350 
houses within the plan period.   
New Homes 
4. The site is allocated f or: 
a. Appr oximatel y 2,000 ne w homes of whic h appr oximatel y 1,350 will be 
completed within the period of this plan.   Of these 2,000 ne w homes 
i. 700 will be aff ordable homes,  of whic h appr oximatel y 473 will be 
completed within the period of this plan. 
ii. A propor tion will be specialist housing f or older people , with an 
emphasis on e xtra care accommodation. 
iii. Up to 5% will be ser viced plots to be off ered f or sale to self or custom 
builder s. 
b. 8 permanent Gypsy and Traveller pitc hes in the location sho wn on the 
Policies Map and Illustrative Concept Plan. 
Green Belt 
5. 115.7 ha of the site is identified on the P olicies Map and Illustrative Concept 
Plan as remo ved fr om the Green Belt,  of whic h 115.3 ha is inc luded within a 
new settlement boundar y 
77 6. 0.4 ha of the land remo ved fr om the Green Belt is allocated f or 8 permanent 
Gypsy and Traveller pitc hes. 
7. A Green Belt boundar y will be created to f orm a permanent def ensib le edg e to 
the Green Belt and a strategic landscape b uffer.  It will comprise the use and 
appr opriate reinf orcement of e xisting boundar y features where the y exist, and 
the creation of ne w boundar y features where the y do not. 
8. A pac kage of compensator y impr ovements o ver and abo ve normal polic y 
requirements will be pr ovided to offset the impact of remo ving land fr om the 
Green Belt inc luding: 
a. Countr y Parks on the eastern and western par ts of the site of at least 79 
and 45 hectares respectivel y comprising: 
i. Open Space of Pub lic Value; 
ii. Tree and hedg erow planting;  and, 
iii. Spor ts pitc hes and ancillar y facilities. 
b. Bridle way links and accessib le routes. 
c. Biodiver sity enhancements. 
Comm unity 
9. The site will be designed,  developed and mana ged to ensure the long term 
governance and ste wardship of comm unity assets with ref erence to the Gar den 
Village Principles set out in the suppor ting te xt to this polic y. 
10. A local centre will be pr ovided inc luding retailing and a primar y health care 
facility .  1,528 m2 retail floor space will be pr ovided,  with at least 836 m2 including 
convenience retailing in the plan period. 
11. Other comm unity facilities will be pr ovided within the o verall site inc luding: 
a. Comm unity b uilding whic h ma y be incorpatred as par t of the local centre; 
b. One 3 f orm entr y primar y school and pla ying fields;   
c. Nursery provision; 
d. Open Space of Pub lic Value within the settlement boundar y comprising: 
i. Greenwa ys whic h connect fr om the local centre , through the site to 
both Countr y Parks and inc lude leisure access r outes f or all user s, 
78 existing and ne w trees and other planting,  draina ge atten uation,  play 
areas and fur ther biodiver sity f eatures. 
ii. A netw ork of other green corridor s and connections f or all user s within 
development par cels pr oviding strategic f ootpath/c ycleway links, 
including the pr otection,  enhancement and estab lishment of Pub lic 
Rights of Way.  
iii. A ne w neighbourhood centre park. 
iv. Retention,  or re-pr ovision of the Comm unity Landshare inc luding an 
orchard. 
v. Allotments. 
vi. Retention of impor tant e xisting planting,  trees and tree belts 
supplemented with ne w provision inc luding tree gr oups and a venues. 
vii. Play areas. 
viii. Spor ts Gr ound and P avilion. 
Sustainability and Transpor t 
12. The de velopment will be suppor ted b y a Sustainability Frame work whic h will 
set out ho w the polic y requirements f or mana ging en vironmental and social 
risks will be met and will ensure that the most sustainab le choices are made . 
This will integrate , provide direction to,  and be inf ormed b y, the assessments 
under taken in the f ollowing strategies; 
a. An Ener gy Strategy to inc lude measures to ensure an e xemplar lo w carbon 
development,  including:   
i. net z ero regulated emissions f or dwellings;   
ii. new non-residential b uildings to meet BREEAM ‘excellent’  standar d; 
iii. reduced embodied carbon in construction;  and 
iv. carbon off-setting. 
b. A Transpor t Strategy to inc lude measures to ensure the measures to 
mitigate the impact of the de velopment and the deliver y of sustainab le 
modes of tra vel.  The Transpor t Strategy will inc lude a comprehensive 
package of on and off-site transpor t measures to:     
i. mitigate the de velopment’ s impact on the highwa y netw ork with 
impr ovements to e xisting junctions at Three Leg ged Cr oss; Maidens 
Green along with the deliver y of ne w access points to the site on the 
A395 Maidenhead Road and A330 Ascot Road; 
ii. encoura ge self-containment of journe ys within the site; 
79 iii. encoura ge sustainab le modes of transpor t including measures to 
increase the use of car c lubs,  bus ser vices,  walking and c ycling 
including the pr ovision of a pedestrian and c ycle rout along the A3095 
Maidenhead Road,  and 
iv. minimise the ad verse impacts on air quality 
c. An Ecology Strategy to inc lude: 
i. measures to pr otect and enhance priority habitats; 
ii. the pr ovision of ne w habitats f or priority and pr otected species; 
iii. the pr otection,  enhancement,  creation and b uffering of ecological 
features; 
iv. a Biodiver sity Net Gain Strategy to demonstrate ho w the net gain will 
be ac hieved; 
v. a site mana gement plan f or the lif etime of the de velopment.    
d. A Draina ge Strategy to inc lude a tec hnical in vestigation and assessment 
of all sour ces of flooding will be required (inc luding surface water and 
ground water) to the determine flood risk mana gement measures,  including 
on-site sustainab le draina ge systems (SuDS) and off-site draina ge 
impr ovements where necessar y. 
e. A Green Infrastructure Strategy to sho w ho w a well-connected netw ork of 
multifunctional green infrastructure will be delivered thr ough both the 
developed areas and the countr y parks. 
f. A Pub lic Rights of Way Strategy to demonstrate ho w existing Pub lic Rights 
of Way will be pr otected and enhanced and ho w ne w ones will be 
estab lished,  including bridle way links and saf e crossing points. 
g. A Lighting Strategy whic h will inc lude consideration of dark skies and 
measures to mitigate the impact on biodiver sity. 
h. A Landscape Strategy to identify the landscape constraints and 
oppor tunities.  This will be inf ormed b y a detailed landscape and visual 
assessment to determine the location and e xtent of the de velopment;  the 
location of strategic landscaping and tree planting and a phasing strategy 
to reduce the visual impact of the ne w settlement in the wider landscape 
through time .  
13. The Sustainability Frame work and suppor ting strategies will f orm the 
environmental baseline in the de velopment of the masterplan.   Once appr oved, 
the suppor ting strategies will be updated prior to the submission of an y planning 
application and thereafter updated thr ough the lif e of the de velopment as 
requirements and best practice e volve. The measures identified in the individual 
strategies will inf orm the content of an y planning application. 
Design and Landscape  
14. A design pr ocess will be estab lished and a greed at an earl y sta ge to the Local 
Planning A uthority whic h inc ludes meaningful comm unity enga gement in the 
planning and design of the site . 
80 15. A masterplan and design code pr oduced thr ough the a greed design pr ocess 
will be submitted and appr oved b y the Local Planning A uthority prior to an y 
planning application(s) being submitted.   Once a greed b y the Council the y will 
be an impor tant material planning consideration in the determination of 
subsequent planning applications. 
16. A detailed landscape and visual impact assessment of the emer ging pr oposals 
shall be under taken as par t of the Sustainability Frame work and thereb y inform 
the masterplan,  strategic landscaping and design. 
Mitigation f or Habitats Sites 
17. Measures to a void and mitigate the impact of de velopment on habitat sites in 
agreement with the Council and Natural England.   This will inc lude the pr ovision 
in perpetuity of: 
a. On-site bespoke Suitab le Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) within a 
79 hectare eastern area;  and, 
b. A financial contrib ution to wards Strategic Access Mana gement and 
Monitoring;  and, 
c. Any other measures required to satisfy the Habitat Regulations,  the 
Council’ s Thames Basin Heaths Special Pr otection Area a voidance and 
mitigation Strategy and rele vant guidance . 
Stewardship   
18. A programme f or ac hieving appr opriate and sustainab le long-term go vernance 
and ste wardship of comm unity assets is to be pr oduced.   The assets will inc lude 
green space , pub lic realm areas and comm unity and other rele vant facilities.   
Arrang ements a greed are to be funded the long term and inc lude comm unity 
representation to ensure residents ha ve a stake in the long term de velopment, 
stewardship and mana gement of their comm unity . The pr ogramme and 
arrang ements are to be a greed with the Council in a Gar den Village Compliance 
Statement. 
81 Other Requirements 
19. Development will be required to demonstrate that e xisting herita ge assets will 
be pr otected fr om harm and that the significance of the asset is saf eguar ded 
and, where possib le enhanced and an y impacts mitigated. 
20. An education outreac h programme to b uild on e xisting links with education 
institutions. 
21. The abo ve is not a comprehensive list of requirements.  Further detail of other 
mitigation required can be f ound in the Infrastructure Deliver y Plan. 
82 Figure 3 Jealott's Hill Illustrative Concept Plan 
83 Emplo yment 
7.110 In order to create a balanced sustainab le comm unity, it is impor tant that the ne w 
emplo yment floorspace is deliv ered in tandem with the housing de velopment.  This is also 
required to reflect that land is being e xceptionally released from the Green Belt in this location 
because of the impor tance of enab ling Syngenta to contin ue its w orld leading oper ations on 
the site . 
7.111 Planning applications that per mit ne w housing de velopment on the site will be subject 
to legal ag reements requir ing the pro vision of specified amounts of commercial floorspace on 
completion of ne w homes . These legal ag reements will be str uctured to ensure that at least 
38,750 m2 (net) of ne w floorspace is deliv ered b y the time 1,350 ne w homes ha ve been 
completed.  This reflects the amount of de velopment that is projected to be deliv ered within the 
plan.  The remaining balance of the floorspace in the ne w Science and Inno vation P ark (33,450 
m2) may be deliv ered be yond 2037.  In total the emplo yment floorspace at Jealott’ s Hill will be 
132,800 m2, resulting in a net increase of 72,200 m2. 
7.112 It is anticipated that o verall, the main emplo yment area at the site will gener ate 
appro ximately 2,000 ne w jobs , predominantly in ag ri-tech and similar high-tech sectors with a 
focus on research and de velopment.  The Science and Inno vation P ark will create a research 
and de velopment-f ocused b usiness en vironment within which Syngenta can e xpand and adapt 
its own facilities to enab le moder n collabor ative commercial w orking to flour ish. 
7.113 Links with education and research estab lishments will be fur ther de veloped through 
investment in the site detailed in an education outreach prog ramme to be pro vided in conjunction 
with the first planning application f or de velopment on site . 
7.114 Other emplo yment gener ating uses will also be created in the Local Centre and school. 
Housing 
7.115 Housing is required on the site in order to cross-subsidise in vestment in the Science 
and Inno vation P ark and enab le Syngenta to maintain and de velop its globally impor tant w ork 
at Jealott’ s Hill. 
7.116 Having housing on the site mak es Jealott’ s Hill an e xceptional oppor tunity to create a 
genuinely mix ed-use sustainab le comm unity with significant emplo yment and other suppor ting 
uses . Based on the Council’ s estimated b uild r ates f or the site , some 1,350 ne w homes could 
be deliv ered within the plan per iod out of a total allocation of 2,000. 
7.117 In line with Policy LP 9 'Aff ordab le housing' , 35% of the ne w housing will be pro vided 
as aff ordab le homes . This equates to 700 ne w affordab le homes from the full allocation of 2,000 
of which 473 are e xpected to be pro vided within the plan per iod. 
7.118 The mix of housing will contr ibute to meeting identified needs and should theref ore 
accord with the Council’ s housing mix requirements in Policy LP 24 'Housing mix' .  Part of the 
identified housing need in the Borough is f or specialised housing f or older people .  This site 
will be e xpected to pro vide a propor tion of residential accommodation to meet such needs , with 
an emphasis on e xtra care units f or which there is a par ticular need.      
84 7.119 In order to pro vide plots suitab le for those on the Council’ s Self Build Register , serviced 
plots equiv alent to 5% of the total homes pro vided, shall be pro vided on the site and off ered 
for sale to self or custom b uilders . If the plots are not tak en up f or self-b uild after a reasonab le 
period of mar keting, the y ma y be de veloped f or alter nativ e housing.  The details of the 
arrangements f or this will be included in a S106 legal ag reement. 
Gypsy and Traveller site 
7.120 A site of appro ximately 0.4ha has been remo ved from the Green Belt (b ut remains 
outside a defined settlement) and is specifically allocated as a gypsy and tr aveller site including 
eight per manent gypsy and tr aveller pitches of appro ximately 500 m2 each and an amenity 
block. The site (as sho wn on the P olicies Map and Illustr ative Concept Plan) currently contains 
hardstanding and semi-derelict ag ricultur al buildings . It has good access to the road netw ork 
and will ha ve access to the ne w comm unity f acilities as par t of the Garden Village . The site will 
be saf eguarded f or use as per manent gypsy and tr aveller site through a legal ag reement. 
7.121 Along with other f actors set out belo w, the design of the site should be sympathetic to 
the surrounding area;  this is par ticular ly impor tant giv en the site is located in the countr yside 
inset into the Green Belt.  A ne w per manent def ensib le edge to the Green Belt m ust be created 
along the nor th edge of the site , which will also pro vide landscape mitigation.  Landscape design, 
site la yout (including par king and tur ning arr angements f or large v ehicles , and stor age) along 
with f actors such as boundar y treatments and ar tificial lighting will be k ey consider ations . This 
policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 25 'Gypsies , travellers and tr avelling 
showpeople' . 
Green Belt 
7.122 The Green Belt boundar y is amended, as sho wn on the P olicies Map , to e xclude from 
the Green Belt  the e xtent of the Jealott’ s Hill site that is allocated f or built de velopment f or a 
permanent Gypsy and Traveller site .  
Boundar y 
7.123 It is recognised that the NPPF sa ys that Green Belt boundar ies should use ph ysical 
features that are readily recognisab le and lik ely to be per manent (par a 39).  However, if that 
approach w as followed at Jealott’ s Hill it w ould result in significant additional land that w ould 
still ser ve a useful Green Belt function being remo ved unnecessar ily from the Green Belt. 
Theref ore, the ne w boundar y has been largely defined to align with the e xtent of allocated b uilt 
development.  The policy requires the use of e xisting appropr iate f eatures where the y exist, and 
the creation of ne w boundar y features where the y do not.  It is not en visaged that this will cause 
any significant prob lems as the ne w boundar y will f or the most par t follow the edges of areas 
of pub lic open space . It will also pro vide a def ensib le edge to the settlement and pro vide 
landscape mitigation. 
7.124 In order to saf eguard the remaining Green Belt and create a ne w def ensib le landscaped 
edge to the Green Belt boundar y, reinf orcement of the ne w boundar y is required.  The 
Sustainability F ramework requires a site wide landscape str ategy to demonstr ate ho w this will 
be achie ved. 
85 Compensator y Impr ovements 
7.125 Paragraph 138 of the NPPF ref ers to the need f or compensator y impro vements to the 
environmental quality and accessibility of the remaining Green Belt land.  This is fur ther e xplained 
in the PPG and can include impro vements to biodiv ersity , new or enhanced w alking and cycle 
routes and impro ved access to ne w recreational and pla ying field pro vision. 
7.126 Just o ver 50% (around 124 ha) of the allocated site remains within the Green Belt and 
will be significantly impro ved in order to compensate f or the remo val of other par ts of the site 
from the Green Belt.  The e xtent of land, along with its location, char acter and relationship with 
the Garden Village pro vides enor mous oppor tunities f or a suite of impro vements associated 
with g reen infr astructure and the opening up of the land f or inf ormal and f ormal recreational 
purposes br inging health, social and en vironmental benefits . The land is currently in ag ricultur al 
use, hence the major ity of it has limited biodiv ersity v alue. Although some pub lic rights of w ay 
pass around the per ipher y of the e xisting site , it is pr ivate land, and theref ore pub lic access is 
restricted across the major ity of the site . 
7.127 Measures to impro ve environmental quality and the accessibility of the Green Belt will 
include: 
The e xtension of e xisting areas of deciduous w ood and the planting of ne w tree belts . This 
planting will f orm a str ategic landscape b uffer and will mitigate the landscape impact and 
provide compensator y impro vements . The b uffer extends to 20m depth along the nor thern 
boundar y with Ascot Road and is typically o ver 50m (and o ver 100m in some areas) around 
the east, south and w est settlement boundar y. More f ormal tree planting is required along 
certain k ey routes including along the Maidenhead Road and that linking the local centre 
with the road netw ork  
Extensiv e countr y par ks (at least 124 ha) on the w ester n and easter n sides of the site 
linked by two new greenw ays crossing the whole site from nor th east to w est, and from 
south east to nor th west. These will help realise the m ultifunctional potential of the land 
for formal (creation of ne w spor ts pitches and ancillar y facilities) and inf ormal recreation.   
Formal f ootpaths and cycle ways will be created within the settlement which will link to 
existing r ights of w ay. A ne w bridleway is proposed in the easter n countr y par k, connecting 
the e xisting br idleway netw ork in the nor th east (PR OW BW1) to that to the south w est of 
the site via Bo wyers Lane (PR OW BR22/BR19).  Collectiv ely these measures will 
significantly impro ve the pub lic accessibility and en vironmental quality of the remaining 
Green Belt. 
The creation of a ne w and substantially enhanced a g reen infr astructure netw ork, (including 
creation of contin uous and impro ved corr idors f or wildlif e, bridging identified gaps in the 
grassland and the w oodland habitat netw orks), across the site , A biodiv ersity net gain of 
at least 20% will be  required, an increase of 10% from the standard policy requirements . 
7.128 The Sustainability F ramework for the site includes the requirement f or a Green 
Infrastructure Str ategy and Biodiv ersity Net Gain Str ategy to ensure that these elements of the 
proposal are satisf actor ily incor porated in the master planning process and through planning 
applications . Implementation of the measures will be secured through the use of conditions 
and S106 ob ligations . This includes the long-ter m maintenance of the land and re view of the 
net gain str ategy . 
7.129 Further details of the nature of these pro visions are included within the requirements 
for a Green Infr astructure Str ategy as set out belo w. 
86 Comm unity 
Garden Village Principles 
7.130 The Jealott's Hill de velopment represents an outstanding oppor tunity to create an 
exemplar de velopment.  In order to achie ve the high standards e xpected both in the design of 
the ne w settlement and in its ongoing go vernance it will be e xpected to f ollow garden village 
principles . These are based on the Town and Countr y Planning Association Garden City 
principles and the Go vernment’ s Garden Comm unity Qualities . Compliance with these pr inciples 
will be demonstr ated through the submission of Garden Village Compliance Statement as par t 
of the master planning process . 
7.131 The k ey principles that will be e xpected to be adopted are: 
Meaningful comm unity in volvement in creating a vision and creating a design that achie ves 
the vision. 
Ensur ing the comm unity has o wnership and ste wardship of k ey comm unity assets and 
appropr iate elements of pub lic realm. 
Be designed with a distinctiv e local identity as a ne w garden comm unity, with an attr active 
and functioning centre and pub lic realm. 
Exemplar y standards of design will be e xpected.  The e xpectation is that a tr uly vibr ant 
comm unity will be created pro viding a v ariety of emplo yment oppor tunities and g reat 
facilities f or recreational and comm unity uses . 
Be designed f or good health to pro vide the choices and chances f or all to liv e a health y 
life. 
Have adequate infr astructure to meet the da y to da y needs of the comm unity and is fle xibly 
and rob ustly designed to allo w adaptation to meet changing needs . 
Homes (including aff ordab le homes) m ust be of demonstr ably high quality and contr ibute 
to the distinctiv eness of the village . The mix of housing types , sizes and ten ures should 
provide f or all stages of lif e. 
The mo vement netw ork should pro vide f orward looking and accessib le transpor t options 
that suppor t economic prosper ity and w ellbeing f or residents . It should encour age w alking, 
and cycling, and the use of pub lic transpor t. The village should be easy to na vigate and 
provide easy sustainab le access to jobs , facilities and ser vices . 
Green spaces will be a k ey par t of the ne w village . There will be generous , accessib le, 
green and b lue infr astructure that promotes health, w ellbeing, and quality of lif e, and 
delivers en vironmental gains including biodiv ersity net gain. 
Legacy and ste wardship arr angements should be in place f or the care of comm unity assets , 
infrastructure and pub lic realm, f or the benefit of the whole comm unity. 
The ne w village should ha ve resilience b uilt in.  It must be designed and managed to allo w 
for changing demog raphics and the impacts of climate change . This will include flood r isk 
and w ater a vailability , durable landscaping and b uildings designed f or gener ations to come . 
The Local Centre 
7.132 The Local Centre should pro vide a vibr ant hub f or the village and a f ocal point f or the 
development.  To do this , it m ust ha ve a mix of uses that mak e it a f ocus f or comm unity activity 
including shopping, health and other uses . 
87 7.133 It is e xpected that 1,528 m2 retail related floor space w ould be pro vided, with at least 
836 m2 within the plan per iod. This should include (within the plan per iod) a super market of at 
least 760 m2 (net inter nal area) to ensure that da y to da y needs can be met on-site . The centre 
should also contain other retail units e xtending to around 480 m2 (net inter nal area), 288 m2 
food and dr ink pro vision, and non-retail f acilities such as a health centre , veterinary clinic.  The 
local centre ma y also include pro vision of a comm unity b uilding and children’ s nurser y.  While 
these f acilities will be required within the site , their locations will depend upon the decisions 
made dur ing the master planning process and ha ving regard to their accessibility and the 
convenience of their future users . 
7.134 The centre should be located so that it benefits from pro ximity to other uses on the 
site, particular ly education and emplo yment.  It must also be readily accessib le to the residential 
development.  A suitab le location in this respect is sho wn on the Illustr ative Concept Plan. 
7.135 Deliv ery of the centre m ust be co-ordinated with the deliv ery of housing and emplo yment 
development, and appropr iate tr iggers will be set through the S106 ag reement(s) to ensure 
that this happens . The e xpectation is that the super market and suppor ting retail, f ood and dr ink 
outlets ha ving a minim um floorspace of at least 836 m2 (net inter nal area) will be pro vided 
within the plan per iod. 
Exemplar lo w carbon   
The de velopment of the Jealott’ s Hill site will be based on the highest standards of 
sustainability and achie ving an e xemplar lo w carbon de velopment. 
Residential dw ellings will achie ve net z ero carbon f or regulated emissions (energy used 
to pro vide space heating and cooling, hot w ater and fix ed lighting). 
New non-residential b uildings (including comm unity and education f acilities) shall achie ve 
BREEAM ‘excellent’. 
Refurbished and repur posed b uildings shall be assessed on a case b y case basis against 
the BREEAM standards to re view the technical f easibility and viability of meeting BREEAM 
standards;  measures to be ag reed on a case-b y-case basis with the Council. 
This will include the planting of significant areas of w oodland to act as carbon sinks (which 
will also pro vide other benefits). 
Embodied carbon in constr uction will be reduced f or each phase , applications will b uild 
on the Sustainability F ramework and detail f or the constr uction process: 
Reduction of carbon emissions in the man ufacture , deliv ery to site and constr uction 
of mater ials. 
Reduction of carbon emission in the tr avel of the w orkforce to site .  
How waste and en vironmental pollution is a voided dur ing constr uction. 
Efficient use of resources , the reduction of demolition or constr uction w aste to landfill, 
re-use of b uildings , recycling of mater ials and reduction in w ater use . 
Moder n methods of constr uction. 
7.136 The use of moder n methods of constr uction is encour aged, par ticular ly if these methods 
can be sho wn to ha ve a positiv e impact on the local econom y by bringing ne w skills and 
manufactur ing processes to the Br acknell area. 
7.137 As par t of the Sustainability F ramework for the site , an Energy Str ategy will be required 
in adv ance of planning applications being submitted.  The Str ategy will: 
88 take adv antage of the scale of the de velopment to deliv er an e xemplar y scheme;  review 
the potential to e xceed the net z ero carbon f or regulated emissions include a ‘fabric-first’ 
approach to reduce energy demand; 
be electr ically led to tak e adv antage of the decarbonisation of the g rid; 
include e xtensiv e pro vision of pub lic and pr ivate electr ic vehicle charging points;  include 
renewable energy sources on site; 
make use of technology; 
set out monitor ing and re view arr angements;  and 
be implemented in accordance with conditions attached to an y rele vant planning 
permission(s). 
Water Mana gement 
7.138 The de velopment will adopt sustainab le water management.   This will include measures 
to deliv er a maxim um w ater use of 100 litres/head/da y.   
Green Infrastructure 
7.139 The site will be e xpected to pro vide e xceptional g reen infr astructure . The e xtent and 
nature of the site pro vides an oppor tunity to create v aluab le green infr astructure assets that 
are e xceptional in both scale and quality . In de veloping a site wide master plan and Green 
Infrastructure Str ategy , a holistic approach in line with Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure'  is 
required to protect, enhance and pro vide ne w green infr astructure . It will be impor tant that the 
approach tak es full adv antage of the m ultiple roles of g reen infr astructure and the benefits of 
creating a rob ust netw ork of g reen infr astructure f eatures to create corr idors f or wildlif e and f or 
the benefit of residents and others who use the site . 
7.140 The holistic approach should seek to maximise the benefits that can be achie ved 
through links to other g reen infr astructure outside the site and mak e best use of e xisting assets 
within the site including mature trees and hedges . The Green Infr astructure Str ategy (as par t 
of the Sustainability F ramework) and master plan f or the site should sho w how greenw ays ha ve 
been incor porated into the site la yout (as indicated on the Illustr ative Concept Plan).  Green 
infrastructure will ha ve an impor tant function as a significant f eature in the local and wider 
landscape . This will include the use of str ategic tree belts to reduce the wider visual impact of 
new development (inf ormed b y the detailed landscape and visual impact assessment).  The 
green infr astructure on the site will pro vide a r ange of diff erent benefits such as compensator y 
impro vements to the Green Belt, biodiv ersity net gain, climate change mitigation, visual amenity , 
landscape char acter , play, personal w ellbeing, health and the encour agement of an activ e life. 
7.141 Provision will include par kland, biodiv ersity , SANG, spor ts and other types . There will 
be tw o new countr y par ks (W ester n Countr y Park and Easter n Countr y Park) in the Green Belt 
which together will be a minim um of 124 hectares in area, with str ategic g reenw ays each being 
a minim um of 20 metres wide linking them through the de velopment area. 
7.142 The Wester n Countr y Park will be appro ximately 45 hectares compr ising;   
Up to 20 hectares of ne w and enhanced f orest / w oodland. 
Up to 20 hectares of gener al par kland (meado w, trees , hedgero ws, sustainab le drainage , 
natur al pla y areas , other planting and habitat, w et areas , picnic spots and tr ails). 
Up to 5 hectares of ne w grassed spor ts pitches with ancillar y facilities such as a pa vilion 
and par king. 
89 The enhancement of adjacent r ights of w ay and br idleways. 
Connectivity f or people , wildlif e and habitat to off-site areas where appropr iate. 
7.143 The Easter n Countr y Park will be appro ximately 79 hectares compr ising: 
New Suitab le Alter nativ e Natur al Greenspace (SANG) to be located adjacent to e xisting 
SANGs south of the allocated site (see par agraph 7.169 f or more details). 
Up to 69 hectares of par kland (meado w, trees , hedgero ws, sustainab le drainage , other 
planting and habitat and tr ails). A large par king area will also be required in the nor th 
easter n par t of the countr y par k to accommodate visitors . 
The pro vision of a ne w bridleway which connects r ights of w ay PR OW BW1 in the nor th 
east of the site to the beginning of FP3 (at the F rost F olly car park and to allo w horses to 
access Bo wyers Lane and onto BR22 in the south / south w est of the site . New Pegasus 
Crossings at roads where the br idleways cross them will be required to ensure the saf ety 
of horse r iders and other users . 
7.144 Within the settlement there will also be substantial g reen infr astructure to ser vice the 
development compr ising: 
A neighbourhood centre par k including trees , other planting and a Neighbourhood Equipped 
Area of Pla y (NEAP).  The to wn par k is to be located in an accessib le area and act as a 
focal point f or the ne w comm unity. 
The retention or re-pro vision of the Comm unity Landshare area and orchard. 
The pro vision of an allotment site or sites with par king and w ater supply . The site/s will be 
transferred to Warfield P arish Council. 
An area f or formal spor ts pro vision which will include a floodlit ar tificial g rass pitch, ancillar y 
storage f acilities , a Multi-Use Games Area (MUGA), pro vision f or teenagers and associated 
parking. 
A green-g rid netw ork of leisure routes across the site to pro vide saf e routes f or people 
walking and cycling.  These routes should also pro vide a g reen-corr idor with habitats , trees , 
hedgero ws, wildflo wer str ips etc.  to contr ibute to wards biodiv ersity net gain and pro vide 
local access to nature f or residents .  The width of the routes which join the tw o countr y 
parks from nor th west to south east, and nor th east to  w est as sho wn on the concept 
plan.   Pub lic ar t should be pro vided along these routes . 
Provision of amenity areas , kickabout spaces and SuDS f eatures . 
The retention of impor tant trees , hedgero ws and other habitats f or their visual, biodiv ersity 
and en vironmental v alue. 
Flooding and SuDS 
7.145 Part of the site is at r isk of surf ace w ater flooding, with some areas ha ving ele vated 
ground w ater le vels. In some instances these e xtend into areas of de velopment on the Illustr ative 
Concept Plan.  However, the quantum of de velopment f or which the site is allocated tak es 
account of flood r isk. Development of the site should a void areas at r isk of all sources of flooding, 
and pro vide suitab le sustainab le drainage systems to mitigate the impact of the de velopment 
(that is surf ace le vel SuDS as opposed to b uried tr aditional systems), ha ving regard to an y 
existing field and road dr ainage f eatures . Off-site dr ainage impro vements ma y be required. 
7.146 When de veloping a site wide master plan, technical in vestigation and assessment of 
all sources of flooding should be under taken to deter mine the flood r isk management measures , 
and SuDS f eatures required (including OSPV and SANG areas), in order to achie ve sustainab le 
90 development.  This should meet the requirements f or the site identified in the Le vel 2 Str ategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (JBA, 2019).   This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 
18 'Flood r isk' and Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' . 
Biodiver sity 
7.147 The site predominantly consists of cultiv ated fields bordered b y field margins , hedgero ws 
and trees , as w ell as g rassland fields , and smaller areas of w oodland, scr ub, ruderal plants , 
standing w ater, buildings and bare g round. 
7.148 Theref ore, a detailed ecological impact assessment will be required to identify and 
assess potential impacts on the habitats and species present at the site . Overall, the site la yout 
will need to be designed sensitiv ely to balance e xisting biodiv ersity with the needs of the 
development.  A site management plan f or the lif etime of the de velopment is also required to 
set out the prog ramme of w orks needed to achie ve restor ation and enhancements to the site . 
7.149 The scale of the site and the creation of the countr y par ks pro vides an oppor tunity to 
impro ve the quality and quantity of these habitats , in order to ensure a net biodiv ersity gain of 
at least 20%.  This will both mitigate the impact of the de velopment and pro vide compensator y 
impro vements to the Green Belt.  Biodiv ersity net gain will be achie ved by biodiv ersity pro vision 
across the de veloped areas of the site , and the outlying countr y par ks. A Biodiv ersity Net Gain 
Strategy will be submitted to the Planning A uthor ity pr ior to the submission of an y planning 
application, demonstr ating ho w the net gain will be achie ved. Subsequent planning applications 
will be accompanied b y a re view of the Str ategy to ensure account is tak en of an y detailed 
design changes to ensure that a 20% net gain is achie ved overall. 
7.150 The applicant will under take biodiv ersity net gain monitor ing in accordance with national 
planning guidance and advice from bodies such as Natur al England. 
7.151 The Council will also consider the use of a conser vation co venant to secure the 
long-ter m future of these habitats . This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 
46 'Biodiv ersity' . 
7.152 Within the design of the de velopment, consider ation m ust be giv en to pre vent additional 
recreational impact to SSSIs within the vicinity of the site . 
Transpor t 
7.153 The mix of uses on the site pro vides the oppor tunity to minimise jour neys by motor ised 
vehicles . The pac kage of measures to be pro vided will maximise the self-containment of jour neys 
within the site . It will be e xpected to pro vide a netw ork of attr active pedestr ian and cycle routes 
both within the site and linking to routes outside the site . It is impor tant that measures are 
included to create attr active non-car routes to Br acknell Town Centre . 
7.154 The de velopment should be designed to encour age the use of pub lic transpor t including 
the pro vision and use of b us ser vices and Demand Responsiv e Transpor t (DR T) which will be 
a free/lo w costs taxi-style/mini b us ser vice f or residents of the site including ancillar y stor age 
facilities pro vided on-site . The tr anspor t proposals should include measures to ensure a frequent 
and con venient b us ser vice to k ey destinations . 
91 7.155 New roads and junctions will need to be pro vided within the site . Suitab le par king 
provision will be required, with an appropr iate propor tion of electr ic vehicle charging points . 
There will also need to be saf e crossing points at ag reed locations f or pedestr ians, cyclists and 
horse r iders . 
7.156 It is recognised that the de velopment will increase tr affic on local roads and the pac kage 
of measures will include off-site enhancements to increase the capacity of k ey points on the 
netw ork to mitigate the impacts of the additional mo vements . These measures include: 
A new roundabout junction to the A3095 Maidenhead Road with the A330 Ascot Road 
which is off-site b ut will use some land within the allocated site . It will also pro vide access 
into the site . 
Other site access points at ag reed locations . 
An impro ved junction at the 3-Legged Cross which will in volve widening the br idge. This 
will require the land to be acquired b y the de veloper or ter ms ag reed b y the Council to 
secure the land through a de veloper bac ked Compulsor y Purchase Order . 
A new roundabout junction at Maidens Green.  This will require the land to be acquired b y 
the de veloper or ter ms ag reed b y the Council to secure the land through a de veloper 
backed Compulsor y Purchase Order . 
Other necessar y off-site highw ays impro vements to be ag reed with the Council. 
7.157 The site will deliv er a main sustainab le transpor t hub and satellite hubs which are 
readily accessib le to the ne w comm unity via pedestr ian and cycle routes within the site . These 
hubs will pro vide f ocal points and f acilitate the introduction of measures to optimise the use of 
sustainab le transpor t modes through the deliv ery of b us stops , Electr ic Vehicle Charging, 
mobility scooter hire , cycle stor age cycle hire and car hire .  These should be accompanied b y 
the deliv ery of inf ormation technology to pro vide real time inf ormation regarding b us ser vices 
and sustainab le transpor t choices . 
7.158 To mak e the site sustainab le it will be impor tant to pro vide saf e off-site pedestr ian and 
cycle access to link to par ts of Warfield and Br acknell.  This will include: 
A dedicated and separ ate route alongside the A3095 Maidenhead Road which ma y the 
need to be par tly pro vided on third 3rd par ty land to be purchased b y the de veloper and 
possib ly by Compulsor y Purchase Order . 
A quieter shared surf ace route along Wellers Lane , Westhatch Lane (par tly to be closed 
off the tr affic) and Osbor ne Lane . This route m ust be saf e and con venient f or walkers and 
cyclists . 
Impro vements to Bo wyers Lane including surf acing and signage .  
Other necessar y off-site impro vements to be ag reed with the Council 
7.159 There will also need to be financial contr ibutions to wards tr avel planning measures 
and initiativ es to tr uly maximises sustainab le transpor t choices . 
7.160 As par t of the Sustainability F ramework for the site , details of the abo ve measures and 
timings will need to be set out in a Transpor t Strategy which m ust be submitted f or appro val. 
This will inf orm the master planning process and subsequent planning applications , to address 
the abo ve points . 
92 Other infrastructure requirements 
7.161 The de velopment will pro vide a ne w primary school f or three f orms of entr y. The school 
will be deliv ered in phases with the first tw o forms of entr y being deliv ered within the plan per iod 
with  enough land (at least 3 hectares) being saf eguarded  f or future e xpansion in the later 
phases of the de velopment.  The school should include pre-school pro vision and be suitab ly 
located within the site to maximise oppor tunities f or walking/cycling to school.  There will also 
be a need to pro vide suitab le par king and drop-off pic k up oppor tunities . Secondar y; post 16 
school pro vision and some SEN will be pro vided off-site in e xisting schools capab le of ser ving 
the site . 
7.162 The site will be e xpected to pro vide tw o areas f or comm unity recycling of glass and 
other recyclab le mater ials. 
7.163 On and off-site infr astructure , in accordance with the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan, will 
be required to suppor t the de velopment.  Infrastructure required to suppor t the de velopment 
may be secured including in-kind pro vision and/or through de veloper contr ibutions .  This policy 
should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' . 
Design and Landscape 
Landscape 
7.164 A strategic landscape and visual appr aisal f or land at Jealott’ s Hill has been under taken 
and identified the f ollowing landscape and visual design pr inciples f or the de velopment: 
The location and maxim um height of b uildings (34) should reflect those tested;  whilst creating 
a varied and interesting skyline . 
Ensure that the design a voids skyline vie ws of the de velopment with the e xception of one 
or tw o glimpses of k eynote emplo yment and village centre b uildings , whose roofscape 
should be designed to be seen. 
Ensure that the design responds to the outcome of the lighting str ategy and the need to 
reconcile landscaping;  biodiv ersity and the deliv ery of a saf e and accessib le en vironment. 
A def ensib le Green Belt boundar y including str ategic landscape b uffers will be designed-in 
to the de velopment.  The Green Belt boundar y and the str ategic landscape b uffers will 
form the per manent def ensib le edge to the Green Belt and pro vide biodiv ersity net gain 
and oppor tunities f or recreation.  It shall be ag reed with the Council and shall be; 
Located as indicated on the policies map and Illustr ative Concept Plan. 
Planted at an appropr iate stage in the de velopment to be set out and secured via the 
S106 ag reement. 
Designed to include a mix of nativ e species and clear ings, paths and glades to a void 
becoming a w all of g reener y, while pro viding the necessar y enclosure and rob ust 
boundar ies.  
Phasing f or the deliv ery of fur ther str uctur al planting required f or landscape mitigation, 
both with the settlement and areas of open space , shall be ag reed with the Council.   
Oppor tunities to create ne w outw ard vie ws should be included (three locations ha ve been 
identified on the Illustr ative Concept Plan). 
34 The maxim um heights f or buildings that ha ve been tested are 9m f or residential b uildings (2-store ys), 15m f or commercial 
buildings , 15m f or the neighbourhood centre and 9m f or the pr imary school 
93 The master plan m ust respect the undulating topog raphy; and retain and enhance the 
Landscape Char acter Areas , particular ly the sensitiv e valley char acter within the site (east 
and w est). 
Retain, manage and enhance e xisting trees and hedgero ws. 
Maintain the r ural char acter of lanes and roads approaching the site . 
Create a rob ust visual enclosure along the nor thern boundar y through the management 
of the e xisting strong hedgero w and trees , and ne w woodland planting. 
The less sensitiv e (in landscape ter ms) areas of the site are to be de veloped in adv ance 
of the more sensitiv e locations so that f orward planted tree belts enclose vie ws of them 
when seen from be yond the de velopment.   A Phasing plan is to be ag reed with the Council 
to ensure the implementation of this approach. 
7.165 A detailed landscape and visual impact assessment of the emerging proposals shall 
be under taken in accordance with IEMA and the Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment 
2013 (‘GL VIA3’) and the requirements of the En vironmental Impact Assessment Regulations 
2017, including consider ation of additional visual receptors .  This will f orm par t of the 
Sustainability F ramework for the site .  Any subsequent amendments to the landscape and 
visual design pr inciples will be subject to ag reement with the Council and will only be suppor ted 
where it can be demonstr ated: 
that skyline vie ws of de velopment can be a voided; 
that proposed planting mitigation will ensure that the de velopment can be accommodated 
into the landscape; 
that ne w proposed planting belts w ould create a long-ter m def ensib le edge which w ould 
protect the char acter of the wider landscape and the v alleys that lie east and w est of the 
site; and 
how the assessment has inf ormed the siting, design and mitigation of the de velopment. 
7.166 The findings of the detailed landscape and visual impact assessment shall inf orm the 
Landscape Str ategy .  Measures required to pre vent, reduce , minimise and mitigate impacts 
will be tak en forward through the master plan, design codes and Green Infr astructure Str ategy .  
Masterplan 
7.167 The de velopers of the site , through the deliv ery of the master plan, design code and 
planning applications will be required to demonstr ate the deliv ery of a high quality design with 
a strong emphasis on place making to ensure the creation of a cohesiv e and inclusiv e 
comm unity. The master plan will be prepared in collabor ation with the local planning author ity 
and the local comm unity. The master plan will need to be ag reed b y the local planning author ity 
before the submission of an y planning application(s) f or the de velopment of the site and will 
be and impor tant mater ial planning consider ation in the deter mination of subsequent planning 
applications . It will guide the design of the de velopment o ver a long per iod and will theref ore 
need to include a re view mechanism so that changes can be made o ver time in ag reement 
with the local planning author ity. Detailed design codes will also be required as par t of an y full 
or reser ved matter applications and these will be ag reed with the Council, ideally pr ior to 
submission . 
7.168 The master plan will be a detailed document which will: 
Provide the vision f or the site , to reflect local engagement and aspir ations f or the whole 
comm unity including b usinesses .  
94 Include r igorous analysis of the conte xt of the site including oppor tunities , constr aints and 
local aspir ations . 
Be clear ly based on that analysis including landscape , heritage , drainage , ecology and 
other e vidence .  
Implement the landscape and visual design pr inciples , heritage statement, biodiv ersity net 
gain, dr ainage str ategy and sustainability pr inciples .  
Provide an arr angement of uses that will deliv er the vision, create a vibr ant centre and 
ensure appropr iate relationships betw een diff erent uses . 
Contain detailed design guidance and design codes f or diff erent par ts of the site that will 
create beauty , legibility and distinctiv eness in the b uildings and pub lic spaces . 
Include inf ormation on appropr iate densities and b uilding heights f or diff erent par ts of the 
site.  The approach to density and b uilding heights will need to reflect: 
the relationship of b uilt form to the Green Belt boundar y; 
the need to create legibility with appropr iately scaled f ocal points;  the need to respect 
the integ rity and settings of her itage and other assets;  and 
retain vie ws into and out of the site (as indicated on the Illustr ative Concept Plan). 
Provide f or a phased de velopment that will ensure that emplo yment is deliv ered in tandem 
with ne w housing and that str ategic landscaping measures are phased at an ear ly stage 
so that the y will pro vide visual screening of ne w development within the wider landscape .  
The phasing plan will also ensure that infr astructure necessar y to mitigate the impacts of 
the de velopment and create a sustainab le comm unity is pro vided at the r ight times . 
Mitigation f or Habitats Sites 
7.169 Mitigation will be required to a void and mitigate the impact of de velopment on the 
habitats sites in ag reement with the Council and Natur al England.  For dw ellings located in the 
5 -7km SP A buffer zone. This will include: 
provision in per petuity of on-site bespok e SANG at a minim um of 2ha per 1,000 ne w 
population which is link ed to F rost F olly SANG;   
a financial contr ibution to wards Str ategic Access Management and Monitor ing; and, 
any other measures that are required to satisfy Habitats Regulations , the Council's Thames 
Basin Heaths Special Protection Area Str ategy and rele vant guidance .  
7.170 This P olicy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths 
Special Protection Area' and Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity' . 
Herita ge  
7.171 There are 8 designated her itage assets in the f orm of statutor ily and locally listed 
buildings within and on the per ipher y of the site . Designated and non-designated her itage 
assets , including their settings , will be protected from har m and oppor tunities will be sought to 
sustain and, where appropr iate, enhance their significance in line with Policy LP 45 'Protection 
and enhancement of the histor ic environment' .  A Her itage Statement will be required to suppor t 
development proposals and demonstr ate a clear understanding of the significance of their 
settings and ho w their significance w ould be aff ected, as w ell as pro viding clear mitigation f or 
any har m caused. 
95 7.172 In addition to b uilt her itage there is the potential f or archaeological remains on the site . 
Proposals should theref ore be inf ormed b y an appropr iate desk-based archaeological 
assessment and where necessar y, a field e valuation in order to a void and mitigate an y impacts . 
Other Matter s 
7.173 In addition to the abo ve, there are other matters which will need to be tak en into account 
in the consider ation and assessment of the site: 
Due to the presence of se wage w orks within the site , there is a need to under take and 
take account of an odour impact assessment. 
Due to the presence of main roads , under take and tak e account of an acoustic repor t.  
Due to location of the site with a proposed Miner als and Waste Saf eguarding Area, a 
further re view is required to deter mine the suitability and viability f or prior extraction of 
miner als.  
Proposals f or the ne w development or refurbishment, including infr astructure will be required 
to outline ho w sustainability will be deliv ered dur ing the constr uction process through 
Constr uction En vironmental Management Plans (CEMP) and Constr uction Traffic 
Management Plans (CTMP). 
Proposals f or the de velopment will be e xpected to ensure the deliv ery telecomm unications 
infrastructure including full fibre to premises .  
Proposals f or the de velopment will be e xpected to include measures to address sustainab le 
waste management.   
7.174 As the De velopment Plan should be read as a whole , regard will need to be had to all 
relevant adopted planning policies  together with Supplementar y Planning Documents . 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par as 133-142) 
Strategic Housing and Economic Land A vailability Assessment 
Emplo yment Land Needs Study (Apr il 2020) 
Housing Needs Assessment (2020) 
GTAA 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
7.175 Deliv ery 
7.176 The site is within single o wnership .  A small propor tion of the area to be de veloped is 
previously de veloped land, though the major ity of the land to be allocated is g reenfield.  Due to 
the scale of de velopment proposed, e xtensiv e investigativ e and prepar atory works will be 
required together with the pro vision of a wide r ange of suppor ting infr astructure . 
7.177 Representativ es of the lando wner are carr ying out technical w ork in prepar ation f or 
the submission of a planning application.   Provided that an acceptab le scheme can be negotiated 
and infr astructure can be pro vided in a timely manner , it is en visaged that housing could star t 
to be deliv ered in 2027/28.  The de velopment will be phased.  Depending on mar ket conditions 
and other f actors , it is projected that 1,350 dw ellings , 36,750 m2 (net) ne w emplo yment floorspace 
96 and 863 m2 retail floorspace in the local centre will be deliv ered dur ing the plan per iod. Further 
development will tak e place in the ne xt plan per iod, the projected completion date being 2044 
(Appendix 2). 
7.178 Monitor ing; 
The deter mination and monitor ing of planning applications and appeals , 
Partnership w orking with the lando wner , developers , statutor y agencies and the local 
comm unity. 
Number of dw ellings (net) per mitted and completed each y ear 
Amount of economic floorspace (net) per mitted and completed each y ear 
Number of specialist homes f or older people (net) per mitted and completed each y ear 
Habitat monitor ing for biodiv ersity net gain to achie ve target habitat type and condition. 
Number of gypsy and tr aveller pitches completed each y ear 
Number of self b uild /custom b uild dw ellings per mitted and completed each y ear 
97 7.6 The P eel Centre and The P oint, Skimped Hill Lane , 
Bracknell 
7.179 The P eel Centre and The P oint are located on the edge of Br acknell Town Centre .  
The site is in a sustainab le location with good access to Br acknell Town Centre to the east, 
and pub lic transpor t hubs . It currently pro vides medium-scale w arehouse style retail units , a 
super market and ‘The P oint’ which includes a bo wling alle y, cinema, bingo , restaur ants and 
beauty salon, as w ell as a surf ace le vel car par k ser ving the retail and leisure f acilities . The site 
has tw o key pedestr ian links:  east to Mar ket Street (which in tur n leads to the b us and r ail station 
to the south);  and a nor th/south link to wards Ar lington Square (nor th), the Souther n Emplo yment 
Area and Wildr idings residential neighbourhood (south) via f ootw ays/cycle ways that r un past 
this site . 
7.180 The site is appro ximately 6.54ha occup ying a broadly tr iangular piece of land which 
tapers to the nor th easter n cor ner. The site is bounded to the nor th west by the dual carr iageway 
of Skimped Hill Lane . There are tw o vehicular access points off this road into the site .  There 
is a w ell-used f ootway/cycle way on the nor th wester n edge of the site pro viding access to health 
facilities and Br acknell Town Centre . There is a large ser vice y ard area in the souther n par t of 
the site , providing rear access to all the w arehouse units and the super market. The P oint has 
its own ser vice y ard off Skimped Hill Lane .  The r ailway line is adjacent to the souther n boundar y. 
There are good pedestr ian and cycle links to residential and commercial neighbourhoods south 
of the r ailway via a netw ork of subw ays under the Twin Br idges roundabout.  Beyond this is Old 
Bracknell Lane West which has an e xisting allocation f or a mix of residential and commercial 
uses . To the east are tw o development sites that ha ve planning appro val for residential 
development off Mar ket Street.  The f ormer Bus Depot (Site BRA12) immediately adjacent to 
the P oint is also allocated f or mix ed-use de velopment through this Plan.  To the w est of the site 
is Twin Br idges roundabout, which is par t of the highw ay netw ork linking the M3 and M4 
motorw ays.    
98 Policy LP 8 
The P eel Centre and The P oint, Skimped Hill Lane , Brac knell 
1. Land at the P eel Centre and The P oint as sho wn on the P olicies Map and 
Illustrative Concept Plan is allocated f or a comprehensive well-designed 
development inc luding the f ollowing: 
i. Appr oximatel y 900 residential units,  of whic h appr oximatel y 600 are to be 
delivered within the period of this plan. 
ii. Appr oximatel y 315 aff ordable homes (35%) as par t of the o verall allocation, 
of whic h appr oximatel y 210 are to be delivered within the period of this 
plan 
iii. Provision of an element of specialist accommodation f or older people . 
iv. A supermarket with a floor space of appr oximatel y 3,000 m2 to be b uilt 
before e xisting supermarket is remo ved. 
v. Appr oximatel y 500 m2 gross floor space f or other commer cial de velopment. 
vi. This site has been identified in Policy LP 15 'Design principles'  as requiring 
a masterplan and design code .  Proposals f or this site should be design-led 
and be inf ormed b y a masterplan.   Once a greed b y the Council,  they will 
be an impor tant material planning consideration in the determination of 
subsequent planning applications. 
vii. Provision of Green infrastructure . 
viii. On-site Open Space of Pub lic Value (OSPV) 
ix. Measures to a void and mitigate the impact of residential de velopment upon 
habitats sites,  in agreement with the Council and Natural England.  This 
will inc lude pr ovision in perpetuity of: 
a. Suitab le Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) capacity of at least 
8ha per 1,000 ne w population and a financial contrib ution to wards 
Strategic Access Mana gement and Monitoring measures;  and 
b. Any other measures that are required to satisfy Habitats Regulations, 
the Council's Thames Basin Heaths Special Pr otection Area (SP A) 
Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy and rele vant guidance . 
x. On- and off-site infrastructure , including in-kind pr ovision,  required to 
suppor t this de velopment (as set out in the Infrastructure Deliver y Plan) 
comprising (b ut not limited to): 
a. An adopted f oot/c ycleway route connecting the site to the wider 
netw ork and Town Centre; 
99 b. Transpor t (inc luding a ser vice r oad f or the supermarket,  retail units 
and associated customer car parking),  travel planning,  education, 
comm unity facilities,  Green infrastructure inc luding OSPV (inc luding 
a green corridor with full y integrated landscaping,  biodiver sity f eatures, 
play space and amenity areas,  creating a pub lic realm that runs the 
length of the site),  waste rec ycling, draina ge impr ovements,  and utility 
connections.   
xi. A high quality pub lic realm that is not dominated b y car parking. 
xii. Technical in vestigation and assessment of all sour ces of flooding (inc luding 
surface water and gr ound water) and draina ge to determine flood risk 
mana gement measures to ensure sustainab le de velopment,  and pr ovision 
of on-site sustainab le draina ge systems (SuDS). 
xiii. Provision of an ecological netw ork inc luding retaining,  protecting, 
enhancing,  creating and b uffering ecological f eatures and a minim um 10% 
biodiver sity net gain (inc luding trees,  hedg erows, wildflo wer planting and 
two Tiny Forests) tog ether with a site mana gement plan f or the lif etime of 
the de velopment. 
xiv. Mitigation of an y potential contamination. 
xv. Mitigation of potential impact on residential amenity associated with the 
railway and surr ounding highwa y netw ork. 
100 Figure 4 The P eel Centre and The P oint Illustrative Concept Plan 
Site boundary
Residential
Supermarket within mixed use development
Open space
Play area
Surface car parking
Landscape buffer
Existing residential development sites 
Neighbouring mixed use allocation
Landmark building
Key junction improvement
Main access point (vehicles)
Key parking access point (vehicles)
Food store servicing access point
Green corridor + new pedestrian link
New pedestrian link
Enhanced pedestrian/cycle link
Potential new pedestrian link
© Crown copyright and database rights 2020 Ordnance Survey 100019488
101 Housing 
7.181 The site is allocated f or appro ximately 900 dw ellings , with appro ximately 600 of these 
to be deliv ered dur ing this plan per iod up to March 2037.   This is to include pro vision of aff ordab le 
housing totaling appro ximately 315 units (35%) across the site (210 in the plan 
period). An element of specialist accommodation f or older people is to be included within the 
total to be deliv ered in the plan per iod.  
Emplo yment uses 
7.182 The P eel Centre currently includes a super market at the south w ester n end of the site . 
In the shor t-term, de velopment of other phases of the site w ould ha ve to tak e account of the 
retention of the f ood store and f acilitate its current oper ation, including an appropr iate le vel of 
parking f or the f ood store and staff , and ser vice y ard access .  The Council is seeking to retain 
a super market function on the site and will require the ne w premises and its associated car 
parking to be b uilt bef ore the e xisting is remo ved. It is en visaged that this could be par t of a 
mixed-use b lock with con venience retailing on the g round floor of appro ximately 3,000 m2. Car 
parking f or a ne w food store will need to be carefully designed and located within the site so 
as not to impact on the residential areas and their associated par king. 
7.183 The site currently has appro ximately 15,500 m2 of retail and 8,500m2 of leisure 
floorspace . Several of the e xisting occupiers ha ve also had a presence in Br acknell Town 
Centre since the Le xicon opened in 2017.  With leases on the e xisting b uildings due to e xpire 
in the shor t to medium ter m, it is not considered that the current f ormat of the retail w arehousing 
or mar ket demand will contin ue throughout the plan per iod. To help suppor t the contin uing 
regener ation and ongoing viability of Br acknell Town Centre , the policy seeks appro ximately 
500 m2 gross floorspace f or other commercial de velopment in addition to the f ood store . This 
will pro vide fle xibility f or the mar ket to deliv er floorspace in uses which are in highest demand 
over the plan per iod and be yond. 
Masterplan and phasing 
7.184 Due to the siz e of the site and the need f or de velopment to be phased, and deliv ered 
over more than one plan per iod, a master plan is required to be ag reed b y the Council, ideally 
prior to the submission of an y planning applications , before planning appro val can be g ranted.   
Master plans and design dodes are required f or larger , comple x or more sensitiv e developments 
to ag ree an o verall vision and str ategy f or a de velopment that demonstr ates a high quality , 
comprehensiv e approach to design.   Design codes will be required as par t of an y Full or 
Reser ved Matters applications f or the site with a master plan, and similar ly these will ideally be 
agreed with the Council pr ior to submission.   Once ag reed b y the Council, the y will be an 
impor tant mater ial planning consider ation in the deter mination of subsequent planning 
applications . 
7.185 Based on a capacity study under taken for the site , it is anticipated that the site ma y 
come f orward in three phases: 
Phase 1 – e xisting retail units and par t of the e xisting car par k rede veloped.  Super market, 
service road and associated customer car par king to be retained and accessed off Skimped 
Hill Lane . 
Phase 2 – the P oint to be rede veloped, to include the replacement super market and 
associated customer car par king. 
Phase 3 – e xisting super market, ser vice road and car par king to be rede veloped.   
102 7.186 It is essential that in accordance with Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples'  development of 
the site is design-led, positiv ely contr ibuting to placemaking from the outset.  Constr aints and 
oppor tunities should inf orm the la yout of the site , ensur ing a comprehensiv e and w ell-designed 
development that will successfully integ rate into the wider area.   
7.187 In addition to being in a sustainab le location, rede velopment of The P eel Centre and 
The P oint will mak e effective and efficient use of pre viously de veloped land (NPPF chapter 11). 
It is theref ore essential that proposals f or the site are design-led and inf ormed b y a master plan 
for the site that has been ag reed with the Council.  A capacity study f or the site has been 
under taken, which the master plan and planning applications will be e xpected to accord with.   
7.188 The site should create a sense of place with its o wn identity and char acter . The height, 
scale and f orm of the b uildings m ust be carefully considered in order to contr ibute positiv ely to 
the streetscenes . There should be a coordinated and integ rated approach to g reen infr astructure  
from the outset.  Consider ation should be giv en to landmar k buildings to signal the arr ival and 
approach to the to wn centre in accordance with an ag reed master plan.   The site should deliv er 
a high quality pub lic realm, based on a clear str ategy f or the site , including str uctur al planting 
and landscaping to pro vide a pleasant living en vironment f or all.  Inside the site , car par king 
should not dominate and should be pro vided within the f ootpr int of the b uilt forms and shared 
street areas should be designed to be pedestr ian fr iendly . 
Green infrastructure and open space 
7.189 In de veloping a site wide master plan, a holistic approach is required to protect, enhance 
and pro vide ne w green infr astructure (in line with Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' ). 
Consider ations f or the master plan include: 
the la yout of OSPV within the site , including pla y and amenity areas; 
provision of SuDS; 
how biodiv ersity connectivity will be achie ved including a g reen corr idor netw ork with 
access routes within and adjoining the site;  and 
landscaping of the site . 
7.190 OSPV is an impor tant component of achie ving a sustainab le mix ed-use scheme and 
taking oppor tunities to achie ve net en vironmental gains . Provision should include a g reen 
corridor within the site and fully integ rated landscaping, open SuDS and biodiv ersity f eatures 
in the pub lic realm.   Activ e and natur al pla y spaces should be pro vided in the pub lic realm 
(including f or example , a skate bo wl, ramps and a children’ s play area).   Usab le comm unal 
amenity space f or future residents should be incor porated in areas of pub lic realm that r uns 
the length of the site . Usab le private amenity space should also be pro vided f or residents on 
the site .  In the shor t term the souther n par t of the site will be retained as a ser vice y ard and 
its access . In the longer ter m it will incor porate open SuDS which allo w for substantial g reen 
space and can be landscaped to pro vide fur ther pla y and amenity areas , and oppor tunities f or 
biodiv ersity .  Additionally , impro vements in OSPV in and around Br acknell Town Centre will be 
sought that future residents will be ab le to access and enjo y. The la yout and landscaping of 
the site should maximise oppor tunities f or pub lic and pr ivate amenity space .   
Mitigation f or habitats sites 
7.191 It will not be possib le to de velop and mak e effective use of the site if a SANG is pro vided 
on site . An off-site solution will need to be f ound as a requirement of an y planning consent 
which can include the purchase of SANG capacity from third par ty SANGs capab le of ser ving 
103 the de velopment.  This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 17 'Thames Basin 
Heaths Special Protection Area'  and Policy LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and geological 
sites' . 
Transpor t  
7.192 Highw ay impro vements necessar y to suppor t development of the site include: 
Capacity impro vements to nearb y road junctions including Wester n Roundabout and 
Running Horse Roundabout. 
Impro vements to the f ootw ays along Mar ket Street to allo w shared use pro viding better 
accessibility f or pedestr ians and cyclists to education and the wider cycle tr ack netw ork. 
Impro ving pub lic transpor t links to the wider area. 
Other infrastructure requirements 
7.193  On and off- site infr astructure , in accordance with the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan, will 
be required to suppor t the de velopment.  Infrastructure required to suppor t the de velopment 
may be secured through in-kind pro vision and/or through de veloper contr ibutions . This P olicy 
should also be read in conjunction with Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' . 
7.194 The site is sustainab ly located on the edge of Br acknell Town Centre , within 
appro ximately a 5-min ute w alk of r ail and b us stations , and Br acknell Town Centre . Accordingly , 
links connecting the site to the wider netw ork and Town Centre are essential in order to maximise 
sustainab le modes of tr anspor t and connectivity .  This includes enhanced pedestr ian/cycle 
links and ne w pedestr ian links as sho wn on the Illustr ative Concept Plan. 
Parking 
7.195 Development of the site will require residential car par king to be accommodated in a 
manner that does not dominate the pub lic realm.  A solution ma y be to locate car par king 
underg round, or within the b uilding at g round le vel but set bac k to allo w for activ e frontages 
along street edges . Private residential cour tyards could be r aised and located on the roof of 
car par ks, to maximise amenity space and pro vide fur ther oppor tunities f or on-site biodiv ersity 
whilst meeting par king standards . 
Flooding and SuDS  
7.196 The site is subject to surf ace w ater flood r isk and associated dr ainage which is a 
mater ial consider ation and needs to inf orm the la yout of the site from the outset.  When 
developing a site wide master plan, technical in vestigation and assessment of all sources of 
flooding should be under taken to deter mine the flood r isk management measures , and SuDS 
features required (including OSPV areas) in order to achie ve sustainab le de velopment.  This 
should meet the requirements f or the site identified in the Le vel 2 Str ategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (JBA, 2019).    
7.197 High quality pub lic realm and OSPV should incor porate SuDS and b uildings will be 
expected to include measures , such as g reen roofs , to capture w ater where it f alls and ease 
drainage issues whilst contr ibuting to enhancing biodiv ersity net gain on the site . This policy 
should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 18 'Flood r isk' and Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le 
Drainage Systems (SuDS)' . 
104 Biodiver sity 
7.198 The current use of the site does not lend itself to areas of high ecological v alue. A 
benefit of rede veloping the site with a strong landscape str ategy , including integ rated g reen 
infrastructure throughout, is the site can help impro ve air quality , benefit local health and 
wellbeing, promote biodiv ersity , and achie ve a biodiv ersity net gain.  This policy should be read 
in conjunction with Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity'  and Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' . 
Pollution and potential f or contamination 
7.199 The site is located close to the r ailway line betw een London Waterloo and Reading,  
and the highw ay netw ork which includes a k ey route betw een the M3 and M4 motorw ays. This 
means that careful consider ation needs to be giv en to noise and other pollution issues that 
might aff ect the health and w ellbeing of future residents . Due to the pro ximity of the site to main 
roads and a r ailway it will be necessar y to under take and tak e account of an acoustic repor t, 
and due to pro ximity to the A QMA (to the south of the site), under take and tak e account of an 
air quality assessment to assess the impact of the A QMA on the health of future residents . This 
policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 52 'P ollution and hazards' .  
7.200 Due to the addition of sensitiv e land uses on the site , it will also be necessar y to assess 
the potential f or contamination within the site in accordance with Policy LP 53 'De velopment of 
land potentially aff ected b y contamination' . 
Other Matter s 
7.201  In addition to the abo ve, there are other matters which will need to be tak en into 
account in the consider ation and assessment of the site: 
Due to the under lying geology , and presence of an aquif er, demonstr ate there is adequate 
wastewater capacity both on and off site to ser ve the de velopment;  that it w ould not lead 
to prob lems f or existing or ne w users;  and w ould protect e xisting w ater quality . 
7.202 As the De velopment Plan should be read as a whole , regard will need to be had to all 
relevant adopted planning policies (including an y in the Br acknell Town Neighbourhood Plan 
and Miner als and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementar y Planning Guidance , in the 
consider ation of this site .  It is recommended that a pre-application proposal is submitted f or 
consider ation pr ior to the submission of a planning application.    
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (Chapter 5 deliv ering a sufficient supply of homes;  Chapter 8 Promoting health y 
and saf e comm unities;  Chapter 11 Making eff ective use of land;  Chapter 12 Achie ving 
well-designed places) 
PPG (Eff ective use of land;  Housing needs of diff erent g roups;  Housing f or older and 
disab led people;  Design:  process and tools) 
Housing Bac kground P aper (BFC) (This pro vides an o verview of the rele vant e vidence 
base f or the site) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
7.203 Deliver y 
105 7.204 The site is in single o wnership , however existing commercial uses on the site ha ve 
leases with diff erent ag reements in place .  
7.205 Provided that an acceptab le scheme can be negotiated, and that suitab le mitigation 
and SANG can be pro vided in a timely manner , it is en visaged that housing could star t to be 
delivered in 2031/2032.   This is due to the site's comple xity and phasing of de velopment. 
Depending on mar ket conditions and other f actors , it is estimated that appro ximately 600 
dwellings , the super market and 500 m2 commercial floorspace will be deliv ered dur ing the plan 
period. Further de velopment will tak e place in the ne xt plan per iod, the projected completion 
date being 2039/40 ( Appendix 1:  'Housing Trajector y').  
7.206 Monitoring 
Deter mination and monitor ing of planning applications and appeals . 
Number of dw ellings (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Number of aff ordab le homes (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Number of specialist homes f or older people (net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Amount of economic floorspace (g ross and net) per mitted and completed each y ear. 
Habitat monitor ing for biodiv ersity net gain to achie ve target habitat type and condition. 
106 7.7 F orms of residential accommodation 
7.207 In addition to ensur ing an adequate supply of housing, it is also necessar y to ensure 
that the mak eup of accommodation pro vided meets future needs and helps achie ve mix ed and 
inclusiv e comm unities . This ma y include ne w and inno vative approaches to pro vision that 
require all in volved in the housing mar ket to w ork together . The f ollowing sections theref ore 
set out the fr amework for allo wing this to happen and consider aff ordab le housing, 
accommodation f or older people , self b uild and custom b uild and pro vision f or gypsies , travellers 
and tr avelling sho wpeople .  
107 7.8 Aff ordab le housing 
7.208 The NPPF (par a. 61) states that local author ities should mak e pro vision f or those who 
require aff ordab le housing in their area.  Insufficient aff ordab le housing can ha ve detr imental 
effects on the economic and social health of the area.   It is an impor tant consider ation in the 
creation of sustainab le, inclusiv e and mix ed comm unities . The major ity of aff ordab le housing 
in the Borough is achie ved by requir ing de velopers to pro vide aff ordab le homes as par t of open 
market housing de velopments (through S106 ag reements). 
Objectiv es 
D - Le vel of de velopment / land supply  
F - Strong Comm unities  
108 Policy LP 9 
Affordable housing 
1. In or der to assist in meeting the identified local need f or aff ordable housing, 
planning permission will onl y be granted f or residential de velopment  on sites 
of 10 d wellings or more (gr oss) or whic h have an area of 0.5 ha or 
more , including mix ed use de velopments whic h incorporate residential 
dwellings,  whic h satisfy criteria (i) and (ii) belo w.  This will also appl y to 
specialist housing f or older people where the site is delivering a net gain of 10 
or more self-contained units (C3 and C2). 
i. 35% of ne w homes will be aff ordable. 
ii. The aff ordable homes will meet local housing need in accor dance with the 
Council’ s most up to date e vidence whic h satisfy the criteria f or qualifying 
cases. 
2. Proposals where aff ordable housing is required should ha ve regar d to the 
following: 
i. Relaxation of the aff ordable housing requirement,  in par t or in full,  will onl y 
be considered f or a sc heme that is c learly subject to abnormal costs,  not 
including the price paid f or land,  and not otherwise en visaged by the Local 
Plan Viability Assessment.   Relaxation will onl y be a greed f ollowing an 
independent assessment of an open book financial appraisal of the 
development pr ovided b y the applicant.       
ii. In cases where the 35% calculation pr ovides a fraction of an aff ordable 
dwelling suc h provision will be collected thr ough a financial contrib ution 
of br oadly equiv alent v alue to that whic h would ha ve been required on-site . 
iii. An appr opriate ten ure mix of aff ordable homes f or rent and other aff ordable 
home o wner ship pr oducts. 
iv. The aff ordable housing should be designed as an integral par t of a 
development,  distrib uted appr opriatel y acr oss the site and the mix should 
reflect the type and siz e of market housing unless otherwise specified b y 
the Council.   The aff ordable housing should be indistinguishab le in 
appearance fr om the market housing on site .  
v. With the e xception of par t dwellings,  affordable housing should be pr ovided 
on site . 
vi. Where a de velopment falls belo w the site siz e thresholds in P art 1 but is 
demonstrab ly par t of a potentiall y larger de velopab le area abo ve those 
thresholds,  the Council will require aff ordable housing on a pr o rata basis. 
109 7.209 The Br acknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment (J uly 2020)  (35) indicates a significant 
need f or aff ordab le housing in the Borough.  A total need of 338 aff ordab le homes per y ear 
(taking account of the pipeline supply at 1st Apr il 2019) is calculated split betw een 232 units of 
rented aff ordab le homes and 106 aff ordab le home o wnership products . This represents a 
consider able percentage of the o verall housing pro vision and the Council has to consider the 
implications of meeting such a le vel of need on the viability of ne w housing de velopment.  This 
was carr ied out through the Local Plan Viability Assessment which tested diff erent le vels of 
on-site aff ordab le housing pro vision to pro vide an indication of the lik ely viability of aff ordab le 
housing pro vision.  The site siz e threshold (which f ollows national guidance) and required le vel 
of aff ordab le housing target are set at the le vel proposed, in order to achie ve an appropr iate 
balance betw een meeting m uch of the need within the Borough, whilst ensur ing the deliv ery of 
other impor tant elements such as infr astructure and the maintenance of a sustainab le housing 
market which will deliv er the r ange of housing needed to help meet mar ket demand as w ell 
affordab le. Proposals which pro vide a higher amount of aff ordab le housing than that set out 
above will also be permitted. 
7.210 The w eight giv en to an y viability assessment submitted alongside a planning application 
which seeks to diff er in the aff ordab le housing contr ibution from the policy position of 35% with 
the appropr iate ten ure split will be a matter f or the Council.   In such cases the relaxation of 
normal requirements will only be considered where there are costs associated with a par ticular 
site which could not ha ve been en visaged at the plan-making stage or where circumstances 
have changed since the plan w as adopted.   
7.211 In such instances a detailed viability assessment m ust be submitted which will be made 
publicly a vailab le in the interests of tr ansparency . This will need to reflect the recommended 
approach in national planning guidance , including standardised inputs . Where this is ag reed it 
will also be necessar y for the viability assessment to under take modelling of v arious aff ordab le 
housing options , rather than relying on an assumption that no aff ordab le housing can be 
provided.  This viability assessment shall be v erified b y an independent consultant chosen b y 
the Council at the de veloper’ s expense .  Where an y concessions are ag reed f or viability reasons 
the S106 Ag reement will be e xpected to include cla w-bac k pro visions , and an independent 
assessor appointed at the de veloper’ s expense to monitor the scheme on an open-book basis 
against the cla w-bac k pro visions .  
7.212 Where the aff ordab le housing policy w ould result in a requirement that par t of an 
affordab le home should be pro vided, a financial contr ibution of equiv alent v alue will be sought.   
7.213 The Housing Needs Assessment (J uly 2020) mak es it clear that the pr iority need is 
for rented aff ordab le housing.  Within the o verall aff ordab le housing pro vision, 69% is required 
to be deliv ered as rented aff ordab le housing to meet the needs of households who do not ha ve 
other housing options . A 50/50 split in pro vision is indicated betw een social rent and aff ordab le 
rent.  Affordability of the latter is to be link ed to Local Housing Allo wance (LHA) (36) and tak e 
account of ser vice charges . 
7.214 The remaining 31% of the o verall housing pro vision will compr ise aff ordab le home 
ownership products .  These ma y be shared o wnership , discounted mar ket sales or , star ter 
homes .  Their cost should be gen uinely aff ordab le in the conte xt of Br acknell F orest based 
upon a household not spending more than 35% of its income on housing.   
7.215 The split betw een aff ordab le homes is illustr ated belo w: 
35 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/5819854 
36 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/benefits/housing-benefit/local-housing-allo wance-lha/r ates 
110 Table 10 P ercenta ge split between ten ures 
35% aff ordable homes 
31% aff ordable home 
owner ship pr oducts 69% aff ordable homes f or rent 
50% aff ordable rent capped 
at LHA 50% social rent 
7.216 The tab le abo ve reflects the o verall need in ter ms of ten ure split based on the HNA 
(2020).  The Council ma y consider alter nativ e negotiated mix es of ten ure on a site specific basis 
to best address local need.  Further details will be set out in a f orthcoming  Housing SPD . 
7.217 Affordab le homes should be b uilt to National Aff ordab le Housing Prog ramme 
requirements and should not be distinguishab le from mar ket housing in ter ms of o verall siz e, 
type, design details , build quality and mater ials. To help ensure that the siz e and types of 
affordab le homes are appropr iate to meet the requirements of the local comm unity, the Council 
will tak e into account the latest e vidence from the Housing Register and monitor ing of other 
data sources .  The high le vel of need f or family homes is reflected in the higher a verage w aiting 
times on the Housing Register f or those in need of larger proper ties. Further, over 40% of the 
1 bedroom need on the Housing Register is in the lo west need categor y whereas those registered 
for family housing are largely in more urgent need.   Ann ual lettings data o ver the past f our y ears 
(including ne w lets and re-lets) illustr ates that significantly f ewer 3 bedroom or larger proper ties 
become a vailab le relativ e to need.   
7.218 It will be impor tant to a void aff ordab le dw ellings being o verly concentr ated in only a 
few areas of a de velopment.  Dispersal and integ ration will be sought across the 
development.   Methods f or achie ving this will be set out in a f orthcoming  Housing SPD.  
7.219 Affordab le housing should nor mally be pro vided on-site . Provision off-site , or through 
a comm uted sum pa yment in lieu, will only be considered where it will be of broadly equiv alent 
value to on-site pro vision and it can be rob ustly justified in deliv ering aff ordab le homes through 
mixed and balanced comm unities . Exceptional circumstances include when a Registered 
Provider has demonstr ated, b y means of e vidence ag reed with the Council, that it w ould not 
be pr actical to deliv er or manage on-site aff ordab le housing.  Once e xceptional circumstance 
have been ag reed the options are: 
to pro vide a significantly larger n umber of aff ordab le homes off site on an alter nativ e site 
provided b y the de veloper , or, 
to mak e a financial contr ibution (pa yment in lieu) equiv alent to the maxim um reasonab le 
affordab le housing and associated  land v alue that could be pro vided on site as assessed 
through a viability assessment. 
7.220 Where a proposal site is subject to phasing, is sub-divided, or where there is a 
reasonab le prospect of adjoining land coming f orward for residential de velopment, the Council 
may consider the site(s) tak en as a whole f or the pur pose of deter mining the appropr iate 
affordab le housing pro visions .   This will be par ticular ly rele vant if it is clear that a proposal has 
been f ormulated with a vie w to circumv enting aff ordab le housing requirements . 
111 7.221 As par t of residential de velopment proposals , where v acant b uildings are brought bac k 
into an y lawful use , or are demolished to be replaced b y new buildings , the aff ordab le housing 
requirement f or the proposal will be discounted b y a propor tion equiv alent to the e xisting g ross 
floorspace of the v acant b uildings unless the requirement to do so is remo ved or moder ated 
by a change in national policy or guidance . 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicies 
Policy LP 22 'Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings' 
Policy LP 24 'Housing mix' 
7.222 KEY EVIDENCE  
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par as 20, 34,  61-64) and Anne x 2 Glossar y) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (par agraphs:  ID: 2a-018-20190220 to 2a-024-20190220, 
67-005-20190722, to 67-008-20190122, 23b-026-20190315,  
23b-023-20190901,10-001-20190509 
Bracknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment  (J uly 2020) 
BNP Local Plan Viability Study 2021 
Housing Register 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
7.223 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
7.224 Monitor ing 
No of aff ordab le dw ellings completed each y ear split b y affordab le homes f or rent and 
affordab le home o wnership products 
Value of comm uted sums receiv ed each y ear to wards the deliv ery of off-site pro vision  
Size/ten ure breakdo wn compared with need (w aiting time) f or each y ear  
No of aff ordab le specialist C3 and C2 dw ellings completed each y ear.  
112 7.9 Specialist housing f or older people and people with 
disabilities 
Future need 
7.225 Paragraph 61 of the NPPF (2019) ref ers to the need to plan f or a mix of housing to 
meet the needs of diff erent g roups in the comm unity including older people .  The Anne x 2 
Glossar y indicates that these are people o ver or approaching retirement age . They will include 
the activ e elder ly at one end of the scale and the v ery frail elder ly at the other . Demog raphic 
projections set out in the Br acknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment (J uly 2020) 
(HNA) (37) indicate that the population of Br acknell F orest is lik ely to increase b y 18,800 o ver 
the per iod 2019 – 2036.   Within this total, the n umber of people aged 65 and o ver is estimated 
to increase b y 10,400 people or 55% of the total projected population change .  
7.226 Data dr awn from the 2011 Census suggests that those people in the oldest age bands 
are also more lik ely to ha ve a Long Term Health Prob lem or Disability (L THPD).  It will theref ore 
be impor tant to ensure that ne w mainstream housing aimed at meeting some of the current 
and future needs of the ageing population is accessib le and adaptab le and includes wheelchair 
housing.  This issue is considered fur ther in P art 2 of the Plan under Policy LP 22 'Accessib le 
and adaptab le dw ellings' .   
7.227 Whilst man y older households will pref er to contin ue to liv e in mainstream housing, 
given the substantial g rowth in the population of older people , there is lik ely to be a need f or a 
range of specialist housing.   The le vel of care required will v ary significantly betw een people 
of similar ages and o ver time .  A range of models are considered in the HNA including the 
following which are categor ised according to whether the y involve suppor t or care (the amount 
may vary depending on the nature of the scheme): 
Retirement living or sheltered housing (housing with suppor t) 
Enhanced sheltered housing (housing with care)  
Extra care housing or housing-with-care (housing with care): 
Residential care homes and n ursing homes (care bedspaces). 
7.228 If the conclusions of the HNA are adjusted f or the plan per iod and to 
take of commitments (38) at 31st March 2020, the need f or specialist housing f or older people 
in Bracknell F orest is as set out in the Table belo w. 
Table 11 Need f or specialist older per son housing 2020 - 2037 
Total no.  of units 
577 (34pa) Housing with suppor t 
551 (32pa)  Housing with care 
7.229 Analysis of the data also indicates that the ten ure profile of need f or housing with 
suppor t (such as sheltered and retirement housing) is pr incipally f or leasehold pro vision (97%). 
For housing with care (such as e xtra care schemes), 60% of the need is f or leasehold and 40% 
for rented pro vision . 
37 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/5819854 
38 completions 2019-2020 and outstanding commitments at 31st March 2020 
113 7.230 The HNA also estimates the need f or additional residential care and n ursing home 
bedspaces . After ha ving adjusted the figures (f or the plan per iod and commitments at 31st 
March 2020),  the need is 764 bedspaces . This is considered to be the maxim um le vel of need 
as there is potential f or some of this need to be met through the pro vision of e xtra care schemes , 
depending on the deliv ery of such schemes .  An analysis of commitments o ver the last 5 y ears 
substantiates this as it sho ws that 48% of all completions f alling within Use Class C2 ha ve been 
extra care . 
7.231 The HNA also states that the ultimate le vel of pro vision the Council seeks to suppor t 
will be influenced b y its broader str ategy f or older persons housing and care . 
7.232 The Council’ s Older P ersons Accommodation and Suppor t Strategy(39) sets out to 
meet f our k ey objectiv es including:    
Objectiv e 3: Strategically plan sustainab le housing that meets the needs and aspir ations 
of older people no w and in the future;   
Objectiv e 4: Suppor t older people to liv e independently , in all ten ures and e xtend the 
availability of pre ventativ e ser vices 
7.233 Through implementing these objectiv es the Council wishes to: 
i. Help more people to liv e for longer in their o wn homes; 
ii. Deliv er more fle xible suppor t and care to enab le independence; 
iii. Create more oppor tunities f or older people to liv e in accommodation of their choice;  and 
iv. Enab le older people to f eel saf e and secure in their homes and neighborhoods . 
7.234 Against this bac kground, the Local Plan seeks to help meet needs b y requir ing str ategic 
sites, where suitab le en vironments can be created, contr ibute to wards a r ange of attr active 
housing options f or older people . In ter ms of the Use Classes Order , it is lik ely that some of 
this accommodation will come f orward as Use Class C3 (residential dw elling house) and some 
as Use Class C2 (residential institutions), depending on mar ket factors . The Council's pref erence 
is for extra care and enhanced sheltered which tend to f all within Use Class C2.   These schemes 
have the capacity to deliv er fle xible twenty f our hour care from an on-site care team, based on 
individual need that can increase or decrease according to circumstances . A review of planning 
commitments data f or specialist housing, also sho ws that a n umber of schemes on sites in the 
urban area come f orward as 'windf all' de velopment through the de velopment management 
process . If there is fur ther need, it is lik ely that de velopers/pro viders will contin ue to identify 
sites f or such proposals . A de velopment management policy is theref ore included in P art 2 
dealing with locational cr iteria as where a scheme is located influences the deg ree of comm unity 
integ ration and in volvement and ease of access f or staff and visitors such as relativ es/friends . 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy 
Policy LP 22 'Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings' 
Policy LP 23 'Specialist housing f or older people and people with disabilities' 
39  https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/sites/def ault/files/documents/older-persons-accommodation-and-suppor t-strategy-2011-to-2026.pdf 
114 7.10 Self b uild, custom b uild and gypsy and tr avellers and 
travelling sho wpeople 
Custom b uild and self b uild 
7.235 The need to plan f or a mix of housing to address the need of diff erent g roups in the 
comm unity includes people wishing to commission or b uild their o wn homes . Custom b uild and 
self b uild are the tw o types of project most commonly ref erred to . They are as f ollows: 
Custom b uild: the e ventual occupiers tak e on a “project management”  role, coordinating 
the ser vices of designers , architects , planners and constr uction staff . They may get activ ely 
involved in some aspects , but gener ally ph ysical in volvement is k ept to a minim um. 
Self b uild: the occupiers tak e on an activ e role , procur ing, designing and b uilding their 
own home . They ma y outsource elements of the project, where their skills or time do not 
allow it. 
7.236 The Self-b uild and Custom House b uilding Act 2015 (as amended b y the Housing and 
Planning Act 2016), requires the Council to maintain a custom and self-b uild homes register to 
estab lish the le vel of need f or this type of housing.  The Council  m ust have regard to this in 
fulfilling its planning and housing functions . In August  2020,  there w as 1 Association and 84 
individuals register ing an interest.   
7.237 Self b uild and custom b uild plots can be deliv ered in a n umber of w ays, ranging from 
multiple individual ser viced plots within large de velopments to single or small sites identified 
by individuals or b y Town and P arish Councils through the neighbourhood plan process .  
7.238 In order to meet the need identified on Br acknell F orest's Self and Custom Build 
Register , and, taking into account the nature of str ategic sites , upto 5% of the  o verall dw ellings 
shall be pro vided through the pro vision of ser viced plots f or sale to address local self or custom 
build need on  Land at Beauf ort Park, Nine Mile Ride , Bracknell, Land East of Wokingham Road 
and South of Duk es Rides (Derb y Field), Sandhurst and Land at Jealott's Hill, Warfield (P olicies 
LP5 to LP7).   This does not pre vent smaller scale proposals f or self b uild and custom b uild 
housing coming f orward on smaller sites as has histor ically been the case . They will be assessed 
on their o wn mer its in the light of the pre vailing policies of the plan and an y other mater ial 
consider ations . 
7.239 A legal ag reement will be used to secure the deliv ery of self b uild and custom b uild 
plots . Planning applications including such schemes should be suppor ted with a marketing 
strategy f or the self-b uild plots on the application site and other measures intended to ensure 
effective engagement with the comm unity and parties on the self-b uild register . If plots are 
not taken up b y the pub lic after being mar keted f or an appropr iate time (to be ag reed with the 
Council through the g ranting of planning per mission f or the site) , consider ation w ill be giv en to 
allowing them  to re vert to con ventional b uild plots . The planning ob ligation will set out 
the circumstances under which the requirement to deliv er self-b uild/custom b uild plots will 
be relax ed or released. 
115 Gypsies,  traveller s and tra velling sho wpeople 
7.240  The Council's Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GT AA) estab lished 
an overall ‘cultur al’ need f or pitches which accords with the o verall need f or the  tr avelling 
comm unity, taking into account the Human Rights Act 1998, and the Equalities Act 2010 which 
protects the cultur al choice of gypsies and tr avellers to liv e in mobile accommodation.   The 
Housing and Planning Act 2016 section 124 also mak es specific ref erence to the needs of 
households living in car avans. Accordingly there is a need to plan f or this type of accommodation. 
Within this cultur al need, some households meet the definitions set out in the Planning P olicy 
for Traveller Sites (PPTS) Anne x 1.  In Br acknell F orest, the GT AA found that 33% of households 
met the definitions (the 'PPTS need'). 
7.241 The o verall scale of need f or gypsy , traveller and tr avelling sho wpeople accommodation 
in Bracknell F orest is small compared with wider housing needs . Using the assumptions set 
out in the GT AA, the need in the Borough o ver the plan per iod is f or:   
eight gypsy and tr aveller pitches based on cultur al need (of which three pitches represent 
the PPTS need).  This can be brok en do wn into:   
three gypsy and tr aveller pitches based on cultur al need dur ing the per iod 2020/21 
- 2024/25 (of which one pitch represents the PPTS need);   
five gypsy and tr aveller pitches based on cultur al need dur ing the per iod 2025/26 – 
2036/37 (of which tw o pitches represent the PPTS need); 
no plots f or travelling sho wpeople;  and 
the need to giv e consider ation to the pro vision of tr ansit pitches in Br acknell F orest Borough 
as par t of a str ategic cross-boundar y response to unauthor ised encampment activity . 
7.242 The Council intends to meet the cultur al need f or gypsy and tr aveller pitches . At the 
time of wr iting the Council had resolv ed to appro ve an application f or four retrospectiv e pitches , 
which w ould wholly address the shor t-term need f or pitches and star t to meet the need in the 
latter par t of the plan per iod. 
7.243 It is proposed to meet the need in the latter par t of the plan per iod through the allocation 
of land f or eight per manent pitches on land at Jealott's Hill, Warfield alongside the creation of 
a Garden Village (see Policy LP 7 'Land at Jealott's Hill, Warfield' ).  This allocation has required 
an alter ation to the Green Belt similar to that f or the main de velopment of land at Jealott's Hill. 
The approach tak en is considered to pro vide clar ity and cer tainty , and be a proactiv e and 
pragmatic to meeting Br acknell F orest's future pitch needs .  
7.244 No suitab le transit sites w ere submitted through the SHELAA , consultations or other 
reviews.  As a similar need has been highlighted in neighbour ing A uthor ities, the Council will 
contin ue to e xplore oppor tunities to meet this need outside the Borough. 
7.245  Development management Policy LP 25 'Gypsies , travellers and tr avelling sho wpeople' 
sets out specific cr iteria which will be used to assess applications that ma y come f orward and 
seeks to saf eguard e xisting sites . 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy 
Policy LP 25 'Gypsies , travellers and tr avelling sho wpeople' 
116 8: Economic de velopment 
8.1 Pro vision of economic floorspace 
8.1 The Government’ s 2017  Industr ial Strategy  emphasises  suppor ting businesses to create 
better , higher paid jobs with in vestment in the skills , industr ies and infr astructure of the  future . 
Four ‘Grand Challenges’  are identified  to put the UK at the forefront  of industr ies of the future . 
Two of these challenges involve maximising the adv antages for UK industr y from the  global 
shift to clean  growth (which includes  high efficiency  agriculture)  and putting the  UK at the 
forefront of the ar tificial intelligence (AI) and data re volution (which includes w orking with industr y 
to develop inno vative uses of AI and adv anced analytic  technologies). 
8.2 The Ber kshire Local Enter prise P artnership pub lished its Dr aft Ber kshire Local Industr ial 
Strategy (BLIS) in March 2019 (40).  This highlights the impor tance of the Lif e Sciences and 
Information Technology Sectors to Ber kshire . The BLIS identifies ‘priorities that are to be 
developed in order to help acceler ate g rowth in Ber kshire as there is concer n that le vels of 
investment ha ve decreased due to a cautious approach being tak en by the b usiness comm unity 
due to the le vel of uncer tainty . One pr iority identified is to look at w ays of enhancing productivity 
within Ber kshire’ s enter prises. A fur ther pr iority is to f oster relationships and inter dependencies 
linked to economic lif e which are considered to be w eaker than in some areas outside Ber kshire . 
The potential of cer tain organisations and sites to act as institutional anchors is to be in vestigated. 
Specific ref erence is made to the global research and de velopment centre f or ag ro-chemical 
research oper ated b y Syngenta at Jealott’ s Hill.  Whilst this str ategy is still e volving, the Local 
Plan can help suppor t this oppor tunity f or long-ter m economic g rowth in these sectors . 
8.3 A theme of the Council’ s Plan (41)is economic resilience , including the aim that Br acknell 
Forest should contin ue to thr ive, even with the challenges ahead f or all sectors of the econom y 
and to help retain b usinesses and attr act ne w companies to the area. 
8.4 Whilst the population of Br acknell F orest increased b y around 12% o ver the per iod 
2004-2019 (ONS midy ear population estimates),  jobs declined b y 1.4% (ONS).  Levels of 
unemplo yment ha ve however fallen o ver the same per iod from 3.1% in 2004 to 2.5% in 2019 
(ONS).  An increasing n umber of residents who w ork are tr avelling to jobs outside the Borough. 
Bracknell F orest is in the Centr al Ber kshire Functional Economic Mar ket Area (FEMA) since it 
has strong economic relationships with the Boroughs of Reading, Wokingham and par t of 
Windsor and Maidenhead.  Some mo vement to jobs outside the Borough is theref ore to be 
expected.  Data dr awn from the 2011 Census suggested that a significant n umber of residents 
travel to the Boroughs of Windsor and Maidenhead and Wokingham.  This reflects the role of 
Maidenhead as a popular office location and the inclusion of a large par t of the Reading urban 
area within the Borough of Wokingham.  More recently Centr al Reading has benefitted from the 
tendency of occupiers to f avour vibr ant to wn centre locations with good connectivity and tr anspor t 
links and it is lik ely that this is ha ving a fur ther impact on comm uting flo ws from Br acknell F orest. 
The main challenges associated with this g radual loss of self-containment are the pressure 
that it places on tr anspor t infrastructure especially at peak times and loss of a mix of uses which 
adds to the vibr ancy of comm unities . The Council is k een to suppor t existing b usinesses and 
wishes the area to g row in a sustainab le way. 
40 http://www .thamesv alleyberkshire .co.uk/getfile/documents/Ber kshire%20Local%20Industr ial%20Str ategy%20-%20F ramework%20Document.pdf 
41 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/council-and-democr acy/str ategies-plans-and-policies/council-plan/about-council-plan   
117 8.5 For the pur pose of this plan, emplo yment de velopment is defined as offices , gener al 
industr ial, and storage or  warehousing  and distribution  together with  any sui gener is uses  that 
share  a significant  number  of character istics  with those  uses . However, economic  development 
covers a broader r ange of uses including emplo yment de velopment and 'Main Town Centre'. 
For clarity, 'economic  development'  is theref ore taken as including  office , industr ial and storage 
(warehousing  and distribution),  retail,  leisure , enter tainment  and more  intensiv e sport and 
recreation uses , arts, culture and tour ism development. 
8.6 The latest Emplo yment Commitments (42) data sho w a contin uing reduction in the stoc k 
of A2, B1 and B2 floorspace with an increase in the e xisting stoc k of B8 floorspace .  Overall, 
there w as a net reduction of -15,017m2  B1, B2 and B8 floorspace o ver the per iod 2019-2020. 
This w as mainly due to a net loss of B1 floorspace of -49,497m2. The total outstanding 
permissions f or emplo yment floorspace (including B1, B2 and B8) amount to 72,337m2  (net) 
of floorspace . Much of the loss of B1 floorspace has been due to the use of P ermitted 
Development Rights (PDR) allo wing the change of use from offices to residential.  A key driver 
has been the diff erence betw een residential v alues and office v alues , particular ly those f or 
lower grade office space .  However, data suggests that the r ate of office to-residential PDR 
applications is decreasing possib ly because de velopers ha ve already identified most of the 
obsolete offices in centr al locations that can be easily con verted.  It is not y et kno wn ho w recent 
and planned changes to per mitted de velopment r ights and the Use Class Order will aff ect 
supply . 
Designated Emplo yment Areas 
8.7 These areas contain estab lished concentr ations of office , industr ial and w arehousing 
development  with suppor ting infrastructure , the larger  areas around  Bracknell being  well located 
in respect of str ategic tr anspor t routes . These areas pro vide the home to man y multi-national 
companies  and thousands  of smaller  ones  that contr ibute to the buoyant local econom y. Whilst 
it is recognised  that some  diversification  of uses  is required  in terms of those  uses  that directly 
benefit or ser ve the people w orking in these locations , it is impor tant to saf eguard their 
emplo yment gener ating role and maintain an appropr iate supply of emplo yment land through 
the redevelopment  of existing sites and premises to  make more  efficient  use of sites and provide 
moder n premises and r ange of units in siz e, type and  configur ation. 
8.8 The Council has re viewed its designated emplo yment sites to account f or changes in 
circumstances such as allocations in pre vious plans and other de velopments that ha ve tak en 
place par ticular ly through per mitted de velopment r ights . It has concluded that the designated 
Emplo yment Areas listed in the policy belo w and sho wn on the P olicies Map need to be 
protected. 
Objectives 
C - Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience  
D - Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
42 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/monitor ing/econom y-and-emplo yment-monitor ing 
118 Policy LP 10 
Designated Emplo yment Areas 
Designated Emplo yment Areas are as f ollows: 
Western Emplo yment Area,  Western Road,  Brac knell 
Eastern Emplo yment Area,  Eastern Road,  Brac knell 
Southern Emplo yment Area,  Doncastle Way, Brac knell 
Wellington Business P ark, Dukes Ride , Crowthorne 
Vulcan Way, Swan Lane , Sandhur st. 
8.9 The larger  designated  Emplo yment  Areas are covered by an Article 4 Direction  to control 
changes of use from offices to residential.  A fur ther challenge to the integ rity of these areas 
has resulted from The Town and Countr y Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) 
Regulations 2020 that came into f orce on 1 st September 2020.  This resulted in the revocation 
of Use Classes A, B1 and D and the creation of a ne w Class E (commercial, b usiness , and 
service).  The changes br ing together A1 (shops), A2 (financial and prof essional ser vices), A3 
(restaur ants and caf es) and B1 (b usiness) as w ell as par ts of Classes D1 (non-residential 
institutions) and D2 (assemb ly and leisure) into one single ne w E Use Class . Changes of use 
betw een the different  types  of uses  listed  in Class  E will not constitute  development  and so will 
not require planning per mission.   
8.10 It is theref ore possib le that b uildings used f or business pur poses could change to uses 
such as retail and leisure .  Protecting the supply of floorspace is impor tant to meet the needs 
of ne w and e xpanding b usinesses that ma y not be ab le to compete with alter nativ e higher v alue 
uses .  Some alter nativ e uses ma y not be compatib le with the estab lished surrounding uses 
and could adv ersely aff ect the role and contin uing viability of designated emplo yment areas . 
The Council will monitor the position and ma y use conditions and/or planning ob ligations to 
restrict ne w floor-space to b usiness uses within Class E, in order to achie ve policy objectiv es. 
8.11 Policies seek to promote and suppor t Bracknell Town Centre as a f ocus of emplo yment 
due to its sustainab le location and the need to suppor t its vitality and contin uing rene wal. There 
is a need to tak e a fle xible approach to economic de velopment in order to maximise oppor tunities 
for investment and  boost the to wn centre’ s capacity to respond positiv ely to change , particular ly 
during such uncer tain times .  However, although the NPPF directs offices to to wn centres , there 
may not be sufficient capacity to meet the full f orecast need f or offices in these locations 
depending on the demand from retail and other oper ators of to wn centre uses . Office 
development within the designated Emplo yment Areas is also considered acceptab le and ma y 
facilitate clusters or netw orks of kno wledge and data-dr iven, creativ e or high technology 
businesses . 
8.12 Planned ne w concentr ations of emplo yment de velopment, such as that at Jealott’ s Hill, 
will be defined and designated through a future Local Plan, f ollowing deliv ery of schemes .  
8.13 There ma y also be oppor tunities f or emplo yment de velopment which ha ve not been 
specifically identified and are not located in e xisting estab lished emplo yment locations . 
119 Future need f or floor space f or economic de velopment 
Emplo yment de velopment 
8.14 The study on Emplo yment Land Needs in Br acknell F orest(43) gives figures f or the need 
for office , industr ial and stor age/w arehousing floorspace . If these figures are adapted to the 
plan per iod, there is a need f or a fur ther 19,125 m2 of office floorspace and 48,875 m2 of industr ial 
and stor age/w arehousing floorspace .  This tak es account of the current planned supply 
(commitments and v acant floorspace) compared with g ross need.   
8.15 The study w as pub lished just bef ore the CO VID-19 pandemic which ma y result in a 
change in the w orking patter ns of man y people .  The e xtent to which these changes might 
become per manent is not y et clear . It appears that some emplo yers are lik ely to mak e more 
agile w orking pr actices per manent.   For some there ma y still be a need to spend time in an 
office f or social inter action, the gener ation of ideas and lear ning from colleagues .  Although 
space gener ally represents a relativ ely small propor tion of o verall costs , occupiers are lik ely to 
be re viewing their space needs par ticular ly in light of the financial difficulties and uncer tainties 
businesses f ace around CO VID-19  and BREXIT .  Some are lik ely to conclude that the y do not 
need the amount or type of floorspace which the y currently occup y.  The focus of the 
Government’ s economic and fiscal str ategy is on ensur ing that it contin ues to suppor t workers 
and b usinesses as the UK reco vers from the CO VID-19 pandemic.   Whilst it w ould be premature 
to quantify the impact on future need, this highlights the need f or fle xibility to enab le businesses 
to adapt  to meeting changing mar ket conditions and achie ve inno vations .  For this reason, it 
has been decided to combine the figures f or Business , Industr ial and Warehousing uses into 
a single figure co vering the need f or emplo yment floorspace which equates to 68,000m2. 
Retail de velopment 
8.16 The Wester n Ber kshire Retail and Commercial Leisure Assessment (2016) (44) originally 
set out the need f or compar ison and con venience floorspace f or the per iod 2016 to 2036. 
Although the study had regard to planned future de velopment, the Le xicon w as not open when 
the assessment w as completed.  At the time , it was assumed that Br acknell’ s attr activeness as 
a compar ison goods shopping destination w ould increase as a consequence of the opening of 
the Le xicon and that theref ore Br acknell’ s ‘market share’  would increase gener ating a g reater 
‘need’  for ne w compar ison goods floorspace in Br acknell.   
8.17 The Le xicon opened in September 2017 and Br acknell Town Centre rose in the retail 
rankings (T revor Wood Associates) to 29th in 2019 (from 255 bef ore the rede velopment). 
Further impro vements are contin uing through the implementation of a scheme based on the 
former Bentall’ s store which will pro vide ne w retail, f ood, dr ink and leisure f acilities .  
8.18 A review (45) of the  Wester n Ber kshire Retail and Commercial Leisure 
Assessment concluded that a m uch lo wer propor tion of the Le xicon has been deliv ered as 
compar ison goods floorspace than e xpected, so the uplift in the compar ison goods mar ket 
share predicted ma y have overstated the need f or compar ison floorspace set out in the or iginal 
repor t. Special F orms of Trading (i.e . online) ha ve been re vised upw ards significantly , 
(irrespectiv e of the impact of CO VID-19) and retailer efficiency g rowth assumptions (i.e . assuming 
that retailers use their space more efficiently e very year) ha ve increased.   Whilst it is recognised 
that Br acknell has e xperienced a step change in its role as a centre , the combination of f actors 
43 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/5643472 
44 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/4621392 
45 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/5755785 
120 outlined means that there is unlik ely to be a need f or ne w retail floorspace .  Although the impact 
of the pandemic on the High Street is as y et unkno wn, it is lik ely that it will ha ve exacerbated 
the position in ter ms of a decrease in f ootfall, and closure of stores .  
8.19 For town centres to remain viab le the y must off er experiences that cannot be matched 
by online shopping.  This means that the y need to be giv en scope to div ersify and e volve. The 
Council will theref ore encour age proposals f or complementar y town centre uses of an appropr iate 
scale to suppor t the role of to wn centres as social spaces , increase customer dw ell time , and 
make them more interesting places to visit.  This requires a fle xible planning approach that 
encour ages in vestment, not just through economic policies b ut also b y ensur ing that local 
infrastructure and the Borough’ s environment are of a high quality .  
8.20 Changes in planning legislation allo w greater fle xibility of use through the introduction 
of Use Class E which incor porates f ormer use classes A1-3 (shops , financial ser vices and 
restaur ants) as w ell as Class B1 (b usiness – pr imarily office space). 
8.21 The Council wishes to suppor t businesses in volved in economic sectors with potential 
to grow by assisting in the pro vision of ne w and refurbished floorspace designed to meet future 
needs . It is hoped that this will encour age g rowth in jobs and oppor tunities , together with the 
ability f or people to liv e and w ork locally , reducing out comm uting.  The f ollowing policy should 
be read alongside Policy LP 4 'Sites allocated f or residential/mix ed use de velopment'  that deals 
with sites allocated f or residential uses since a mix of uses w ould be incor porated on each site 
listed. 
Objectives 
C - Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
D - Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
121 Policy LP 11 
Sites allocated f or economic de velopment/mix ed use 
The f ollowing sites,  as sho wn on the P olicies Map,  are allocated f or 
economic/mix ed-use de velopment and should be de veloped in accor dance with the 
relevant strategic policies within this plan and Appendix 2:  'Site pr ofiles f or allocated 
sites'  together with g eneral polic y considerations. 
Table 12 Sites allocated f or economic de velopment/mix ed use 
Appr oximate capacity  (m2 net) Address Site ref (as used in 
the SHELAA) 
3,160 Town Square , The Ring BRA7 
4,700 Former Bus Depot,  Market Street BRA12 
5,100 Jubilee Gar dens,  The Ring BRA14 
9,400 Land east of Station Way and nor th 
of Chur ch Road (Southern Gate way) BRA15 
7,575 Bus Station,  The Ring BRA17 
-12,139 Peel Centre and The P oint, Skimped 
Hill Lane BRA18 
72,200  
(of whic h 38,750 is to be delivered 
within the plan period) and 
1,528 
 (local centre , of whic h 836 is to be 
delivered in the plan period) Land at Jealott's Hill WAR3 
91,524 Total 
of whic h 57,382 is to be delivered in 
the current plan period 
8.22 The sites allocated in the policy abo ve are k ey to implementing the str ategy of maximising 
the unique oppor tunity to de velop a globally significant ag ri-tech asset at Jealott’ s Hill and to 
further de veloping economic oppor tunities in and around Br acknell Town Centre .  
8.23 The site at Jealott's Hill has a long estab lished and unique reputation f or its research 
and de velopment into ag ricultur al technology . As a result, it is a v aluab le concentr ation of diverse 
disciplines , skills , knowledge and e xpertise.  However, for it to remain at the f orefront of 
innovation, major in vestment is no w required to enab le it to adapt to increasingly collabor ative 
approaches to research and de velopment.  Companies no w need to br ing their talent and 
facilities together in order to deliv er disco veries more efficiently and eff ectively to the mar ket. 
 Co-location is required in the f orm of a Science and Inno vation P ark specialising in agricultur al 
research of global impor tance .   The proposed de velopment in volves 86,500 m2 of ne w (gross) 
floorspace in addition to the retention of 46,300 m2 of existing floor pace  which is to 
be refurbished .  The proposal w ould theref ore result in a campus of 132,800 m2 (72,200 m2 net 
gain).  In addition to retaining 850 jobs on the site it is estimated that the proposal will ha ve the 
capacity to gener ate appro ximately 2,000 fur ther jobs . 
8.24 The current b usiness w ould act as the anchor f or the comple x occup ying 60,600 m2 of 
the floorspace (e xisting and replacement floorspace).  The additional floorspace w ould be used 
by associated b usinesses in volved in directly related technologies .  It is also e xpected to attr act 
122 businesses with a less direct relationship b ut involved in industr ies such as en vironmental 
management, w aste management and clean energy . The de velopment w ould f acilitate 
co-location of interconnected organisations and theref ore increase oppor tunities f or those with 
a range of e xpertise to w ork collabor atively on research projects and their tr anslation into 
commercial activity to the benefit of the local, regional, national economies and global scientific 
advancement  
8.25 The de velopment of the Science and Inno vation P ark is related to the enab ling 
development required to create a viab le Science and Inno vation par k proposition.   The enab ling 
development is residential de velopment as par t of a Garden Village .  This will create an 
oppor tunity f or people to liv e and w ork  in a thr iving comm unity with all essential amenities 
including a local centre ( which will pro vide 1,528 m2 of retail floorspace (appro ximately 86 jobs), 
as well as other ser vices such as a n urser y, health centre , veterinary practice and school) . It 
is also e xpected to enhance the appeal of the e xpanded Campus to potential occupiers .  The 
provision of housing and emplo yment will be carefully phased and will result in some of the 
floorspace being deliv ered be yond the plan per iod.  The management of the phasing will be 
secured via an enf orceab le legal arr angement. 
8.26 Whilst the specialist nature of the w ork under taken requires highly skilled scientists , the 
development is anticipated to gener ate job oppor tunities in ter ms of suppor t staff and in other 
uses cr itical to the de velopment of a sustainab le comm unity, such as education, health, leisure 
and retail.   
8.27 Bracknell Town Centre and its adjacent area is an impor tant emplo yment and commercial 
centre and the most accessib le location in the Borough, off ering the widest r ange of ser vices 
and f acilities . For these reasons , further economic g rowth is also directed to centr al sites which 
will help suppor t the contin uing regener ation and ongoing viability of the centre . This accords 
with the Br acknell Town Centre Vision 2032 in which the Council confir ms its commitment to 
the fur ther regener ation of the area.  This also reflects the str ategy of f ocusing a significant 
propor tion of residential de velopment on this area and encour aging it to become an activity-based 
comm unity gather ing place .  Some of these schemes are planned to include offices to help 
meet the need f or fle xible small to medium siz ed units in a to wn centre en vironment.  This will 
provide oppor tunities f or occupiers of sites in designated Emplo yment Areas to re-locate and 
for those sites to be rede veloped f or other emplo yment uses if the mar ket indicates a need.   
Activ e uses , such as retail, caf es and restaur ants will be encour aged on the g round floor of 
appropr iate b uildings . 
8.28 The P eel Centre and the P oint are located on the per ipher y of Br acknell Town Centre 
and compr ise a pre viously de veloped site in a highly sustainab le location.   The major ity of the 
site currently compr ises retail w arehousing, and there is also a super market, restaur ants and 
leisure f acilities .  The regener ation of Br acknell Town Centre , particular ly the opening of the 
Lexicon, together with the difficult retail mar ket has resulted in some duplication of tenants .  
The design of the units is dated and does not meet the needs of  increasingly discer ning 
occupiers and consumers .  A mix ed-use rede velopment of the site is theref ore proposed retaining 
a super market and pro viding some smaller retail units that meet current e xpectations and ser ve 
the increasing n umber of people living in the wider area. 
8.29 Whilst pro vision does not meet the theoretical need f or economic floorspace there is 
significant uncer tainty around future demand f or floorspace and it w ould pro vide a significant 
supply which could be dr awn upon f or a n umber of y ears.  Take up needs to be carefully 
monitored to identify an y emerging trends . 
123 Linked De velopment Mana gement polic y/policies 
Policy LP 26 'De velopment within designated Emplo yment Areas' 
Policy LP 28 'Smaller b usinesses' 
Policy LP 29 'De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par agraphs 20, 80-82) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Housing and Economic Needs Assessment) 
Berkshire Functional Economic Mar ket Area Study (F ebruary 2016) 
Study on Emplo yment Land Needs in Br acknell F orest (Apr il 2020) 
Town Centre Retail Needs Technical Re view (October 2020) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
8.30 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
8.31 Monitor ing 
Amount of economic floorspace (net) per mitted and completed each y ear 
Unemplo yment r ate 
124 8.2 Hier archy of centres 
Shopping hierar chy 
8.32 Bracknell F orest has a w ell-estab lished netw ork of centres , ranging in siz e and function 
from local centres meeting da y-to-da y retail needs to larger distr ict and pr imary town centres 
that pro vide a broader r ange of goods and ser vices and ser ve a wider area. 
8.33 Bracknell Town Centre is the main shopping destination f or residents in the Borough 
and pla ys a v ery impor tant role in creating a sense of place and identity f or the Borough.   It 
provides the main f ocus f or retailing in the Borough, and is also a f ocus f or leisure and b usiness 
activity in a highly accessib le location at the centre of the Borough's pub lic transpor t netw ork. 
The Le xicon has created a ne w social and cultur al hear t for the to wn, br inging a high-quality 
mix of shopping, leisure and vibr ant pub lic spaces to the Town Centre . The regener ation is 
contin uing with the de velopment of The Dec k, based around the f ormer Bentalls store in the 
High Street and w ork on de veloping Pr incess Square .   
8.34 The Distr ict Centres of Cro wthor ne and Sandhurst are vibr ant centres with a f ocus on 
smaller retail units , restaur ants and coff ee shops .  They pro vide a v aried retail and leisure r ange 
that helps meet local con venience and da y-to-da y shopping needs .  Their compar ison goods 
offer is limited and theref ore the y ser ve a more local catchment. 
8.35 The Borough’ s Local Centres pla y an essential role in ser ving the e veryday retail needs 
of the local comm unity, providing such uses as con venience stores and phar macies .  Particular ly 
impor tant to residents with limited mobility , they reduce the need to tr avel by car to shop and 
are impor tant in creating a sense of comm unity and identity . Such is their impor tance in creating 
sustainab le comm unities , local centres will contin ue to be pro vided as par t of ne w residential 
development. 
8.36 All the identified centres perf orm an impor tant function f or their local comm unities , and 
in some cases f or wider comm unities .  The pur pose of this policy is to define the hier archy and 
extent of the Borough’ s centres to ensure that de velopment proposals are consistent with their 
role and function. 
8.37 Given the n umber of distr ict and local centres in the borough, ser ving areas that do not 
necessar ily identify as ‘towns’;  for the pur poses of this plan, the ter m ‘centres’  replaces the 
NPPF ter m of ‘town centre'. 
Objectives 
C – Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
E – Retail centres 
F – Strong comm unities 
125 Policy LP 12 
Hierar chy and e xtent of centres 
Development pr oposals within a centre , whic h are defined on the P olicies Map(46) and 
include the primar y shopping areas,  will be suppor ted where the y are consistent 
with the r ole and function of that centre , having regar d to its place in the f ollowing 
hierar chy: 
Primar y Town Centre 
Brac knell (1) 
District Centres 
Crowthorne (2) 
Sandhur st (3) 
Local Centres 
Bagshot Road (4) 
Binfield (5) 
Birch Hill (6) 
Bullbr ook (7) 
Colleg e Town (8)  
Crown Wood (9) 
Crowthorne (Station P arade) (10)  
Easthampstead (11) 
Forest P ark (12) 
Great Hollands (13) 
Hanw orth (14) 
Harmans Water (15) 
Martins Her on (16) 
North Ascot (Fernbank Road) (17) 
North Ascot (W arren Ro w) (18) 
Owlsmoor (19) 
Priestw ood (20) 
Sandhur st (East of Swan Lane) (21) 
Sandhur st (Old Mill) (22) 
Whitegr ove (23) 
Wildridings (24) 
8.38 There are a n umber of retail f acilities that, whilst planned f or, have not been deliv ered 
at the time of dr afting and theref ore ha ve not been included in the policy .  Any new retail f acilities 
(such as those within ne w strategic housing de velopments) should be considered in the conte xt 
of this hier archy. 
46 Inset maps sho wing the e xtent of centres can be f ound in Appendix 3:  'Defined Centre maps' . Each centre is attr ibuted 
a number to allo w cross ref erencing betw een the policy ,  Inset map and  P olicies Map 
126 8.39 The planned ne w Local Centres are: 
Land at TRL, Cro wthor ne 
Amen Cor ner South, Binfield 
Priory Field, Warfield  
Jealott's Hill, Warfield. 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy/Policies 
Policy LP 29 'De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre' 
Policy LP 30 'De velopment proposals in centres' 
Policy LP 31 'De velopment of main to wn centre uses outside of designated centres' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
Wester n Ber kshire Retail and Commercial Leisure Assessment  (Apr il 2017) 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Paragraphs 85, 91, 92 & 104) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (T own Centre and retail P aragraphs 001 Ref erence ID: 
2b-001-20190722 to 008 Ref erence ID 2b-008-20190722)   
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
8.40 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
The use of planning conditions and ob ligations 
8.41 Monitor ing 
Annual retail sur vey 
Health chec ks of identified centres 
127 128 9: Infrastructure 
9.1 New development planned in the Borough will ha ve an impact on local roads , school 
capacity , health f acilities , open spaces , utilities and man y other f orms of infr astructure . To 
mitigate the impacts of ne w development and create sustainab le developments and comm unities , 
new and impro ved infr astructure will be required at the r ight time and  in the r ight place . 
9.2 Infrastructure co vers a broad spectr um of items and f acilities . There are three main 
elements of infr astructure: 
Physical infr astructure including tr anspor t, waste and recycling f acilities , built spor ts facilities , 
sports pitches , water supply and w astewater (including treatment 
plants), telecomm unications infr astructure including full fibre broadband, electr icity and 
gas netw orks. 
Social infr astructure including education, comm unity f acilities , healthcare , emergency 
services , pub lic transpor t and libr aries. It can also include Policy LP 9 'Aff ordab le housing' . 
Green infr astructure including SuDS , parks, playing fields , allotments , amenity areas , 
verges , biodiv ersity f eatures , woodlands , hedgero ws, water f eatures such as lak es and 
rivers (also ref erred to as ‘blue infr astructure’) and other open spaces . It also co vers SANGs 
and SAMM (see Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' ). 
129 9.1 Secur ing local infr astructure and f acilities 
9.3 Various mechanisms are used to secure infr astructure which include: 
Conditions attached to a planning per mission which ma y, for example , require the pro vision 
of on-site infr astructure to be ag reed, pro vided and maintained such as a pr ivate 
(unadopted) road. 
Legal ob ligations to secure on-site infr astructure (such as a ne w school or open space) 
and financial contr ibutions to wards off-site infr astructure (such as comm unity f acilities) 
which are usually set out in the ter ms of the S106 ag reement. 
Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy (CIL) which is a charge on based on a set of r ates per 
square metre f or rele vant de velopments .   CIL is usually spent on larger more str ategic 
pieces of infr astructure such as secondar y schools . 
Council funded  ne w or impro ved infr astructure such as the Cor al Reef Watersplash Centre . 
Privately funded infr astructure such as that pro vided b y utility companies , for example , a 
new water supply pipeline to a de velopment.  Companies fund their o wn impro vements in  
accordance with their str ategic upg rade plans . 
Grants from a v ariety of sources , such as Go vernment (f or school impro vements) and 
Local Enter prise P artnerships (f or impor tant road junction impro vements).     
9.4 Failure to pro vide the required infr astructure  to ensure sustainab le de velopment and 
comm unities w ould ha ve a detr imental impact on local amenity and the quality of the Borough’ s 
built and natur al en vironment.  Key issues to be addressed through the Local Plan are the 
co-ordination of ne w development with required infr astructure and the need to tak e into account 
the capacity of e xisting infr astructure . 
9.5 One of the main challenges in the deliv ery of sustainab le de velopment will be the funding 
of necessar y suppor ting infr astructure . Deliv ery of ne w or impro ved infr astructure depends 
upon secur ing necessar y contr ibutions through the de velopment process . Additional resources 
and suppor t from both the pub lic and pr ivate sectors are necessar y.   The Go vernment also 
has a role in pro viding appropr iate re venue suppor t to those agencies that manage , maintain 
or pro vide infr astructure to create sustainab le de velopment. 
Objective 
I - infr astructure needs 
130 Policy LP 13 
Infrastructure 
1.  Development will be permitted whic h mitigates its impacts thr ough the pr ovision of 
new, or the enhancement of e xisting infrastructure . As appr opriate to its scale and 
nature , development will be permitted whic h: 
i. enhances or funds enhancement of e xisting infrastructure , 
including oppor tunities f or m ulti-functional use of comm unity facilities; 
ii. provides or funds necessar y new infrastructure; 
iii. makes use of other sour ces of funding to bring f orwar d joint 
infrastructure schemes; 
iv. satisfies the requirements of infrastructure pr ovider s with regar d to 
future and e xisting facilities and ser vices inc luding,  but not limited to 
educational,  health and transpor t facilities and utilities infrastructure 
including telecomm unication masts and br oadband ser vices; 
v. is coor dinated with the deliver y of ne w or impr oved infrastructure;  and 
vi. provides and/or contrib utes to wards future maintenance of 
infrastructure provided as a result of the ne w de velopment. 
2.  Where viability constraints are demonstrated b y robust e vidence , the Council will: 
i. prioritise de veloper contrib utions f or strategic and local infrastructure in line 
with rele vant policies in the Local Plan and the detail of requirements outlined 
in the Infrastructure Deliver y Plan;  and / or 
ii. use an appr opriate mec hanism to def er par t of the de veloper contrib ution / 
in-kind pr ovision requirement to a later date;  or 
iii. if necessar y, refuse planning permission if the de velopment pr oposal 
would be unsustainab le without the required infrastructure f ollowing 
consideration of alternative funding sour ces. 
3.  Evidence used to demonstrate viability constraints m ust: 
i. take account of viability e vidence suppor ting the Local Plan; 
ii. be independent,  transparent and pub lished; 
iii. be full y funded b y the applicant (inc luding an independent assessment 
of the e vidence on behalf of the Council);  and 
iv. be a greed b y the Council. 
131 9.6 The Council will w ork with infr astructure pro viders , stak eholders , partners and neighbour ing 
councils to ensure that ne w and e xisting infr astructure is pro vided, impro ved and maintained 
to suppor t sustainab le de velopment proposals identified in the Local Plan, helping Br acknell 
Forest to g row sustainab ly. Development proposals and infr astructure pro vision will be 
coordinated to ensure that g rowth is suppor ted b y the timely and appropr iate pro vision of 
infrastructure . Planning conditions , S106 planning ob ligations and CIL income will be used to 
provide infr astructure to suppor t new development. 
9.7 In line with regulator y requirements , the Council produces an ann ual Infr astructure Funding 
Statement (IFS) which sets out its infr astructure pr iorities including mechanisms f or secur ing 
them.   Some projects ma y be funded b y a combination of both CIL and S106 contr ibutions . 
9.8 The Council’ s Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan (IDP) indicates the type , scale and timetab le 
for the deliv ery of infr astructure to suppor t the rele vant objectiv es and policies of the Local Plan. 
It also identifies the main funding mechanisms and lead agencies responsib le for infr astructure 
provision.  Infrastructure requirements are also set out in rele vant policies in the BFLP , 
Supplementar y Planning Documents (SPDs), de velopment br iefs and master plans associated 
with ne w major de velopment proposals and allocated sites . In ensur ing the timely deliv ery of 
infrastructure requirements , development proposals m ust demonstr ate that full regard has been 
paid to the IDP and all other rele vant infr astructure policies in the BFLP . Strategic and local 
infrastructure pro vision will be based on a whole lif e costs approach.  The IDP identifies 
programmed infr astructure pro vision from both the pub lic and pr ivate sectors , in addition to that 
delivered through the de velopment process . It pro vides an o verview of the Borough’ s 
infrastructure requirements and deficits , identifies who is responsib le for deliv ery of these and 
includes a broad indication of phasing, timescales , costs and funding mechanisms . Capacity 
in infr astructure and ser vices and the perf ormance of both will be monitored through regular 
engagement with inter nal and e xternal infr astructure ser vices pro viders oper ating in the borough 
and the IDP bac kground suppor ting inf ormation will be regular ly updated. 
9.9 The Council adopted its CIL (47) on 6th Apr il 2015.  CIL will be re viewed per iodically .  CIL 
receipts are to be spent in accordance with the infr astructure list in the Council’ s ann ual 
Infrastructure Funding Statement (IFS).   This le vy suppor ts sustainab le de velopment in the 
borough b y secur ing funding f or infr astructure , facilities and ser vices necessar y to meet local 
plan objectiv es and comply with rele vant policies . The Council will also seek to secure site 
specific or local infr astructure through S106 planning ob ligations , in-kind pro vision or financial 
contr ibutions . This accords with the Council’ s Planning Ob ligations SPD (48).  Some on-site 
infrastructure ma y also be secured through conditions attached to planning per missions . Further 
infrastructure ma y be required through other policies , such as Policy LP 16 'Green 
infrastructure'  and Policy LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area' . 
47 www.bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/comm unity-infr astructure-le vy/what-comm unity-infr astructure-le vy 
48 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/supplementar y-planning-documents 
132 Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy/Policies 
Policy LP 33 'Pla y, open space and spor ts pro vision' 
Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' 
Policy LP 54 'Assessing tr anspor t impacts and requirements' 
Policy LP 55 'T ranspor t infrastructure pro vision' 
Policy LP 56 'T ravel plans' 
Policy LP 57 'P arking' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par agraphs 7, 8, 16, 20, 22, 25, 26, 28, 34, 72, 81, 91, 102, 104, 149 and 151) 
S106 of the Town and Countr y Planning Act 1990 (as amended) 
CIL Regulations 2010 (as amended) 
Planning Ob ligations Supplementar y Planning Document 2015 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (PPG) ref erence ID:  61-001, 61-002, 61-016, 61-034, 61-043, 
61-045, 61-046 and 61-048 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
9.10 Deliv ery - 
Deter mination of planning applications 
Implementation of other rele vant P olicies in the Local Plan 
The statutor y functions of the Local Highw ays Author ity 
Implementation of the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan Prog rammes 
Section 38/278 Highw ay Legal Ag reements 
Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy and / or other infr astructure funding mechanisms 
S106 Legal Ag reements and Planning Conditions 
9.11 Monitor ing  
The prog ress and deliv ery of str ategic and local infr astructure prog rammes in the 
Infrastructure Deliv ery Plan. 
The Infr astructure Funding Statement (IFS) 
S106 legal ag reements / Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy and other infr astructure funding 
mechanisms monitor ing. 
133 9.2 Transpor t principles 
9.12 Development in the Borough has a direct impact on tr anspor t infrastructure in the area 
such as roads , junctions , footpaths , cycle ways and pub lic transpor t. The current tr anspor t 
infrastructure is under pressure from a g rowing population, increased car o wnership , new 
development in neighbour ing author ities and tr affic gener ated from fur ther afield.  The Council 
has a responsibility to ensure that the pressure on local tr anspor t infrastructure is carefully 
managed and planned f or and that, where possib le, adv erse impacts are mitigated, including 
in relation to saf ety, design, the en vironment and e xisting infr astructure . The sustainability of 
future de velopment will depend on the application of eff ective transpor t policies . 
9.13 The f ollowing policy and suppor ting De velopment Management tr anspor t policies 
(Section 19 Transpor t) will help to deliv er a w ell-designed and sustainab le transpor t system 
which enab les reliab le access to ser vices and f acilities , reduces the need to tr avel, enab les a 
choice of tr anspor t modes , and mitigates the impacts of ne w development on the tr anspor t 
netw ork. 
9.14 The tr anspor t policies accord with the NPPF , PPG and policies in the Local Transpor t 
Plan 3, which also reflect the planning related statutor y functions of the Local Highw ays Author ity. 
They pro vide an integ rated set of pr inciples to guide decision making, and should be read and 
considered together with all the other policies in the BFLP . 
Objective 
H - Transpor t 
134 Policy LP 14 
Transpor t principles 
1. Development m ust pre vent,  minimise and mitigate negative impacts on the 
transpor t netw ork and r oad saf ety.  Development pr oposals will be permitted 
where the y: 
i. provide sustainab le modes of transpor t including the pr ovision of 
infrastructure and measures that impr ove tra vel c hoice , particularl y for 
pedestrians,  cyclists and pub lic transpor t; 
ii. provide accessibility and connectivity both within and be yond the bor ough 
boundaries; 
iii. provide transpor t solutions whic h reduce flood risk,  greenhouse gas 
emissions and emissions to air as a result of the de velopment; 
iv. provide an appr opriate le vel of parking; 
v. suppor t an accessib le pub lic transpor t netw ork inc luding b us ser vices and 
associated infrastructure; 
vi. maintain and where required,  impr ove the capacity and the saf e and efficient 
operation of the pub lic highwa y netw ork; 
vii. impr ove or not w orsen highwa y saf ety; 
viii. safeguar d routes and/or land whic h is necessar y to pr ovide infrastructure 
to increase highwa y capacity or widen transpor t choice;  and, 
ix. provide eff ective , convenient and saf e deliver y, collection,  servicing,  refuse 
and rec ycling collection,  and emer gency access arrang ements. 
9.15 The Council recognises the need to accommodate the g rowing population in the borough 
and aims to deliv er an eff ective, efficient, w ell managed and sustainab le transpor t system.  New 
development can br ing about positiv e changes to tr anspor t provision.  Well designed and located 
development which pro vides a mix of ne w housing, schools , health f acilities , retail and leisure 
facilities or emplo yment can reduce the need to tr avel. However, new development can also 
add significant pressure to b usy netw orks. There are often oppor tunities to minimise impacts 
but where se vere impacts (par ticular ly, but not solely , those relating to congestion and highw ay 
safety) cannot adequately be mitigated, proposals will be refused.  Development will be e xpected 
to pro vide choice b y making suitab le pro vision f or non-car modes of tr anspor t such as cycle ways.  
It  will also be e xpected to pro vide appropr iate infr astructure and mitigate se vere adv erse 
impacts to ensure the Borough's tr anspor t system oper ates in a saf e, efficient and con venient 
manner . Mitigation measures will be sought where the y are rele vant to , and commensur ate, 
with the scale of de velopment.  Developers should not pa y to mitigate impacts that do not ar ise 
from their de velopment. 
9.16 Bracknell F orest is situated betw een the M3 and M4 with se veral str ategic A-roads 
running through the Borough.  As a result, the local road netw ork experiences high tr affic v olumes 
and m ust be eff ectively managed to minimise congestion.  The Council will saf eguard routes 
and land required f or infr astructure impro vements and secure w orks to impro ve routes and 
junction capacities . 
135 9.17 There are good r ail links from the borough to Reading, London Waterloo and the 
Blackwater Valley. However, these and other pub lic transpor t netw orks ma y need 
further in vestment to pro vide an attr active alter nativ e choice to the car . For example , the train 
service betw een Br acknell and London is relativ ely slo w consider ing the distance (32 miles).   The 
Council will contin ue to lob by  Netw ork Rail and other stak eholders f or faster jour ney times as 
well as impro vements to jour ney experience in ter ms of better station f acilities and g reater Wi-Fi 
coverage.  
9.18 The Borough benefits from an e xtensiv e range of cycle paths and pedestr ian routes; 
the Council will ensure these are protected as par t of its nor mal highw ay function, and that the 
new development will pro vide saf e and con venient oppor tunities f or walking, and cycling both 
within the de velopment and to nearb y schools , shops , emplo yment, leisure and other f acilities . 
Oppor tunities will also be sought to impro ve and pro vide ne w links betw een e xisting routes and 
give priority to cycle and pedestr ian mo vement through good design. 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy/Policies 
Policy LP 54 'Assessing tr anspor t impacts and requirements' 
Policy LP 55 'T ranspor t infrastructure pro vision' 
Policy LP 56 'T ravel plans' 
Policy LP 57 'P arking' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (PPG) 
Local Transpor t Plan 3  
Core Str ategy and Implementation Plan 2011-26 (Apr il 2011), 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
9.19 Deliv ery 
 Deter mination of planning applications .  
Implementation of the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan.   
S106 Ag reements and planning conditions .  
Section 38/278 Ag reements 
Local Transpor t Plan 3 2011-2026 and its relating str ategies . 
The Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy (CIL) and / or other infr astructure funding mechanisms 
9.20 Monitor ing 
IDP 
136 10: Climate change and b uilt and natur al 
environment 
10.1 Climate change 
10.1 Climate change is caused in par t by greenhouse gases that are pr imarily produced 
through the b urning of f ossil fuels and land use changes . It results in increasing hazards such 
as flooding, heatw aves,  and drought. 
10.2 In 2020 the Council pub lished the Climate Change Str ategy 2020-24 (49) which includes 
detailed action plans and measur able ambitious ann ual targets to ensure that the Council meets 
the go vernment target of er adicating its net contr ibution to climate change b y 2050. 
10.3 The NPPF confir ms that “The planning system should suppor t the tr ansition to a lo w 
carbon future in a changing climate ," through v arious policy measures . 
10.4 Climate change mitigation is about reducing emissions and to this end the plan includes 
the following measures:  - 
Reducing the need to tr avel by locating de velopment in the most sustainab le locations . 
Encour aging sustainab le transpor t, through promoting sustainab le modes of tr anspor t and 
travel choice , travel plans , electr ic vehicle charging.   
Suppor ting rene wable and lo w carbon technologies and sustainab le constr uction.   
Promoting reduced carbon design approaches such as using site landf orm to benefit from 
shelter and theref ore minimise heat losses in winter and maximise shade in summer , and 
net z ero carbon f or regulated emissions from major ne w build residential de velopments . 
10.5 Adapting to climate change is about being prepared f or climate change . The plan includes: 
Consider ation of the r isks of climate change when allocating de velopment sites , such as 
through the consider ation of e xpected increases in flood r isk.  
Consider ation of the impact of site la yout and good design, f or example in response to 
flood r isk.  
Consider ation of the a vailability of w ater and reduction of w ater use through efficiency 
standards .  
Consider ation of w ater quality through re view of the w astewater infr astructure . 
Promoting g reen and b lue infr astructure to allo w habitat connectivity , provide urban cooling 
and shading, surf ace w ater management and absorb and store carbon.   This is fur ther 
suppor ted b y open space standards the pro vision of SANG and the protection of r iver 
corridors . 
10.6 A combination of the policies outlined in this document and measures under the Building 
Regulations should ensure sustainab le forms of de velopment that minimise carbon emissions 
from housing and associated tr anspor t.   
49 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/council-and-democr acy/str ategies-plans-and-policies/climate-change/climate-change-councils-approach 
137 Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy/Policies 
Policy LP 56 'T ravel plans' 
Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' 
Policy LP 42 'Design' 
Policy LP 50 'Rene wable and lo w carbon energy' 
Policy LP 49 'Sustainab le constr uction' 
138 10.2 Built en vironment  - design pr inciples 
10.7 The design of de velopment has a significant influence o ver the identity , cohesion and 
function of places . The Council is committed to secur ing high quality , robust designs and 
placemaking, meeting the needs of the local comm unity.  New development proposals should 
create connected en vironments , enab ling ease of mo vement on f oot, cycle , pub lic transpor t 
and emerging technologies , to aid the creation of health y places and comm unities that people 
want to liv e and w ork in.  In addition, ne w development should include measures which to help 
comm unities to minimise , mitigate and adapt to climate change . 
10.8 This commitment is suppor ted b y national policy which attaches g reat impor tance to 
the design of the b uilt en vironment.   The NPPF states that good design is a k ey aspect of 
sustainab le de velopment and creates better places in which to liv e and w ork.  It advises that 
local plans should include rob ust and comprehensiv e policies that specify the quality of 
development that will be e xpected f or the area.  This policy sets out the k ey strategic pr inciples 
that the Council e xpects de velopment proposals to f ollow to deliv er high quality de velopment 
in the borough. 
Objective 
G - Ac hieving High Quality De velopment  
Policy LP 15 
Design principles 
1. All de velopment m ust ac hieve a high standar d of design that positivel y 
contrib utes to placemaking.  Proposals should be design-led and will be 
suppor ted where the y: 
i. create attractive places b y responding to and enhancing the distinctive 
character , herita ge, amenity and/or appearance of the local area,  or where 
appr opriate , create c haracter , identity and attractiveness; 
ii. create vibrant neighbourhoods with easy access to local facilities,  and, 
where appr opriate to the scale and location of the de velopment,  provide a 
mix of uses;   
iii. are appr opriatel y connected to e xisting streets,  footwa ys and c ycleways; 
iv. maximise the oppor tunity f or linka ges between green spaces,  include high 
quality landscaping to reflect and enhance the local c haracter of the area 
and enhance biodiver sity; 
v. integrate Sustainab le Draina ge Systems (SuDS) and draina ge solutions 
into site la youts at an earl y design sta ge; 
vi. include measures to minimise c limate c hang e and alle viate its eff ects, 
having regar d to: 
a. adapting to a c hang e in c limate 
139 b. ensuring oppor tunities f or ener gy efficienc y have been maximised; 
and 
c. ensuring de velopments are designed to pre vent o verheating. 
vii. create inc lusive places and spaces,  designed f or ease of mo vement and 
access,  to meet the needs of all the comm unity; 
viii. create saf e comm unities and minimise oppor tunities f or crime and 
anti-social beha viour;  and 
ix. do not prejudice the comprehensive de velopment of a wider area. 
2. Masterplans and design codes will be required f or lar ger, comple x or more 
sensitive de velopments to estab lish an o verall vision and strategy f or a 
development that demonstrates a high quality , comprehensive appr oach to 
design.  A masterplan will be required to be a greed with the Council,  ideall y 
prior to the submission of an y planning applications f or the site .  Design codes 
will be required as par t of an y Full or Reser ved Matter s applications f or sites 
with a masterplan and similarl y these will ideall y be a greed with the Council 
prior to submission.   Kno wn sites where a masterplan and design code are 
required are: 
i. Town Square De velopment Area of Brac knell Town Centre and immediate 
vicinity; 
ii. The Southern Gate way De velopment Area of Brac knell Town Centre 
(including J ubilee Gar dens (BRA 14),  Land east of Station Way and nor th 
of Chur ch Road (BRA 15) and the Bus Station (BRA 17)),  and immediate 
vicinity; 
iii. The P eel Centre and The P oint, Skimped Hill Lane , Brac knell;   
iv. Land at Jealott's Hill,  Warfield; 
v. Land at Beauf ort Park, Nine Mile Ride , Brac knell;  and 
vi. Land east of Wokingham Road and south of Dukes Ride (Derb y Field), 
Sandhur st. 
10.9 Good design can deliv er positiv e social, economic and en vironmental eff ects. The design 
and function of b uildings , the space around b uildings and linking ne w development to e xisting 
facilities can help to impro ve local identity , social w ellbeing and health outcomes .  It can assist 
in creating a sense of social cohesion and can ease the impact of de velopment on the 
environment.    
Character and design 
10.10 Proposals should respond to the ph ysical, visual and functional conte xt within which 
a proposal is located, with an aim to alw ays enhance and add quality to an area.   Applicants 
should respond to the char acter and histor y of the area, assessing landscape , townscape , 
streetscenes , development g rain and b uilt forms.  Proposals should reflect and where ver 
possib le enhance the identity of the area and conte xt, whilst allo wing f or inno vative and f orward 
thinking design.   
140 10.11 The borough is v aried in ter ms of char acter , with r ural villages in the nor th, the Ne w 
Town her itage of Br acknell in the centr al area of borough, and the histor ic and vibr ant 
comm unities of Cro wthor ne and Sandhurst to the south.   The Char acter Area Assessments 
Supplementar y Planning Document defines char acter in man y par ts of the borough and sets 
out a clear fr amework for de velopment proposals coming f orward in these areas .  In some par ts 
of the borough there is also an oppor tunity to create de velopment with its o wn identity and 
attractiveness , particular ly the ne w str ategic sites identified in this plan.   However, such 
development will contin ue to need to look to the landscape and visual conte xt within which it 
is located  
10.12 Design and la youts should create functional, saf e places , as w ell as attr active ones , 
that suppor t the health and w ell being of future comm unities .  Appropr iate le vels of pr ivate and 
public amenity spaces should be incor porated into de velopments . Public spaces should ha ve 
good natur al sur veillance from surrounding proper ties.  Safety, secur ity and measures to alle viate 
anti-social beha viour should be considered from the outset and designed into de velopment 
proposals .      
Connectivity and ease of mo vement 
10.13 A mix of uses is encour aged within de velopments , particular ly on larger sites .  This 
assists in creating w alkab le neighbourhoods , reducing the dependency on the car and creating 
more cohesiv e comm unities , with places where all gener ations can meet and socialise .    
10.14 Safe and easy routes to w alk and cycle to f acilities and ser vices should be readily 
accessib le to residents , promoting and enab ling healthier comm unities .   Development proposals 
should integ rate eff ectively with e xisting mo vement patter ns, particular ly pedestr ian, cycle and 
public transpor t routes and the e xisting road netw ork.  Safe and secure pedestr ian and cycle 
routes should be pro vided both within the site and linking into the wider netw ork.  A good le vel 
of natur al sur veillance will be sought to ensure routes f eel saf e and o verlooked.  Proposals 
should f acilitate and encour age sustainab le travel methods . 
10.15 The policy seeks to ensure that the design and location of all ne w development mak es 
it accessib le to all members of the comm unity, including older people , people with disabilities 
and parents with y oung children.   The site should be designed to f acilitate ease of mo vement, 
in an inclusiv e manner .  Routes should be le vel or on a gentle g radient, surf aces should aid 
access and the needs of all should be designed into a site , its spaces , facilities , and b uildings 
to create an inclusiv e environment f or all.     
Natural en vironment 
10.16 The natur al en vironment creates a strong conte xt and char acter to man y par ts of the 
borough, both within de velopments , and as a bac kdrop .  Much of the borough w as histor ically 
forest and this has led to areas with a v ery distinct g reen identity . Different par ts of the borough 
have diff erent landscape char acters , with a par ticular ly strong contr ast betw een the nor thern 
and souther n areas .  It is impor tant to include landscaping that responds to , and enhances , the 
character of the area.   Linking g reen spaces within the borough is also a k ey objectiv e to 
enhance biodiv ersity and create wildlif e corr idors .  Larger spaces f or str uctur al planting often 
have a g reater visual impact than man y small areas of g reener y.  No single approach fits 
all; landscape assessments should inf orm what is appropr iate and can be deliv ered to enhance 
a proposal and integ rate it within its landscape .   
141 Climate c hang e and en vironmental sustainability 
10.17 SuDS and dr ainage solutions need to be considered at the outset when e valuating a 
site.  It is vital that de velopers consider w ater mo vement and where w ater will dr ain at the 
earliest stage of site assessment.  This should then inf orm site la youts, street design, landscaping 
strategies , biodiv ersity and the design of open spaces . 
10.18 The la yout and design of streets , the design and or ientation of b uildings and appropr iate 
mater ials can all be used to alle viate some of the negativ e impacts of climate change .   The 
use of height on a site needs careful consider ation and placement.  Landscaping and tree 
planting can also assist in pro viding shade in par ts of a de velopment, such as within 
streetscenes , parking areas and pub lic and pr ivate amenity areas .  Further guidance is set out 
in the  16.1 'Design' section of the Council’ s Sustainab le Resource Management SPD (50).  
 National guidance documents such as the National Design Guide pub lished b y the Ministr y of 
Housing, Comm unities and Local Go vernment (51) is also a useful source of inf ormation to guide 
development. 
Comprehensive de velopment 
10.19 Developments should be planned comprehensiv ely in an integ rated manner . Some 
larger scale de velopments or comple x sites can tak e a number of y ears to complete and deliv ery 
is phased.    In order to ensure de velopments tak es place in a coherent and str uctured w ay, 
master plans and design codes should be produced and ag reed with the Council to estab lish 
an overall vision and str ategy f or a de velopment as a whole .  This should ideally be completed 
prior to the submission of an y planning applications .  The master planning process should include 
engagement with local comm unities .  Applicants should also note that the Council will e xpect 
developers of larger , comple x or more sensitiv e sites in the borough to par ticipate in and be 
the subject of assessment b y a Design Re view Panel.   Please contact the Council f or fur ther 
details relating to the design re view process . 
Further inf ormation 
10.20 This policy li nks to man y other policies within this plan, which should be c ross ref erenced 
at the outset of de veloping a proposal for a site .  
10.21 Developers are e xpected to ha ve regard to v arious national documents relating to high 
quality design, in addition to the Council’ s Supplementar y Planning Documents .  The “National 
Design Guide”  2019, produced b y the Ministr y of Housing, Comm unities and Local Go vernment, 
sets out ho w to achie ve good design in the planning system.  “Buildings f or Lif e 12:  the sign of 
a good place to liv e”  (52)  is a v aluab le tool to meeting the Council’ s policy objectiv es and will 
be used to monitor ho w high quality design is being met in the borough.   Any emerging design 
advice and good pr actice to ensure that de velopment schemes positiv ely contr ibute to 
placemaking should also be ref erred to .  
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy/Policies 
Policy LP 43 'T all buildings' 
Policy LP 42 'Design' 
50 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/supplementar y-planning-documents-spds 
51 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/national-design-guide 
52 https://www .designcouncil.org.uk/resources/guide/b uilding-lif e-12-third-edition 
142 Policy LP 22 'Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par agraphs 7-10 and 124-132) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance - Design;  process and tools 
National Design Guide 2019 
Building f or Lif e 12 
The Council’ s Supplementar y Planning Documents (SPDs): 
Designing f or Accessibility SPD (2008) 
Char acter Area Assessments SPD (2010)  
Streetscene SPD (2011) 
Design SPD (2017) 
Spor t England - Activ e Design  
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
10.22 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
10.23 Monitor ing 
The n umber of residential schemes that meet 'Building f or Lif e 12’ criteria (or similar national 
standard) "v ery good", "good", "a verage" or "poor" standards . 
143 10.3 Green infr astructure 
10.24 Green infr astructure is a netw ork of multi-functional g reen space , urban and r ural, 
which is capab le of deliv ering a wide r ange of en vironmental and quality of lif e benefits f or local 
comm unities and includes 'blue infr astructure' such as w atercourses . Bracknell F orest contains 
many green infr astructure assets which contr ibute to its char acter and sense of identity and 
make an impor tant contr ibution to wards increasing biodiv ersity , helping to pro vide mitigation 
for climate change and impro ving health and w ell-being.  These assets are par tly a result of the 
design of the Br acknell Ne w Town and planning policy standards f or the pro vision of OSPV 
and par tly due to the natur al assets of inter national, national and local impor tance . The 
requirement f or SANG that is used as mitigation f or the Thames Basin Heaths SP A (see Policy 
LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area' ) that pro vides alter nativ e open space 
has significantly added to these assets . 
10.25 This policy seeks to protect and enhance g reen infr astructure b y maximising 
oppor tunities that ar ise through de velopment.  The Council has an e xisting suite of str ategies; 
and has under taken a Green Infr astructure Re view(53) to identify e xisting assets , deficits and 
oppor tunities .  The Council will contin ue to w ork to de velop an o verarching Green Infr astructure 
Strategy to pull this w ork together and f ocus on measures to protect and enhance the Green 
Infrastructure netw ork. 
Objective 
B - Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
I - Infr astructure 
53 CLP/EV/9a at 
https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base 
144 Policy LP 16 
Green infrastructure 
1. The bor ough’ s green infrastructure will be pr otected and enhanced.  In 
considering pr oposals that aff ect the bor ough’ s green infrastructure account 
will be taken of the scale , type and quality of an y assets lost or created and the 
contrib ution the y make to the wider green infrastructure netw ork. As appr opriate 
to the scale of de velopment and the oppor tunities it  offers, development should: 
i. be designed and located to maximise oppor tunities f or green infrastructure 
within the de velopment; 
ii. protect and enhance the wider green infrastructure netw ork inc luding the 
connectivity of diff erent habitat types; 
iii. provide ne w links to the e xisting pub lic access netw orks; 
iv. create ne w green infrastructure either thr ough on site pr ovision or financial 
contrib utions;  and, 
v. not fra gment green infrastructure assets or create barrier s to the mo vement 
of people , biodiver sity and water thr ough green infrastructure . 
2. Where ne w or impr oved green infrastructure is pr oposed,  the maxim um benefit 
should be ac hieved b y designing it to ser ve a v ariety of functions. 
3. Where possib le, development should pr ovide accessib le natural green space 
to help meet identified green infrastructure deficits in Brac knell Forest in line 
with the standar ds in Policy LP 33 'Pla y, open space and spor ts pr ovision' . 
4. Development pr oposals on or aff ecting green infrastructure will onl y be 
suppor ted where it can be demonstrated that the need f or the de velopment 
outweighs an y harm caused b y the de velopment inc luding thr ough fra gmentation 
and that adequate mitigation measures are put in place . 
5. Where the ad verse impacts of de velopment on green infrastructure are identified, 
they must be pr opor tionatel y addressed in accor dance with the mitigation 
hierar chy of: 
i. Avoidance; 
ii. Mitigation; 
iii. Compensation.   
6. Where the requirements of this hierar chy cannot be met,  development will be 
refused. 
7. Where de velopment is pr oposed adjacent to a main river or an or dinar y 
water cour se a minim um 8 metre wide unde veloped b uffer zone should be created 
or retained between the top of the river bank and the de velopment.  A long term 
landscape and ecological mana gement plan will be required f or this b uffer. 
8. Planning permission will normall y onl y be granted f or pr oposals whic h do not 
involve the culver ting of water cour ses and whic h do not prejudice future 
oppor tunities f or de-culver ting.  
145 10.26 Green infr astructure is not simply an alter nativ e descr iption f or con ventional open 
space . As a netw ork it includes both pub lic and pr ivate g reenspace , deliber ate and incidental 
areas such as par ks, open spaces , playing fields , woodlands , street trees , allotments , private 
gardens , green roofs and w alls. It also includes b lue infr astructure such as r ivers, lakes, streams , 
SuDS and other w ater bodies and f eatures . 
10.27 Green Infr astructure can ser ve the f ollowing functions:   
i. access and recreation; 
ii. ecological netw orks of wildlif e corr idors and stepping stones f or biodiv ersity; 
iii. connecting urban and r ural areas;   
iv. landscape and visual amenity benefits; 
v. providing cooling and shading in urban areas;   
vi. surface w ater retention and management; 
vii. absorbing and stor ing carbon, pro viding mitigation f or climate change; 
viii. food production;  and,  
ix. water and flood management. 
10.28 It can contr ibute to human w ell-being b y: 
i. providing accessib le green spaces f or exercise , recreation and pla y; 
ii. creating oppor tunities f or comm unity cohesion through allotments , comm unity gardens 
and comm unity orchards;  and, 
iii. providing accessib le walking, r iding and cycling routes to link comm unities with both urban 
and r ural areas . 
10.29 Green infr astructure assets include: 
i. parks and gardens - urban par ks, countr y par ks, formal gardens; 
ii. amenity g reenspace - inf ormal recreation spaces , outdoor spor ts facilities , domestic 
gardens , village g reens , commons , other incidental space , green roofs and w alls; 
iii. natur al and semi-natur al green space – SANGs , woodland and scr ub, grassland, heath, 
wetlands , open and r unning w ater, unmanaged land and disturbed g round; 
iv. blue infr astructure – w atercourses , flood z ones , ponds and sustainab le urban dr ainage 
systems . 
v. allotments , church yards and cemeter ies; 
vi. other g reen f eatures – hedgero ws, verges , individual trees or tree g roups;  and,  
vii. corridors – paths , cycle w ays, riparian, ditches , verges , lines of trees , hedgero ws and 
linear g reen spaces . 
10.30 Further details of the types and functions of g reen infr astructure assets can be f ound 
in the Council’ s Green Infr astructure Re view. 
10.31 Through the enhancement of e xisting g reen infr astructure assets , and the creation of 
new green infr astructure assets , oppor tunities will be sought to  benefit from the functions of 
green infr astructure as set out abo ve. For every proposal it will need to be decided ho w to 
prioritise betw een functions . 
10.32 Through Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity'  measures that enhance , mitigate and compensate 
biodiv ersity can also pro vide an oppor tunity f or green infr astructure and impro ve habitat 
connectivity . Watercourses are identified as an impor tant local resource f or suppor ting 
146 biodiv ersity within that policy . In order to suppor t this biodiv ersity function, de velopment should 
be set at least 8 metres bac k from the bank on main r ivers and ordinar y watercourses and 
should be maintained as a natur al or semi-natur al habitat, free from b uilt de velopment, par king 
areas , private gardens and f ormal landscaping.  Where a main r iver or ordinar y watercourse 
runs through a proposed de velopment, a minim um 8 metre b uffer shall be pro vided on both 
banks leading to a minim um 16 metre unde veloped area in total.   A long ter m landscape and 
ecological management plan will be required f or this b uffer zone. Also the r apid e xpansion of 
Bracknell Ne w Town resulted in the culv erting of a significant length of w atercourse which it is 
desir able to de-culv ert when oppor tunities ar ise. New culv erting will nor mally be resisted e xcept 
where it is clear ly necessar y such as to pro vide a means of access . All these measures br ing 
many other benefits such as pro viding inf ormal access f or enjo yment of the w ater, enhancing 
the landscape , minimising flood r isk, reducing the le vels of diffuse pollution reaching the 
watercourse from land-based activities and pro viding access f or river maintenance . 
10.33 The Br acknell F orest Green Infr astructure Re view identified that Br acknell F orest has 
few formal g reen spaces (par ks and gardens), b ut has significant amenity g reen space . It has 
significant natur al assets , including b lue infr astructure;  woodlands are moder ately w ell connected, 
and g rasslands and heathlands are more fr agmented.  There is good access to open space , 
especially some large areas , but it is not w ell connected.  Productiv e land is dominated b y 
forestr y; there is little ag riculture , and comm unity oppor tunities f or growing f ood (orchards , 
allotments) are f ew in most par ishes (Br acknell being the e xception).  Water and flood 
management can be a significant issue . There are oppor tunities f or addressing gaps in pro vision 
and connectivity both in enhancing e xisting assets and in ne w pro vision as par t of de velopments . 
It identified the pr iorities f or  green infr astructure in Br acknell F orest f ocusing on impro ving 
connectivity f or wildlif e and people , water and flood management and oppor tunities f or comm unity 
food production. 
10.34 The Council is updating its Green Infr astructure Str ategy which will help to inf orm 
delivery of this P olicy. Additional w ork will include a statement of pr iorities f or protecting k ey 
areas of the netw ork and addressing deficiencies in g reen infr astructure . It will outline ho w the 
Council will w ork with par tners to plan, protect, promote , enhance and e xtend the netw ork and 
to embr ace oppor tunities pro vided b y development. 
10.35 Green infr astructure has a strong relationship with other policies in this Plan 
including Policy LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area' , Policy LP 18 'Flood 
risk', Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' , Policy LP 33 'Pla y, open space and spor ts pro vision' , Policy 
LP 34 'Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic Value', Policy LP 42 'Design' , Policy LP 
46 'Biodiv ersity' , Policy LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and geological sites' , Policy LP 
51 'Sustainab le Drainage Systems (SuDS)'  and Policy LP 55 'T ranspor t infrastructure pro vision'  .  
10.36 The Council will use its planning po wers and responsibilities as a lando wner to w ork 
with local comm unities and other par tners , including those prepar ing Neighbourhood Plans and 
in adjoining local author ities, to identify and implement oppor tunities to impro ve the quality of 
the g reen infr astructure and to protect the e xisting g reen infr astructure assets from har mful 
development. 
10.37 The pro vision of g reen infr astructure should be b uilt into proposals at an ear ly stage 
of the design process , particular ly on larger sites where proposals should demonstr ate ho w 
Green Infr astructure assets are to be incor porated. 
147 Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicies 
Policy LP 33 'Pla y, open space and spor ts pro vision' 
Policy LP 34 'Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic Value' 
Policy LP 42 'Design' 
Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity' 
Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' 
Policy LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and geological sites' 
Policy LP 55 'T ranspor t infrastructure pro vision' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework, par agraphs 99, 109,114 
Planning Pr actice Guidance , Paragraph: 027 Ref erence ID:  8-027-2160211 to Ref erence 
ID: 8-032-2160211 
Natur al England Green Infr astructure Guidance (NE176) 
Bracknell F orest Green Infr astructure Re view TVERC 2017 
Bracknell F orest Biodiv ersity Action Plan 
Bracknell F orest Landscape Char acter Assessment 
Bracknell F orest Local Flood Risk Management Str ategy 
Bracknell F orest P arks and Open Space Str ategy 
Bracknell F orest Open Space and Spor ts Study 
Bracknell F orest Pla ying Pitch Str ategy 
Bracknell F orest Thames Basin Heaths A voidance and Mitigation Str ategy 
Bracknell F orest Tree Str ategy 
Bracknell F orest Planning Ob ligations Supplementar y Planning Document 
Bracknell F orest Rights of Way Impro vement Plan 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
10.38 Deliv ery  
Implementation of the Green Infr astructure Str ategy 
Deter mination of Planning Applications 
Identification of impro vements within CIL list of projects BFC land management 
Implementation of other P olicies in the BFLP Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan 
10.39 Monitor ing  
Monitor ing of the suite of str ategies which compr ise the Green Infr astructure Str ategy in 
the Borough. 
148 10.4 Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area 
10.40 The Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection  Area (TBH SP A) is a netw ork of heathland 
sites that pro vides a habitat f or impor tant g round nesting bird species . Two of these heathland 
sites are in Br acknell F orest.  The TBH SP A was designated in March 2005 and is protected b y 
UK legislation.  The SP A affects ele ven local author ities across Hampshire , Ber kshire and 
Surre y. 
10.41 The integ rity of the SP A has the potential to be adv ersely aff ected b y new development, 
such as through urbanisation, recreational activity and air pollution.   Unless there are 'Imper ative 
Reasons of Ov erriding Pub lic Interest', to comply with the la w, it m ust be cer tain that the har m 
is avoided and mitigated. 
10.42 The SP A within Br acknell F orest co vers o ver 1,300 hectares and includes Broadmoor 
to Bagshot Heaths Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) (the area surrounding the Look Out 
Disco very Centre) and the Sandhurst to Owlsmoor Bogs and Heaths SSSI (also kno wn as 
Wildmoor Heath ). 
Objective 
B - Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
149 Policy LP 17 
Thames Basin Heaths Special Pr otection Area 
1. New de velopment whic h, either alone or in combination with other plans or 
projects,  is likel y to ha ve a significant ad verse eff ect on the integrity of the 
Thames Basin Heaths Special Pr otection Area (SP A) (as identified on the P olicies 
Map) without appr opriate a voidance and mitigation measures will be refused. 
2. Where de velopment is pr oposed that is likel y to ha ve a significant ad verse 
effect on the integrity of the SP A it m ust be demonstrated that adequate 
measures will be put in place to a void or mitigate an y suc h eff ects.  Suc h 
measures m ust be a greed with the Council and Natural England.  In or der to 
assist the Council in carr ying out a Habitats Regulations Assessment,  the 
developer will be required to pr ovide suc h inf ormation as the Council ma y 
reasonab ly require f or the purpose of the assessment.   For lar ger residential 
developments this ma y inc lude an air quality assessment of the likel y significant 
effects on the SP A and other habitats sites.  Applications f or non-residential 
development will be dealt with on a case b y case basis.   
Zones of Influence 
3. Where Suitab le Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) and Strategic Access 
Mana gement and Monitoring (SAMM) mitigation measures are required f or 
residential de velopment the Council will f ollow a consistent appr oach to 
mitigation,  based on the f ollowing zones of influence (as identified on the 
Policies Map): 
i. A straight line distance of between 0 to 400 metres fr om the SP A boundar y 
(400m Zone of Influence).  This will be an ‘exclusion zone’  where mitigation 
measures are unlikel y to be capab le of pr otecting the integrity of the SP A. 
Proposals f or a net increase in d wellings within this zone will not be 
permitted unless it can be demonstrated thr ough a Habitats Regulations 
Assessment that there will be no ad verse eff ect on the integrity of the SP A. 
ii. A straight line distance of between 400 metres and 5 kilometres fr om the 
SPA boundar y (400m-5km Zone of Influence).  Within this zone measures 
must be pr ovided f or all residential pr oposals f or 1 or more net ne w 
dwellings to ensure that the integrity of the SP A is pr otected.   Mitigation 
measures will be based on a combination of the pr ovision of SANG and 
SAMM measures and will be delivered prior to occupation and in 
perpetuity .   
iii. A straight line distance of between 5 and 7 kilometres fr om the SP A 
boundar y (5km-7km Zone of Influence).  Within this zone residential 
developments with a net increase of more than 50 d wellings will be dealt 
with on a case b y case basis and are likel y to be required to pr ovide 
appr opriate mitigation based on a combination of SAMM and the pr ovision 
of SANG to a lo wer quantity than within the 400m – 5km zone .   
iv. Mitigation measures will be delivered prior to occupation and in perpetuity . 
150 SANG Standar ds 
4. The pr ovision of SANG will meet the f ollowing standar ds and arrang ements: 
i. Within the 400m – 5km zone a minim um of 8 hectares of SANG land (after 
discounting to account f or current access and capacity) will be pr ovided 
per 1,000 ne w occupants; 
ii. Residential de velopments of net 9 d wellings or f ewer will not be required 
to be within a specified distance of SANG land pr ovided it is ensured that 
a sufficient quantity of SANG land is in place to cater f or the consequent 
increase in residents;    
iii. Developments of 10 or more net d wellings will need to be within the 
catchment of a specified SANG and a sufficient quantity of SANG land 
must be in place to cater f or the consequent increase in residents; 
iv. Small de velopments as set out in suppor ting guidance will be required to 
provide de veloper contrib utions to wards strategic SANG facilitated b y the 
Council subject to a vailab le SANG capacity unless there are other material 
considerations; 
v. Large developments as set out in suppor ting guidance ma y be e xpected 
to pr ovide bespoke SANG; 
vi. SANG will accor d with Natural England’ s SANG Guidelines and  include a 
combination of benefits suc h as biodiver sity enhancement,  green 
infrastructure and,  potentiall y, new recreational facilities; 
vii. Developments whic h use thir d par ty SANG capacity will need to 
demonstrate to the Council that this has been a greed with the lando wner 
and that there is sufficient SANG capacity in the correct location to mitigate 
their de velopment. 
SAMM Contrib utions 
5. A de veloper contrib ution will be made to ward the SAMM Pr oject f or eac h net 
additional d welling.  This will pr ovide an SP A-wide war dening and education 
service and monitor the eff ectiveness of the a voidance and mitigation measures 
and visitor pressure on the SP A. 
Further Evidence 
6. Where fur ther e vidence demonstrates that the integrity of the SP A can be 
protected using diff erent linear thresholds or with alternative mitigation 
measures (inc luding air quality mitigation and standar ds of SANG pr ovision 
different to those set out in this polic y) these m ust be a greed with the Council 
and Natural England. 
10.43 The TBH SP A is designated under European d irectiv e 2009/147/EC because of its 
populations of three heathland species of birds – Dar tford Warbler, Nightjar and Woodlar k.  
This Directiv e has been tr ansposed into UK la w by the Habitats Regulations . 
151 10.44 Natur al England has identified that net additional housing up to 5 kilometres from the 
SPA boundar y is lik ely to ha ve a significant eff ect (alone or in combination with other plans or 
projects) on the integ rity of the SP A. Some de velopment betw een 5 and 7 kilometres from the 
SPA boundar y ma y also ha ve an impact on the integ rity of the SP A. The e vidence a vailab le 
indicates that eff ective mitigation measures should compr ise a combination of pro viding suitab le 
areas f or recreational use b y residents to div ert them from the SP A and actions on the SP A to 
manage access and encour age use of alter native sites . Should other e vidence become a vailable, 
further a voidance and mitigation measures ma y be required and will be set out in suppor ting 
guidance . 
10.45 The Council will suppor t small de velopments where ver possib le by pro viding str ategic 
SANG capacity .  Priority for the allocation of str ategic SANG capacity will be giv en to small 
developments within the defined settlement.   These are de velopments which in the Council’ s 
view are not sub-divisions of a larger site in order to meet the threshold f or str ategic SANGs .  
Other small de velopment sites in areas outside of the defined settlement ma y need to pro vide, 
or contr ibute to wards, a bespok e or third par ty SANG solution.    
10.46 Large developments ma y be e xpected to pro vide their o wn SANGs although the Council 
may pro vide SANG capacity f or large to wn centre sites if capacity is a vailab le. Where the 
Council is unab le to pro vide SANG capacity , the option remains f or large de velopments to 
provide an off-site SANG or purchase SANG capacity from third par ty pro viders if a vailab le and 
within catchment of the de velopment.   The release of council-o wned str ategic SANG f or such 
developments , or for de velopments per mitted under Pr ior Appro val arr angements could 
jeopardise the SANG capacity required f or planned de velopment on allocated sites .  This w ould 
put them at r isk of not being ab le to meet the Habitats Regulations and gain planning per mission.   
The Council theref ore reser ves the r ight not to pro vide a vailab le SANG capacity if the proposal 
is considered to under mine the Council’ s SPA avoidance and mitigation str ategy and/or the 
delivery of allocated de velopment sites . 
10.47 Applications f or de velopment will be subject to a Habitats Regulations Assessment 
where the y are lik ely to ha ve a significant adv erse impact on the integ rity of the TBH SP A and 
reference should  be made to the BFLP Habitats Regulations Assessment.  Where an air 
quality  assessment is required, g uidance f or the assessment of a ir pollution eff ects on habitats 
sites has been ag reed with Natur al England and  is availab le from the Council.  The f ocus of this 
policy is on a voidance and mitigation of the eff ects of residential de velopment.   All applications 
for non-residential de velopment that are lik ely to ha ve a significant adv erse impact on the 
integ rity of the TBH SP A will be dealt with on a case b y case basis . 
10.48 Detailed guidance about SANG and the SAMM project is pro vided in the Thames Basin 
Heaths Special Protection Area Supplementar y Planning Document which will be updated 
periodically as necessar y. This guidance sets out: 
Zones of Influence 
Strategic SANG pro vided in the Borough. 
Financial contr ibutions f or str ategic SANG including ho w the y are calculated on a per 
bedroom basis 
Standards and requirements f or pro viding bespok e SANGs . 
Details of the SAMM Project including the financial contr ibutions on a per bedroom basis 
152 10.49 The Council will w ork positiv ely with applicants to br ing forward third par ty SANG and 
with other local author ities to implement mitigation measures . This ma y include assistance to 
those author ities with insufficient SANG land within their o wn boundar ies. 
10.50 This policy has a strong relationship with other policies in this Plan including:  Policy 
LP 16 'Green infr astructure' 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicies 
Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity' 
Policy LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and geological sites' 
Policy LP 52 'P ollution and hazards' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par as 20, 170, 171, 174, 175, 176, and 177) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance:  ID ref erences:  8-007, 8-008, 8-011, 8-017, 8-018 and 8-020  
BFLP  Habitats Regulations Assessment 
Thames Basin Heaths Deliv ery Framework (2009) Thames Basin Heaths Joint Str ategic 
Partnership Board 
Thames Basin Heath Special Protection Area Supplementar y Planning Document (TBHSP A 
SPD) (2018) 
DELIVER Y & MONIT ORING 
10.51 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
Implementation of the TBH SP A SPD 
Management of CIL income 
Deliv ery of SANG Management Plans 
10.52 Monitor ing 
SANG capacity a vailab le each y ear 
Financial contr ibutions receiv ed for SANG each y ear 
Expenditure on SANGs each y ear 
SAMM contr ibutions paid b y Bracknell F orest developments  each y ear 
Number of planning applications appro ved contr ary to Natur al England advice and n umber 
of appeals allo wed each y ear 
153 10.5 Flooding and dr ainage 
10.53 The Climate Change Act 2008 mak es it clear that climate change is a national policy 
priority.  One of the major impacts of a changing climate is an increased r isk of flooding.   Flood 
risk is a combination of the probability and potential consequences of flooding from all sources . 
These sources include r ivers, seas ,  rainfall, rising g roundw ater, sewers and dr ainage systems 
exceeding capacity , reser voirs, canals and lak es. New development should be planned to 
avoid increased vulner ability to the r ange of impacts ar ising from climate change .  Inappropr iate 
development in areas at r isk of flooding should be a voided b y directing de velopment a way from 
areas at highest r isk, and where de velopment is necessar y, making it saf e without increasing 
flood r isk else where .  Application of the sequential test, sequential approach and the e xception 
test, as required b y the NPPF , achie ve these objectiv es.  
Objectives 
B - Protect/ enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets  
D - Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
154 Policy LP 18 
Flood risk 
1. In the areas defined as functional floodplain in the Brac knell Forest Council 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA),  or more recent flood modelling,  only 
water compatib le uses and essential infrastructure de velopment will be 
suppor ted. 
2. Development will onl y be permitted in areas at risk of flooding if: 
i. the sequential test,  when required b y national polic y, is applied to the 
location of de velopment taking into account flood risk fr om all sour ces, 
both no w and in the future , including c limate c hang e, and is passed; 
ii. the sequential appr oach is applied to the la yout of de velopment within 
an application site , taking into account flood risk fr om all sour ces, both 
now and in the future , including c limate c hang e, to ensure that the 
most vulnerab le de velopment is located in the lo west risk flood areas 
within a site; 
iii. flood risk fr om all sour ces of flooding,  now and in the future , including 
climate c hang e, are taken into consideration and full y addressed;  and, 
iv. the e xception test,  when required b y national polic y (54), is full y 
complied with. 
3. A Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) will be required f or de velopments in areas 
identified in the latest SFRA as being at risk of flooding no w or in the future , 
including c limate c hang e, and when required b y national polic y.  The FRA is 
required to demonstrate that: 
i. the de velopment will not increase flood risk off-site o ver the lif etime 
of the de velopment and will implement oppor tunities to reduce the 
causes and impacts of flooding;   
ii. any loss of flood stora ge capacity m ust be compensated f or to ensure 
that the total v olume of floodplain stora ge is not reduced ;  
iii. suitab le allo wances f or climate c hang e have been taken into account 
in accor dance with the most up to date guidance; 
iv. the de velopment is saf e for its lif etime fr om all f orms of flooding with 
finished floor le vels set abo ve predicted design flood le vels;   
v. safe access and egress r outes are pr ovided;  and 
vi. all sour ces of flooding ha ve been considered. 
10.54 Bracknell F orest Le vel 1 (2018) and Le vel 2 (2019) Str ategic Flood Risk Assessments 
(SFRAs) (55) have been prepared to inf orm this policy and the allocations included within the 
Local Plan.  All de velopment proposals should comply with the recommendations in the SFRA. 
54 NPPF or successor documents 
55 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base 
155 10.55 The SFRAs ha ve considered all sources of flooding including fluvial, surf ace w ater, 
groundw ater, sewers and reser voirs, both no w and in the future , taking climate change into 
account.  They have identified Flood Zone 3a, with an allo wance f or climate change , and Flood 
Zone 3b (functional floodplain).  Fluvial flooding is not gener ally a significant issue as the major ity 
of the Borough is within Flood Zone 1 (lo w risk of flooding).   The most significant sources of 
flooding in the Borough are surf ace w ater and g roundw ater and the Council will require these 
sources of flooding to be fully addressed in the sequential test, sequential approach and site 
specific flood r isk assessments . For example , by protecting o verland flo w routes and appropr iate 
use of SuDS as a means of addressing surf ace w ater, suppor ted b y investigation and 
groundw ater monitor ing.  
10.56 Information on flood r isk is being updated contin uously and flood r isk identified in the 
SFRAs ma y change . The most up to date flood r isk inf ormation should alw ays be used, including 
the SFRAs and the Flood Zones identified b y the En vironment Agency Flood Map f or Planning. 
Sequential test,  exception test,  and sequential appr oach 
10.57 The aim of the sequential test is to direct ne w development to areas at the lo west risk 
of flooding from all sources , both no w and in the future , to ensure that areas with little or no 
risk of flooding are de veloped in pref erence to areas at higher r isk. Development should not 
be per mitted if there are reasonab ly availab le sites in areas with a lo wer risk of flooding.  The 
sequential test is required in accordance with national policy .  
10.58 If it is not possib le for de velopment to be located in areas at lo wer risk of flooding, the 
exception test ma y need to be applied.  The need f or the e xception test will depend on the 
vulner ability of the proposed de velopment and the Flood Zone as set out in the PPG 'flood r isk 
vulner ability classification' and 'flood r isk vulner ability and flood z one compatibility' tab le. 
10.59 The e xception test requirements as set out in the 'flood r isk vulner ability and flood z one 
compatibility' tab le in the PPG are only concer ned with coastal and fluvial flooding.  In the conte xt 
of Bracknell F orest, it is impor tant that the r isks from other sources , such as surf ace w ater, are 
addressed.  The En vironment Agency has advised that in locations within Flood Zone 1, where 
the e xception test is not required, b ut there is a r isk from other sources of flooding, it m ust be 
shown that de velopment will be saf e for its lif etime and the r isk can be managed through a 
sequential approach to design. 
10.60 A sequential approach to the la yout of a de velopment site can reduce the r isk of flooding 
through a voiding areas at r isk of flooding from all sources and not increase flood r isk overall, 
both off and on site . This approach also ensures that the most vulner able development is located 
in the areas at the lo west risk of flooding.  Although the first pref erence is to a void flood r isk, 
where this is not possib le, flood resistant and resilient measures can be incor porated into the 
design of b uildings and infr astructure . Design can be addressed in site-specific FRA and the 
Council’ s Design SPD (2017) (56) provides fur ther inf ormation. 
10.61 The SFRA pro vides the necessar y information f or the sequential and e xception tests 
to be applied.  Early discussions with the En vironment Agency and the Council are encour aged, 
at the pre-application stage , for sites within flood r isk areas , to address flooding issues .  
56 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/supplementar y-planning-documents-spds/design-supplementar y-planning-document 
156 Flood Risk Assessment 
10.62 A site-specific FRA will be required f or an y development located within areas identified 
as being at r isk of flooding identified in the SFRAs as w ell as in locations prescr ibed b y national 
policy (Flood Zone 2 and 3).  Information on flood r isk is being updated contin uously and flood 
zones identified in the SFRAs ma y change and the most up to date fluvial flood z ones should 
always be used (see the En vironment Agency Flood Map f or Planning).   
10.63 This policy has a strong relationship with the Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' . 
Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicy/Policies 
Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' 
Policy LP 25 'Gypsies , travellers and tr avelling sho wpeople' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Meeting the challenge of Climate change , flooding 
and coastal change:  paragraphs 148 - 150, 155 - 165) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Flood r isk and coastal change:  001 Ref erence ID: 
7-001-20140306 to 068 Ref erence ID:  7-068-20140306 and Climate change:  001 Ref erence 
ID: 6-001-20140306  to 007 Ref erence ID:  6-007-20140306 ) 
Bracknell F orest Le vel 1 Str ategic Flood Risk Assessment (2018) 
Bracknell F orest Le vel 2 Str ategic Flood Risk Assessment (2019) 
Draft Sequential Test and Exception Test of the Dr aft Br acknell F orest Local Plan (2019) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
10.64 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
10.65 Monitor ing 
Number of appeals allo wed when refusal is on g rounds of flood r isk. 
157 10.6 Str ategic Gaps and Wedges 
10.66 Bracknell F orest contains a n umber of distinct settlements , which are ph ysically and 
visually separ ated b y open areas of land.   These open areas f orm gaps and w edges separ ating 
settlements .  Although predominantly unde veloped, the y are subject to consider able development 
pressures , being close to or adjoining defined settlements . 
Objectives 
B - Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
158 Policy LP 19 
Identification of strategic gaps and wedg es 
1. The f ollowing strategic gaps are defined on the P olicies Map:   
i. Binfield – Wokingham  
ii. Brac knell – Wokingham  
iii. Brac knell - Cr owthorne  
iv. Crowthorne – Sandhur st  
v. Sandhur st – Yatele y/Blac kwater  
vi. Brac knell – Nor th Ascot 
2. The f ollowing green wedg e is defined on the P olicies Map:   
i. Binfield - Warfield 
10.67 Where an area of open land separ ates defined settlements , or diff erent par ts of a 
settlement, str ategic gaps and w edges ha ve been identified to pre vent their coalescence .  The 
criteria used f or the identification of these gaps and w edges is pr imarily based on the need to 
prevent coalescence , rather than being related to landscape quality .  The function of a gap 
relates to both ph ysical and visual separ ation.   They can also protect the area surrounding 
settlements , by maintaining a r ural setting, which helps to maintain their distinct and separ ate 
identity .    
10.68 The identification of gaps is suppor ted b y the local comm unity within Br acknell F orest.   
If these areas are de veloped, this could potentially lead to the merging of settlements , and the 
loss of individual settlement identity .  However, it should be noted that where ‘gaps’  are identified, 
this policy will not necessar ily pre vent all de velopment, b ut only that which w ould result in the 
coalescence of settlements .  In addition, proposals will need to demonstr ate that the landscape 
character has not been compromised.   (This is set out in a fur ther Policy LP 38 'Separ ation of 
settlements' ). 
10.69 The Council’ s Landscape Char acter Assessment (LUC , September 2015) (57)identified 
whether a landscape char acter area had a role in pro viding ph ysical and visual separ ation 
betw een settlements .  A fur ther study assessed the function of gaps betw een settlements within 
Bracknell F orest and identified the str ategic gaps (betw een larger settlements areas) listed in 
the P olicy belo w.  
10.70 A fur ther ‘wedge’  area w as also identified betw een Binfield and Warfield.   This area 
does not separ ate tw o defined settlements , but is an area of land betw een tw o par ts of the 
same o verall settlement boundar y. 
57 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/3976918 
159 Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicies 
Policy LP 35 'De velopment in the countr yside' 
Policy LP 38 'Separ ation of settlements' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF (par agraphs 20 and 170) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (ref ID:  26-007) 
Landscape Char acter Assessment (LUC , September 2015)  
Landscape Recommendations repor t (LUC , September 2015) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
10.71 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications . 
10.72 Monitor ing 
Number of appeals allo wed contr ary to the aims of the Landscape Char acter Assessment.   
Number of appeals allo wed in str ategic gaps and w edges . 
160 10.7 Green Belt villages 
Villages  in the Green Belt     
10.73 A study of Green Belt Villages w as under taken to deter mine the e xtent and location 
of ‘villages’  within the Green Belt, based on cer tain cr iteria (Green Belt Village Assessment, 
BFC, February 2018, (58)).  The ter m ‘village’  is not defined in national policy .  For Br acknell 
Forest, to qualify as a ‘village’  a form of comm unity f acility needs to be a vailab le (such as a 
church, comm unity hall, or school).   Consider ation is also giv en to the le vel of other f acilities 
availab le (such as pro vision of a local shop/post office , pub lic house , restaur ant or ob vious 
village centre/recreation area);  and  whether areas  pro vide a village function (if w alkab le) to 
other nearb y areas .  Areas which compr ised solely housing w ere not considered to meet the 
definition of a ‘village’.    
Objectives 
B - Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
Policy LP 20 
Identification of Green Belt villa ges 
1. The f ollowing Green Belt villa ge areas are defined on the P olicies Map: 
i. Cranbourne 
ii. Chur ch Road,  Winkfield 
iii. North Street,  Cranbourne 
iv. Cheapside 
v. Maidens Green/Winkfield Street. 
58 LP/Ev/5d  http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/4860644   
161 10.74 An overview of the r ationale f or defining areas as ‘villages’  is set out in the tab le belo w: 
Table 13 Rationale f or defining Green Belt villa ges 
Reason defined as a ‘villa ge’ ‘Villa ge’ name 
Linear de velopment of housing.   Contains 
school, restaur ant and recreation g round, with 
bus route . Village is w alkab le (along 
pavement) to Nor th Street – together the tw o 
provide village f acilities . Cranbour ne  
Linear de velopment of housing.  Contains local 
convenience store , pub lic house , bus route 
and se veral smaller b usinesses .  North Street, Cr anbour ne 
Village is w alkab le (along pa vement) to 
Cranbour ne, Lovel Road – together the tw o 
provide village f acilities .  
Linear de velopment of housing.  Contains a 
church, village hall, and pub lic house , and 
bus route .  Village is w alkab le (along 
pavement) to Maiden’ s Green, together the 
two pro vide village f acilities .  Church Road, Winkfield 
Linear de velopment of housing.  Contains 
public house and b us route .  Village is 
walkab le (along pa vement) to Church 
Road which contains church and village hall 
– together the tw o pro vide village f acilities . Maidens Green/Winkfield Street  
This f orms par t of a wider village , the major ity 
of which lies with the Ro yal Borough of 
Windsor and Maidenhead.   Within the wider Cheapside 
village area there is village hall, school and 
recreation g round.   There are also a limited 
number of small b usiness premises which 
provide village f acilities .   
10.75 These villages will contin ue to be w ashed o ver by the Green Belt.   However, a boundar y 
around the villages has been identified to allo w development restr icted to limited infilling;  and 
will pro vide consistency and clar ity in ter ms of application of  Policy LP 36 'Green Belt' . 
162 Linked De velopment Mana gement P olicies 
Policy LP 36 'Green Belt' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraphs 140 and 145e) 
Green Belt Village Assessment (BFC , February 2018) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
10.76 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications . 
10.77 Monitor ing 
Number of applications/appeals g ranted in Green Belt village areas . 
163 164 Part 2 - Non-Str ategic 
issues 11 Introduction 
11.1 De velopment Management P olicies 
11.1 Part 2 of the BFLP contains the non-str ategic policies . In gener al, these are the policies 
that set cr iteria for consider ing and deter mining planning applications . Policies are both gener ic 
(covering cr iteria that can be applied to all de velopments), and topic based f or par ticular issues 
that are specific to Br acknell F orest.  They help deliv er the 'Vision' and str ategic objectiv es by 
promoting and enab ling de velopment that deliv ers the Spatial Str ategy in P art 1 of the BFLP .  
11.2 The de velopment management policies ha ve been prepared ha ving regard to the NPPF , 
supplemented b y the PPG.  The Council is mindful of go vernment guidance which mak es it 
clear that de velopment management policies should not just repeat what is already contained 
within national policy (and in some cases legislation).  Consequently , there are no de velopment 
management policies f or cer tain topics  as national policy will be relied on f or decision making 
purposes .  In ter ms of the process to be f ollowed in deter mining planning applications ,  the 
presumption in f avour of sustainab le de velopment is already set out in par agraph 11 of the 
NPPF and similar ly, it is not considered necessar y to repeat it in this document. 
Implementation,  deliver y and monitoring  
11.3 The policies within this document m ust not be read in isolation.  All rele vant policies in 
Part 1 and P art 2 of the BFLP , together with policies in other adopted de velopment plan 
documents including 'made' Neighbourhood Plans , will be tak en into account in deter mining 
planning applications , along with other mater ial consider ations . While link ed policy bo xes are 
included to related str ategic policies of direct rele vance , they do not list or cross-ref erence all 
other policies that ma y be rele vant. Proposals f or ne w development will be judged against all 
relevant policies in the De velopment Plan.  Applicants are encour aged to enter into pre-application 
discussions to help identify all k ey issues surrounding a de velopment proposal and matters 
that should be the subject of infr astructure contr ibutions and legal ag reements .  
11.4 The deliv ery of  de velopment management policies will in the main be through the g rant 
or refusal of planning per mission and an y subsequent appeals .  Monitor ing allo ws the local 
planning author ity to assess whether objectiv es are being achie ved. The suppor ting te xt to 
each proposed policy sets out ho w the policy will be monitored.  The results of monitor ing 
exercises are included in the ann ual A uthor ity Monitor ing Repor t (AMR).  This will highlight 
whether a re view of an y policy is required.   
166 12 Housing 
12.1 Protection of e xisting housing stoc k 
12.1 To ensure a sufficient supply and choice of housing, it is impor tant that not only are 
additional ne w homes pro vided, b ut also that the e xisting housing stoc k, and land that is or w as 
in residential use , is protected.   This should ensure there is sufficient o verall net gain of ne w 
homes to meet future needs . 
Objective 
D - le vel of de velopment/land supply 
Policy LP 21 
Protection of e xisting housing stoc k and land 
Development whic h would lead to the net loss of residential accommodation within 
Class C3 d welling houses or residential care homes and n ursing homes within Class 
C2, or the c hang e of use of land currentl y or last used f or residential purposes, 
(including empty homes) will be permitted where: 
i. the contin uation of residential use is undesirab le because of en vironmental 
conditions;  or 
ii. the de velopment f orms par t of a wider comprehensive sc heme whic h would 
result in an o verall net increase in residential units;  or 
iii. the pr oposal deliver s overriding pub lic benefits whic h outweigh the loss of the 
residential use;  or 
iv. a chang e from residential use is the onl y viab le wa y of ensuring the pr otection 
of a herita ge asset;  or 
v. it has been demonstrated that residential use has been abandoned. 
12.2 This policy relates to residential units which f all within Use Class C3 dw elling houses 
and residential care homes and n ursing homes within Class C2. 
12.3 Policy LP 3 Pro vision of Housing sets out the requirement f or ne w homes to meet future 
housing needs in the Borough o ver the Plan per iod.  It is impor tant to plan f or the deliv ery of 
new homes to meet this need.   The Council also needs to protect the e xisting housing stoc k, 
and land already used, or last in la wful use f or, residential pur poses  including suppor ting 
proposals that br ing empty homes into use . This will help ensure that the net increase in ne w 
homes is maximised and that future housing needs are met. 
167 12.4 Any development proposal that leads to the net loss of residential accommodation 
whether through change of use or rede velopment will be resisted unless there are o verriding 
public benefits that w ould justify the loss of the residential use . However, the Council recognises 
that there ma y be par ticular circumstances that justify the loss of residential uses and the 
circumstances where such a loss ma y be acceptab le are set out in this policy .  
12.5 The Council is suppor tive of br inging empty homes bac k into use subject to the la wfulness 
of accommodation and e vidence that the residential use has not been abandoned.  In the e vent 
that the accommodation is not la wful, its use f or residential pur poses will be addressed in the 
conte xt of the pre vailing policies of the plan relating to the assessment of a ne w dw elling.   
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 3 'Pro vision of housing' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par as: 59, 61) 
Vacancy r ates 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
12.6 Deliv ery: 
Deter mination of planning applications  
Bracknell F orest Empty Homes Scheme (59) 
12.7 Monitor ing: 
Net loss of e xisting homes (C3, C3 specialised and C2 use) through rede velopment and 
change of use each y ear. 
59 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/housing/empty-homes 
168 12.2 Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings 
12.8 Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings ha ve the potential to meet the needs of a wide 
range of social g roups , including older people , some disab led people , and non-disab led people 
including f amilies with children.  They are  impor tant in helping to create strong, health y and 
self-reliant comm unities . 
Objectives 
D – Le vel of de velopment/land supply  
F – Strong comm unities 
Policy LP 22 
Accessib le and adaptab le dwellings 
Housing pr oposals will be e xpected to meet high standar ds of accessibility and,  to 
this end: 
1. All ne w build d wellings will,  as a minim um, be constructed in accor dance with 
the requirements of P art M4 Categor y 2 – Accessib le and adaptab le dwellings 
of the Building Regulations 2010 (Appr oved Document ‘M’ – Access to and use 
of Buildings – d wellings 2015) (As Amended) and an y subsequent updates. 
2. On de velopments of 10 (gr oss) or more d wellings at least 5 % of d wellings will 
be constructed in accor dance with the requirements of P art M4 (3) Categor y 3 
- Wheelc hair user  d wellings of the Building Regulations 2010 (Appr oved 
Document ‘M’ – Access to and use of Buildings – d wellings 2015) (As Amended) 
and an y subsequent updates 
12.9 Accessib le and adaptab le homes suppor t the changing needs of residents from r aising 
children through to mobility issues f aced in old age or through disability .  Such homes ha ve 
design f eatures that help mobility issues f aced due to old age , injur y, disability , pregnancy and 
the presence of y oung children requir ing buggies or equipment . The objectiv e of this policy is 
to secure the deliv ery of accessib le and adaptab le housing to meet the changing accommodation 
requirements of occupiers throughout their lif etime and in par ticular , the needs of older people 
and people with disabilities . Accessib le dw ellings ha ve the benefits of enab ling independent 
living, personal health benefits , personal psychological benefits and social cost benefits . Homes 
such as these are also more suited to be visited b y people with restr icted mobility . 
12.10 Part M of the Building Regulations relates to the Access and use of Buildings . Revisions 
to Part M of the Building Regulations in October 2015 introduced additional technical 
requirements f or accessibility f or dw ellings (e xceeding the minim um standards required b y the 
Building Regulations) kno wn as ‘optional standards’.  The optional standards ma y be applied 
169 where a local planning author ity has a policy in place , based on e vidence , that a higher le vel 
of accessibility and adaptability in ne w residential de velopment is viab le and necessar y to meet 
current and future housing needs . 
12.11 Part M, Volume 1 Dw ellings , sets out the f ollowing: 
Mandator y Building Regulations as set out in Regulation M4(1):  Visitab le Dw ellings . This  
covers the ph ysical secur ity of dw ellings and it requires that reasonab le pro vision should 
be made f or most people , including wheelchair users , to approach and enter the dw elling 
and to access habitab le rooms and sanitar y facilities on the entr ance store y.   
12.12 Optional Building Regulations are set out belo w: 
M4(2);  Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings . This pro vides f or dw ellings to be capab le of 
adaptation through time to meet the changing needs of occupiers . It requires that 
reasonab le pro vision should be made to enab le most people to access the dw elling.  The 
dwelling should also incor porate features that mak e it potentially suitab le to a wide r ange 
of occupants , including older people , those with reduced mobility and some wheelchair 
users .  
M4(3);  Wheelchair user dw ellings .  This requires wheelchair users to be ab le to liv e in 
the dw elling and use an y associated pr ivate outdoor space , parking and comm unal 
facilities that ma y be pro vided f or the use of the occupants . 
12.13 The Br acknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment (J uly  2020) (60) provides e vidence 
for the need f or accessib le and adaptab le housing in vie w of the projected change in the age 
profile of the Borough.  It demonstr ates that there will be a g rowth in the n umber of people aged 
over 65 and a corresponding increase in the n umber of people with a limiting long-ter m health 
problem or disability . The Housing Needs Assessment also concludes that the need 
for wheelchair user dw ellings  equates to about 5% of the total housing need after applying 
national data to to the demog raphic projections .  
12.14 The e vidence suppor ts the deliv ery of both accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings M4(2) 
and wheelchair users dw ellings M4(3). 
12.15 New housing de velopment will be e xpected to comply with requirements of this policy 
unless it has been demonstr ated that specific site f actors such as the vulner ability to flooding, 
site topog raphy or other site circumstances mak e the site less suitab le for complying with the 
optional standards in M4(2) and M4(3).  Compliance with the policy should be demonstr ated in 
the Design and Access Statement submitted with the planning application. 
12.16 This policy has a strong relationship with other policies in this Plan including Policy LP 
24 'Housing mix' , Policy LP 42 'Design'  and Policy LP 23 'Specialist housing f or older people 
and people with disabilities' . 
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 9 'Aff ordab le housing' 
Policy LP 3 'Pro vision of housing' 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
60 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/5819854 
170 KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par a 61) 
Bracknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment J uly 2020 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Housing f or older and disab led people – Accessib le and 
adaptab le housing ID:  63-008-20190626 to 63-009-20190626 ) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
12.17 Deliv ery 
Through the deter mination of planning applications 
12.18 Monitor ing 
Size and type of dw ellings per mitted and completed 
Applications f or Disab led F acilities Gr ant (DFG) 
171 12.3 Specialist housing f or older people and people with 
disabilities 
12.19 Where older people choose to liv e is influenced b y a wide r ange of f actors . These 
include health, mobility , lifestyle , income , equity and care requirements . While the adaptation 
of the e xisting housing stoc k, assisted b y new technology and in-home suppor t,  and deliv ery 
of ne w housing that is adaptab le and accessib le will pla y an impor tant role in enab ling people 
to live independently as long as the y are ab le, the deliv ery of specialist housing, including self 
contained C3 (with suppor t) and C2 accommodation (with care) will ha ve a role to pla y in 
meeting the needs of older and disab led people . The high le vel of need f or specialist housing 
for older people has already been outlined in P art 1 of the plan with some pro vision being made 
on specific str ategic sites . Past trends sho w that applications will also be submitted on other 
sites including those in volving rede velopment.  The Council is k een to  ensure that ne w specialist 
accommodation contr ibutes to a r ange of attr active options a vailab le for older people .  The 
location and design of this type of de velopment are impor tant f actors in the process .   
Objective 
D – Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
 F – Strong comm unities 
172 Policy LP 23 
Specialist housing f or older people and people with disabilities 
Housing pr oposals will be e xpected to meet the needs of older people and people 
with disabilities and,  to this end: 
1. Where there is an identified need f or the type of accommodation pr oposed, 
specialist housing f or older people (either within Class C3 or C2) will be 
suppor ted where it can be demonstrated that: 
i. the pr oposed de velopment w ould be located within a sustainab le location 
with access to essential e very day ser vices inc luding transpor t, shops, 
comm unity and health facilities;  and, 
ii. the pr oposal w ould not ha ve an ad verse impact on the c haracter and 
appearance of the surr ounding area or the amenities of neighbouring 
occupier s; and, 
iii. the pr oposal pr ovides adequate ser vicing arrang ements to meet the needs 
of the de velopment and inc ludes gar den and amenity space of appr opriate 
size and quality;  and 
iv. it deliver s affordable housing in accor dance with the requirements of P olicy 
LP9 – Aff ordable Housing.     
2. Development pr oposals f or C2 accommodation should be accompanied b y an 
identifiab le pac kage of on site per sonal care pr ovision commensurate with the 
use. 
12.20 This policy relates to housing designed and designated f or occupation b y older people . 
It ma y also  meet the needs of disab led people , and vulner able people with specific housing 
needs . It is ref erred to within the policy and hereafter as ‘specialist housing’.  People with the 
need f or specialist housing contr ibute to the comm unity in man y ways, but for some their ability 
to par ticipate fully in society is hampered b y poor or inappropr iate housing, which aff ects their 
physical or mental health, or their ability to receiv e the suppor t they need to liv e as independently 
as possib le.  
12.21 Specialist housing r anges from self-contained housing (units with their o wn front door) 
with no suppor t to n ursing homes with 24 hour care . A number of diff erent names are used to 
define the diff erent types - retirement living or sheltered housing (housing with 
suppor t), enhanced sheltered housing and e xtra care housing (housing with care) or residential 
care homes or n ursing homes . 
12.22 Proposals need to be located on sites with good access to local f acilities . While residents 
in care or n ursing homes ma y be unlik ely to lea ve the site unaccompanied, staff and visitors 
are lik ely to tr avel to and from such homes on a regular basis . It is theref ore impor tant that this 
form of accommodation  is also in locations with easy access to ser vices and f acilities . Locating 
accommodation with suppor t close to shops and ser vices can also encour age residents to visit 
them, potentially with help from staff or visitors , thereb y remaining more activ e. 
173 12.23 They also need to be in locations where the y can be  integ rated with the surrounding 
comm unity, for example b y design of shared space a nd pro vision of ancillar y facilities that 
complement local pro vision.  This will help achie ve inclusiv e, mixed comm unities as will the 
avoidance of large concentr ations of such accommodation across a small area.   Where possib le, 
specialist  housing should also incor porate s afe and accessib le high quality amenity space . 
12.24 Self contained specialist older person housing within Use Classes C3 and C2 will be 
required to pro vide aff ordab le housing f or those whose needs are not met b y the mar ket in 
accordance with Policy LP 9 'Aff ordab le housing' .   
12.25 Over recent y ears ne w specialist housing types ha ve emerged and there has been a 
blurring of f orms.  Proposals f or specialist housing will be considered on their o wn mer its ha ving 
regard to whether the proposal f alls within  Class C2 or Class C3.  This will depend upon f actors 
such as the  configur ation of accommodation,  including le vel of comm unal space and on site 
facilities . A fur ther impor tant f actor will be the nature and amount of personal care off ered.     
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 3 'Pro vision of housing' 
Policy LP 9 'Aff ordab le housing' 
12.26 KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraph 61) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance - Housing f or older and disab led people - ref erence ID: 
63-001-20190626 to ID:63-019-20190626  
Bracknell F orest Older P ersons Accommodation and Suppor t Strategy 2011 – 2026 
Bracknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment, Iceni, 2020  
Accommodation and housing with care re view research, Housing Lear ning Impro vement 
Netw ork, No vember 2018 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
12.27 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
12.28 Monitor ing 
Net n umber of specialist homes (Use Classes C3 and C2) g ranted planning per mission 
each y ear (dw ellings and bedspaces including dw elling equiv alent) 
Net n umber of specialist homes (Use Classes C3 and C2) completed each y ear (dwellings 
and bedspaces including dw elling equiv alent) 
174 12.4 Housing mix 
12.29 In addition to ensur ing a supply of housing land, it is also necessar y to ensure that the 
right mix, type and siz e of housing is deliv ered.  Different households require diff erent f orms, 
types and siz es of housing.  It is impor tant that an appropr iate choice and mix of housing is 
provided across the Borough in order to enab le people to mo ve through the mar ket from one 
type of house to another and create balanced and sustainab le comm unities .  
Objective 
D – Le vel of De velopment/land supply 
F - Strong Comm unities 
Policy LP 24 
Housing mix 
1. Proposals will be suppor ted whic h inc lude a mix of housing to meet the e xisting 
and future housing needs of diff erent gr oups in the comm unity , including 
specialist housing f or older people , as set out in the most up to date e vidence . 
i. All residential de velopments,  including con versions of 10 or more d wellings 
(gross) will be e xpected to provide a rang e of types and siz es with an 
emphasis on famil y homes outside Brac knell Town Centre . 
ii. Developments of f ewer than 10 units will be encoura ged to pr ovide types 
and siz es of d wellings that reflect local needs. 
2. The d welling mix ref erred to abo ve does not appl y to de velopments of specialist 
housing,  including f or older people in the f orm of housing with suppor t or 
housing with care . 
3. In determining an y variation fr om the housing mix,  type and siz e, the Council 
will ha ve regar d to: 
i. the site’ s siz e; 
ii. individual site cir cumstances inc luding the c haracter of the area and 
physical b uilding constraints in relation to an y con versions;  and, 
iii. site specific viability . 
12.30 The NPPF requires local planning author ities to identify the r ange , size, and type of 
housing needed.  The Br acknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment (2020) (61) includes  an 
analysis of the current housing stoc k within the Borough and e xpected demog raphic trends . It 
theref ore pro vides the baseline e vidence to assist in deter mining the housing mix required 
61 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/5819854 
175 across the plan per iod.  The study recognises that the ‘market’ is to some deg ree a better judge 
of what is the most appropr iate profile of homes to deliv er at an y point in time , and demand 
can change o ver time link ed to macro-economic f actors and local supply . 
12.31 Proposals f or specialist accommodation should pro vide a mix of units that respond to 
the identified needs f or the par ticular section of the comm unity that the y seek to accommodate . 
They will not be e xpected to pro vide a balanced and propor tionate mix of dw elling types and 
sizes that is applicab le to accommodating the identified local needs f or gener al needs housing 
of the wider population.  Proposals should, ho wever, still contr ibute to re-balancing the wider 
housing mar ket and the pro vision of a balanced housing mix as par t of an y of the larger 
developments . 
12.32 The results of monitor ing and data from other local sources of inf ormation should also 
be used to help respond to housing needs .  Policy LP 9 'Aff ordab le housing'  deals with aff ordab le 
housing and ref ers to the need f or the aff ordab le housing mix to reflect the type and siz e of 
market housing to be pro vided on the site . Applicants are required to pro vide sufficient e vidence 
to suppor t their proposals . 
12.33 Whilst the housing mix should be inf ormed b y this e vidence , it will also need to respond 
to the char acter of the site and its setting.  The Spatial Str ategy f ocuses a significant propor tion 
of planned ne w housing on sites in and around Br acknell Town Centre . This is where there are 
a number of pre viously de veloped sites and the location is highly accessib le and close to 
services and f acilities . In vie w of this and the need to mak e efficient use of land, higher densities 
are sought on these sites which is lik ely to mean that smaller units will be deliv ered.  It will 
theref ore be par ticular ly impor tant to seek larger f amily homes (including larger aff ordab le 
dwellings) on the sites outside this area to help to meet the needs f or families . 
12.34 This policy has a strong relationship with other polices in the Plan including Policy LP 
9 'Aff ordab le housing' , Policy LP 22 'Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings'  and Policy LP 
42 'Design' . 
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 7 'Land at Jealott's Hill, Warfield' 
Policy LP 3 'Pro vision of housing' 
Policy LP 9 'Aff ordab le housing' 
Policy LP 23 'Specialist housing f or older people and people with disabilities' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par a 61) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance ID67-001-20190722 
Bracknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment (J uly 2020) 
Deliver y 
Through the deter mination of planning applications  
Monitoring 
176 Housing completions  on sites of less than 10 b y type and siz e inside and outside Br acknell 
Town Centre each y ear 
Housing completions  on sites of 10 or more b y type and siz e inside and outside Br acknell 
Town Centre each y ear 
Market and aff ordab le housing completions b y type and siz e each y ear 
177 12.5 Gypsies , travellers and tr avelling sho wpeople 
12.35 The Go vernment’ s Planning P olicy f or Traveller Sites states that local author ities should 
provide a basis against which planning applications f or traveller de velopment proposals will be 
deter mined.   
Objectives 
A - P ositiv e and Proactiv e 
B - Protect/ enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
D - Le vel of De velopment/ Land supply 
F - Strong comm unities 
G - Achie ving High Quality De velopment 
H - Transpor t 
178 Policy LP 25 
Gypsies,  traveller s and tra velling sho wpeople 
1. Development pr oposals f or ne w gypsy and tra veller pitc hes and tra velling 
showpeople plots will be suppor ted where: 
i. The pr ovision is f or occupants recognised as gypsies,  traveller s or tra velling 
showpeople; 
ii. it is located and designed so that a ny adverse impacts upon local amenity and 
the natural en vironment are  a voided,  or where this is not possib le, can be 
mitigated and impr ovement sought;   
iii. there is good access to local ser vices,  including education,  health and welfare 
services,  and shops; 
iv. there is saf e access to the highwa y, pub lic transpor t ser vices and other 
sustainab le transpor t options;   
v. adequate on-site facilities are pr ovided f or parking,  stora ge and waste 
collection;   
vi. the potential f or successful integration between tra velling and settled 
comm unities can be demonstrated;  and 
vii. it is not within the Green Belt e xcept in ver y special cir cumstances. 
2. To ensure the needs of the gypsy , traveller and tra velling sho wpeople comm unities 
are met,  an acceptab le pr oposal will be subject to a condition or legal a greement 
limiting use and occupanc y to gypsies,  traveller s or tra velling sho wpeople . 
3.  Existing authorised sites f or gypsies,  traveller s and tra velling sho wpeople will 
be saf eguar ded fr om de velopment whic h would result in the loss of pitc hes or plots 
and whic h would prec lude their contin ued occupation b y these gr oups,  unless 
acceptab le replacement accommodation can be pr ovided that meets the criteria 
above, or the site is no long er required to meet an identified need. 
12.36 Development proposals will be considered against the policy consider ations set out 
above and the plan as a whole .  They will only be per mitted where pro vision is f or those who 
are recognised as gypsies , travellers or tr avelling sho wpeople (62) , and the location and design 
of the site satisfies the policy tests .  Acceptab le proposals will require a condition or legal 
agreement limiting the use and occupation of the site to gypsies , travellers or tr avelling 
showpeople as appropr iate. 
12.37 When consider ing the impact on local amenity and the natur al en vironment, 
consider ation should be giv en to both e xisting local residents and future occupiers of the site , 
including the potential f or noise and air pollution, tr affic mo vements and other activities lik ely 
to be taking place both within and around the site .  
12.38 The la yout of the site should be designed to a high standard, including adequate 
parking, stor age, waste collection and other associated on site f acilities such as hardstandings , 
space f or large v ehicle tur ning, amenity b locks, amenity space and boundar y treatments .  
62 defined as persons that are leading or ha ve led a nomadic habit of lif e 
179 Proposals should be sympathetic to , and in-k eeping with, the surrounding area to encour age 
comm unity cohesion.   The design and la yout of the site should tak e account of car avan site 
licensing requirements . 
12.39 The PPTS states that inappropr iate de velopment is har mful to the Green Belt and 
should not be appro ved, e xcept in v ery special circumstances . Gypsy , traveller or tr avelling 
showpeople sites (tempor ary or per manent) in the Green Belt are inappropr iate de velopment. 
The abo ve policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 36 'Green Belt' . 
12.40 Existing sites which ha ve planning per mission or la wful use f or gypsy or tr aveller or 
travelling sho wpeople use , will be saf eguarded from other types of de velopment.   This will 
ensure that there is no net loss of pitches or plots and that the per mitted use as a gypsy , traveller 
or travelling sho wpeople site is not lost through the g rant of an y subsequent planning per mission, 
or relaxation of planning conditions . This will include the loss of pitches or plots f or per manent 
structures such as br icks and mor tar accommodation.  Proposals that in volve the loss of these 
sites or pitches/ plots will only be per mitted if a satisf actor y replacement can be pro vided.  The 
replacement will need to be pro vided pr ior to the loss of the e xisting pitch/ plot or site , and 
should meet the same policy cr iteria identified abo ve relating to a ne w site . This is to ensure 
that these sites , and others that ma y be author ised, are retained to meet identified needs within 
the Borough. 
12.41 The abo ve policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 45 'Protection and 
enhancement of the histor ic environment' .  National policy sets out that de velopment proposals 
should a void or minimise har m to her itage assets (NPPF par agraph 190).   
12.42 The abo ve policy should also be read in conjunction with Policy LP 18 'Flood 
risk' and Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' .  National policy is that sites f or 
travelling populations should not be located in areas at high r isk of flooding (including functional 
floodplains), giv en the par ticular vulner ability of car avans. New or e xtended tr aveller sites will 
not be suppor ted in areas at high flood r isk. 
12.43 The abo ve policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 52 'P ollution and 
hazards' .  Water quality is a k ey consider ation to pre vent pollution of aquif ers and w ater courses . 
Sites should be connected to f oul se wers, or where this is not possib le, waste should be disposed 
of without impacting on w ater quality (NPPF par agraph 170). 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 18 'Flood r isk' 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
Planning P olicy f or Traveller Sites (PPTS) 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraphs 8(c), 61, 124-132, 163-164, 170 and 
189-202) 
Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (arc4, 2017) 
Designing Gypsy and Traveller Sites Good Pr actice Guide (2008) 
180 DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
12.44 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
12.45 Monitor ing 
Location of sites per mitted each y ear 
Net n umber of pitches g ranted planning per mission each y ear 
Data from the Traveller car avan count 
181 13 Economic de velopment 
13.1 Designated Emplo yment Areas 
13.1 Strategic Policy LP 10 'Designated Emplo yment Areas'  details fiv e emplo yment areas 
within the Borough.   These are all defined on the Policies  Map. 
13.2 The Borough’ s designated Emplo yment Areas are impor tant locations of b usiness f ocus 
and oppor tunity , with the designated Emplo yment Areas around Br acknell in par ticular , providing 
space f or more e xtensiv e industr ial, stor age and distr ibution uses .  It is impor tant that the 
economic function of these areas is protected and strengthened. 
Objective 
C - Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
182 Policy LP 26 
Development within designated Emplo yment Areas 
1. Within the designated Emplo yment Areas (as defined on the P olicies Map) the 
following will be suppor ted: 
i. development f or business,  industr y, distrib ution and stora ge uses (BIDS);   
ii. development that will enab le existing b usinesses to e xpand and/or adapt 
to changing cir cumstances;  and 
iii. proposals that meet an e videnced need f or a par ticular type of BIDS 
development. 
2. The sequential test will not be required where ne w office floor space is pr oposed 
in designated Emplo yment Areas.   
3. Development within designated Emplo yment Areas f or non-BIDS uses (with the 
exception of 'ancillar y ser vices') will be resisted and will be permitted where 
there is a justification f or a depar ture fr om this polic y following submission of 
information on,  and consideration of , the f ollowing matter s: 
i. impact on the suppl y (amount,  type , quality and use) of BIDS land and 
premises;   
ii. evidence of need f or the pr oposed use and the need f or it to be located 
within a designated Emplo yment Area;   
iii. evidence that the site has been eff ectivel y and contin uousl y marketed f or 
BIDS uses thr ough a v ariety of media f or a period of at least 12 months;   
iv. the relative suitability of the site f or BIDS and f or the alternative use;  and, 
v. the location of the site and its relationship to other uses. 
13.3 The designated Emplo yment Areas are the k ey areas in the Borough that contr ibute 
significantly to the emplo yment land supply f or business , industr y, distr ibution and stor age uses 
(BIDS).   They also off er oppor tunities f or regener ation and intensification.  For the pur poses of 
this policy , the ter m 'business' is considered to co ver office , research and de velopment and 
light industr ial uses . The Emplo yment Land Study confir ms that there is a need to protect these 
areas since sites  are vulner able to pressure from alter native higher v alue uses . Their cum ulativ e 
loss w ould ha ve an adv erse impact on the ability of b usinesses to estab lish, e xpand or relocate 
and might gener ate pressure to release land in less acceptab le locations . The retention of the 
designated emplo yment areas reflects the NPPF advice that planning policies and decisions 
should help create the conditions within which b usinesses can in vest, e xpand and adapt. 
13.4 Due to amendments to legislation in September 2020, changes of use within Class E 
are not regarded as de velopment and theref ore no planning per mission is required.  They cannot 
be restr icted through the use of Ar ticle 4 Directions .  Whilst this w eakens the Council’ s ability 
183 to protect the integ rity of the designated Emplo yment Areas , it is considered appropr iate to 
retain ref erences to uses that f all within Use Class E  to co ver circumstances  when planning 
permission is required.   In order to a void a prolif eration of wider Class E uses in these areas , 
the Council ma y consider the remo val of per mitted de velopment r ights or add conditions to limit 
the use . 
13.5 The NPPF promotes a sequential approach to ‘main to wn centre uses’, which includes 
offices . This means that the y should in the first instance be directed to Br acknell Town Centre 
and other centres . However, some office occupiers ma y have specific mar ket and locational 
requirements that mean the y are better located on the designated Emplo yment Areas . As such, 
new office de velopment within the designated Emplo yment Areas will be e xempt from the 
sequential test. 
13.6 The loss of BIDS uses has the potential to ha ve a significant impact on the quality and 
character of the area and the ability of the Borough to achie ve emplo yment g rowth.  In order 
to ha ve sites a vailab le that can fle xibly accommodate the changing needs of b usiness o ver the 
coming y ears it is impor tant that the integ rity of these areas is protected.   
13.7 In order to justify non-BIDS uses in designated Emplo yment Area, par t 3 of the policy 
requires se veral factors to be considered.   Applicants will need to consider the impact of the 
proposal on the supply of BIDS floorspace in ter ms of outstanding planning commitments , take 
up and the amount of v acant floorspace , provide e vidence of the length of time the proper ty 
has been un used f or BIDS pur poses and sho w that the site has been eff ectively and contin uously 
marketed f or BIDS uses (including the possibility of rede velopment) f or at least 12 consecutiv e 
months .  Such e vidence should document where the proper ty has been pub licly mar keted 
including pub lications and proper ty jour nals, details of adv ertisements on site , prices at which 
the land and b uildings ha ve been mar keted dur ing this per iod, (which should be at a pr ice 
commensur ate with mar ket values based on e vidence from recent and similar tr ansactions and 
deals in the locality), a list of all e xpressions of interest dur ing this per iod and an e valuation of 
why it is considered that the proper ty has f ailed to attr act interest from potential occupiers or 
for rede velopment f or BIDS uses . It will also be necessar y to address the relativ e suitability of 
the site f or the alter nativ e use compared with a BIDS use including demonstr ating that the 
proposed use w ould not aff ect the ability of estab lished la wful b usinesses , or potential future 
BIDS occupiers , to carr y out their activities without constr aints . 
13.8 It is accepted that emplo yees w orking in premises on designated Emplo yment Areas 
need access to a r ange of small scale ‘ancillar y ser vices’.  These are dealt with in Policy LP 
28 'Smaller b usinesses' . 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 11 'Sites allocated f or economic de velopment/mix ed use' 
Policy LP 10 'Designated Emplo yment Areas' 
184 KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 6 Building a strong, competitiv e econom y) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Housing and economic needs assessment) 
Emplo yment Land Needs Study (Apr il 2020) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
13.9 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
13.10 Monitor ing 
Net amount of BIDS and non-BIDS floorspace g ranted per mission and completed in 
designated Emplo yment Areas each y ear. 
185 13.2 Emplo yment de velopment outside designated 
Emplo yment Areas 
13.11 Other emplo yment sites e xist outside designated Emplo yment Areas , including in to wn 
centres and are v alued f or the job oppor tunities that the y pro vide. Sites in other uses ma y also 
come f orward for emplo yment de velopment.   
Objectives 
B - Protect / enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
C - Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment  
186 Policy LP 27 
Emplo yment de velopment outside designated Emplo yment Areas 
1. Outside designated Emplo yment Areas,  business,  industr y, distrib ution and 
stora ge uses (BIDS) de velopment will be suppor ted where it does not ha ve 
unacceptab le ad verse impacts on nearb y residents,  other b usinesses or other uses.   
This inc ludes impacts caused b y transpor t mo vements,  noise , emissions,  hour s of 
operation and lighting.  This suppor t will appl y to pr oposals that: 
i. help create a rang e of diff erent types and siz es of emplo yment sites and 
premises to meet the diver se needs of the local econom y; and/or , 
ii. comprise the appr opriate intensification,  rede velopment or upgrading of an 
existing emplo yment site or premises to help meet the f orecast demand o ver 
the plan period and to respond to modern b usiness needs;  and/or , 
iii. suppor t impr ovements to the education and skills le vels of Bor ough residents 
and initiatives to use local labour , particularl y on the de velopment of lar ge and 
strategic sites;  and/or , 
iv. are an appr opriate par t of a mix ed use de velopment. 
2. Planning applications f or lar ge emplo yment de velopments outside designated 
Emplo yment Areas (in volving a net increase of at least 2,500m2 Gross External Area, 
GEA) will also be required to be accompanied b y an Emplo yment Impact Statement 
demonstrating: 
i. compliance with the sequential appr oach to location; 
ii. how it is appr opriate in nature and scale to its location;   
iii. the transpor t implications of the pr oposal and ho w the y will be pr ovided f or;  
iv. the n umber and type of jobs likel y to be created b y the de velopment,  and ho w 
they are to be sour ced; and, 
iv. how an y unacceptab le ad verse impacts will be mitigated. 
13.12 The Council is committed to suppor ting 
economic  growth in the Borough  and sustainab le comm unities . To enab le growth, it is 
impor tant to ensure  that e xisting b usinesses are ab le to adapt and e xpand and help ne w 
businesses as long as  there are no  significant en vironmental or amenity prob lems that cannot 
be overcome . In some cases , the siz e, location and char acter istics of a site ma y mean that 
more intensiv e, mixed use de velopment could pro vide g reater benefit to the comm unity in ter ms 
of addressing local needs , rather than if the site w as retained solely in emplo yment use .  
187 13.13 The policy aims to suppor t and enab le such de velopment and to direct it to suitab le 
locations . The sequential approach referred to in point 2 ( i) abo ve means that Bracknell 
Town Centre , other centres  and the  designated Emplo yment Areas will be the first pref erence for 
office de velopments before alter nativ e locations are considered acceptab le.  
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 11 'Sites allocated f or economic de velopment/mix ed use' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 6:  Building a strong, competitiv e econom y)  
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Housing and economic needs assessment - ref erence ID 
2a)  
Emplo yment Land Needs Study (Apr il 2020) 
Planning Commitments f or Emplo yment Uses   
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
13.14 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
13.15 Monitor ing 
Net amount of BIDS floorspace g ranted per mission and completed outside of designated 
Emplo yment Areas each y ear. 
188 13.3 Smaller b usinesses 
13.16 Small b usinesses and emerging economic sectors fulfil an impor tant role in the 
Borough’ s econom y and can help achie ve a sustainab le approach to de velopment b y pro viding 
jobs across the Borough. 
Objectives 
C - Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
189 Policy LP 28 
Smaller b usinesses 
1. Development pr oposals that w ould assist small and star t-up b usinesses and 
enab le their e xpansion,  including the creation of fle xible floor space and 
provision of sites will be permitted.   Proposals should not result in unacceptab le 
harm to: 
i. highwa y saf ety; and, 
ii. residential amenity . 
2. Ancillar y ser vices will be permitted in appr opriate locations within designated  
Emplo yment Areas and other areas pr ovided that the y: 
i. are small in scale (100m2  or less GEA);   
ii. suppor t the primar y business function of the designated Emplo yment Area; 
and, 
iii. cumulativel y do not compr omise the integrity of the prime b usiness 
functions of the designated Emplo yment Area. 
3. The sequential test will not be required where ancillar y ser vices are pr oposed 
within designated Emplo yment Areas.   
4. Proposals that result in the net loss of smaller b usiness units (500 m2 or less 
GEA) will be permitted where: 
i. adequate a vailab le alternative pr ovision alread y exists in the locality , or 
the loss w ould be replaced b y an equiv alent or better facility in a suitab le 
and accessib le location;  or, 
ii. the pr oposal is f or an alternative use – the benefit of whic h clearly 
outweighs the loss;  or 
iii. a robust assessment has been carried out demonstrating that: 
a. the facility is no long er needed f or an y of the functions it 
performs;   
b. all reasonab le eff orts ha ve been made to retain the facility 
(including e vidence to confirm that the pr oper ty or site has been 
activel y and positivel y marketed f or a meaningful period (63) with 
reasonab le commer cial terms (64)and that there is no realistic 
interest in its retention f or the current use);  and, 
c. it would no long er be economicall y viab le, feasib le or practicab le 
to retain the b uilding or site f or its e xisting use . 
63 For one y ear 
64 Commercial ter ms that are constr ued b y the Council as being reasonab le, i.e. at a sound, realistic and viab le price for 
the type of use . 
190 13.17 Small b usiness units ha ve an impor tant role in pro viding accommodation f or a v ariety 
of small b usinesses and contr ibuting to the strength and div ersity of the local econom y. They 
are par ticular ly impor tant in enab ling small and medium siz ed enter prises to oper ate and 
expand.   
13.18 Emplo yees w orking in premises on the designated Emplo yment Areas often require 
access to a r ange of f acilities or ‘ancillar y ser vices’.   For the pur poses of this policy , these are 
defined as small shops , food and dr ink estab lishments , gymnasia and crèches of less than 
100m2.  The absence of such f acilities can increase tr avel demand and mak e areas less attr active 
to emplo yers and staff . However, it is impor tant that ‘ancillar y ser vices' are  subordinate to , and 
do not f orm an integ ral par t of, the main emplo yment uses in the designated Emplo yment Area. 
Furthermore , they must not under mine the a vailability or suitability of land f or core uses or 
compete with oper ators of compar able main to wn centre uses in sequentially pref erable locations . 
Where ne w emplo yment areas are proposed, the need f or 'ancillar y ser vices' should be 
considered as par t of the o verall de velopment scheme .   
13.19 As ‘ancillar y ser vices’  fall within the definition of main to wn centre uses , they would 
normally be directed to Br acknell Town Centre and other centres in the first instance . Due to 
their role in complementing the main emplo yment uses in the designated Emplo yment Area, 
the  sequential approach will not be applied to applications f or ‘ancillar y’ services’. 
13.20 Smaller units often come under pressure f or rede velopment to higher v alue larger 
emplo yment units or alter nativ e uses , especially residential.  It is impor tant that the y are 
encour aged and retained to suppor t a div erse local econom y. Smaller b usiness units are 500m2 
or less GEA in siz e. When deter mining applications that in volve the loss of smaller b usiness 
units (500m2 or less GEA), a r ange of e vidence will be required as ref erred to in P art 4 of policy 
above and e xpanded belo w: 
Details of an y existing or pre vious occupiers dur ing the last fiv e years including the nature 
of oper ations  and reasons f or vacating the premises . 
An explanation of an y specific issues with the contin ued use of the site f or emplo yment 
which cannot be mitigated and mean that the f acility cannot function proper ly.  
The a vailability of suitab le alter nativ e accommodation in the local area.   Where an e xisting 
tenant is present whether or not relocation might impact on the oper ation and sustainability 
of the b usiness .  
Evidence that the premises or site ha ve been activ ely mar keted f or at least 12 consecutiv e 
months at a pr ice commensur ate with mar ket values (based on e vidence from recent and 
similar tr ansactions and deals).  It should also be demonstr ated that the ter ms and conditions 
set out in the lease are reasonab le and attr active to potential b usinesses and that no 
reasonab le off er has been refused. 
Details of the condition of the site or b uilding especially where it is argued that this renders 
it unsuitab le for its present use . Economic viability and f easibility e vidence should be 
submitted. 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 2 'Sustainab le locational pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
191 National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 6:  Building a strong, competitiv e econom y)  
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Housing and economic needs assessment) 
Emplo yment Land Needs Assessment   
Planning Commitments f or Emplo yment Uses 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
13.21 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
13.22 Monitor ing 
Net amount of 'ancillar y' floorspace compr ising smaller units (100m2 or less GEA) g ranted 
permission and completed each y ear 
Net amount of emplo yment floorspace compr ising units 500m2 or less GEA g ranted 
permission and completed each y ear 
192 13.4 Br acknell Town Centre 
13.23 Bracknell Town Centre lies at the hear t of Br acknell F orest and is the Borough’ s main 
centre f or retail, leisure , civic and cultur al activities .  It also  acts as a tr anspor t hub ser ving the 
outer areas of Br acknell, the smaller settlements within the Borough and destinations fur ther 
afield.  The r ail station and b us ter minals , along with the large taxi r ank at the souther n end of 
the Town Centre pro vide a m ulti-modal tr anspor t interchange .  The to wn’s retail and leisure 
offer has been significantly enhanced  as a result of the opening of the Le xicon in 
2017.   Evidence on f ootfall and other indicators gathered prior to the pandemic , sho wed that 
the de velopment  had significantly increased the attr activeness of the centre .  The broader r ange 
of Town Centre  uses created means local residents no longer need to tr avel outside the Borough 
to access a choice of shopping, eating and enter tainment oppor tunities . A number of residential 
developments ha ve also been completed which add vibr ancy and off er the oppor tunity f or urban 
living. 
13.24 Regener ation is contin uing with the refurbishment of Pr incess Square and the area 
around the old Bentalls store , called The Dec k. The  Council is k een to promote and suppor t 
other oppor tunities f or de velopment that ha ve the potential to add to vitality and viability . Positiv e 
planning is required to attr act a r ange of main to wn centre uses , including offices , leisure and 
cultur al uses that suppor t the da y-time and e vening econom y, as w ell as fur ther residential 
development and a mix of appropr iate suppor ting f acilities and ser vices . 
Objectives 
C - Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
E - Town centres 
F - Strong comm unities 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
H - Transpor t 
193 Policy LP 29 
Development in Brac knell Town Centre 
Brac knell Town Centre is designated on the P olicies Map and inc ludes a defined 
Primar y Shopping Area.   Development in Brac knell Town Centre will be suppor ted 
whic h: 
i. contrib utes to the Town Centre’ s diver sity,  vitality , viability and en vironmental 
quality; 
ii. provides a mix of uses whic h ma y inc lude retail,  residential,  emplo yment, 
recreational,  leisure , civic,  cultural and health facilities; 
iii. helps meet the local con venience , comparison and specialist shopping needs 
of the Bor ough; 
iv. contrib utes to its r ole as a transpor t hub f or the Bor ough; 
v. creates a high quality , distinctive and well-designed en vironment and pub lic 
realm that helps reduce crime and the f ear of crime; 
vi. retains and enhances the settings of b uildings of special ar chitectural or historic 
impor tance; 
vii. provides necessar y infrastructure inc luding pub lic transpor t services,  pedestrian 
and c ycle facilities,  green spaces,  and aff ordable housing; 
viii. improves e xisting access and connectivity within and to Brac knell Town Centre; 
and, 
ix. does not harm the vitality and viability or r ole of the Primar y Shopping Area. 
13.25 Further sites are already coming f orward for de velopment and are allocated in this 
plan f or a mix of uses . These include the f ormer Bus Depot in Mar ket Street, J ubilee Gardens , 
The Ring and a site on the per ipher y of Br acknell Town Centre at Coopers Hill, Cro wthor ne 
Road Nor th where the Council has entered into a joint v enture . The de velopment of these sites 
will b uild on recent impro vements to the r ange of uses , connectivity and quality of the 
environment and e xpand the comm unity of residents w orkers and visitors . 
13.26 There is a need f or a strong policy to f acilitate and encour age the regener ation of 
further par ts of Br acknell Town Centre .  It is lik ely that the confidence already demonstr ated 
by investors will lead to other sites coming f orward dur ing the plan per iod.  The policy encour ages 
a div erse r ange of uses whilst contin uing to emphasise the impor tance of a strong retail hear t 
based on the pr imary shopping area, which will add to the vibrancy  of the area dur ing the da y 
and e vening. 
13.27 New development should contr ibute to the r ange of acceptab le uses including:   
retail, (con venience and compar ison); 
residential; 
emplo yment (e .g. offices); 
recreational & leisure (e .g. restaur ants, bars , bowling alle ys, cinemas , open space , gyms 
etc.); 
civic (T own and Borough Council offices); 
194 cultur al (e.g. churches , galler ies, libraries); and, 
health f acilities (including social care ser vices). 
13.28 There is a need to ensure that the necessar y infr astructure is pro vided in a timely 
manner to suppor t the oper ation and function of the area.  This includes necessar y transpor t, 
services and f acilities .  With an increasing residential population, the area is beginning to 
become a neighbourhood in its o wn right. However,  rapid g rowth, combined with a significant 
propor tion of the residential de velopment coming f orward through the Pr ior Appro val process 
means that it has not benefited  from the same r ange of suppor ting f acilities that accompan y 
some pur pose-b uilt neighbourhoods . New development m ust theref ore be suppor ted b y other 
complementar y uses such as leisure and comm unity f acilities that also pla y an activ e role in 
contr ibuting to the functionality of the Town Centre . 
13.29 Green spaces and v egetation including street trees are impor tant in Br acknell Town 
Centre pro viding a wide r ange of en vironmental and quality of lif e benefits f or those who liv e, 
work and visit the area.   They also reflect the 'g reen' char acter of the Borough and enhance 
the settings of b uildings .  The Council will seek to ensure that de velopments include g reen 
features and link and enhance the e xisting netw ork of g reen spaces .  This policy should be 
read in conjunction with Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' . 
13.30 Bracknell Town Centre is accessib le by roads , pedestr ian footpaths and cycle ways 
from all directions .   Ho wever, potential e xists to mak e further impro vements on the fr inges to 
impro ve connectivity with the surrounding neighbourhoods and reduce the f ocus on the car . 
This should be a consider ation in the deter mination of planning applications and it is impor tant 
that the policy is read in conjunction with Policy LP 55 'T ranspor t infrastructure pro vision' .   
13.31 The Town Centre acts as a tr anspor t hub ser ving the outer areas of Br acknell and 
smaller settlements within the Borough and destinations fur ther afield.  The r ail station and b us 
terminals , along with the large taxi r ank at the souther n end of the Town Centre pro vide a 
multi-modal tr anspor t interchange . Whilst Policy LP 11 'Sites allocated f or economic 
development/mix ed use'  allocates the b us station f or residential and economic/ mix ed use 
development,  it is a requirement of the policy that the b us station function is replaced either 
on-site or at another location in pro ximity to the r ail station and the centr al area in order to 
contin ue the pro vision of a m ulti-modal pub lic transpor t hub .  
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 4 'Sites allocated f or residential/mix ed use de velopment' 
Policy LP 12 'Hier archy and e xtent of centres' 
Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' 
Policy LP 11 'Sites allocated f or economic de velopment/mix ed use' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraph 85 and 86) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (T own centres and retail) 
Bracknell Town Centre Vision 2032 
195 DELIVER Y & MONIT ORING 
13.32 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
The use of planning conditions and ob ligations 
13.33 Monitor ing 
Amount of floorspace g ranted and completed each y ear for 'main to wn centre' uses with 
a net change of at least 100m2 in Br acknell Town Centre each y ear. 
196 13.5 De velopment proposals in centres 
13.34 Attractive and accessib le shopping is an impor tant par t of creating places in which 
people w ant to liv e, work and enjo y leisure time . 
13.35 Bracknell F orest’ s centres are defined in Policy LP 12 'Hier archy and e xtent of centres' , 
and their e xtent, including pr imary shopping areas (65), is defined on the P olicies Map and 
shown in Appendix 3:  'Defined Centre maps' . 
13.36 The pur pose of this policy is to maintain and enhance the vitality and viability of these 
centres to ensure that the y contin ue to perf orm their intended function eff ectively, and to pre vent 
development that w ould under mine this . 
Objective 
C – Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
E – Town centres 
F – Strong comm unities 
G– Achie ving high quality de velopment 
Policy LP 30 
Development pr oposals in centres 
1. Development within the centres defined on the P olicies Map will be suppor ted 
where it: 
i. would not ha ve an ad verse impact on the viability , vitality or c haracter of that 
or an y other centre whether inside or outside the Bor ough,  either alone or 
cumulativel y with other pr oposals and recent de velopments; 
ii. would not ha ve an ad verse impact on pub lic health or en vironmental amenity , 
particularl y in terms of noise , litter and odour;  and,   
iii. would not ha ve an ad verse impact on the saf ety and con venience of highwa y 
user s.  
2. Chang es of use within primar y shopping areas defined on the P olicies Map will be 
permitted in the f ollowing cir cumstances:   
i. Chang es of use fr om Use Class E to other uses will not result in there being 
more than 20% of non-Use Class E units in the primar y shopping area of centres.   
ii. Chang es of use to residential (C3 uses) where the pr oposal makes use of v acant 
upper floor s and would not result in an inactive fr onta ge on the gr ound floor . 
65 as defined in the NPPF , Anne x 2: Glossar y, page 70 
197 13.37 The retail sector contin ues to be subject to significant challenges , including changing 
shopping habits such as increased inter net shopping, ‘click and collect’, and tough competition. 
Successful retailers ha ve adapted to this ne w en vironment.  For man y, maintaining a store 
netw ork where customers can bro wse and seek advice as w ell as collect goods bought online 
is par t of their off er. Retail policy needs to be fle xible and responsiv e enough to accommodate 
further changes in shopping trends , to ensure that centres remain activ e, vibrant and sustainab le 
in the long ter m.  
13.38 In response to these challenges , changes to the Use Classes Order in 2020 allo w far 
greater fle xibility with the introduction of a broader Class E ‘Commercial, Business and Ser vice’ 
use class . This allo ws typical high street uses to change betw een uses within Class E without 
the need f or planning per mission to better adapt to changing demand. 
13.39 Primary shopping areas in Br acknell F orest’ s centres will contin ue to f ocus on pro viding 
retail, with suppor t from other Class E uses such as  cafes and restaur ants. This policy will help 
prevent the o ver-pro vision of non-E class uses that could under mine the vitality and viability of 
centres . 
13.40 Outside the pr imary shopping areas b ut within the wider to wn and other centres , a 
variety of main to wn centre uses will be encour aged, including more intensiv e spor t and 
recreation uses , arts and cultur al uses , and other f ootfall gener ating uses that add to the 
liveliness , attractiveness and economic resilience of the v arious centres .   
13.41 Where a proposal w ould in volve the loss of Class E floorspace in a pr imary shopping 
area that w ould lead to non-E class units e xceeding the stated percentage of the total units in 
the pr imary shopping area, an assessment will be required.   This will deter mine whether it w ould 
under mine the vitality and viability of the centre .  Factors to tak e into consider ation include: 
i. whether the e xisting use is sur plus to requirements; 
ii. the nature of the proposed use and its contr ibution to vitality; 
iii. the current mix of uses in the pr imary shopping area; 
iv. the n umber of v acant units in the pr imary shopping area and wider centre; 
v. the n umber of contiguous units in non-retail use that w ould be created; 
vi. whether all reasonab le eff orts ha ve been made to retain the e xisting use (including 
evidence to confir m that the proper ty has been mar keted f or a meaningful per iod (66) on 
reasonab le commercial ter ms (67), and that there is no realistic interest in its retention f or 
the current use;  and, 
vii. whether it is economically viab le, feasib le or pr acticab le to retain the e xisting use . 
66 For a minim um of one y ear 
67 Commercial ter ms that are constr ued b y the Council as being reasonab le, i.e. terms that do not require abnor mally high 
rent or an un usually shor t letting per iod, compared with similar units in the Borough, which could mak e the proposition 
unattr active to a prospectiv e tenant. 
198 13.42 The percentage cr iterion will be applied fle xibly where: 
i. an acceptab le change of use w ould result in the o verall number of units in the pr imary 
shopping area only marginally e xceeding the threshold f or non E class use;  and,  
ii. a proposal w ould not ha ve an adv erse impact on the vitality and viability of the centre . 
13.43 This cr iterion will also apply to proposals in centres that already breach this threshold. 
13.44 In order to a void unnecessar y dela y in the deter mination of applications , applicants 
are recommended to submit a pre-application enquir y.  This will enab le the abo ve factors to 
be assessed at the ear liest oppor tunity and guidance pro vided as to the inf ormation required 
as par t of a planning application. 
13.45 The Council recognises the impor tance of maintaining the en vironmental quality of its 
shopping areas .  The impor tance of off ering a r ange of uses has to be balanced against the 
impact of de velopment proposals on local amenity and pub lic health.   For example , the 
assessment of applications f or proposals f or change of use to hot f ood tak e-aways (sui 
gener is) will consider an y cum ulativ e impact taking into account other e xisting tak eaways and 
whether there are an y sensitiv e uses in the local area such as a school or residential proper ties. 
13.46 Residential de velopment can benefit the vitality of to wn and other centres b y creating 
activity outside of b usiness hours and pro viding better natur al sur veillance .  Within the pr imary 
shopping areas such de velopment w ould nor mally be suppor ted on upper floors where it a voids 
creating “dead frontages”  which can fr agment retail frontages .  Residential proposals that reduce 
ground floor retail space in centres are lik ely to under mine their core function and to har m their 
vitality and viability and will not nor mally be per mitted. 
13.47 New centres needed to meet the needs of ne w comm unities will be required and should 
be of an appropr iate scale and incor porate an appropr iate mix of uses to ser ve local needs . 
13.48 The location and e xtent of ne w planned centres will be refined through the planning 
application process , and the y will be designated and defined in subsequent plans , if appropr iate. 
13.49 The impor tance of local con venience stores , post offices and chemists outside centres 
in pro viding essential ser vices to the comm unity the y ser ve is recognised.  Such uses can be 
hubs of the comm unity, impor tant f or comm unity cohesion and ha ve a v aluab le role to pla y in 
social inclusion.  These uses are protected b y Policy LP 32 'Protection of comm unity f acilities 
and ser vices' .     
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 12 'Hier archy and e xtent of centres' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 7) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (T own centres and retail) 
Town and Countr y Planning (Gener al Permitted De velopment) (England) Order 2015 (as 
amended) 
199 Bracknell F orest Retail Health Assessment (scoping e xercise) 2017 
Bracknell F orest Ann ual Retail Sur vey 
13.50 DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
13.51 Deliv ery: 
Deter mination of planning application 
13.52 Monitor ing: 
Percentages of use classes in centres 
Percentage of non-E class units in pr imary shopping areas permitted and completed each 
year 
Vacancy le vels 
200 13.6 De velopment of main to wn centre uses outside 
centres 
13.53 Bracknell F orest has an estab lished hier archy of to wn and other centres (68) with 
Bracknell Town Centre being the pr imary centre .  This is because it is the most sustainab le 
location in the Borough f or retail and other main to wn centre uses .  While Br acknell Town Centre 
serves as the main retail, leisure and tr anspor t hub f or the Borough, the other centres also ha ve 
impor tant roles in ser ving their local comm unities’  day to da y needs .  It is impor tant that the 
Borough’ s centres remain competitiv e and that policies suppor t their viability and vitality .   
13.54 The tr ansformation of Br acknell Town Centre into a legib le and vibr ant place f or people 
to visit, liv e and enjo y is a cr itical element in the str ategic planning of the Borough.   New housing 
and other de velopments around the Borough ha ve been allocated and designed with the 
intention of suppor ting its role .  It is theref ore impor tant that this is not compromised b y new 
development outside centres that could ha ve a significant adv erse impact on its attr activeness 
and viability .   
Objectives 
C - Suppor t economic g rowth and resilience 
E -Town centres 
68 Policy LP 12 'Hier archy and e xtent of centres' 
201 Policy LP 31 
Development of main to wn centre uses outside of designated centres 
Sequential test 
1. Development,  including e xtensions to e xisting facilities,  for main to wn centre 
uses (with the e xception of offices and ancillar y ser vices),  should be located 
in Brac knell Town Centre and other centres defined on the P olicies Map,  then 
in edg e of centre locations.   It should onl y be located in out of centre locations, 
if having demonstrated appr opriate fle xibility in f orm and scale , it cannot be 
accommodated within a suitab le and a vailab le centre or edg e of centre 
location.  When considering edg e of centre and out of centre pr oposals, 
preference will be given to accessib le sites that are well connected to centres.   
2. Where de velopment inc ludes offices,  it should be located in Brac knell Town 
Centre , other centres or on the designated Emplo yment Areas prior to other 
areas of the Bor ough.  Applications f or ancillar y ser vices in designated 
emplo yment areas will be e xempt fr om the sequential test. 
Impact assessment 
3. Development f or retail or leisure uses of 1,000 m2 or more of floor space outside 
centres will onl y be permitted if it is demonstrated that it will not cause a 
significant ad verse impact on e xisting centres. 
13.55 In order to promote the vitality and viability of centres ,  the NPPF sets out a  'centres' 
first policy , through a sequential test that directs main to wn centre uses to e xisting centres . 
This is suppor ted b y an impact test f or retail and leisure de velopments which requires 
development that might har m a centre to be assessed against a r ange of f actors .  
13.56 The estab lished hier archy of centres in Br acknell F orest,  ( Policy LP 12 'Hier archy and 
extent of centres' ) serves a v aluab le local and borough-wide function.   It is an impor tant par t 
of the Council’ s strategy that Br acknell Town Centre should contin ue to act as a pr imary location 
for main to wn centre uses as it is is the Borough’ s most accessib le and sustainab le location. 
The smaller centres in the Borough act as f ocal points f or comm unities and help meet e veryday 
needs . They are f airly rob ust ha ving reasonab ly high le vels of occupancy and f ew long-ter m 
vacant premises .   Ho wever, man y have a limited off er and could suff er significantly from the 
loss of relativ ely few existing uses .  Such centres might be vulner able, particular ly to impacts 
from ne w retail or leisure proposals within their catchments of a significantly smaller scale than 
the NPPF default threshold  for requir ing an impact assessment of 2,500 m2.  They have the 
potential to cause har m either individually or cum ulativ ely, by diverting tr ade a way from the 
centres . Man y of these centres ha ve units with an o verall floorspace of less than, or little more 
than 1,000 m2.  
13.57 Any impact assessments f or shopping or leisure proposals located outside centres will 
need to ensure that the y do not under mine or fr ustrate fur ther regener ation oppor tunities in 
Bracknell Town Centre or prejudice the vitality and viability of centres , including local consumer 
choice and tr ade.   Some of the larger ne w planned de velopments will ha ve their o wn 
202 neighbourhood centres/shopping par ades .  It is impor tant that these are designed to ser ve the 
day to da y needs of local residents and do not ha ve any significant adv erse impacts on e xisting 
centres . 
13.58 It is clear that within Br acknell F orest,  schemes of less than 2,500 sqm, (the NPPF 
default threshold f or assessing impact), ha ve the potential to cause har m either individually or 
cumulativ ely, by diverting tr ade a way from centres . The Plan sets a locally specific floorspace 
threshold of 1,000 m2 (gross e xternal floor area) abo ve which an impact assessment will be 
required to accompan y retail and leisure proposals outside centres . This reflects the modest 
size of centres across the Borough.   If a proposed de velopment outside a centre is unlik ely to 
have an adv erse impact, such de velopments should also be accessib le to the comm unity b y 
foot, car , pub lic transpor t and cycling.  In addition, sufficient car par king should be pro vided on 
site and de velopments should not add significantly to tr affic gener ation on the surrounding 
roads .  Sites proposed f or such de velopment should not be required f or other uses . 
13.59 The pur pose of assessing proposals outside centres in volving retail and/or leisure uses 
is to ensure that the y do not ha ve significant adv erse impacts o ver time (up to 5 y ears [or 10 
for major schemes]) on e xisting centres .  It is impor tant that the impact is assessed in relation 
to all centres that ma y be aff ected, which are not necessar ily just those closest to the proposal 
and ma y be in neighbour ing local author ity areas . 
13.60 Where an impact test is required the f ollowing steps should be tak en in accordance 
with the Planning Pr actice Guidance: 
estab lish the state of e xisting centres and the nature of current shopping patter ns (base 
year); 
deter mine the appropr iate time fr ame f or assessing impact, f ocusing on impact in the first 
five years, as this is when most of the impact will occur ; 
examine the ‘no de velopment’  scenar io (which should not necessar ily be based on the 
assumption that all centres are lik ely to benefit from e xpenditure g rowth in con venience 
and compar ison goods and reflect both changes in the mar ket or role of centres , as w ell 
as changes in the en vironment such as ne w infr astructure); 
assess the proposal’ s turnover and tr ade dr aw (dr awing on inf ormation from compar able 
schemes , the oper ator’s benchmar k turnover of con venience and compar ison goods , and 
carefully consider ing lik ely catchments and tr ade dr aw); 
consider a r ange of plausib le scenar ios in assessing the impact of the proposal on e xisting 
centres and f acilities (which ma y require breaking the study area do wn into a ser ies of 
zones to gain a finer-g rain analysis of anticipated impact); 
set out the lik ely impact of that proposal clear ly, along with an y associated assumptions 
or reasoning, including in respect of quantitativ e and qualitativ e issues; 
any conclusions should be propor tionate:  for example , it ma y be sufficient to giv e a broad 
indication of the propor tion of the proposal’ s trade dr aw likely to be der ived from diff erent 
centres and f acilities in the catchment area and the lik ely consequences to the viability 
and vitality of e xisting centres . 
13.61 A judgement as to whether the lik ely adv erse impacts are significant will be reached 
in light of local circumstances .  Where this requires the impact assessment to be re viewed by 
an independent specialist as par t of the planning application process , this will be paid f or by 
the applicant. 
203 Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 12 'Hier archy and e xtent of centres' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraph 89) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (T own centres and retail Ref erence ID:  2b-014-20190722 to 
ID: 2b-018-20190722) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
13.62 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
The use of planning conditions and ob ligations . 
13.63 Monitor ing 
Health chec k data f or centres 
Amount of floorspace f or main to wn centre uses (e xcept offices) per mitted and completed 
within and outside centres each y ear  
Amount of floorspace f or offices per mitted and completed within Br acknell Town Centre , 
the designated Emplo yment Areas , other centres and the rest of the Borough each y ear.  
Amount of retail and leisure floorspace per mitted and completed within and outside centres 
each y ear 
204 14 Local infr astructure and comm unity uses 
14.1 Protection of comm unity f acilities and ser vices 
14.1 Comm unity facilities and ser vices pla y an impor tant role in developing and maintaining 
comm unity inclusion and cohesion.  They help mak e places more sustainab le by meeting the 
comm unity’ s day-to-da y needs . They compr ise a r ange of social, recreational and cultur al 
facilities and ser vices , such as: 
Local con venience stores , post offices and chemists 
Play, open space and spor ts facilities 
Healthcare f acilities 
Public houses 
Comm unity centres and village halls 
Arts centres , music v enues 
Theatres , cinemas 
Places of w orship 
Education f acilities  
Libraries 
Allotments 
Children’ s centres 
14.2 Residents in the B orough’ s neighbourhoods and villages are gener ally w ell ser ved and 
the aim of this policy is to saf eguard against the unnecessar y loss of v alued f acilities where 
they collectiv ely or individually make an impor tant contr ibution towards the health and well-being 
of residents . 
Objectives 
E - Town Centres 
F - Strong Comm unities 
  
Policy LP 32 
Protection of comm unity facilities and ser vices 
1. Development will be permitted where: 
i. existing facilities and ser vices are retained and maintained; 
ii. the quality and capacity of e xisting facilities and ser vices is impr oved; and, 
iii. new facilities and ser vices are pr ovided. 
205 2. Development pr oposals that w ould result in the loss of comm unity facilities and 
services will be permitted where: 
i. the loss w ould be replaced b y an equiv alent or better facility in a suitab le and 
accessib le location;  or,  
ii. the de velopment is f or an alternative comm unity use - the benefit of whic h 
clearly outweighs the loss;  or,  
iii. a robust assessment has been carried out that demonstrated that the facility 
or ser vice is surplus to requirements.   The assessment m ust e valuate the 
quantity and quality of e xisting facilities in the locality and assess their need 
and v alue to the comm unity and should inc lude e vidence that: 
a. the facility is no long er needed f or an y of the functions it perf orms;   
b. all reasonab le eff orts ha ve been made to retain the facility (inc luding 
evidence to confirm that the pr oper ty or site has been activel y and positivel y 
marketed f or a meaningful period (69) with reasonab le commer cial terms (70), 
and that there is no realistic interest in its retention f or the current use);    
c. consideration has been given to an alternative comm unity use on the whole 
or par t of the site;  and 
d. it would no long er be economicall y viab le, feasib le or practicab le to retain 
the b uilding or site f or its e xisting use . 
14.3 The NPPF states that local author ities should 'plan positiv ely' for the pro vision of social, 
recreational and cultur al facilities and guard against the loss of v alued f acilities and ser vices 
where it w ould reduce the comm unity's ability to meet its da y-to-da y needs . 
14.4 Advancing the health and w ell being of residents is a k ey par t of good planning.  The 
loss of e xisting comm unity f acilities and ser vices will only be per mitted in e xceptional 
circumstances , suppor ted b y rob ust e vidence to justify the loss in accordance with the cr iteria 
set out abo ve. This will help to ensure that all residents contin ue to ha ve good access to the 
facilities and ser vices the y rely on. 
14.5 Comm unity uses are often lo wer value uses of land and are theref ore more vulner able 
to de velopment pressures . This policy is f ocused specifically on land or b uildings currently or 
last used f or a comm unity use;  and is less concer ned about the current o wner or occupier . 
14.6 A valued comm unity asset, such as a pub or comm unity f acility , can be nominated b y 
a comm unity organisation as an Asset of Comm unity Value (A CV).  If an application f or an A CV 
is successful, the local comm unity will be inf ormed in the e vent that the proper ty is listed f or 
sale within the fiv e year listing per iod. This will giv e the comm unity an oppor tunity to enact a 
Comm unity Right to Bid, allo wing a per iod of six months to r aise the finance to purchase the 
asset.  Designation as an A CV will be a mater ial consider ation in the deter mination of a planning 
application. 
14.7 This policy deals with the broader issue of retaining v alued comm unity f acilities and 
services . The retention of retail uses in defined retail areas is co vered b y 13.5 'De velopment 
proposals in centres' . 
69 For a minim um of one y ear. 
70 Commercial ter ms that are constr ued b y the Council as being reasonab le, i.e. at a sound, realistic and viab le price for 
the type of use . 
206 Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 2 'Sustainab le locational pr inciples' 
Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' 
KEY EVIDENCE   
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par a 92) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
14.8 Deliv ery: 
Deter mination of planning applications . 
14.9 Monitor ing 
Net losses / gains of comm unity f acilities and ser vices (use and floorspace) per mitted and 
completed each y ear. 
Amount of floorspace in comm unity use lost each y ear. 
207 14.2 Pla y, open space and spor ts pro vision 
14.10 Play, open space and spor ts facilities are impor tant f or impro ving and maintaining 
quality of lif e. They include a wide r ange of open space , spor ting and recreational f acilities . 
14.11 One defining char acter istic of Br acknell F orest is its w ealth of g reen infr astructure such 
as open space trees and outdoor recreation which reflects the pr inciples estab lished in the 
creation of the Br acknell Ne w Town. This legacy includes long standing sites such as Lily Hill 
Park which successfully combines spor ting pro vision, preser vation of a histor ic landscape and 
a haven for wildlif e and people . The legacy has been contin ued in ne w developments such as 
The P arks which embr ace the same ideals . Within the b uilt-up areas of the Borough there are 
natur al open spaces of v arious siz es that are in easy reach of the Borough’ s residents and 
workers. 
14.12 Regular use of natur al open spaces and spor ts facilities is kno wn to benefit health and 
wellbeing.  An activ e health y lifestyle pro vides benefits f or the ph ysical and mental health of 
residents . Access to open spaces , spor ts and recreational f acilities has been a consistently 
popular aspects of lif e in Br acknell F orest with residents and visitors . To meet the needs of a 
growing population, and to maintain quality of lif e, these f acilities should be protected, enhanced, 
maintained and supplemented with ne w or impro ved ones close to where ne w developments 
will be located. 
Objectives 
B - Protect / enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
F - Strong comm unities 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment  
I - Infr astructure 
208 Policy LP 33 
Play, open space and spor ts pr ovision 
1. The Bor ough’ s pla y, open space and spor ts pr ovision will be pr otected and 
enhanced.  Development m ust pr ovide f or an y pla y, open space and spor ting needs 
it creates.  Development pr oposals should: 
i. protect e xisting,  enhance and/or pr ovide ne w Open Space of Pub lic Value 
(OSPV) and Built Spor ts Facilities in line with defined quantity and quality 
standar ds; 
ii. protect,  enhance and pr ovide connectivity between OSPV and Built Spor ts 
Facilities thr ough the use of the f ootpath and c ycleway netw ork, the Pub lic 
Rights of Way netw ork, and long-distance recreational r outes; 
iii. enab le beneficial c hang es to the recreational function of e xisting OSPV and 
Built Spor ts Facilities where this is suppor ted b y evidence of local demand; 
iv. promote the dual use of facilities suc h as sc hools f or comm unity recreational 
purposes;  and, 
v. impr ove access to recreational activity in the countr yside (inc luding the Green 
Belt) where this does not harm its function or c haracter . 
14.13 The protection and enhancement of pla y, open spaces and spor ts facilities is a core 
part of the Council’ s strategy , theref ore the loss of e xisting pro vision will be resisted.  Policy LP 
32 'Protection of comm unity f acilities and ser vices' will protect e xisting f acilities and ensure that 
new facilities are pro vided.   Standards f or the pro vision of OSPV are set out in Policy LP 
34 'Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic Value'. 
14.14 The Council will contin ue to mitigate the impact of ne w development on pla y, open 
space and spor ts facilities b y: 
i. Secur ing the pro vision of ne w facilities either in-kind or through financial contr ibutions; 
and, 
ii. Secur ing financial contr ibutions to wards the impro vement of e xisting f acilities .  This will 
be through the Plus One Pr inciple (where ne w developments pro vide contr ibutions to 
increase the capacity of e xisting f acilities) and to achie ve other objectiv es such as 
biodiv ersity net gain. 
14.15 Play, open space and spor ts facilities f all into tw o main categor ies: 
i. OSPV (e .g. parks, woodlands and spor t pitches);  and, 
ii. Built spor ts facilities (e .g. spor ts halls , swimming / leisure pools , ice r inks, ski centres , 
gyms and fitness centres , indoor tennis centres , climbing w alls, indoor bo wls and other 
indoor spor ts facilities). 
209 14.16 The land on which pla y, open space and recreational f acilities are located is called 
OSPV and can be broadly classified as Activ e OSPV or P assiv e OSPV : 
14.17 Activ e OSPV compr ises children’ s play areas , spor ts pitches and f acilities , golf courses , 
state par ks, allotments , jogging/w alking routes , school pla ying fields , artificial g rass pitches , 
multi-use games areas (MUGAs) and inf ormal kic k-about areas . 
14.18 Passiv e OSPV compr ises w oodland, g reen corr idors , SANG, nature areas , picnic areas 
and amenity open space . 
14.19 OSPV  can be classified as: 
i. Public open space , which is land a vailab le for satisfying the recreational needs of the local 
comm unity, such as pitches , play areas or countr y par ks and is usually maintained b y the 
Borough or Town and P arish Councils;  and, 
ii. Private open space , which is land that ser ves a similar pur pose b ut ma y have restr icted 
public access , such as golf courses , horse r iding centres;  or Ministr y of Def ence land which 
can include land with no pub lic access . 
14.20 In both cases , its pub lic value is der ived from its contr ibution either to the recreational 
needs of the comm unity and/or from that which its openness mak es to the char acter and 
appear ance of the locality , and to the quality of lif e. In pro viding ne w OSPV , land will only count 
towards the OSPV standard if there is a guar anteed and secured comm unity use of the space . 
This can include educational open land where it can be secured f or the joint benefit of the school 
and the comm unity. Exceptions to this could include sensitiv e ecological areas where there is 
a need to restr ict pub lic access . 
14.21 Development proposals can pro vide ne w OSPV and b uilt spor ts facilities to meet the 
needs of residents and/or contr ibute to wards enhancing e xisting pro vision if the y increase the 
capacity of the space to accommodate the residents from a ne w development.  A de velopment 
site might pro vide connectivity betw een tw o existing open spaces such as pro viding a wildlif e 
corridor or w alking route . However, such connecting routes will only count to wards the OSPV 
standards if the y include an element of useab le open space alongside the connection such as 
a footpath with a wildlif e corr idor. 
14.22 Oppor tunities to incor porate and enhance g reen infr astructure and to achie ve biodiv ersity 
net gain will be sought within pla y, open space and spor ts facilities where the y are compatib le 
with such uses . Theref ore, this policy should be read and be implemented alongside Policy LP 
46 'Biodiv ersity'  and Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure'  to ensure eff ective deliv ery of open 
space and other Green Infr astructure assets . 
14.23 Public Rights of Way (PRoW) and long-distance recreational routes such as the 
Bracknell F orest Ramb lers Route or the Binfield Br idleway Circuit are v aluab le assets f or local 
comm unities and should alw ays be protected, unless alter nativ e access can be pro vided to an 
acceptab le standard and impro ved where possib le. Where there is oppor tunity , impro vements 
will be sought to the quality and accessibility of PRoW and other routes through widening, 
resurf acing, replacing stiles/gates and biodiv ersity projects .  Where a PRoW is located in the 
countr yside (including Green Belt) enhancements should not negativ ely impact on their e xisting 
rural attr ibutes. This reflects objectiv es set out in the Rights of Way Impro vement Plan. 
210 14.24 The Pub lic Open Space and Spor ts (POSS)  (71) study identifies se veral oppor tunities 
to link PRoW routes in the Borough as w ell as impro ve their biodiv ersity v alue. The POSS policy 
framework is  intended to w ork in conjunction with the POSS study projects and Infr astructure 
Deliv ery Plan (IDP).   This will ensure de velopers can deliv er identified projects to enhance the 
Public Rights of Way netw ork and other routes . 
14.25 There ma y be oppor tunities to change the function of an e xisting open space from one 
typology to another , such as changing an amenity space to a spor ts pitch to ensure that e xisting 
recreational f acilities do not stagnate or where there is a sur plus of a par ticular type . This could 
be acceptab le where e vidence demonstr ates a shor tfall in the open space typology that the 
intended change in function is proposed to fill. 
14.26 In addition to its pr imary function, open space also contr ibutes to cooling the urban 
environment.  OSPV should also be designed to create saf e and secure en vironments with 
appropr iate lighting and passiv e sur veillance . These matters should be considered in tandem 
with other policies in the Local Plan, including the consider ation of light pollution under Policy 
LP 52 'P ollution and hazards' 
14.27 School pla ying fields can be a useful resource f or the local comm unity where , for 
example , they can be used f or non-school activity at w eekends . This pro vides the local 
comm unity (e .g. football teams) a f acility to use whilst gener ating an income f or schools . 
Theref ore, school pla ying fields ma y count wholly or par tly (depending on conditions of usage) 
towards the OSPV amount b ut only if the y are secured f or comm unity use b y agreement. 
14.28 The countr yside (including the Green Belt) can pro vide an impor tant resource f or 
recreational activities such as horse-r iding and w alking, on pub lic rights of w ay and in countr yside 
parks and SANG.  However, some activities can cause localised issues such as noise and tr affic 
problems . Theref ore ne w recreational pro vision should be considered against matters such as 
landscape impact, residential amenity , char acter and openness , and be considered with other 
relevant policies in the Local Plan. 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy (par agraph 97) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Open space , spor ts and recreational f acilities , pub lic rights 
of way and local g reen space) 
Play Open Space and Spor ts study (2019) Pla ying Pitch Str ategy (2019) 
Planning Ob ligations SPD (2015) 
Parks and Open Space Str ategy (2012) 
Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area  SPD (2018) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT OR 
14.29 Monitor ing 
71 http://consult.br acknell-f orest.go v.uk/file/4751238 
211 Number of IDP projects implemented 
Amount of S106 ob ligations (financial contr ibutions and land, w orks in kind) secured f or 
the implemented IDP project. 
212 14.3 Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic Value 
Objective 
B - Protect / enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
F - Strong comm unities 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
I - Infr astructure 
Policy LP 34 
Standar ds for Open Space of Pub lic Value 
1. Residential de velopment should pr ovide Open Space of Pub lic Value (OSPV) 
at a standar d of 4.3 hectares (ha) per 1000 per sons,  comprising 2 ha of Active 
OSPV and 2.3 ha of P assive OSPV . This can be thr ough ne w provision and/or 
financial contrib utions,  by agreement with the Council depending on site 
circumstances. 
2. Development will be appr oved whic h provides and maintains OSPV in 
accor dance with the quantity standar ds listed in Table A, that is reasonab ly 
accessib le from the de velopment (T able C) and is of high quality design. 
3. Financial contrib utions made in lieu of on-site pr ovision will fund enhancement 
of the capacity , quality and accessibility of e xisting OSPV in accor dance with 
the Plus One Principle and the standar ds in Tables B and C.   
4. Where ver possib le, relevant de velopment should impr ove the connectivity of 
OSPV whic h ma y inc lude creating ne w routes or the enhancement of e xisting 
routes 
14.30 Development will be required to contr ibute to wards the pro vision of ne w, or the 
impro vement of e xisting, OSPV .  How this is achie ved will depends on the site circumstances , 
including the scale of de velopment and SANG arr angements . The deliv ery of planned OSPV 
within a site will be secured b y planning ob ligation and will nor mally include pro vision to secure 
its future maintenance and pub lic access f or the lif e-time of the de velopment.  OSPV on an 
alternativ e site and pro vided b y others , may be funded b y the use of planning ob ligations . The 
strategy will include on-site pro vision of open space and financial contr ibutions to wards off-site 
provision which will be as defined projects in v arious documents such as the Pla ying Pitch 
Strategy (PPS) , Pla y, Open Space and Spor ts (POSS) and the IDP which are deliv ered f or 
the benefit of the de velopment.   
213 14.31 The type of pro vision will depend on local needs and projects identified b y the Council. 
It should be noted that there is a par ticular need f or more allotments and spor ts pitches (g rass 
and ar tificial) as identified in the Br acknell F orest Pla ying Pitch Str ategy (PPS) (2019) (72). 
14.32 The f ollowing tab le sets out the e xpected arr angements f or meeting the OSPV standard 
set out in the policy f or diff erent site circumstances .  In Table A ro w C (sites betw een 1 and 2 
hectares), through good planning some on-site OSPV pro vision ma y be accommodated on 
sites betw een 1 and 2 hectares .  
14.33 The standards is der ived from a pre vious  requirement of 30% on-site pro vision and 
70% b y financial contr ibutions in-lieu of pro vision.   
14.34 If new OSPV is tr ansferred to the Council a comm uted maintenance sum will also be 
required f or the assumed lif etime of the de velopment.  If more pr actical and of g reater benefit; 
there will be the potential f or off-site mitigation (to wards pro viding, e xpanding, or impro ving 
local open space and/or recreational f acilities) and/ or on-going maintenance . The Council ma y 
accept the pr ivate o wnership of OSPV pro vided its pub lic accessibility and maintenance is 
guaranteed. 
Table A OSPV Standar ds 
Expected arrang ements to meet the OSPV 
standar d Site cir cumstances 
There is no requirement f or the on-site 
Passiv e OSPV . The Council will accept a financial 
contr ibution in-lieu of P assiv e OSPV pro vision. 1 Site o ver 2 hectares where an on-site SANG is pro vided. A 
On-site pro vision of Activ e OSPV at a standard 
of 2 hectares per 1000 persons . 2 
On site P assiv e and Activ e OSPV at 4.3ha/1000 
persons . Sites o ver 2 hectares where the SANG is pro vided off-site; 
or a SANG is not required;or sites of 50 dw ellings or more 
betw een 5km and 7km of the  TBHSP A designation. B 
On-site OSPV of 1.4 hectares per 1000 persons and 
financial contr ibution calculated at a standard of 2.9 
hectares per 1000 persons to wards off-site 
mitigation (providing, e xpanding, maintaining or 
impro ving OSPV) Sites betw een 1 and 2 hectares C 
Financial contr ibution to wards pro viding, e xpanding, 
or impro ving OSPV . Sites under 1 hectare D 
Quality Standar ds – The Plus One Principle 
14.35 The Plus One Pr inciple is a quality impro vement standard f or the contin uous 
impro vement of all OSPV on a prog ressiv e basis . The standard requires the impro vement of 
OSPV f or example from a good quality r ating to a v ery good quality r ating using quality 
assessment cr iteria based upon Green Flag A ward assessments . It was first de veloped in the 
Council’ s study of open space (73) which suppor ted the Core Str ategy De velopment Plan 
Document (2008) and w as subsequently adopted b y the Council in the P arks and Open Spaces 
Strategy(74).  The quality auditing process has been repeated in the latest POSS study which 
recommended a contin uation of the Plus One Pr inciple as a quality standard to impro ve the 
quality of pla y, open space and spor ts facilities . 
72 4b 
https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base 
73 Bracknell F orest Borough Study of open space , spor ts, recreational and leisure f acilities . (PPG17) (2006) 
74 Bracknell F orest P arks and Open Spaces Str ategy (2012) 
214 14.36 The Plus One Pr inciple (T able B) will be used to quantify impro vements to OSPV 
including to maintain OSPV which is already r ated as e xcellent to k eep it as an e xcellent r ated 
space .  New OSPV should meet  the e xcellent standard with guar anteed maintenance to ensure 
its quality does not decline . Where de velopment contr ibutes to wards off-site OSPV pro vision, 
financial contr ibutions will fund quality and capacity impro vements of e xisting OSPV . These 
projects will usually be carr ied out f or the benefit of the de velopment b y the Council or the par ish 
/ town councils . 
Table B Plus One Principle ratings (based on Green Fla g Award criteria) 
Impr ovement in quality Existing quality rating of OSPV 
Good quality Very poor , poor or moder ate quality 
Very good quality Good quality 
Excellent quality Very good quality 
Maintain e xcellent quality Excellent 
14.37 New OSPV should be readily accessib le to its users (including f auna) in accordance 
with the f ollowing OSPV Accessibility Standards .   Schemes to achie ve these standards should 
be prepared in par tnership with the Council who will de velop projects across the Borough to 
achie ve the desired OSPV pro vision.   These will be a star ting point in the consider ation of 
planning applications with the o verall aim to ha ve comprehensiv e locally accessib le OSPV 
across the Borough.   
14.38 Links and poc ket green spaces can be achie ved through small biodiv ersity f eature 
such as hedgero w and tree g roups .  Linear g reen corr idors with pla y and biodiv ersity f eatures 
will  be impor tant in high density locations such as  Br acknell Town Centre .  The standards are 
designed f or all types of pro vision whether the y are large f ormal par ks or small amenity areas 
within the local street scene . 
215 Table C OSPV Accessibility Standar ds 
Rationale /Sour ce   OSPV 
Type Typology 
Locally der ived 
standard based on 
experience 400m w alking distance Local Access to a par k and garden within 
400m of home 1 Activ e/ 
Passiv e A. Parks and 
Gardens 
4000m dr iving distance Strategic Access to a destination par k or 
open space within 4km 2 
Locally der ived 
standard based on 
existing biodiv ersity 
character of the 
Borough 240m w alking distance Local Access to Nature 5 min utes w alk 
(240m) from all homes 3 Passiv e B. Natur al and 
Semi Natur al 
(including 
urban 
woodlands) 
The Woodland Trust 
(Space f or People – 
Targeting action f or 
woodland access , 
Jan 2015) 500m w alking distance No person should liv e more than 500 
metres from at least one area of 
accessib le woodland of no less than 2 
hectares in siz e. 4 
C. Green 
Corridors 
4000m dr iving distance There should also be at least one area of 
accessib le woodland of no less than 20 
hectares within 4 kilometres (8 kilometre 
round-tr ip) of people’ s homes . 5 
Fields in Trust (FIT) 
Standards  
(Guidance f or 100m w alking distance LAP 6 Activ e D. Children and 
people 
(Children’ s 
Play) 400m w alking distance LEAP 7 
1000m dr iving distance NEAP 8 
Outdoor and Pla y – 
Beyond the six acre 
standard, England) 700m dr iving distance Other : Muga, Skateboard  par k Teenage 
play, kickabout, paddling pool/splash pad 
etc. 9 
1200m dr iving distance All pro vision:  Football, 10 Activ e E. Outdoor 
sports facilities 
Cricket, Rugb y Union, Hoc key, Bowls, 
Tennis , Baseball, Softball 
1200m dr iving distance Selected schools whose pitch pro vision 
is also used b y the pub lic 11 Activ e F. School 
facilities 
Connectivity 
14.39 All de velopment sites , not just residential, ma y offer the oppor tunity to impro ve the 
connectivity of OSPV .  The Br acknell Town Centre sites will require a combination of off-site 
contr ibutions to enhance then capacity of e xisting open spaces and small on-site pro vision 
such as pla y areas (including accessib le indoor pro vision), MUGA’ s and a connected netw ork 
of linear par ks and small treed areas . 
Brac knell Town Centre 
14.40 Bracknell Town Centre requires an approach to open space that will allo w a combination 
of on and off site contr ibutions to enhance the capacity of the e xisting open space and pro vided 
small b ut functional on-site pro vision.   Theref ore sites within  (or within close pro ximity 
to) Bracknell Town Centre will be considered on a case b y case basis .  It is e xpected that linear 
corridors with pla y areas , a skateboard area, a Multi-Use Game Area (MUGA), trees and planting 
can be achie ved to an appropr iate quantitativ e standards and be functional and eff ective when 
supplemented b y financial contr ibutions to impro ve off-site OSPV and accessibility to and from 
the site . 
216 Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
NPPF 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Open space , spor ts and recreation f acilities , pub lic rights of 
way and the ne w Local Green Space) 
Bracknell F orest P arks and Open Spaces Str ategy (2012). 
Bracknell F orest Pla y, Open Space and Spor ts (POSS) study (2019). 
Bracknell F orest Pla ying Pitch Str ategy (PPS) (2019). 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
14.41 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications . 
Implementation of the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan. 
S106 Ag reements and Planning Conditions . 
The Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy (CIL) and / or other infr astructure funding mechanisms . 
14.42 Monitor ing 
S106 Ag reement / CIL / planning condition monitor ing 
Amount of OSPV (hectares) secured in S106 Ag reement 
217 15 De velopment aff ecting the countr yside 
and Green Belt 
15.1 De velopment in the countr yside 
15.1 The Council is committed to protecting the char acter of the countr yside f or its o wn sak e 
for the benefit of present and future gener ations .  A pr iority for the Council is to maintain the 
distinction betw een b uilt-up areas and the countr yside b y controlling the spread of de velopment 
outside defined settlements (see Policy LP 38 'Separ ation of settlements' ).  The settlement 
boundar ies ha ve been re viewed and redefined to ensure that the y are , or will be , strong and 
defensib le. 
15.2 This plan allocates sufficient land to meet future de velopment needs and theref ore land 
outside of these allocations and the defined settlements should be protected.   Through its 
assessment of land to allocate , the Council has concluded that the areas outside of defined 
settlements are gener ally in unsustainab le locations , poor ly related to f acilities required on a 
day to da y basis . 
15.3 This policy sets out the types of de velopment that are appropr iate within the countr yside , 
which f or the pur pose of this policy is defined as areas outside of defined settlements , and 
outside of the Green Belt.   It ensures that the intr insic char acter and beauty of the countr yside 
is protected,  whilst suppor ting the r ural econom y.  A separ ate policy relates to the Green Belt 
(Policy LP 36 'Green Belt' ). This policy should be read alongside the policy relating to landscape 
character ( Policy LP 37 'Landscape char acter (outside of defined settlements) ' ).  For 
consider ation of proposals relating to r ural workers dw ellings and equestr ian uses (see Policy 
LP 39 'Dw ellings f or rural workers ' and Policy LP 41 'Equestr ian uses' ).   
Objectives 
B– Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
218 Policy LP 35 
Development in the countr yside 
1. Outside  the defined settlements and the Green Belt (as defined on the P olicies 
Map),  the f ollowing f orms of de velopment will be permitted where the y are 
consistent with national planning polic y and,  where rele vant, comprise: 
i. The rede velopment or infilling of pre viousl y developed land; 
ii. The pr ovision of utilities where a countr yside location is essential; 
iii. New buildings needed to suppor t the rural econom y; 
iv. The replacement,  extension or alteration of e xisting b uildings; 
v. The re-use or con version of e xisting b uildings of permanent and substantial 
construction,   including major alterations,  adaptations or reconstruction; 
vi. Appr opriate c hang es of use of land. 
vii. Facilities f or outdoor spor t and recreation;  or 
viii. The construction of ne w dwellings in accor dance with ( Policy LP 
39 'Dwellings f or rural w orker s '). 
2. All de velopment shall be of a scale appr opriate to its surr oundings,  and sited 
so as to minimise harm to the c haracter and appearance of the rural area and 
the amenities of neighbouring land uses.   It will be e xpected to contrib ute to, 
and enhance the intrinsic c haracter and beauty of the countr yside . 
15.4 Countr yside locations within Br acknell F orest remain close to urban areas .  Theref ore 
development proposals which do not f all within the categor ies listed within the policy , will require 
justification as to wh y the y cannot be located within a defined settlement.    In assessing 
proposals , consider ation will also be giv en to rele vant design/char acter policies ( Policy LP 
15 'Design pr inciples' and Policy LP 42 'Design' ) and design guidance , in addition to the f ollowing 
matters: 
Previousl y developed land    
15.5 National policy promotes the eff ective use of pre viously de veloped sites .  Priority will 
be giv en to de velopment on such sites in line with other aspects of this policy (f or example 
re-use of b uildings).   In consider ing proposals on such sites , development will be e xpected to 
be within the cur tilage of the site , and be appropr iate in scale to its surroundings , and the 
character and appear ance of the area. 
219 Essential  utilities inc luding de velopment f or transpor t infrastructure , and cemeteries  
   
15.6 It is recognised that in cer tain circumstances , it ma y be necessar y to locate essential 
utility pro vision in the countr yside .  This ma y relate to requirements of statutor y under takers 
such as w ater supply , wastewater, gas , electr icity, telecomm unications infr astructure , and 
transpor tation impro vements .  Where proposals are required to be located in the countr yside , 
they must be designed to minimise an y har m to the intr insic char acter and beauty of the 
countr yside , regard will be giv en to the location and scale of proposals . 
Rural econom y    
15.7 It  is recognised that in some cases there will be a need to adapt e xisting sites to help 
suppor t the r ural econom y including b usiness and comm unity needs within the countr yside .  
However, not all sites are in sustainab le locations in ter ms of access to ser vices , and pub lic 
transpor t.  The Council will theref ore suppor t particular uses which need to be located in r ural 
areas and are sustainab ly located, or ha ve the ability f or their location to be made more  
sustainab le (for example through impro ving access b y foot, cycle and pub lic transpor t).  
15.8  Any proposed de velopment will need to minimise its impact upon the char acter and 
appear ance of the area.   The Council will require the need f or proposals to be e videnced.   They 
should be of an appropr iate scale , design and mater ials ha ving regard to the locality (f or example 
location within the site , scale in relation to plot siz e, and scale in relation to an y existing/nearb y 
buildings).   Consider ation should firstly be giv en to the re-use of e xisting  b uildings within the 
site, before ne w buildings are considered.    
15.9 The estab lishment of ne w businesses will require regard to be had to other cr iteria within 
this policy  (such as de velopment of pre viously de veloped sites and re-use of b uildings).   Other 
relevant policies w ould include Policy LP 28 'Smaller b usinesses' , Policy LP 39 'Dw ellings f or 
rural workers ', and Policy LP 41 'Equestr ian uses' .   
Extensions,  outb uildings and replacements of e xisting b uildings 
15.10 Proposals m ust be designed to minimise an y har m to the intr insic char acter and beauty 
of the countr yside .  When consider ing proposals , the star ting point will be a compar ison of the 
size of the e xisting b uilding with that proposed.   In deter mining whether proposals are detr imental 
to the r ural char acter and appear ance of the countr yside , the Council will tak e into account: 
the siz e of the plot;   
the char acter of the site and its surroundings;   
the siting within the plot;   
floorspace , volume and height;  and,  
the design of the proposal.    
Re-use or con version of b uildings 
15.11 The re-use of b uildings pro vides oppor tunities f or the div ersification of the r ural econom y 
and contr ibutes to the economic g rowth of the area.   It can also contr ibute to wards the reduction 
in demand f or ne w buildings in the countr yside and can be a means of conser ving tr aditional 
buildings which are a distinctiv e feature within the Borough’ s rural landscape .  Where a proposal 
relates to the re-use of an ag ricultur al building, it m ust not result in the need to constr uct 
additional ag ricultur al buildings , unless it can be demonstr ated that the b uilding to be re-used 
220 is no longer suitab le or needed f or an ag ricultur al use .  Where b uildings are to be con verted, 
they should be of a per manent and substantial constr uction, as demonstr ated b y a str uctur al 
survey.  They should also be capab le of re-use without major alter ations , adaptations or 
reconstr uction (insof ar as an y proposed w orks fall be yond reasonab le repair that w ould not 
require the submission of a planning application). 
15.12 Whilst the re-use of a v acant b uilding f or residential accommodation ma y be acceptab le, 
some associated f eatures such as f ences and w alls, driveways, domestic par apher nalia and 
ancillar y buildings could har m the char acter of the area.   The creation of ne w residential 
curtilages around ne wly con verted buildings can adv ersely aff ect the unde veloped, r ural char acter 
of an area, ha ving an urbanising eff ect.  Any new cur tilage , and associated boundar y treatment, 
should be propor tionate to the siz e of the b uilding, and be in k eeping with the surrounding r ural 
character .  Enhancements to the immediate area will theref ore be sought (f or example additional 
landscaping), and the remo val of per mitted de velopment r ights considered.    
15.13 The Council will tak e into account the lik ely cum ulativ e impact of a proposal, including 
having regard to its visual impact on the surroundings and highw ay safety. The eff ect of these 
and similar f eatures will be assessed when dealing with re-use applications . 
Chang es of use of land 
15.14 In assessing proposals , regard will be had to whether the y have a g reater impact than 
existing uses on the r ural char acter and appear ance of the area.   The scale and nature of the 
change of use should be appropr iate to its location.   This will include consider ation of associated 
boundar y treatment.   Enhancements to the immediate area (f or example landscaping) will 
theref ore be sought, and remo val of per mitted de velopment r ights considered.    
Proposals f or outdoor recreation 
15.15 Appropr iate recreational uses in the countr yside will be those which are essentially 
outdoor and respect and maintain the unde veloped r ural char acter and appear ance of the 
countr yside .  This w ould include uses such as golf courses .  Buildings required to suppor t the 
recreational use will nor mally be ancillar y to the main outdoor recreational use and will be small 
in scale .  Consider ation will also be giv en to the impact of ar tificial lighting (such as floodlights), 
upon the char acter and appear ance of the countr yside .  In assessing proposals , consider ation 
will also be had to Policy LP 52 'P ollution and hazards' . 
New dwellings  
15.16 Isolated ne w homes in the countr yside will be resisted, and will only be per mitted if 
there is demonstr able need, such as f or essential r ural workers to liv e per manently at or near 
their place of w ork (Policy LP 39 'Dw ellings f or rural workers '), or their design is of e xceptional 
quality .  
Minerals and Waste De velopment 
15.17 Miner als and Waste de velopment proposals will be assessed against the Miner als and 
Waste policies within the de velopment plan. 
221 Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par a. 79, 83 and 170)  
Landscape Recommendations repor t (LUC , September 2016)  
Site Assessment (2017) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Housing needs of diff erent g roups -  Reference ID: 
67-009-20190722 and ID: 67-010-20190722) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
15.18 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
15.19 Monitor ing 
Number of applications/appeals g ranted on land outside defined settlements in the 
countr yside each y ear. 
222 15.2 Green Belt 
15.20 The main aim of Green Belt is to pre vent urban spr awl by keeping land per manently 
open.   The Green Belt also pro vides oppor tunities f or people to access the countr yside (within 
the Green Belt), to protect land f or ag riculture , forestr y and similar land uses , and f or nature 
conser vation.   Appro ximately 3,843 Ha (just o ver 35%) of Br acknell F orest lies within the Green 
Belt.  National policy sets out that whilst most f orms of de velopment are inappropr iate in the 
Green Belt there are some e xceptions .  These include de velopment such as ne w buildings f or 
agriculture and f orestr y, and the limited infilling or rede velopment of pre viously de veloped land, 
where it w ould not ha ve a g reater impact on the openness of the Green Belt.   The f ollowing 
Policy sets out the approach to de velopment in the Green Belt in Br acknell F orest.   Where 
development relates to r ural workers dw ellings and equestr ian uses , this policy should be read 
in conjunction with P olicies Policy LP 39 'Dw ellings f or rural workers 'and Policy LP 41 'Equestr ian 
uses' .    
Objectives 
B– Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
Policy LP 36 
Green Belt 
1. Proposals f or de velopment in the Green Belt (as defined on the P olicies Map) 
will be determined in accor dance with rele vant national polic y (75):   
i. inappr opriate de velopment will not be appr oved e xcept in ver y special 
circumstances;   
ii. appr opriate de velopment will be permitted where it is consistent with the 
other policies in this plan,  providing it preser ves the openness of the Green 
Belt. 
2. Within Green Belt villa ges (as defined on the P olicies Map),  limited infilling will 
be permitted,  subject to it causing no unacceptab le harm to the Green Belt.    
15.21 The NPPF (par agraph 134) defines the pur poses of the Green Belt as: 
to chec k the unrestr icted spr awl of large b uilt-up areas;   
to pre vent neighbour ing to wns merging into one another ; 
to assist in saf eguarding the countr yside from encroachment; 
to preser ve the setting and special char acter of histor ic towns; and, 
to assist in urban regener ation, b y encour aging the recycling of derelict and other urban 
land. 
75 NPPF or successor documents 
223 15.22 Another k ey aspect of the Green Belt is k eeping land per manently open.   Theref ore, 
impact upon openness will be an impor tant consider ation in the deter mination of all rele vant 
proposals in the Green Belt.   Openness can ha ve both spatial and visual impacts .  In the case 
of ne w buildings , it will be rele vant to also consider the v olume of proposals , as one indicator 
of impact. 
15.23 Inappropr iate de velopment will not be appro ved unless v ery special circumstances 
can be clear ly demonstr ated.   
Replacement  b uildings 
15.24 Replacement b uildings are e xpected to be sited on or close to the position of the or iginal 
building, unless it can be clear ly demonstr ated that an alter nativ e position w ould reduce the 
overall impact on the openness of the Green Belt. 
15.25 When consider ing proposals f or replacement b uildings , the star ting point will be the 
size of the e xisting b uilding.   When assessing whether a replacement b uilding is mater ially 
larger than the one it replaces the Council will compare the siz e of the e xisting b uilding with 
that proposed, taking account of siting, floorspace , bulk and height, together with the eff ect of 
the proposals on the openness and char acter of the area.    
15.26 As a gener al guide , a replacement b uilding that w ould result in an increase in the 
volume of the e xisting b uilding b y more than 20% is v ery likely to be regarded as mater ially 
larger .  The Council will calculate v olume as a measurement of e xternal str ucture , inclusiv e of 
roof v oids, and basement areas . 
15.27 The floorspace of e xisting outb uildings will not nor mally be tak en as counting to wards 
the floorspace of the e xisting b uilding to be replaced, unless the outb uilding(s) is closely related 
to the e xisting b uilding (f or example , is of substantial constr uction, within the cur tilage of (and 
within 5m of), and ancillar y to the main use of the b uilding), and it has not been pre viously tak en 
into account as par t of an y replacements of the b uilding itself , or other b uildings on site .   Where 
a proposal seeks to include floorspace/v olume of outb uilding(s), and this is deemed acceptab le, 
the Council will consider the remo val of per mitted de velopment r ights f or future outb uildings .  
The inclusion of a basement to increase floorspace does not preclude it from being tak en into 
account when consider ing whether a replacement b uilding is ‘mater ially larger’  than the or iginal. 
Re-use or con version of b uildings 
15.28 The re-use of b uildings pro vides oppor tunities f or the div ersification of the r ural econom y 
and contr ibutes to the economic g rowth of the area.   It can also contr ibute to wards the reduction 
in demand f or ne w buildings in the Green Belt and can be a means of conser ving tr aditional 
buildings which are a distinctiv e feature within the Borough’ s rural landscape .   
15.29 Where a proposal relates to the re-use of an ag ricultur al building, it m ust not result in 
the need to constr uction additional ag ricultur al buildings , unless it can be demonstr ated that 
the b uilding to be re-used is no longer suitab le/needed f or an ag ricultur al use .  In Apr il 2015, 
the Go vernment updated per mitted de velopment r ights allo wing the change of use of ag ricultur al 
buildings to other uses , subject to cer tain limitations and conditions .  Theref ore, this policy will 
only apply where per mitted de velopment r ights (including an y future amendments) cannot be 
exercised.    
224 15.30 Where b uildings are to be con verted, the y should be of a per manent and substantial 
constr uction, as demonstr ated b y a str uctur al sur vey, and be capab le of re-use without major 
alterations , adaptations or reconstr uction (insof ar as said w orks fall be yond reasonab le repair 
that w ould not require the submission of a planning application).    
15.31 Buildings can often be con verted without causing mater ial har m to the open char acter 
of the Green Belt.   However, the Council recognises that par ticular uses or le vels of use can 
either directly or indirectly ha ve an adv erse eff ect.  For example , whilst the re-use of a v acant 
building f or residential accommodation in itself ma y be acceptab le, some associated f eatures 
such as f ences and w alls, driveways, domestic par apher nalia and ancillar y buildings could 
harm the open char acter of the area.   The creation of ne w residential cur tilages around ne wly 
converted b uildings can adv ersely aff ect the unde veloped, r ural char acter of an area, ha ving 
an urbanising eff ect.  Any new cur tilage , and associated boundar y treatment, should be 
propor tionate to the siz e of the b uilding, and be in k eeping with the surrounding r ural char acter , 
and not cause substantial har m to the openness of the Green Belt.   Enhancements to the 
immediate area (f or example landscaping) will theref ore be sought, and remo val of per mitted 
development r ights considered.    
15.32 The Council will tak e into account the lik ely cum ulativ e impact of a proposal, including 
having regard to its visual impact on the surroundings and highw ay safety.  The eff ect of these 
and similar f eatures will be assessed when dealing with re-use applications . 
Villages in the Green Belt 
15.33 As set out in Policy LP 20 'Identification of Green Belt villages'  some village areas ha ve 
been defined on the P olicies Map , for the pur poses of allo wing limited infilling (in line with 
paragraph 145(e) of the NPPF).   This reflects the need to protect the openness of the Green 
Belt.  For the pur poses of this policy , limited infilling is considered to be the de velopment of a 
small gap in an otherwise contin uous b uilt-up frontage , or the small-scale rede velopment of 
existing proper ties within such a frontage .  The infill plot should be compar able in siz e and 
shape to those de veloped plots which adjoin the site and m ust ha ve an e xisting frontage to a 
suitab le road.     The proposal should be appropr iate to the scale of the locality and not ha ve 
an adv erse impact on the char acter and openness of the Green Belt, or the local en vironment.    
Extensions and alterations 
15.34 The e xtension or alter ation of b uildings in the Green Belt is not considered to constitute 
inappropr iate de velopment, pro vided that it does not result in dispropor tionate additions o ver 
and abo ve the siz e of the or iginal b uilding, and is theref ore b y definition, har mful to the openness 
of the Green Belt.    
15.35 The star ting point f or consider ation of proposals f or extensions to e xisting b uildings in 
the Green Belt will be the siting, floorspace , bulk and height of the 'or iginal' b uilding.  This means 
the b uilding that e xisted on 1 J uly 1948 or , if constr ucted after 1 J uly 1948, as it w as or iginally 
built.  Any extensions and outb uildings b uilt subsequently will not be considered par t of the 
original b uilding.    
15.36 The floorspace of outb uildings will not nor mally be tak en as counting to wards the floor 
space of the ‘original b uilding’  unless the f ollowing applies .  Where an outb uilding(s) is of 
substantial constr uction, within the cur tilage of (and within 5m of), and ancillar y to the main use 
of the b uilding, and there is clear e vidence it w as built concurrently with the b uilding being 
extended/altered (such as a dw elling with a detached gar age), it will be considered to compr ise 
225 part of the ‘original b uilding’.   Where a proposal seeks to include floorspace/v olume of 
outbuilding(s), and this is deemed acceptab le, the Council will nor mally remo ve per mitted 
development r ights f or future outb uildings .  
15.37 When assessing whether a proposed e xtension represents a dispropor tionate addition, 
the Council will compare the siz e of the ‘original’  building with the proposed e xtension, taking 
account of siting, floorspace , bulk and height, together with the  eff ect of the proposals on the 
openness and char acter of the area.   The floor space of basements included in an y proposal 
will be tak en into account when consider ing whether an e xtension or alter ation is a 
dispropor tionate addition.    
15.38 As a gener al guide , an e xtension that w ould result individually , or cum ulativ ely with 
other e xtensions , in an increase in the v olume of the or iginal b uilding of more than 40% is v ery 
likely to be regarded as dispropor tionate .  The Council will calculate v olume as a measurement 
of external str ucture , inclusiv e of roof v oids, and basement areas . 
15.39 New outb uildings within the cur tilage of a residential proper ty will be regarded as 
inappropr iate de velopment, being b y definition, har mful (as the y are not listed as an e xception 
within national policy). 
Chang es of use of land 
15.40 Changes of use of land are not considered to be inappropr iate de velopment, pro vided 
they preser ve the openness and do not conflict with the pur poses of the Green Belt.   In assessing 
proposals , regard will be had to whether the y have a g reater impact than e xisting uses on the 
open, r ural and unde veloped char acter of the Green Belt and whether the y detr act from the 
purposes of including land in it.    This will include an y associated boundar y treatment.   
Enhancements to the immediate area (f or example landscaping) will theref ore be sought, and 
remo val of per mitted de velopment r ights considered.   
Previousl y De veloped Land  
15.41 Limited infilling, or par tial or complete de velopment of pre viously de veloped land is not 
considered to be inappropr iate de velopment, pro vided that it does not ha ve a g reater impact 
upon openness compared to e xisting de velopment.   In assessing impact, consider ation will be 
given to an y change in scale of de velopment, spread of de velopment within the site , and the 
siting, floorspace , bulk and height of b uildings .   
15.42 Proposals f or infilling will need to relate to the present activity on the site , and should 
compr ise de velopment within small gaps in otherwise b uilt up areas .  Any replacement b uildings 
should be sited on or close to the position of the or iginal b uildings , unless it can be clear ly 
demonstr ated that an alter nativ e position w ould reduce the o verall impact on the openness of 
the Green Belt.   Enhancements to the immediate area (f or example landscaping) will theref ore 
be sought, and remo val of per mitted de velopment r ights considered.   
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 2 'Sustainab le locational pr inciples' 
Policy LP 20 'Identification of Green Belt villages' 
226 KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 13) 
Landscape Recommendations repor t (LUC , September 2016) 
Green Belt Re view (Amec , June 2016) 
Green Belt Village Assessment (BFC , February 2018) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
15.43 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
15.44 Monitor ing 
Number of applications/appeals g ranted in the Green Belt each y ear. 
227 15.3 Landscape char acter (outside of defined settlement) 
15.45 Bracknell F orest has a distinct and v aried landscape .  The Council is committed to 
ensur ing that the intr insic char acter and beauty of the countr yside , together with v alued f eatures 
of the landscape are protected and enhanced, whilst enab ling the sustainab le growth necessar y 
for comm unities and the econom y to thr ive.  The policy aims to protect and enhance the 
distinctiv e landscape char acter of land outside of defined settlements (both within and outside 
of the defined Green Belt), including the setting of settlements .  It will need to be demonstr ated 
how development proposals tak e into account and respond positiv ely to the char acter of their 
surroundings .  Particular regard m ust be had to the landscape's v alued f eatures and 
character istics and to the landscape str ategy f or the local char acter area as set out in the 
Landscape Char acter Assessment (2015, or an y subsequent document which supersedes 
this).   
Objectives 
B - Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets  
F – Strong comm unities 
G – Achie ving high quality de velopment 
Policy LP 37 
Landscape c haracter (outside of defined settlements)  
1. Outside of defined settlements,  development pr oposals will be permitted whic h 
recognise and enhance the intrinsic c haracter and beauty of the countr yside 
(including the Green Belt),  and quality of the landscape c haracter area within 
whic h the y are situated (as defined on the P olicies Map),  including the setting 
of settlements. 
2. Development pr oposals will be e xpected to demonstrate: 
i. how the y protect,  enhance and/or restore the condition,  character and 
features whic h contrib ute to the surr ounding landscape c haracter as set 
out in the Landscape Character Assessment;  and, 
ii. that the y maintain and respond positivel y to the v alued f eatures and 
characteristics of the local landscape c haracter area,  and the landscape 
strategy;  and, 
iii. that the y minimise an y negative impacts on landscape c haracter . 
228 15.46 National planning policy recognises the intr insic char acter and beauty of the countr yside 
(including the Green Belt).  Bracknell F orest’ s countr yside pro vides an attr active landscape 
setting f or the settlements and its links with ecological and g reen corr idor netw orks in urban 
areas .  National P olicy also ref ers to proposals contr ibuting to the natur al and local en vironment, 
being sympathetic to local char acter , including the surrounding landscape setting, and 
estab lishing and maintaining a strong sense of place . 
15.47  Bracknell F orest’ s landscapes are en vironmental assets which contr ibute to the 
Borough’ s distinctiv e and v aried landscape char acter .  These landscapes ha ve evolved to their 
present f orm over thousands of y ears from a combination of natur al geomor phological changes 
and human influence .  All landscapes are v alued across Br acknell F orest f or diff erent reasons 
as set out in the Br acknell F orest Landscape Char acter Assessment (2015).    
15.48 The Br acknell F orest Landscape Char acter Assessment identifies a n umber of landscape 
types which are inf ormed b y similar patter ns of geology , topog raphy, vegetation and human 
influences .    These areas include: 
heathland (m uch of which f orms par t of the Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection 
Area),  
woodland (predominantly conif erous plantations), 
grasslands (more e xtensiv e in the nor th of the borough w ere ag riculture is more pre valent), 
and 
wetland habitats (including the main r iver corr idors of The Cut and the Riv er Blac kwater). 
15.49 Landscape char acter areas share gener ic char acter istics with other areas of the same 
types , but are single unique discrete geog raphical areas of landscape type .  The local landscape 
character  areas are as set out in the Landscape Char acter Assessment (and are defined on 
the P olicies Map): 
A1 – Br acknell F orest 
B1 – Cro wthor ne/ Sandhurst Heathland Mosaic 
C1 – Binfield and Warfield Cla y Farmland 
C2 – Winkfield and Cr anbour ne Cla y Farmland  
D1 – The Haz es Wooded Cla yland 
E1 – Blac kwater Riv er Valley 
F1 – Cha vey Down Wooded Sands  
G1 – Easthampstead Wooded Estate 
G2 – Sunninghill Wooded Estate 
H1 – Windsor Great P ark  
H2 – Windsor F orest 
15.50 The Assessment descr ibes the k ey char acter istics that define these landscapes , 
identifies v alued f eatures and char acter istics , forces f or change (such as contin ued pressure 
for de velopment) acting on the landscapes , and pro vides a landscape str ategy f or each 
landscape char acter area. 
229 15.51 The Landscape Char acter Assessment will be used to assess the impact of rele vant 
development proposals on the char acter of landscape , ensur ing that landscape char acter and 
sensitivity are fully considered.   Development proposals will need to demonstr ate ho w the y 
take into account and respond positiv ely to: 
valued landscape f eatures and char acter istics , and 
the defined character istics of the rele vant landscape char acter area, and 
the landscape str ategy f or that landscape char acter area, and  
show ho w an y adv erse impacts will be mitigated. 
15.52 Proposals should strengthen and enhance landscape char acter and local distinctiv eness 
where ver possib le.  This inf ormation could be included in a design and access statement, 
master plan, landscape proposal or Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment (L VIA).   It is 
impor tant that v alued f eatures proposed f or retention and areas f or proposed enhancement 
and mitigation are clear ly sho wn on a plan, so that the o verall impact on the landscape char acter 
can be proper ly assessed.   A propor tionate approach will be tak en depending on the qualities 
and impact on the aff ected landscape , and the nature of the proposed de velopment. 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 2 'Sustainab le locational pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraphs 20, 127, 170) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Design - ref erence ID:  26-007) 
Landscape Char acter Assessment (2015)  
Landscape Recommendations repor t (2015) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
15.53 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications . 
15.54 Monitor ing 
Number of appeals allo wed contr ary to the aims of the Landscape Char acter Assessment. 
230 15.4 Separ ation of settlements 
Objectives 
B - Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets  
F – Strong comm unities 
G – Achie ving high quality de velopment 
Policy LP 38 
Separation of settlements 
1. Within strategic gaps and wedg es defined on the P olicies Map,  development 
will be suppor ted where it can be demonstrated that it w ould not ad versely 
affect the function of the gap or wedg e, and not unacceptab ly reduce the 
physical and visual separation of settlements (or distinct par ts of a settlement) 
either within or adjoining the bor ough. 
15.55 Countr yside areas (including the Green Belt) are often subject to de velopment pressures 
which can threaten their open and unde veloped char acter , which if not resisted could lead to 
a coalescence of settlements thereb y eroding their distinctiv eness .  Consequently , development 
which w ould significantly narro w a ph ysical and/or visual gap betw een settlements , or under mine 
it's function, will not be suppor ted. 
15.56 Development proposals in defined str ategic gaps and w edges should demonstr ate 
how the Landscape Char acter Assessment has been tak en into consider ation, and that identified  
landscape f eatures and functions relating to the separ ation of settlements will not be 
compromised, including on a cum ulativ e basis . 
15.57 The cum ulativ e impact of de velopments is a k ey consider ation because o ver time the 
unique landscape char acter istics of gaps and w edges can be eroded or har med, both ph ysically 
and through visual impacts . Accordingly , the Landscape Char acter Assessment will help inf orm 
the deter mination of planning applications . 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 19 'Identification of str ategic gaps and w edges' 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 2 'Sustainab le locational pr inciples' 
231 KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraphs 20, 127, 170)  
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Design - ref erence ID:  26-007)  
Landscape Char acter Assessment (2015) 
Landscape Recommendations repor t (2015) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
15.58 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications . 
15.59 Monitor ing 
Number of appeals allo wed in str ategic gaps and w edges . 
232 15.5 Dw ellings f or rural workers and occupancy conditions 
15.60 National policy sets out that ne w isolated homes outside of defined settlements should 
be avoided unless specific  circumstances apply such as the essential need f or a r ural worker, 
(including those taking major ity control of a f arm business) to liv e per manently at or near their 
place of w ork. In order to a void pressure f or additional dw ellings f or rural workers there is also 
a need to consider carefully an y proposals to remo ve existing occupancy restr ictions on r ural 
homes .  This policy applies to land outside of defined settlements so should be read in 
conjunction with Policy LP 35 'De velopment in the countr yside' and Policy LP 36 'Green Belt' . 
Objectives 
B– Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
233 Policy LP 39 
Dwellings f or rural w orker s 
1. The construction of a ne w permanent or temporar y rural w orker’ s dwelling will 
normall y be permitted where all the f ollowing criteria are met: 
i. the pr oposed d welling is necessar y to meet the accommodation needs of a 
full-time w orker in a griculture , forestr y or other b usinesses requiring a location 
outside of a defined settlement (inc luding those taking majority contr ol of a 
farm b usiness);  and, 
ii. the agricultural or f orestr y unit or the b usiness activity has been estab lished 
for a minim um of three y ears (at least one of whic h has been pr ofitab le) and is 
demonstrab ly financiall y sound,  both at present and f or the pr ospective future; 
and, 
iii. provision on-site or in the immediate vicinity is essential f or the operation of 
the b usiness as e videnced b y a g enuine functional need;  and, 
iv. no suitab le accommodation e xists or could be made a vailab le in estab lished 
buildings on the site or else where;  and, 
v. the pr oposal does not in volve replacing a d welling disposed of recentl y as 
general market housing;  and, 
vi. the dwelling is appr opriatel y located and is no lar ger than is required to meet 
the operational needs of the b usiness;  and, 
vii. the siting and landscaping of the ne w dwelling minimises the impact on the 
character and appearance of the area and causes no ad verse impact on 
designated sites. 
2.  A temporar y rural w orker’ s dwelling should take the f orm of a cara van or mobile 
home and will be permitted f or no more than three y ears, after whic h the site should 
be restored.   Permission will not be granted f or the erection of a temporar y rural 
worker’ s dwelling in a location where a permanent rural w orker’ s dwelling w ould 
not be permitted. 
3. Acceptab le pr oposals will be , and all e xisting d wellings at the rural enterprise 
may be, subject to a condition or legal a greement tying occupanc y and limiting use 
to the specific rural enterprise or adjacent farmland and b uildings.   
4. Consent f or an y new dwelling will be subject to conditions remo ving permitted 
development rights.   
234 Policy LP 40 
Occupanc y conditions 
1. Applications f or the remo val of occupanc y conditions will be permitted where it 
can be demonstrated that: 
i. there is no long er a need f or accommodation in association with a rural b usiness 
at that site or in the local area (within a 15-20 min ute car journe y); and, 
ii. it can be demonstrated that the b usiness operation at that site is no long er 
financiall y viab le; and, 
iii. the pr oper ty has been marketed f or sale or rent f or a reasonab le period (at least 
1 year) at a price or rental le vel whic h reflects the e xistence of the occupanc y 
condition. 
Rural w orker s dwelling 
15.61 Rural workers are nor mally those in volved in ag riculture , or forestr y, but in special 
circumstances ma y be associated with other r ural-based enter prises such as equestr ian uses . 
It will often be as con venient and more sustainab le for such w orkers to liv e in the urban area 
of the Borough, or suitab le existing dw ellings , so a voiding ne w and potentially intr usive 
development outside of defined settlements . 
15.62 However, there will be some cases where the nature and demand of w ork in ag riculture , 
forestr y and other r ural industr ies mak es it essential f or one or more people engaged in the 
enter prise to liv e at, or v ery close to , the site of their w ork.  Where the functional need f or a 
new rural worker’s dwelling cannot be fulfilled b y another e xisting dw elling or an y other e xisting 
accommodation in the area, the pro vision of a tempor ary dwelling or constr uction of a ne w 
permanent dw elling will be per mitted, subject to such proposals fulfilling all rele vant policy 
requirements . Whether the need f or a dw elling f or an enter prise is essential in an y par ticular 
case , as w ell as the siz e of the dw elling, will depend on the functional needs of the individual 
enter prise and not on the personal pref erences or circumstances of an y of the individuals 
involved. Con venience of being on site does not constitute an essential need.   The need f or a 
secur ity presence will not on its o wn nor mally f orm an acceptab le basis to justify a ne w dw elling.   
15.63 All applications will need to pass both a functional and financial test.  A functional test 
is necessar y to estab lish whether it is essential, f or the proper functioning of the enter prise, for 
one or more w orkers to be readily a vailab le at most times . 
15.64 A financial test will also need to be passed to ensure that the r ural enter prise is 
economically viab le. The Council will tak e a rob ust approach to the assessment of the le vel of 
profitability , as these de velopments remain per manently in the location in spite of an y failure 
of a r ural enter prise. Theref ore the financial test will assess whether the proposed dw elling can 
be sustained in the long ter m by the ag ricultur al activity or enter prise, and the Council will e xpect 
to see details of ho w the enter prise is e xpected to de velop. The applicant should ensure that 
all necessar y information is included with an y planning applications in order f or the Council to 
carry out to its satisf action, the functional and financial tests . This includes b udget books , 
recorded hours etc.   
235 15.65 In order to justify a ne w rural worker’s dwelling an applicant m ust be ab le to conclusiv ely 
demonstr ate that all other potentially a vailab le dw ellings on the ag ricultur al unit or enter prise 
are already totally committed or are unsuitab le. Where applications relate to units where only 
part of the land f orming the enter prise is o wned b y the applicant, the Council will require e vidence 
of land being held on a secure basis or the ready a vailability of suitab le land.  If a need is 
estab lished, a ne w building should be sited so as to minimise the visual impact on the area, 
and the requirements of all rele vant policies of the De velopment Plan will apply . The creation 
of ne w residential cur tilages can adv ersely aff ect the unde veloped, r ural char acter of an area, 
having an urbanising eff ect.  Any new cur tilage , and associated boundar y treatment, should 
be propor tionate to the siz e of the b uilding, and be in k eeping with the surrounding r ural 
character . 
15.66 For the pur poses of this policy in cr iterion v,  'recent' is tak en as being within the tw o 
years pr ior to the submission of a planning application and the applicant will be e xpected to 
confir m this matter . 
15.67 If per mission is giv en for a tempor ary dwelling, the per iod of the tempor ary per mission 
will be clear ly set out and e xtensions to the tempor ary per iod be yond three y ears will not be 
given, unless a satisf actor y case can be made to the Council.  If a per mission is not implemented 
within a y ear of being g ranted, this will used as e vidence to indicate there is no functional need 
for the r ural worker accommodation.  If per manent per mission is g ranted, or the ag ricultur al or 
other use of the site ceases , the tempor ary dwelling will be required to be remo ved and the 
land restored, or where possib le enhanced. 
15.68 The Council will impose occupancy conditions on all ne w workers’ dwellings and where 
an additional dw elling on a f arm holding is per mitted, an occupancy condition ma y, in appropr iate 
circumstances , be applied to the or iginal f armhouse . Any proposal f or an ag ricultur al unit which 
it is considered could be aff ected b y fragmentation will be subject to planning ob ligations to tie 
the dw elling(s) to adjacent f armland and b uildings to pre vent them being sold separ ately. In 
some circumstances , the Council ma y require an ag reement under S106 of the Town and 
Countr y Planning Act 1990 pre venting the sale of the dw elling or par ts of the land separ ately 
from the land f orming the holding. 
15.69 The Council will also consider remo ving cer tain per mitted de velopment r ights f or an y 
dwelling per mitted under this policy , to ensure that the dw elling remains at a siz e, which can 
be justified b y the functional need and can be suppor ted b y the income from the ag ricultur al 
unit.  
Occupanc y conditions 
15.70 Applications can be made to the Council f or the remo val of r ural worker occupancy 
conditions . They will be the subject of careful consider ation in order to assess whether a long 
term need f or a r ural worker’s dwelling remains . This will in volve mar keting the proper ty for sale 
or rent f or a per iod of at least 12 months at a realistic pr ice to reflect the occupancy condition, 
and that an y reasonab le off ers ha ve not been rejected. 
15.71 Occupancy conditions will not be remo ved from tempor ary per missions;  if the tempor ary 
accommodation is no longer required, the accommodation should be remo ved and the site 
restored or where possib le enhanced.    
236 Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 5 Deliv ering a sufficient supply of homes - 
rural housing) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
15.72 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
15.73 Monitor ing 
Number of occupancy conditions remo ved on appeal contr ary to policy . 
Number of applications/appeals g ranted contr ary to policy . 
237 15.6 Equestr ian uses 
15.74 The Borough contains a n umber of domestic and commercial equestr ian facilities 
including e xisting f acilities f or training and breeding, liv ery yards, stud f arms, riding schools , 
polo clubs and dressage . While the equine industr y contr ibutes significantly to both the local 
and national econom y, development related to equestr ian uses can ha ve a significant impact 
on the r ural area b y way of ph ysical str uctures (such as b uildings and f ences), and b y increased 
usage of roads and br idleways. Such uses can be an impor tant par t of the r ural econom y 
although this m ust be balanced against the impact of the scale and nature of the proposed 
use.  This policy applies to land outside of defined settlements so should be read in conjunction 
with Policy LP 35 'De velopment in the countr yside'  or Policy LP 36 'Green Belt' . 
Objectives 
B– Protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w ones 
Policy LP 41 
Equestrian uses 
Proposals f or the de velopment of equestrian facilities (inc luding e xtensions and 
chang es of use) will be permitted pr ovided the f ollowing criteria are met: 
i. existing b uildings are re-used where possib le and an y new facility should be 
satisfactoril y integrated and consolidated with e xisting b uildings where present; 
and, 
ii. the de velopment will not cause harm to a site of nature conser vation,  landscape 
or historic v alue that cannot be satisfactoril y mitigated;  and,   
iii. the de velopment is appr opriate in terms of design,  layout, siting and e xternal 
materials relative to its intended use and surr ounding area and will not ha ve 
an ad verse visual impact;  and, 
iv. the de velopment will not ha ve a detrimental eff ect on the amenity of 
neighbouring pr oper ties or the local area thr ough activity causing unacceptab le 
levels of noise , smell,  light pollution,  overlooking,  traffic g eneration,  highwa y 
safety or other g eneral disturbance;  and,   
v. proposals f or equestrian estab lishments whether f or priv ate or commer cial use 
are of an appr opriate siz e and scale f or their intended use and in relation to the 
associated fields.   This m ust allo w for the pr oper care of hor ses, including 
stabling, grazing and e xercise where appr opriate , in accor dance with the British 
Horse Society Standar ds (or an y future equiv alent).    
238 15.75 The NPPF advises that recreational f acilities can mak e an impor tant contr ibution to 
the health and w ellbeing of comm unities .  Whether planning per mission is needed f or the use 
of land and b uildings f or horses and equestr ian activities depends on whether the horses are 
used f or ag ricultur al, recreational or commercial pur poses .  The need f or planning per mission 
arises when the land is used to k eep horses f or recreational or commercial pur poses and not 
purely f or grazing and other ag ricultur al pur poses .  
The use of land f or grazing (which is par t of the definition of ag riculture in Section 336 of 
the Town and Countr y Planning Act 1990) is widely tak en to include the g razing of horses 
and so does not require planning per mission.    
Recreation pur poses could include r iding on the land or supplementar y feeding.  If these 
circumstances e xist, the land is no longer used f or ag ricultur al pur poses b ut is used f or 
the k eeping of horses . Planning per mission is necessar y for this change of use . 
Stud f arms, polo y ards, riding schools , livery yards and other such equestr ian facilities are 
considered to be a commercial use . If horses in these equestr ian facilities are not par t of 
a recognised ag ricultur al unit or if horses within such a unit are not k ept for ag ricultur al 
purposes , the Council will require full planning per mission f or their k eeping.  This should 
include e vidence to demonstr ate wh y the proposal w ould be appropr iate under the 
provisions of the NPPF . 
15.76 Commercial proposals will be e xpected to include a suppor ting b usiness case , justifying 
any built de velopment proposed and pro viding e vidence that the de velopment is in accordance 
with equestr ian best pr actice .  This is because ménages or arenas , events, external lighting 
and higher le vels of tr affic can ha ve a more intensiv e impact on the surrounding area.   Where 
a business case is required the applicant will be e xpected to pa y the planning author ity’s 
reasonab le costs f or ha ving it independently assessed.   Proposals f or de velopment within the 
Green Belt will also be assessed against Green Belt policy in the NPPF and Policy LP 36 'Green 
Belt' of this plan. 
15.77 In order to recognise the intr insic char acter and beauty of r ural areas , the potential to 
make use of e xisting b uildings should alw ays be considered bef ore the erection of ne w structures 
for equestr ian pur poses .  Where this is not possib le, the scale , siting and finish should be 
chosen to minimise visual impact and a void prominent and isolated de velopment.   Field shelters 
and similar str uctures should not be constr ucted with such a deg ree of per manence that the y 
could be adapted f or other uses in the future .  Large scale equestr ian facilities should a void 
exposed or prominent locations . This policy should also be read in conjunction with Policy LP 
42 'Design' .  
15.78 In consider ing proposals f or all types of equestr ian facilities , the Council will seek to 
ensure that the siz e and scale of the de velopment, including an y cum ulativ e impacts , are 
appropr iate to its intended use and to the land on which the de velopment is situated.   Careful 
attention should be giv en to the design, siting and landscaping details to a void an adv erse 
impact on the char acter and appear ance of the area and the amenity of neighbour ing proper ties 
in ter ms of noise , smell, light or other gener al disturbances .  Consider ation should be giv en to 
the handling and stor age of man ure at the outset.   This policy should also be read in conjunction 
with Policy LP 52 'P ollution and hazards' .  Consider ation should be giv en to highw ay safety for 
all road and br idleway users . Proposals that ha ve good links to the br idleway netw ork, or can 
deliver impro vements to the br idleway netw ork, will be suppor ted. 
239 15.79 Proposals f or equestr ian de velopments m ust ha ve regard to the Br itish Horse Society 
Standards (or an y future equiv alent) in ter ms of minim um requirements f or housing horses and 
ponies , and the pro vision of adequate pasture land. 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 6 Building a strong, competitiv e econom y 
- Suppor ting a prosperous r ural econom y; Chapter 13 Protecting Green Belt land) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
15.80 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
15.81 Monitor ing 
Number of applications/appeals g ranted f or equestr ian uses contr ary to policy 
240 16 Char acter and design 
16.1 Design 
16.1 Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' sets out the str ategic design pr inciples that are considered 
essential to achie ve high quality de velopment, that positiv ely contr ibutes to place making and 
creates rob ust, connected, accessib le comm unities within the borough.   To meet and achie ve 
these pr inciples , the detailed matters of design that are set out in this policy will also need to 
be met.   Consider ation should be giv en to each aspect of this policy .  Proposals will be e xpected 
to incor porate design elements to achie ve the high quality design.   This design policy will be 
met b y deliv ering high quality de velopment that assesses each site individually to create attr active 
streets , buildings and spaces .   
16.2 National policy attaches g reat impor tance to the design of the b uilt en vironment and 
advises that Local Plans should include rob ust and comprehensiv e policies that specify the 
quality of de velopment that will be e xpected f or the area.  The Council is committed to 
placemaking and has produced a n umber of suppor ting documents as set out in the par agraphs 
below to aid and f acilitate high quality design being deliv ered in the Borough. 
Objective 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
241 Policy LP 42 
Design 
1. In meeting the objectives of Policy LP 15 'Design principles' , applicants will 
need to consider the detailed design matter s set out belo w.  Proposals will be 
suppor ted where  they: 
i. include a full site appraisal that inf orms the pr oposal,  assessing the site's 
conte xt and identifying it's assets of visual,  ecological or herita ge value; 
ii. ensure la youts make efficient use of land,  having regar d to the c haracter 
of the area/location and other factor s affecting good design; 
iii. demonstrate that pr oper consideration of the topograph y of the site and 
levels on and ar ound the site has inf ormed the design and that vie ws into 
and out of the site ha ve been considered; 
iv. include high quality har d and soft landscaping within streetscenes to help 
define the c haracter and legibility of the area;  this ma y inc lude trees,  hedg es 
and planting to enhance the visual amenity of streets; 
v. relate well to their location and surr oundings thr ough their siting,  scale 
(including height and massing),  form,  roofscape , design and materials, 
and in relation to adjoining b uildings,  spaces and vie ws; 
vi. do not ad versely affect the amenity of surr ounding pr oper ties; 
vii. retain e xisting assets on a site that ha ve a visual,  ecological or herita ge 
value in the local en vironment or are of a quality that is w orthy of retention.   
Where reasonab le, these f eatures should be enhanced within their setting; 
this inc ludes trees,  hedg erows, impor tant open areas,  gaps in fr onta ges, 
walls,  fences,  banks and other f eatures of quality and/or visual impor tance 
or inf orms c haracter; 
viii. provide acceptab le levels of priv acy and standar ds of da ylight and sunlight 
that do not ad versely affect the amenity of the locality or surr ounding 
proper ties, particularl y in relation to shado wing and o verlooking; 
ix. include appr opriate , high quality , pub lic open space and an appr opriate 
amount of usab le priv ate amenity space f or all d wellings,  including 
comm unal gar dens and/or balconies f or apar tments; 
x. can demonstrate that the design,  layout and orientation of b uildings 
positivel y contrib ute to reducing the impacts of c limate c hang e, including 
planting sc hemes to pr ovide shade and green r oofs and r oof gar dens, 
particularl y in higher density de velopments; 
xi. provide inc lusive , safe and well-designed places f or all that pr ovide ease 
of access to,  and within,  all ne w de velopment and infrastructure .  This 
should inc lude appr opriate facilities f or disab led people and those with 
mobility issues and,  where reasonab le, impr ove access and facilities when 
alterations are being made to pub licly used b uildings or open spaces; 
xii. provide appr opriate boundar y treatments whic h respond to local f eatures 
and c haracteristics and c learly define the pub lic and priv ate  realms; 
242 xiii. incorporate well designed facilities f or the stora ge and efficient collection 
of waste and rec yclable materials;   
xiv. ensure good natural sur veillance of pub lic and priv ate routes and spaces, 
with appr opriate lighting,  being sensitive to the impacts on biodiver sity 
and the c haracter of the area;  particularl y in rural and semi-rural par ts of 
the Bor ough. 
16.3 Good design is essential f or all de velopment irrespectiv e of its location or type . All 
development proposals m ust demonstr ate that the y are in gener al conf ormity with the design 
principles set out in the Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' , this policy and other rele vant 
Supplementar y Planning Documents (SPDs) (76) published and adopted b y the Council, notab ly 
the Design SPD and Streetscene SPD .  The Council has produced additional guidance f or 
applicants to help ensure de velopments fully respect the char acter of the local area.  Of par ticular 
note is the Char acter Area Assessments SPD , conser vation area appr aisals and management 
plans .  The National Design Guide , first pub lished in 2019, b y the Ministr y of Housing, 
Comm unities and Local Go vernment, should also inf orm de velopment proposals Neighbourhood 
Plans are also mater ial consider ations when assessing planning applications .  Other local 
conte xt information can be f ound in design br iefs for sites and village design guides which also 
provide local conte xt analysis . 
Site, character and conte xt 
16.4 A well designed de velopment relates positiv ely to its surroundings and should be 
integ rated into its conte xt.  Site appr aisals are a k ey star ting point in identifying local f eatures 
and char acter istics that ma y influence a design or technical approach on a site .  Site inf ormation 
and assets such as trees and hedgero ws, key views, how and where w ater dr ains, any site 
constr aints or barr iers etc., should all inf orm de velopment proposals .  Existing assets on a site 
or along a plot’ s boundar y or adjacent streetscene that ha ve visual, ecological, or her itage 
value, or simply contr ibute to inf orming char acter in the area, should be retained and, where 
appropr iate, enhanced.   The Council will require appropr iate site appr aisals to be submitted 
with an application that clear ly sho w ho w an analysis of the site has inf ormed the proposed 
plans .  Additional technical repor ts ma y also be required, depending on the site , size and 
location.         
16.5 The topog raphy of an area and the le vels within a site are impor tant to understand to 
successfully inf orm de velopment.   Existing le vels and an y changes to the le vels on a site need 
to be carefully assessed within the conte xt of the wider landscape and an y existing de velopment 
in the vicinity .  Connectivity is a str ategic design objectiv e, as set out in Policy LP 15 'Design 
principles' .. 
16.6 The Council requires high quality design.   This means that a proposal should create a 
sense of place and be desir able and w orkable for the local comm unity.  It should promote 
health y lifestyles and create saf e places to w ork and liv e in.  Development at all scales will need 
to demonstr ate high design quality .  In some locations this will mean f ollowing a cer tain 
vernacular seen within the area.   The Council’ s Char acter Area Assessments SPD can assist 
with this f or cer tain defined par ts of the borough.   In other locations it will mean creating identity 
and a sense of place .  In all locations , care in relation to the detailed design and the mater ials 
used will deter mine whether a de velopment is perceiv ed as high quality or not.   Theref ore, the 
76 www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/supplementar y-planning-documents 
243 Council will assess a scheme's location,  conte xt, scale , propor tions, setting within a streetscene , 
contr ibution to char acter and identity , and its detailed design and quality of the mater ials, to 
assess the quality of design.   The Council’ s Design SPD clear ly sets out the issues to consider 
when designing a de velopment f or submission within the borough of Br acknell F orest.      
Efficient use of land,  the b uilt f orm and appr opriate amenity 
16.7 While achie ving high quality design, there is also a need to use land efficiently .  Designs 
should be tailored to the site , to ensure that it's potential is maximised.     
16.8 It is impor tant that ne w development integ rates w ell into the e xisting conte xt.  How a 
built form sits on a site , whether its scale and height is appropr iate to the plot siz e, char acter 
of the area and location, will be assessed to deter mine the appropr iateness of the proposal. 
The massing of a b uilding should not be o verbear ing within streetscenes , nor in relation to 
neighbours and/or adv ersely aff ect+ their pr ivate amenity .  In some locations within the borough, 
how a de velopment appears in longer distance vie ws will also need assessment.   Roofscapes 
and their visual impact, par ticular ly on sloping sites , need to be considered and should not 
adversely impact on vie ws.   
16.9 Proposals should alw ays pro vide acceptab le levels of pr ivacy for residents .  The 
relationship betw een b uilt forms and ho w privacy is maintained, par ticular ly with regard to 
private amenity space , will be considered in the deter mination of planning applications .  
Development should not adv ersely aff ect the amenity of the locality or surrounding proper ties, 
particular ly in relation to shado wing and o verlooking.   Further guidance relating to the relationship 
betw een b uilt forms is set out in the Design SPD .  Maintaining good le vels of da ylight and 
sunlight within ne w development is also impor tant, par ticular ly when promoting health y 
comm unities .  The Council will look to the standards set out in the BRE document “Site La yout 
planning f or da ylight and sunlight:  a guide to good pr actice”  (or an y subsequent rele vant updates 
or national standards) to assess acceptab le levels of access to da ylight and sunlight, par ticular ly 
when assessing apar tment b locks and higher density de velopments within the borough.      
16.10 Development should include appropr iate le vels of high quality pub lic open space , as 
set out in Policy LP 34 'Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic Value'.  For housing de velopment, 
access to an appropr iate le vel of usab le, private amenity should be pro vided.   The siz e and 
number of bedrooms will inf orm what is considered an appropr iate quantum of pr ivate amenity . 
Longer pr ivate amenity space ma ybe required f or nor th facing bac k gardens , or where e xisting 
trees shade or reduce the siz e of the usab le amenity space .  Comm unal amenity spaces will 
also be considered if the design r ationale f or a site re volves around comm unal shared f acilities .  
This w ould probab ly only be considered as appropr iate on higher density housing 
development.   Apar tments should also ha ve access to usab le private amenity space in the f orm 
of balconies where ver possib le.  Access to comm unal amenity space is also e xpected to enhance 
a sense of comm unity and pro vide a comm unal meeting place f or residents .  The siz e of an y 
comm unal space f or residents of apar tments should reflect the siz e and scale of the apar tment 
block.  The design of an apar tment b lock on a plot should create a balance betw een the b uilt 
form, usab le amenity space and par king pro vision. 
Streetscenes and saf e places 
16.11 The design of streets often defines the quality of a place and inf orms its char acter . 
Streets should be more than just roads .  If designed appropr iately the y should be saf e places 
for people on f oot and cyclists , as w ell as v ehicles , and pro vide an element of visual amenity 
for street users .   The Council is committed to the deliv ery of streetscenes of quality and has 
244 published a Streetscene SPD .  This document sets out the role of streets , how streets inf orm 
character , the diff erent types of streets and technical guidance relating to the design of streets 
to meet both planning and Highw ay Author ity objectiv es.  Applicants will be required to use this 
SPD to inf orm their proposals .  How proposals contr ibute to a streetscene , how streets are 
designed and ho w to use hard and soft landscaping within the street to maximise visual amenity , 
safety, robustness and future maintenance will be assessed in deter mining planning applications .  
16.12 Boundar y treatments ha ve a wider role than simply defining plots and o wnership .  
Boundar y treatments can help define char acter within a neighbourhood and streetscene .  
Certain boundar y treatments can be pre valent within cer tain areas .  Referencing what is currently 
in place and maintaining and enhancing what e xists within an area, can help to integ rate a ne w 
development within an estab lished area and enhance its char acter .  Where ne w development 
sites are creating ne w comm unities , the use of boundar y treatments can contr ibute to a sense 
of place and char acter .  Boundar y treatments are e xtremely impor tant in this respect.   A str ategy 
setting out ho w boundar y treatments will respond to char acter within a de velopment site , or 
details on a plot b y plot basis f or smaller sites , will need to be pro vided as par t of an y planning 
submission.    
16.13 It is impor tant that measures are designed into a de velopment to promote a sense of 
safety and secur ity for comm unities and b uilding users .  Good natur al sur veillance of pub lic 
and pr ivate pedestr ian and cycle routes should be pro vided b y occupied de velopment o verlooking 
such routes .  Similar ly, development should front onto open spaces to pro vide a le vel of natur al 
surveillance .  Car par ks and par king cour ts should also ha ve good natur al sur veillance from 
the surrounding b uildings and proper ties and include lighting to mak e these areas f eel saf e and 
usab le at all times of the da y and night.   However, in some locations lighting solutions ma y 
need to be sensitiv e to an y negativ e impacts on biodiv ersity and ecology and, in r ural and 
semi-r ural par ts of the borough, to char acter and the wishes of an y existing comm unities .  In 
some locations , lighting ma y not be considered appropr iate f or these reasons . 
Limiting the negative impact of c limate c hang e 
16.14 The la yout of streets , and the design and or ientation of b uildings can be used to 
maximise passiv e solar gain and to tak e adv antage of natur al ventilation methods .  An 
assessment of b uilding heights is needed to ensure all b uildings receiv e appropr iate le vels of 
daylight and sun light and that unacceptab le shado wing is a voided.  Landscaping and tree 
planting can assist in pro viding shade in par ts of a de velopment, such as within streetscenes , 
parking areas and pub lic and pr ivate amenity areas .  Planting should be deciduous to pro vide 
shade in the summer and let light through in the winter months .  Fur ther guidance is set out in 
the Council’ s Sustainab le Resource Management SPD and in national guidance documents 
such as the National Design Guide pub lished b y the Ministr y of Housing, Comm unities and 
Local Go vernment. 
Inclusive design 
16.15 All ne w development should be accessib le to all members of the comm unity.  To create 
a fully inclusiv e environment f or everyone, places , spaces , buildings , facilities and infr astructure 
should be designed and constr ucted f or all to mo ve through and access , with equal ease and 
safety.  Oppor tunities to impro ve the accessibility of the e xisting en vironment, b uildings and 
facilities should also be tak en when de velopment results in changes where w orks could be 
reasonab ly included to aid access .     
245 Waste and rec yclable materials 
16.16 Each de velopment needs to pro vide f or the efficient stor age and collection of w aste 
and recyclab le mater ials.  Waste and recycling should not be stored in the streetscene .  
Theref ore, easy , level access should be pro vided to rear gardens wheelie bins , food w aste and 
recycling bo xes.  The design of apar tment b locks should pro vide f or easy access f or residents 
to the comm unal w aste and recycling stor age locations , and ease of access f or the Council 
refuse collection v ehicles within the par ameters set b y the Building Regulations .  Similar ly, for 
commercial b uildings , ease of access to f acilities f or building users and collection companies 
will be e xpected.       
Monitoring 
16.17 Development proposals will be assessed against the NPPF , national design guidance , 
the Local Plan policies and the guidance contained within the supplementar y planning documents 
adopted and pub lished b y the Council.   The pr inciples set out in Building f or Lif e 12 under pin 
the Council’ s approach to designing good places to liv e and will inf orm discussions with 
applicants and local comm unities .  On completion of housing de velopments e xceeding 10 units , 
the Building f or Lif e 12 tr affic light system will be used to inf orm the le vel of design quality 
achie ved on a site .  
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (2019) – par agraphs 7-10 and 124-132 
National Planning P olicy F ramework Practice Guide - Design. 
Building f or Lif e 12 
National Design Guide 2019 
The Council’ s Supplementar y Planning Documents (SPDs): 
Char acter Area Assessments SPD (2010)  
Streetscene SPD (2011) 
Design SPD (2017) 
Designing f or Accessibility SPD (2008) 
New De velopments Residents Sur vey  
Spor t England - Activ e Design  
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
16.18 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
246 16.19 Monitor ing 
The n umber of residential schemes that meet 'Building f or Lif e' criteria (or similar national 
standard) "v ery good", "good", "a verage" or "poor" standards . 
247 16.2 Tall buildings 
16.20 Tall buildings , of high quality design and architecture , can be appropr iate in the r ight 
locations , such as Br acknell Town Centre . Such b uildings can use land efficiently , enclose key 
areas of pub lic realm and can enhance a space , place or streetscene where the y fit w ell into 
the urban  landscape . Poorly designed  or placed  tall buildings  can have a detrimental  effect on 
the en vironment and on neighbours . They can block views and create a poor en vironment for 
their occupants if not designed and positioned  well.  
16.21 Theref ore, it is impor tant that some basic pr inciples are followed when consider ing tall 
buildings .  Assessment of the proposed location and design, ensur ing that all impacts are 
carefully analysed, will f orm par t of the decision making process . 
Objectives 
G – Achie ving high quality de velopment 
248 Policy LP 43 
Tall buildings 
The Council will suppor t proposals f or tall b uildings where; 
1. the location is sustainab le and suitab le for high intensity de velopment; 
2. they are located at a point of to wnscape significance and ha ve a height,  scale 
and massing that is pr opor tionate to the pr oposed location and siz e of site; 
3. they will not detract fr om the significance or appreciation of herita ge assets, 
nor ha ve a detrimental impact on the local en vironment,  including the 
micr o-climate and the amenity of surr ounding b uildings and spaces; 
4. they positivel y contrib ute to one or more of the f ollowing: 
i. the e xisting streetscene , 
ii. the containment of a space or square , or 
iii. creation of a f ocal point of interest in an appr opriate  location; 
5. they reinf orce or add positivel y to the surrounding  scale  and urban  form of the 
area; 
6. the b uilding will not ad versely affect impor tant vie ws to and fr om key areas  of 
the Borough and will have a positive impact on the  skyline; 
7. the b uilding is of an e xemplar y architectural design and creates a high quality 
living en vironment , maximising  ener gy efficienc y, prioritising  the use of 
sustainab le materials  and construction  methods; 
8. they provide appr opriate le vels of usab le amenity space f or future occupants 
and the pr oposed uses; 
9. they include sufficient  parking  for cars and cycles,and space  is provided  for 
the eff ective ser vicing of the b uilding without ha ving an unacceptab le, 
detrimental eff ect on amenity space and the  streetscene; 
10. their entrances are highl y visib le and legib le; and; 
11. the lower floor s create  visual  interest within  the streetscene  and a positive 
pedestrian  experience . 
16.22 A tall b uilding is defined b y its conte xt, being;    
i. 5 store ys or 15m and abo ve in Br acknell Town Centre;  and/or  
ii. any building that is substantially taller than its neighbours in the borough;  and/or 
iii. its impact on the e xisting skyline within the borough. 
16.23 In consider ing proposals f or the erection of tall b uildings and additional floors to e xisting 
buildings , the f ollowing cr iteria will be tak en into account: 
i. the char acter of the area; 
ii. the relationship betw een an individual site and adjoining land/b uildings including an y 
change in le vel; 
iii. the conte xt within which the proposal will sit; 
iv. the design of the b uilding; 
249 v. the impact on the local en vironment and micro climate;  and 
vi. the impact on long r ange vie ws. 
16.24 When consider ing tall b uildings , an assessment of the appropr iateness of the location 
will be made . Consider ation will be giv en to whether the proposal will achie ve a coherent and 
compatib le streetscene and whether the b uilding will enhance the char acter of the area.  The 
inter-relationship with e xisting b uildings will also be an impor tant f actor in the assessment of 
the appropr iateness of the location and proposal.   Designs which are inappropr iate in their 
conte xt, or which f ail to mak e good use of the oppor tunities f or impro ving the char acter and 
quality of an area, will be refused. 
16.25 Issues relating to the b ulk and massing of a b uilding will also be considered;  permeability 
and legibility within the localised area will remain impor tant. 
16.26 Tall buildings in the borough should be of an e xemplar y architectur al design and create 
high quality living en vironments .  Tall buildings should also achie ve high standards of 
sustainability , maximising energy efficiency and constr uction methods using high quality 
mater ials.  They also need to be functional and meet the needs of their occupants in the shor t 
and longer ter m, pro viding fle xible spaces , particular ly on the lo wer levels and at street le vel, 
to pro vide options f or changing uses and future needs . 
16.27 The design of the b uilding should ensure that the entr ances are clear ly legib le and 
usab le for all members of the comm unity, including when arr iving as a visitor .  Entr ances also 
need to be coherently placed within e xisting streetscenes with the g round floor uses pro viding 
activation within, and natur al sur veillance of , the street. 
16.28 Dwellings within tall b uildings should be accessib le and adaptab le and pro vide high 
quality accommodation f or all ages and abilities as set out in 12.2 'Accessib le and adaptab le 
dwellings' . 
16.29 Provision f or cars , cycles and bin and recycling collections will be needed along with 
delivery vehicles , maintenance equipment and emergency ser vice v ehicles .  Unsightly plant 
on the roof will not be acceptab le. 
16.30 It is essential that consider ation is giv en to longer vie ws and panor amas in and out of 
the urban areas to the surrounding countr yside (including the Green Belt).   Localised vie ws 
appropr iate to an application will also need to be considered.   In addition, k ey views relating to 
Bracknell to wn ha ve been identified on Appendix 5:  'Tall building vie wpoints maps'   as ref erenced 
below in the f ollowing locations: 
a. the w ester n approaches to Br acknell from;   
the A329 (TB 1 and TB 2); 
Peacoc k Lane (TB 3); 
Wokingham Road (TB 4);  and 
b. from the w est and nor th of the Borough from:   
Johnstone Close , Bracknell (TB 5) 
Tilehurst Lane at the junction with Minchin Green in Binfield (TB 6);   
Binfield Road (TB 7 and TB 8); 
250 Cabbage Hill in vicinity of the F orest Road car par k entr ance (TB 9);   
Sopwith Road - approach to the centr al roundabout (TB 10);   
and A330, Ascot Road in vicinity of junction with Weller’s Lane (TB 11). 
16.31 Other vie ws ma y also be impor tant depending on the location of the b uilding and fur ther 
assessment and analysis ma y be needed.   Consider ation should be giv en to Policy LP 
35 'De velopment in the countr yside' , Policy LP 37 'Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) ' , Policy LP 38 'Separ ation of settlements' , Policy LP 36 'Green Belt' . 
16.32 It is impor tant that all proposals f or tall b uildings in the borough are accompanied b y 
high quality conte xtual analysis , demonstr ating ho w the b uilding will fit into the e xisting b uilt 
environment to create positiv e vie ws to and from the surrounding area. 
16.33 Careful analysis relating to the spacing of b locks will be needed and a tall b uilding 
should not adv ersely aff ect neighbours or be o verbear ing.  An assessment of the cum ulativ e 
effect of tall b uildings will also be required;  one tall b uilding will not necessar ily create a precedent 
for a street or area. 
16.34 Detailed inf ormation will also be required on sunlight and shado wing impacts of an y 
new building on the surrounding en vironment, neighbour ing b uildings and occupants of the 
proposed b uilding.   The Council will look to the most up to date and rele vant guidance on best 
practice , currently pro vided b y BS 8206-2 and the BRE pub lication “Site la yout planning f or 
daylight and sunlight;  A guide to good pr actice”  when assessing proposals .  Wind modelling 
may also be required to sho w ho w a tall b uilding is lik ely to aff ect localised wind speeds and 
to demonstr ate that an y unacceptab le impacts are to be mitigated.   Any proposal should also 
be accompanied b y a lighting str ategy to ensure that light pollution from tall b uildings is 
minimised. 
16.35 The borough has man y histor ic features and assets , including Listed Buildings , 
Conser vation Areas and Registered Histor ic Parks and Gardens . Any erosion of the quality of 
their significance , including their settings will not be acceptab le. 
16.36 All tall b uildings should also meet the objectiv es of Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
and Policy LP 42 'Design' . 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (2019) – par agraphs 7-10 and 124-132  
National Planning P olicy F ramework Practice Guide  
Design.  National Design Guide (2019) 
The Council's Supplementar y Planning Documents (SPDs) 
Char acter Area Assessments SPD (2010) 
Streetscene SPD (2011) 
251 Design SPD (2017) 
Designing f or Accessibility SPD (2008) 
New De velopments Residents Sur vey  
Spor t England - Activ e Design 
Building f or Lif e 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
16.37 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
16.38 Monitor ing 
The n umber of residential schemes that meet 'Building f or Lif e' criteria (or similar national 
standard) "v ery good", "good", "a verage" or "poor" standards . 
252 16.3 Adv ertisements and shop fronts 
16.39 The appear ance of shop fronts and adv ertisements can individually or cum ulativ ely 
have a significant impact on the distinctiv eness and char acter of an individual b uilding and the 
amenity of the wider area.  It is impor tant theref ore to have planning policy in place to ensure 
high quality design and enab le proposals that w ould achie ve this. 
Objectives 
E - Town centres 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
Policy LP 44 
Advertisements and shop fr onts 
1. Advertisements will be permitted where the y have no unacceptab le impact on: 
i. public saf ety, including highwa y saf ety; and; 
ii. amenity , including visual amenity , the amenity of neighbouring sites;  and  
iii. the significance of the historic en vironment. 
2. New or altered shop fr onts will be permitted where: 
i. alterations/lighting ha ve regar d to the c haracter , materials,  design,  scale and 
propor tion of the b uilding; 
ii. impor tant ar chitectural or historic f eatures on the e xisting b uilding are restored 
and / or retained and not concealed; 
iii. an active fr onta ge is maintained;  and,   
iv. security measures are well designed and integrated with the fr onta ge.  There 
will be a presumption a gainst visuall y intrusive measures,  such as e xternal 
roller shutter s. 
16.40 In consider ing applications f or consent to displa y adv ertisements , the Council will ha ve 
regard to the interests of amenity and pub lic saf ety. This policy relates to all adv ertisements , 
not just those f or retail premises . 
16.41 The remo val of e xisting signs will be sought where their function is duplicated or where 
they detr act from the appear ance or char acter of the area.  In appropr iate circumstances , the 
Council will seek additional control o ver the displa y of adv ertisements in residential areas . 
253 16.42 Where adv ertisements are to be illuminated, consider ation will be giv en to the le vel 
and type of illumination, taking into account guidance contained in the technical repor t “Brightness 
of Illuminated Adv ertisements”  by the Institution of Lighting Engineers (77) and an y subsequent 
updates or replacements of this . Where appropr iate, to reduce light pollution, conditions could 
be imposed to limit the hours of illumination. 
16.43 The design of shop fronts will be e xpected to integ rate with the retail streetscene , avoid 
the creation of “dead frontages”  and be sympathetic to the char acter and appear ance of the 
local en vironment.  This ma y include the creation of windo ws with displa ys or design f eatures 
that create v ariety and interest in the streetscene . 
16.44 Visually intr usive secur ity measures on shop fronts , such as e xternal roller shutters , 
can be e xcessiv e and create an unw elcoming and hostile en vironment when closed;  either 
outside of the shop's w orking hours or if the shop closes do wn. There are alter nativ e methods 
of secur ity that can be more acceptab le, such as inter nal roller shutters or strengthened glass . 
16.45 This policy b uilds on the changes to shop fronts and adv ertisements allo wed by the 
Gener al Permitted De velopment Order . 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par a. 132) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Adv ertisements , ID ref erence:  18b) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
16.46 Deliv ery: 
Deter mination of planning applications and/or applications f or adv ertisement consent 
16.47 Monitor ing: 
Number of appeals allo wed contr ary to policy . 
77 https://www .theilp .org.uk/resources/ilp-gener al-repor ts/plg05-the-br ightness-of-illuminated-adv ertisements/ 
254 17 Histor ic en vironment 
17.1 Protection and enhancement of the histor ic 
environment 
17.1 The histor ic environment  is recognised  as an irreplaceab le and valued  resource which 
contr ibutes to the local character  and distinctiv eness  of Bracknell Forest. Heritage  assets  such 
as histor ic parks and gardens , listed buildings , conser vation  areas  and scheduled  monuments 
can foster health y lifestyles , comm unity  cohesion,  provide a ‘sense  of place’  and drive economic 
vitality . 
Objectives 
B - Protect / enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
Policy LP 45 
Protection and enhancement of the historic en vironment 
1. Development pr oposals will be e xpected to a void harm to,  sustain and,  where 
possib le, enhance herita ge assets (78)and their settings..  All de velopment 
proposals aff ecting the significance of  herita ge assets inc luding their settings 
must e xhibit sympathetic design in terms of siting,  mass,  scale and use of 
materials. 
2. The impact of de velopment pr oposals on the significance of herita ge assets 
and their settings will be considered in accor dance with case la w, legislation 
and national polic y (79). 
17.2 The impor tance  of Bracknell Forest’ s histor ic environment  is recognised  in its diverse 
range of her itage assets which  include: 
266 Listed Buildings; 
53 Locally Listed Buildings; 
6 Conser vation Areas (Winkfield Village;  Warfield;  Winkfield Ro w; Easthampstead;  Church 
Street, Cro wthor ne, Binfield); 
12 Scheduled Mon uments; 
78 Heritage Asset - a b uilding, mon ument, site , place , area or landscape identified as ha ving a deg ree of significance 
meriting consider ations in planning decisions , because of its her itage interest.  It includes  designated her itage 
assets and assets identified b y the local planning author ity (including local listing).  (Anne x 2: Glossar y, National Planning P olicy F ramework, 
Ministr y of Housing, Comm unities and Local Go vernment 2019) 
79 NPPF and successor documents 
255 6 Registered Histor ic Parks and Gardens (Windsor Great P ark; Ascot Place;  Newbold 
College;  Broadmoor Hospital;  South Hill P ark; and Bagshot P ark); and ' 
536 records entered in the Ber kshire Histor ic En vironment Record (HER) identifying 
archaeological sites and finds in Br acknell F orest. 
17.3 The Council is committed to w orking proactiv ely and inclusiv ely with stak eholders to 
identify oppor tunities to ensure the conser vation and enhancement of the Histor ic En vironment 
(including a re view of e xisting conser vation area boundar ies to ensure their rele vance and 
reliability).   This will ensure that it can be enjo yed for its contr ibution to the quality of lif e of this 
and future gener ations . To this end, the Council, will re view existing conser vation area 
boundar ies to ensure their rele vance and reliability  and consider the appropr iateness of 
restrictions on per mitted de velopment r ights through the use of Ar ticle 4 Directions in such 
areas . 
17.4 The significance of her itage assets to this , and future gener ations , may derive from their 
archaeological,  architectur al, artistic or histor ic interest  and from the contr ibution  made  by their 
settings . Designated and non-designated her itage assets , including their settings will be protected 
from harm and oppor tunities  will be sought to sustain  and where  appropr iate enhance the 
significance of her itage  assets . 
17.5 Proposed de velopments aff ecting her itage assets or their settings will be assessed 
against the her itage policy , and an y other rele vant policies , in this plan and with ref erence to 
the NPPF . 
17.6 It is impor tant that the significance of the Borough’ s her itage assets and their settings 
are understood b y developers . Development proposals aff ecting the histor ic en vironment will 
be expected to be suppor ted b y a Her itage Statement.  Whilst the detail pro vided b y the Her itage 
Statement should be propor tionate to the impor tance of the her itage assets , it must demonstr ate 
a clear understanding of their significance , the contr ibution made b y their settings and ho w their 
significance w ould be aff ected, as w ell as a pro viding clear justification and mitigation f or an y 
harm caused. 
17.7 The Borough’ s most v alued histor ic buildings , archaeological remains , townscapes and 
histor ic landscapes (as identified in the East Ber kshire Histor ic Landscape Char acter isation 
June 2019 (80)) will be giv en the highest le vel of protection.   Oppor tunities to sustain and enhance 
their significance and better re veal the significance and legibility of assets will be sought where ver 
possib le. Harm to the significance of designated her itage assets will not be accepted unless it 
is clear ly justifiab le and una voidab le. 
17.8 Proposals f or works to listed b uildings should conser ve features of architectur al or 
histor ic interest and their settings , where these contr ibute to their significance . Development 
which under mines the economic viability or significance of a listed b uilding will be resisted.  The 
use of appropr iate mater ials, constr uction techniques and methods of repair will be a fundamental 
requirement of an y development proposals . The e vidential v alue of the histor ic fabric is an 
impor tant par t of a listed b uilding’ s significance and retention of as m uch histor ic fabric as 
possib le will be e xpected.  The reinstatement of or iginal architectur al features will be suppor ted 
where it can be demonstr ated that this is adequately histor ically documented and the w ork 
proposed will sustain the significance of the listed b uilding. 
80 East Ber kshire Histor ic Landscape Char acter isation J une 2019 - 
https://archaeologydataser vice.ac.uk/archiv eDS/archiv eDownload?t=arch-3645-1/dissemination/pdf/E_Ber kshire_HLC_Archiv e_Repor t_Dec_2019.pdf&bcsi_scan_31d6b5f09ef66ce0=738PiZkwWgdBgC20nUUq4IJl5oOD AAAA52CFWg==   
256 17.9 The Council will seek to activ ely manage change within the borough’ s conser vation 
areas so that their char acter and appear ance is conser ved and enhanced.  Conser vation area 
appraisals  and management  plans  will be taken into consider ation  when  deter mining  planning 
applications aff ecting their significance . The Council will require ne w developments within 
conser vation areas or their settings to be of high quality . Substantial har m to the significance 
of a conser vation  area will not be permitted unless  there  are substantial  and quantifiab le public 
benefits  that outweigh the harm. Less than substantial  harm to the significance  of a conser vation 
area will be strongly resisted unless there is a clear and con vincing pub lic benefit from the 
proposed  development. 
17.10 Non-designated  heritage  assets are impor tant in contr ibuting  to local distinctiv eness 
and a sense of place which are impor tant to local comm unities . This has been recognised by 
the adoption  of a Local List of Buildings  and Structures .  However, not all non-designated  assets 
are included on the local list and the y may also be identified through the assessment of 
development proposals . The Council will seek to ensure that non-designated her itage assets 
are identified,  retained  and enhanced  and an y impacts  on their significance  is addressed in the 
process  of deter mining  planning applications . The degree of harm to or loss of non-designated 
heritage  assets  will be assessed and balanced against their significance , the positiv e contr ibution 
made by the de velopment and the e xtent to which an y har m can be justified or  mitigated 
Herita ge Assets at Risk 
17.11 The Council  will monitor  designated  heritage  assets  considered  to be at risk through 
neglect  or other  threats ,and proactiv ely seek to engage  owners  in applying sustainab le solutions . 
Unless  a heritage asset  at risk is judged to have been  subject  to deliber ate neglect, the Council 
will consider positiv ely proposals that help restore and maintain heritage assets ‘at risk’. 
17.12 Where  necessar y the Council  will use its statutor y powers to ensure  that designated 
heritage assets are appropr iately maintained or  repaired. 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 16:  Conser ving and enhancing the histor ic 
environment) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Histor ic en vironment) 
Conser vation Area Appr aisals (v arious) 
Conser vation Area Management Proposals (v arious) 
Streetscene Supplementar y Planning Document (2011)  
Design Supplementar y Planning Document (2017) 
Histor ic England’ s National Her itage 
List of Listed Buildings 
Scheduled Mon uments and Registered Histor ic Parks and Gardens 
257 Berkshire Histor ic En vironment Record (HER) 
Desk-based assessments , heritage statements , or East Ber kshire Histor ic Landscape 
Char acter isation J une 2019 or other sur veys. 
DELIVER Y & MONIT ORING 
17.13 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
Conser vation Area appr aisals up-to-date 
17.14 Monitor ing 
Number of listed b uilding applications g ranted per mission each y ear contr ary to Histor ic 
England's advice  
Number of designated her itage assets within the Borough on Histor ic England’ s ‘at risk’ 
register . 
258 18 Natur al en vironment 
18.1 Biodiv ersity 
18.1 National legislation and planning guidance place a duty on local author ities to consider 
biodiv ersity through their Local Plans .  Under the Natur al En vironment and Rur al Comm unities 
(NERC) Act 2006, all Local A uthor ities ha ve a statutor y duty to conser ve biodiv ersity . 
18.2 The Council is committed to the protection and enhancement of biodiv ersity and 
geodiv ersity .  It will w ork with par tners to ensure a proactiv e approach to protection, enhancement 
and management of biodiv ersity identified in national and local str ategies and plans such as 
Biodiv ersity Action Plans (BAPs) and the emerging Green Infr astructure Str ategy . The f ollowing 
policy seeks to ensure that biodiv ersity in the Borough is protected and enhanced.   
Objective 
B - Protect / enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
259 Policy LP 46 
Biodiver sity 
1. Rele vant de velopment in the Bor ough will be e xpected to ac hieve a minim um 10% 
net gain f or biodiver sity. 
2. Rele vant de velopment pr oposals will be e xpected to: 
i. provide suitab le ecological sur vey information and assessment to estab lish 
biodiver sity net gains and the e xtent of an y potential impact on ecological 
features.   These ma y inc lude ancient w oodland,  veteran trees,  waterbodies, 
wildlif e corridor s (inc luding river corridor s), protected species,  priority species 
or priority habitat that ma y be aff ected during and after de velopment.(81) This 
information shall be pr ovided prior to the determination of an application; 
ii. retain,  protect,  enhance and b uffer ecological f eatures and pr ovide f or their 
appr opriate mana gement; 
iii. where possib le, create ne w ecological f eatures and incorporate pr ovisions to 
maximise oppor tunities f or biodiver sity; and 
iv. avoid fra gmentation of habitats and create coherent ecological netw orks within 
the bor ough suc h as impr ovements to Biodiver sity Oppor tunity Areas and 
Nature Reco very Netw orks. 
3. Where the ad verse impacts of de velopment on biodiver sity are identified,  they 
must be pr opor tionatel y addressed in accor dance with the mitigation hierar chy of: 
i. avoidance; 
ii. mitigation;  and,   
iii. compensation. 
4. Where the requirements of this hierar chy cannot be met,  development will be 
refused. 
5. Where biodiver sity has been intentionall y remo ved or degraded (inc luding thr ough 
neglect),  the Council will take the baseline biodiver sity v alue as what it is likel y to 
have been had the remo val or degradation not occurred. 
6. The Council will secure eff ective a voidance , mitigation and compensation measures 
whic h will be maintained o ver the lif etime of the de velopment thr ough the imposition 
of planning conditions,  conser vation co venants or planning ob ligations as 
appr opriate , including monitoring of the eff ectiveness of these measures. 
18.3 Biodiv ersity is not confined to designated sites and e very development has the potential 
to contr ibute to wards the conser vation of locally impor tant habitats and species .  For the 
purposes of this policy ‘relevant’ development will be defined in accompan ying guidance . 
18.4 There are significant areas of habitat in the borough which are an impor tant local resource 
for suppor ting biodiv ersity including: 
81 Inland freshw aters as defined b y the Water Resources Act 1991 as amended 
260 Woodland; 
Hedgero ws; 
Ancient w oodland and v eteran trees; 
Grasslands; 
Watercourses; 
Heathland;  and 
Other f ormal and inf ormal areas of open space 
18.5 Priority habitats and species are those listed under section 41 of the NERC Act or in 
the Br acknell F orest Biodiv ersity Action Plan.  These are an impor tant local resource f or 
suppor ting biodiv ersity . 
18.6 Ecological sur veys should be conducted b y a suitab ly qualified or e xperienced ecologist.   
18.7 Ecological sur veys, assessments and mitigation measures should be implemented in 
line with current national standards and pub lished guidance in addition to an y guidance or 
advice endorsed b y the Council. 
18.8 When consider ing a site f or de velopment, those in volved should tak e account of 
any biodiv ersity resources on the site and design the de velopment in a w ay that enhances them 
or at least a voids, or minimises , any negativ e impacts on them.   Enhancements to the  
biodiv ersity v alue of a site , such as creating ne w habitats , should be incor porated into the 
design.  Creativ e solutions are possib le on all sites , including small sites within urban areas .  
Examples of what w ould be e xpected are set out in accompan ying guidance . 
18.9 Developments are required to demonstr ate ho w existing wildlif e habitats such as trees , 
hedgero ws, woodlands and r ivers will be retained, saf eguarded and managed dur ing and after 
development, including the pro vision of b uffers where required.   Where necessar y, a 
management plan outlining mitigation measures will be required to sensitiv ely manage an y 
issues aff ecting biodiv ersity resources ar ising as a result of the de velopment. 
18.10 To manage potential adv erse eff ects of de velopment on biodiv ersity , the mitigation 
hierarchy should be used as a sequential approach, completing each step bef ore mo ving to 
the ne xt with compensation being the last resor t. In the first instance , development should tr y 
to avoid adv ersely aff ecting e xisting habitats b y using alter nativ e sites or la yout designs . Where 
avoidance is not possib le, and the need f or, and benefit der ived from de velopment outw eighs 
the har m to the nature conser vation v alue of the site , habitat or species , the impact upon wildlif e 
sites, habitat or species should be adequately mitigated.   
18.11 Development should incor porate biodiv ersity impro vements and secure at least a 10% 
net gain f or biodiv ersity .  The standard method f or calculating biodiv ersity losses and gains and 
identifying the le vel of mitigation and compensation required is the DEFRA Biodiv ersity Metr ic.  
Biodiv ersity net gain can be achie ved on site through planting schemes , new habitats , new 
roosting or nesting f eatures , or through enhancement and management of e xisting habitats .  
The Council will pro vide guidance on ho w biodiv ersity net gain will apply to de velopment and 
how any residual offsite needs f or compensation will be addressed.   As par t of this , the Council 
will also de velop biodiv ersity projects across the Borough through the Infr astructure Deliv ery 
Plan (IDP) process which will ha ve a measur able biodiv ersity v alue.  These schemes will be 
paid f or and deliv ered b y rele vant de velopment as mitigation or compensation through planning 
obligations . 
261 18.12 Wildlif e corr idors or ecological netw orks are impor tant f or linking habitats and allo wing 
the mo vement of species across the landscape . They can include r ivers, streams , railways, 
hedgero ws, road v erges , trees , incidental pieces of open space and residential gardens . The 
council’ s Green Infr astructure Re view identifies habitat and ecological netw orks which incor porate 
these f eatures . In addition, the Ber kshire Biodiv ersity Str ategy identifies fiv e Biodiv ersity 
Oppor tunity Areas (BO As) within Br acknell F orest as areas of g reatest oppor tunity f or restor ation 
and creation of habitats . Where ne w development is proposed within an ecological netw ork 
such as a BO A or Nature Reco very Netw ork, oppor tunities f or biodiv ersity impro vements should 
be included and oppor tunities tak en to link biodiv ersity across the wider landscape . Oppor tunities 
for Natur al Flood Management, creating w etland f eatures and reconnecting r ivers with their 
floodplains should be considered, where appropr iate, to enhance biodiv ersity and help manage 
flood r isk. 
18.13 The intentional remo val or deg radation of biodiv ersity pr ior to submitting planning 
applications ma y include:  ploughing or impro ving g rassland, remo ving trees , refusing access 
for ecological sur veys, stopping or star ting habitat management, and situations where pre vious 
habitat mitigation has not been eff ective. To deter mine if an y intentional changes ha ve been 
made , the current habitat type and condition of a site can be judged using an up-to-date ecology 
survey against aer ial photog raphy and land use data o ver time .  Areas of habitat that ha ve 
natur ally de veloped o ver man y years ma y be e xcluded on the basis of natur al succession.   
18.14 This policy has a strong relationship with other policies in this plan including Policy LP 
1 'Sustainab le development pr inciples' , Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' ,  Policy LP 15 'Design 
principles' ,Policy LP 48 'Protection and enhancement of trees and hedgero ws' and Policy LP 
52 'P ollution and hazards' . 
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par as 8, 20 and Chapter 15) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Natur al En vironment) 
Biodiv ersity 2020:  A Str ategy f or England Wildlif e and Ecosystem Ser vices ,  
Defra The Natur al En vironment in Ber kshire:  Biodiv ersity Str ategy (2014 – 2020) 
Bracknell F orest Biodiv ersity Action Plan (2018 – 2023) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
Use of planning conditions , conser vation co venants and planning ob ligations 
Monitor ing 
Changes in areas of biodiv ersity impor tance (L WS/LGS) each y ear 
262 Change in percentage of L WS and LGS in positiv e conser vation management each y ear 
Change in areas of UK NERC Act S41 pr iority habitats each y ear 
Change in n umber of UK NERC Act S41 pr iority species each y ear 
Distribution and status of f armland birds each y ear 
Habitat monitor ing for biodiv ersity net gain to achie ve target habitat type and condition 
263 18.2 Designated Nature Conser vation and Geological 
18.15 National policy advises local  planning author ities to set cr iteria-based policies against 
which proposals f or an y development on or aff ecting protected wildlif e or geodiv ersity sites or 
landscape areas will be judged. 
18.16 This should  be read alongside  the policy  on the Thames  Basin Heaths Special Protection 
Area where  appropr iate. 
Objective 
B - Protect / enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
Policy LP 47 
Designated nature conser vation and g eological sites 
1. Any planning application aff ecting a designated nature conser vation or g eological 
site m ust ensure that these sites are saf eguar ded and enhanced ha ving regar d to 
the national or local status and designation of the site as set out belo w: 
Development pr oposals on or aff ecting 
i. internationall y designated habitats sites,  including candidate sites,  will not be 
permitted unless it can be c learly demonstrated thr ough a Habitats 
Regulations Assessment that there will be no significant ad verse eff ect on their 
integrity .  Developer s will be required to pr ovide all inf ormation that the Council 
may reasonab ly require f or the purpose of the assessment.   For lar ger residential 
developments this ma y inc lude an assessment of the likel y significant air quality 
effects on habitats sites.  Applications f or non-residential de velopment will be 
dealt with on a case b y case basis ;  
ii. Sites of Special Scientific Interest,  will not normall y be permitted and will be 
dealt with in accor dance with national planning polic y; and,   
iii. locall y designated sites will not normall y be permitted unless the need f or the 
development c learly outweighs the harm to the nature conser vation v alue or 
geological v alue of the site .  Such developments will be considered on a case 
by case basis.    
2. Effective a voidance , mitigation and compensation will be secured thr ough the 
imposition of planning conditions or planning ob ligations as appr opriate , including 
monitoring f or the eff ectiveness of these measures. 
264 18.17 Bracknell F orest has a r ich and v aried landscape , containing a wide r ange of habitats , 
which suppor t diverse plants and animals . Over 20 per cent of the Borough is protected b y 
designations , including tw o habitats sites compr ising par ts of the Thames Basin Heaths SP A 
and Windsor F orest and Great P ark SAC, nine Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and 
Local Nature Reser ves (LNR), Local Wildlif e Sites (L WS) and Local Geological Sites (LGS). 
18.18 Designated sites are sho wn on the P olicies Map although their boundar ies ma y change 
over the course of the Local Plan per iod. When implementing an y policy relating to designated 
nature conser vation and geological sites the most up to date boundar ies will be used. 
18.19 There is a r ange of legislation protecting ecological resources in the UK.  This includes 
the NERC Act ref erred to abo ve and the Wildlif e and Countr yside Act 1981.  The Thames Basin 
Heaths SP A and Windsor F orest and Great P ark SAC are giv en the highest le vel of protection 
through the Habitats Regulations . Nationally designated SSSIs ha ve national statutor y protection 
and will be conser ved and enhanced. 
18.20 National policy identifies that distinctions should be made betw een the hier archy of 
international, national and locally designated sites , so that protection is commensur ate with 
their status and giv es appropr iate w eight to their impor tance and the contr ibution that the y mak e 
to wider ecological netw orks.  
18.21 The Council recognises that locally designated sites are areas of substantiv e nature 
conser vation v alue and should be identified, saf eguarded, managed and enhanced.  They mak e 
an impor tant contr ibution to ecological netw orks and nature’ s reco very. They can also pro vide 
wider benefits including pub lic access (where ag reed), climate mitigation and helping to tac kle 
air pollution. 
18.22 Applications f or de velopment will be subject to a Habitats Regulations Assessment 
where the y are lik ely to ha ve a significant adv erse impact on the integ rity of habitats sites and 
reference should be made to the BFLP Habitats Regulations Assessment.  Guidance f or the 
assessment of a ir pollution eff ects on habitats sites has been ag reed with Natur al England 
and is availab le from the Council.  Applications f or de velopment which are lik ely to ha ve an 
adverse eff ect on SSSIs (either individually or in combination with other de velopment) should 
include an assessment of these potential adv erse eff ects; the Council will de velop guidelines 
for such assessments if appropr iate and in consultation with Natur al England. 
18.23 Developers will be required to submit monitor ing data to the Council to sho w the 
effectiveness of an y planning ob ligations and conditions . 
18.24 This policy has a strong relationship with other policies in this Plan including Policy LP 
1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' , Policy LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection 
Area'  and Policy LP 48 'Protection and enhancement of trees and hedgero ws'. 
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area' 
265 KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning Policy F ramework (paras 8, 20 and Chapter 15)  
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Natur al En vironment) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
Use of planning conditions and  obligations 
Monitor ing 
Change in condition status of Sites of Special Scientific Interest each y ear 
Changes in areas of biodiv ersity impor tance ( LWS/LGS) each y ear 
266 18.3 Trees and hedgero ws 
18.25 Trees are a defining char acter istic of Br acknell F orest, co vering appro ximately 
40% (82) of the area of the Borough – the third highest in the UK.  It is impor tant that this resource 
is maintained and enhanced f or people , the econom y, biodiv ersity and the en vironment to 
benefit.   
18.26 Trees and hedgero ws pro vide wide r anging economic , environmental and social 
benefits , such as enhancing recreational e xperiences , impro ving health, enhancing natur al and 
built landscapes and connecting habitat netw orks for wildlif e.  They will also contin ue to pla y 
an impor tant function in mitigating the impacts of climate change , for example b y moder ating 
temper atures and atten uating w ater flo w.  They help to impro ve air quality through absorbing 
airbor ne pollution.   The protection of e xisting assets and planting of ne w trees and hedgero ws 
would ha ve a positiv e impact where the y are pro vided. 
18.27 Individually and collectiv ely, trees and hedgero ws mak e a v aluab le contr ibution to the 
high quality of lif e in the Borough, making it an attr active place f or people to liv e and w ork. 
However future population and economic g rowth in the Borough will contin ue to e xert pressure 
on the natur al en vironment.   Combined with the Borough’ s ageing tree population, this creates 
some r isk for the sylv an char acter of the Borough. 
18.28 The pur pose of these policies is to ensure that ne w development tak es responsibility 
for, and pla ys its par t in, maintaining and contr ibuting to wards the sylv an char acter of the 
Borough.   
Objective 
B - Protect / enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
82 Identified b y Blue Sky in the National Tree Map sur vey (2014) 
267 Policy LP 48 
Protection and enhancement of trees and hedg erows 
Protection 
1. Development pr oposals will be required to secure the sustainab le retention and 
enhancement of trees and hedg erows of  value. 
2. Retained  trees and hedg erows should be integrated  effectivel y into site layouts, 
with ne w landscaping where appr opriate , including by: 
i. creating ver dant fr onta ges to de velopment; 
ii. creating green corridor s thr ough sites;   
iii. making specimen trees or gr oups of trees f ocal points in de velopments;   
iv. fronting de velopments onto significant trees or w oodland; 
v. avoiding encr oachment of de velopment into the r oot pr otection area of trees 
of value to a void an y significant ad verse impact on them;  and 
vi. designating  appr opriate  buffer zones  between development  and woodland and 
ensuring  that built development  does  not encroach into such designated  ‘buffer 
zones’ . 
3. Retained trees shall be pr otected during demolition and construction w orks in 
accor dance with latest arboricultural best  practice . 
Enhancement 
4. Development  proposals  will be required  to provide for additional  tree and hedg erow 
planting where ver possib le.  
5. Development pr oposals will be required to pr ovide a net gain in landscape quality 
on site and full y mitigate f or an y existing trees and hedg erows lost as a result of 
the de velopment. 
6. Development  proposals  will be required to incorporate  landscaping sc hemes  that: 
i. enhance the c haracter and appearance of the landscape , townscape or 
roofscape;   
ii. include the planting of indig enous trees and other flora of local pr ovenance 
appr opriate to the area;   
iii. incorporate species diver sity to estab lish sustainab le landscaping in respect 
of climate c hang e and disease; 
iv. contrib ute to wards the creation of ver dant tree-lined streets; 
v. maximise oppor tunities f or the planting of long-living native br oad-lea ved tree 
species whic h grow to a lar ge siz e; 
268 vi. incorporate appr opriate indig enous species in locations that maximise the 
benefits to  biodiver sity, including the creation of w oodland and green  corridor s; 
vii. maximise oppor tunities f or planting of urban trees within streets and greenspace 
to create ric h urban treescapes; 
viii. replace  existing trees  and hedg erows lost as a result  of development  to result 
in a c lear net gain in landscape quality and the ability to  meet other polic y 
objectives,  including herita ge and biodiver sity,  
ix. maximise  oppor tunities f or planting of ne w hedg es with emphasis on suitab le 
native species; 
x. provide at least one fruit tree in the gar den of eac h new house b uilt and in the 
comm unal gar dens of apar tment b locks; and 
xi. maximise oppor tunities to plant urban or chards in amenity greenspace . 
7. Landscaping  proposals  will be required to incorporate  an appr opriate  post-planting 
mana gement and maintenance pr ogramme to ensure successful health y 
estab lishment and ongoing  development. 
Protecting trees and hedg erows 
18.29 Trees and hedgero ws make a significant  contr ibution  to townscape  and landscape .  
Their  sustainab le retention  and enhancement of v aluab le trees and hedgero ws will be required 
in an y development  proposal to allo w their natur al ongoing de velopment. 
18.30 Where ver there are trees or hedgero ws on or adjacent to a site that could be aff ected 
by a proposed de velopment, a tree sur vey and arbor icultur al impact assessment, in accordance 
with Br itish Standard 5837 ‘Trees in relation to design, demolition and constr uction’  (as amended 
or superseded) will be required. 
18.31 In accordance with the requirements of the NPPF (par a 175c), de velopment will be 
required to protect and conser ve irreplaceab le habitats such as ancient w oodland and ancient 
or veteran trees . Otherwise , development will not be suppor ted, unless justified b y wholly 
exceptional reasons and an appropr iate compensation str ategy is in place . 
18.32 In consider ing a tree or hedgero w’s ‘value’, par ticular consider ation will be giv en to 
whether individually or cum ulativ ely they: 
i. Make a visual contr ibution, presently or ha ve the potential to do so in the longer ter m, to 
the char acter and appear ance of the landscape or to wnscape; 
ii. Contr ibute to wards the v erdant char acter of the streetscene; 
iii. Provide an impor tant ecological function, such as pro viding wildlif e habitat or a g reen link 
betw een habitats; 
iv. Visually soften the roofscape of a de velopment within longer vie ws, or the edge of b uilt 
up areas; 
v. Are of an inter nationally , nationally or locally r are or threatened species; 
vi. Make a v alued contr ibution to an area of histor ic significance;  or 
vii. Have the potential to be future ancient or v eteran trees . 
269 18.33 Development  should not compromise the long-ter m health of trees and hedgero ws or 
fetter their ongoing  development. 
18.34 Where there is no pr actical alter nativ e and an element of encroachment into the root 
protection area of a tree is considered acceptab le by the Council, the applicant will be required 
to work with the Council to find a design solution that minimises an y adv erse impact on the 
tree. 
18.35 The siz e and type of appropr iate b uffer zones to separ ate de velopment from w oodland 
will depend on the scale , type and impact of the de velopment, to be deter mined on a 
case-b y-case basis in line with rele vant guidance . 
18.36 Where appropr iate, the retention and protection of trees or hedgero ws dur ing demolition 
and constr uction will be secured through conditions on planning per missions .  The ongoing 
protection of e xisting or ne wly planted trees will be secured through Tree Preser vation Orders 
(TPO), planning conditions or the designation of Conser vation Areas as appropr iate. 
18.37 Where  the Council accepts  that the need  for a development  is exceptional  enough to 
outw eigh the loss of a v aluab le tree or hedgero w, appropr iate mitigation will be required in the 
form of compensator y planting that will pro vide a longer-ter m net gain in ter ms of quality and 
quantity . Loss of a v aluab le tree or hedgero w will only be considered acceptab le where a rob ust 
justification  is submitted  to, and deemed acceptab le by, the Council.   Where an applicant is 
able to rob ustly demonstr ate that compensator y planting cannot be pro vided on-site , the Council 
will secure off-site in kind w orks or a financial contr ibution for off-site tree and hedgero w 
compensator y planting as par t of a planning per mission, with a pref erence f or pro vision close 
to the site . 
Tree and hedg erow enhancement 
18.38 New development will be required to contr ibute to wards maintaining and enhancing 
the Borough’ s netw ork of trees and hedgero ws to ensure that Br acknell F orest’ s verdant 
character and the v alue of this asset is not eroded o ver time . 
18.39 Where a de velopment requires landscaping, as a minim um, a landscaping str ategy 
(or an indicativ e landscaping scheme f or smaller proposals), will be required to be submitted 
with a planning application pr ior to deter mination.  In circumstances when it is not f easib le to 
provide the detailed planting specification, conditions will be imposed to require this to be 
submitted at an appropr iate stage in the planning and de velopment process .  In order to obtain 
planning per mission, the applicant will be required to demonstr ate that the de velopment la yout 
is capab le of accommodating a high quality landscaping scheme that fulfills policy requirements . 
18.40 Oppor tunities should be tak en to incor porate such f eatures as g reen roofs , roof gardens 
and g reen w alls.  On constr ained sites , or sites with limited oppor tunities to pro vide a net gain 
in landscape quality , off-site pro vision ma y be ag reed b y the Council.   This will be either in kind, 
or by financial contr ibution, with a pref erence f or pro vision close to the site . This could include 
public realm or street tree planting. 
18.41 Developers are required to ensure coordination betw een the location of utilities and 
tree planting, and that trees are planted with correct soil v olumes and appropr iate root protection . 
This is to ensure the proper estab lishment of trees and pre vent future conflict betw een trees 
270 and utilities .  To demonstr ate this , utility plans should be submitted alongside or la yered onto 
landscaping plans to demonstr ate that the landscaping proposed is achie vable and w ould not 
be compromised b y the la ying of ser vices . 
18.42 In addition, to avoid future conflict betw een e xisting and ne w trees , and b uilt str uctures , 
developers m ust giv e proper consider ation to the appropr iateness of a de velopment's b uild 
specification.   This ma y include the type and depth of f oundations , taking full account of a tree's 
future g rowth potential abo ve and belo w ground. 
18.43 Conditions will be used to secure post-planting care to ensure the sur vival of ne w 
planting dur ing its estab lishment, and f or replacement planting if an y plants die , fail to estab lish 
or are remo ved within a set per iod of time . 
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' 
Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par a 170) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Natur al En vironment Ref erence ID:  8) 
Bracknell F orest Tree Str ategy (2017) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
18.44 Deliv ery: 
Deter mination of planning applications 
Use of planning conditions and ob ligations 
18.45 Monitor ing: 
Number of ne w TPOs 
Tree audit / in ventor y 
Number of trees/w oodland subject to TPOs remo ved as a result of the g ranting of planning 
permissions .  
271 19 Climate change and en vironmental 
sustainability 
19.1 Sustainab le constr uction 
19.1 The Go vernment is committed to addressing climate change , through the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions , suppor ting energy efficiency and a voiding the profligate use of 
resources .  The Climate Change Act (2008, as updated) sets a target for the UK to cut 
greenhouse gas emissions to net z ero b y 2050.   National policy highlights the impor tance of 
the planning system in suppor ting a tr ansition to a lo w carbon future . Bracknell F orest has set 
out its commitment to address the causes and impacts of climate change . In 2020 the Council 
published the Climate Change Str ategy 2020-24  (83) which includes detailed action plans 
and measur able ambitious ann ual targets to ensure that the Council meets the go vernment 
target of er adicating its net contr ibution to climate change b y 2050. 
19.2 The deliv ery of sustainab le de velopment is the k ey theme r unning through this local 
plan.  As the Borough needs to accommodate significant housing and economic g rowth dur ing 
the plan per iod, this will increase the need f or energy and w ater consumption.  This impact can 
be mitigated b y developing sustainab le comm unities and encour aging lo wer energy consumption 
through energy efficient design of sites , buildings and ser vices .  Mitigation can also be pro vided 
by rene wable and lo w carbon energy technologies and reducing w ater consumption.  The 
following policy sets out measures to help address climate change through applying constr uction 
standards .  
Objective 
B - protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
D - Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
83 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/council-and-democr acy/str ategies-plans-and-policies/climate-change/climate-change-councils-approach 
272 Policy LP 49 
Sustainab le construction 
1. Development pr oposals will be required to meet c limate c hang e objectives and 
achieve a high standar d of en vironmental sustainability . This will be ac hieved b y 
the f ollowing: 
i. All major  (84)new build residential de velopment will be net z ero carbon f or 
regulated emissions,  unless it can be c learly demonstrated that this is not 
viable.  
ii. All minor (85) new build residential de velopment will be designed ac hieve a 
minim um of 19% impr ovement in the d welling emission rate o ver the tar get 
emission rate , as defined in P art L of the 2013 Building Regulations. 
iii. All residential de velopment shall meet water efficienc y standar d of 110 
litres/per son/da y, or an y updated standar d set b y a re view of P art G of the 
Building Regulations. 
iv. All non-residential de velopment of 500 square metres (gr oss e xternal area) or 
above will meet BREEAM 'e xcellent' or equiv alent standar d, unless it can be 
clearly demonstrated that this is not viab le, in suc h cases de velopment will meet  
BREEAM ‘very good’  standar d. 
19.3 Carbon emissions 
19.4  All major ne w build residential de velopments will be net z ero carbon f or regulated 
emissions (energy used to pro vide space heating and cooling, hot w ater and fix ed lighting), to 
be achie ved on site .  If it is demonstr ated that this is not viab le, a minim um of 35% impro vement 
in regulated emissions o ver the target emissions r ate in P art L of the 2013 Building Regulations , 
plus a Section 106 contr ibution to offset an y remaining carbon emissions to z ero is required. 
This will be charged at a r ate of £1,800 per remaining tonne to wards carbon offsetting f or 
specific schemes within the Borough (calculated as £60/tonne o ver a 30 y ear per iod).(86)  The 
order of pref erence f or achie ving net z ero carbon is as outlined abo ve, but if there are 
overwhelming benefits in being ab le to meet the net z ero carbon requirement in another w ay, 
clear e vidence should be pro vided to demonstr ate ho w it will be achie ved at the planning 
application stage .  
19.5 The plan wide viability study has assessed the cost implications of the policy and has 
concluded that the requirements can be met.   Theref ore, an applicant will need to clear ly 
demonstr ate wh y meeting net z ero carbon is not viab le at the planning application stage .  
19.6 Minor ne w build residential de velopments should be b uilt to a le vel equiv alent to the 
emissions requirement of the f ormer Code f or Sustainab le Homes Le vel 4.  This is a minim um 
19% impro vement in the dw elling emission r ate o ver the target emission r ate, as defined in 
84 As defined b y The Town and Countr y Planning (De velopment Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 
85 As defined b y The Town and Countr y Planning (De velopment Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 
86 The r ate of £60 per tonne o ver a 30 y ear per iod is widely adopted b y Greater London A uthor ities and is based on the 
non-tr aded pr ice of carbon in a go vernment consultation.  The pr ice per tonne of carbon will be k ept under re view and ma y 
change . 
273 Part L the 2013 Building Regulations . Where the 19% reduction in carbon emissions cannot 
be met b y the de velopment on site a Section 106 contr ibution to wards an y residual carbon 
emissions as outlined abo ve, may be possib le. 
19.7 An Energy Statement submitted in suppor t of an application needs to set out ho w the 
development will comply with the carbon reduction requirements and ho w emissions will 
be monitored eff ectively to ensure compliance contin ues. The Sustainab le Resource 
Management SPD will be re vised to set out fur ther detail on ho w developments will be e xpected 
to achie ve these requirements .  
19.8 Water efficienc y 
19.9 The pr udent use of w ater resources can reduce the impact on the en vironment and 
achie ve sustainability objectiv es. The Depar tment f or En vironment, F ood and Rur al Aff airs 
(DEFRA) and the En vironment Agency (EA) produced the Water Stressed Areas classification 
in 2013.  This look ed at the current and future w ater usage and climate change scenar ios, 
indicating the stress situation f or individual w ater companies . The tw o water companies supplying 
proper ties in the Borough are classified as being at “serious stress”, which is the highest of the 
three a vailab le ratings . 
19.10 Part G of the Building Regulations 2010 (with 2015 and 2016 amendments) prescr ibe 
125 litres/person/da y as a mandator y standard f or ne w residential de velopment.  However, if it 
can be justified b y LPAs, Part G ma y be used to apply a more str ingent optional standard of 
110 litres/person/da y. The Council’ s Water Cycle Study Scoping (2017) suppor ts the 110 
litres/person/da y optional standard, which is in line with the gener al principals of sustainab le 
development, reduces the energy consumed in the treatment and supply of w ater and w ould 
be at nominal additional cost to the de veloper . 
BREEAM 
19.11 The Building Research Estab lishment En vironmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) 
is an inter nationally recognised method of assessing, r ating and cer tifying the sustainability of 
buildings . BREEAM assesses cr iteria co vering a r ange of issues including energy and w ater 
use, location and accessibility , building f abric and mater ials, waste recycling, pollution 
and ecology .  A building’ s perf ormance is assessed to pro vide an o verall BREEAM r ating which 
ranges from ‘Pass’ to ‘Outstanding’.  The Council will seek at least a BREEAM ‘excellent’  rating 
or equiv alent f or ne w non-residential de velopment of 500 square metres  (g ross e xternal area) 
or abo ve (including change of use and con versions).  Where it is not viab le to achie ve BREEAM 
‘excellent’  rating, this m ust be clear ly demonstr ated and de velopments m ust  meet the BREEAM 
‘Very Good’  standard.  Assessments should be completed b y an accredited assessor . 
19.12 The abo ve policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 42 'Design' 
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 15 'Design pr inciples' 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
274 KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (paragraphs 7, 148 - 150, 153 and 154) 
National Pr actice P olicy Guidance (Rene wable and lo w Carbon – Ref erence ID:5, Climate 
Change – Ref erence ID:6, Water Supply , wastewater and w ater quality – Ref erence ID:34, 
Housing:  Optional technical standards – Ref erence ID:56) 
Bracknell Forest Water Cycle Study Stage 1 Scoping Repor t (2017) 
Bracknell F orest Water Cycle Study Stage 2 (2018) 
Bracknell F orest Local Plan Viability Testing Repor t  
Water Stressed Areas Classification (DEFRA and EA 2013) 
Part L of the Building Regulations 2010 (with 2013 and 2016 amendments) 
Part G of the Building Regulations 2010 (with 2015 and 2016 amendments) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
19.13 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
19.14 Monitor ing 
Percentage of residential de velopment not meeting w ater efficiency standard of 110 
litres/person/da y. 
Percentage of ne w non- residential de velopment not meeting BREEAM ‘excellent’  or 
equiv alent. 
Percentage of major ne w build residential de velopment not meeting net z ero carbon 
standard. 
Percentage of all other ne w build residential schemes not meeting 19% impro vement in 
the dw elling emission r ate o ver the target emission r ate. 
275 19.2 Rene wable and lo w carbon energy 
19.15 The Planning Act 2008 introduced a duty on local de velopment plans to include policies 
which ensure that the y contr ibute to both climate change mitigation and adaption.   National 
policy states that LP As should adopt proactiv e strategies to mitigate and adapt to climate change 
and suppor t the deliv ery of rene wable and lo w carbon energy and associated infr astructure . It 
also states that planning should suppor t the tr ansition to a lo w carbon future in a changing 
climate and encour age the use of rene wable resources , for example b y the de velopment of 
renewable energy . 
Objectives  
B - protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
D - Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
G - Achie ving high quality de velopment 
Policy LP 50 
Rene wable and lo w carbon ener gy 
Development in volving the g eneration of ener gy fr om lo w carbon and rene wable 
sour ces will be permitted where it can be demonstrated that there will be no 
significant ad verse impact on:   
i. amenity; 
ii. the b uilt or historic en vironment;  and, 
iii. the natural en vironment,  including individual and cum ulative landscape and 
visual impacts. 
19.16 Developments f or rene wable and lo w carbon energy ma y include solar f arms, wind 
turbines , biomass , distr ict heating or combined heat and po wer (CHP) from rene wable resources .  
Rene wable and lo w carbon de velopment of o ver 50 mega watts capacity are currently considered 
by the Secretar y of State f or Energy . Local Planning A uthor ities are responsib le for rene wable 
and lo w carbon energy de velopment of 50 mega watts or less installed capacity . Microgener ation 
(small scale gener ation, usually f or domestic use) is often per mitted de velopment and ma y not 
require planning per mission.  Where rene wable and lo w carbon schemes required b y Policy LP 
49 'Sustainab le constr uction'  are not per mitted de veloped the y will be assessed against this 
policy . 
19.17 The visual impact on the landscape and other sensitiv e areas will be a k ey consider ation 
in deter mining applications . This includes cum ulativ e impacts which ma y arise where tw o or 
more rene wable energy de velopments will be visib le from the same point or from points close 
to each other . The Planning Pr actice Guidance pro vides fur ther detail on planning consider ations 
for assessing rene wable and lo w carbon energy proposals . 
276 19.18 The NPPF states that local plans should identify suitab le areas f or rene wable and lo w 
carbon energy sources , and suppor ting infr astructure , where this w ould help secure their 
development.  The NPPF requires that, when deter mining applications f or wind energy , proposals 
involving one or more turbines should not be considered acceptab le unless: 
the site is in an area identified as suitab le for wind energy de velopment in a de velopment 
plan;  and, 
following consultation, it can be demonstr ated that the planning impacts identified b y 
affected local comm unities ha ve been fully addressed and the proposal has their bac king. 
19.19 Where suitab le areas f or rene wable and lo w carbon energy ha ve been identified in 
plans , local planning author ities should e xpect an y subsequent applications f or a commercial 
scale project outside these areas to demonstr ate that the proposed location meets the cr iteria 
used in identifying suitab le areas . 
19.20 The Br acknell F orest Council Rene wable and Lo w Carbon Energy P otential Study 
(2011) (87) has assessed wind, biomass , geother mal, solar and w aste resources to understand 
the lik ely potential rene wable energy capacity of the borough.  This assessment sho wed that 
there is limited rene wable energy resource to suppor t significant ne w low carbon gener ation 
capacity .  The study identified 4 v ery small areas suitab le for wind turbines within the nor thern 
part of the Borough, close to its boundar y and totaling 2.8km sq. 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Key Evidence 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraphs 7, 148, 151 – 154) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Rene wable and Lo w Carbon – Ref erence ID:5 and Climate 
Change – Ref erence ID:6) 
Bracknell F orest Council Rene wable and Lo w Carbon Energy P otential Study (2011) 
Deliver y and Monitoring 
19.21 Deliv ery  
Deter mination of planning applications 
19.22 Monitor ing 
Number of planning per missions g ranted f or rene wable and lo w carbon energy schemes 
each y ear 
87 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence-base 
277 19.3 Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS) 
19.23 National planning policy in the NPPF sets str ict tests to protect people and proper ty 
from flooding which all local planning author ities are e xpected to f ollow. The NPPF is clear that 
oppor tunities should be tak en to reduce the o verall level of flood r isk, through the la yout and 
form of de velopment which can include the use of SuDS .  Developers are encour aged to include 
SuDS ear ly in the design of a scheme and promote the efficient use of land b y combining them 
with other uses , such as pub lic open space .  SuDS also pro vide the oppor tunity to  impro ve 
water quality to mitigate the impact of de velopment with benefits f or amenity , recreation and 
wildlif e. 
Objectives 
B - protect/enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
D - Le vel of de velopment/land supply 
278 Policy LP 51 
Sustainab le Draina ge Systems (SuDS) 
1. Major de velopment pr oposals(88) and de velopments in areas at risk of flooding 
from all sour ces, both no w and in the future , identified in the latest Brac knell 
Forest Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA),  or more recent modelling, 
shall incorporate SuDS,  unless it can be demonstrated that pr ovision on site 
is inappr opriate . SuDS will:   
i. be an intrinsic par t of the design and la yout and designed in accor dance 
with the principles set out in the Brac knell Forest Local Flood Risk 
Mana gement Strategy , incorporating urban creep allo wances and utilising 
the most up to date c limate c hang e allo wances and rainfall data; 
ii. be selected in accor dance with the hierar chy of draina ge options,  with a 
preference f or green solutions;   
iii. meet the needs of the pr oposed de velopment,  over its lif etime; 
iv. be designed without creating e xcessive maintenance b urdens to future 
owner s/occupier s, and where possib le, incorporated in tandem with other 
site requirements in or der to utilise land efficientl y; 
v. have clear arrang ements in place f or on-going maintenance secured b y 
legal a greement,  or other rele vant mec hanisms; 
vi. have runoff fr om br ownfield de velopment that is reduced to as c lose as 
practicab le to greenfield runoff rates; 
vii. provide sufficient water quality treatment to mitigate the impact of 
development in accor dance with the Thames River Basin Mana gement 
Plan. 
19.24 National policy is clear that oppor tunities should be tak en to reduce the o verall level 
of flood r isk, through the la yout and f orm of de velopment.  This can include the use of SuDS . 
The Br acknell F orest Le vel 1 and Le vel 2 SFRAs (89)base a lso suppor ts the use of SuDS within 
developments . 
19.25 SuDS are designed to control surf ace w ater r un off close to where it f alls and replicate 
natur al drainage . They can: 
a. Reduce the causes and impacts of flooding; 
b. Remo ve pollutants from urban r un-off at source;  and,  
c. Combine w ater management with g reen space , with benefits f or amenity , recreation and 
wildlif e. 
19.26 The Br acknell F orest Le vel 1 and Le vel 2 SFRAs (90)identified the areas at r isk of 
flooding from all sources in the Borough and the Local Flood Risk Management Str ategy 
(2017) (91)  sets out the Borough’ s objectiv es and approaches to managing the r isk. The pro vision 
of SuDS in ne w developments is k ey to managing flood r isk. In accordance with national policy 
88 As defined b y the Town and Countr y Planning (De velopment Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 
89 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence- 
90 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence- 
91 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/cr ime-and-emergencies/flooding/flood-r isk-management 
279 it is impor tant that all ne w developments in areas at r isk of flooding should giv e priority to their 
use. Theref ore all major de velopments and de velopments in areas at r isk of flooding m ust 
incor porate SuDS , unless it is demonstr ated to be inappropr iate, and the pro vision of SuDS is 
encour aged f or all de velopment.   
19.27 Information on flood r isk is being updated contin uously and flood r isk identified in the 
SFRAs ma y change . The most up to date flood r isk inf ormation should alw ays be used, including 
the latest SFRA and the Flood Zones identified b y the En vironment Agency Flood Map f or 
Planning. 
19.28 Incor porating SuDS within a proposed de velopment should be done in the ear ly stages 
of the design process as it is an intr insic par t of the la yout and design of a scheme . SuDS can 
be used in tandem with other site requirements , such as biodiv ersity ( Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity' ) 
and OSPV ( Policy LP 34 'Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic Value') to promote the efficient 
use of land.  Early consider ation of the location and type of SuDS that ma y be suitab le will 
ensure land tak e is k ept to a minim um. The appropr iate design of a site incor porating SuDS 
can do m uch to mak e an unsuitab le site suitab le for de velopment, through inno vative design 
and appropr iate engineer ing solutions .   
19.29 SuDS solutions should be selected in accordance with the hier archy of dr ainage options 
as follows: 
a. Into the g round; 
b. To a surf ace w ater body; 
c. To a surf ace w ater se wer, highw ay drain, or another dr ainage system;  and,  
d. To a combined se wer. 
19.30 Where discharging to a surf ace w ater se wer, confir mation of allo wable discharge r ates 
should be sought from the se wage under taker. Appropr iate in vestigations should be under taken 
to deter mine the viability of infiltr ation at all de velopment sites . 
19.31 The Council will need to be satisfied that there are clear arr angements in place f or 
on-going maintenance and that the proposed SuDS solution will meet the needs of the proposed 
development, o ver it's lif etime , and taking account of climate change . The SuDS m ust be 
designed with consider ation to the long-ter m maintenance costs . These should be propor tionate 
and a void e xcessiv e costs to future o wners/occupiers . 
19.32 The Council will consider adopting SuDS through Section 38 Highw ay Agreements , 
OSPV and within SANGs . Early consultation with the adopting author ity is essential.  If SuDS 
are to be pr ivately o wned and maintained then a f ee to inspect and monitor their on-going 
maintenance ma y be sought through S106 ag reements . 
19.33 Local planning author ities are also required to consider the impact on w ater quality 
when g ranting planning per mission.   Provision of SuDS pro vides the oppor tunity to put in place 
sufficient w ater quality treatment to mitigate the impact of de velopment.   The Br acknell F orest 
Council Water Cycle Study Scoping (2017) (92)  and the Thames Riv er Basin Management Plan 
(2015)(93) suppor ts the pro vision of SuDS as a means of disposing of surf ace w ater and 
addressing w ater quality .   
92 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/de velopment-plan/dr aft-bracknell-forest-local-plan/e vidence- 
93  https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/thames-r iver-basin-distr ict-river-basin-management-plan 
280 19.34 The Br acknell F orest Local Flood Risk Management Str ategy (2017) (94)provides fur ther 
detailed advice on  SuDS pro vision f or each stage of a planning application and the Design 
SPD (2017) (95) provides advice on inf ormation that designers should consider when de veloping 
a master plan.   
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' 
Policy LP 18 'Flood r isk' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (par agraphs 148, 149, 150 (a) and 165) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Climate Change - Ref erence ID:  6, Flood Risk and coastal 
change - Ref erence ID:  7, Design - Ref erence ID:  26, Water supply , wastewater and w ater 
quality - Ref erence ID:  34) 
Bracknell F orest Water Cycle Study Phase 1 Scoping Repor t (2017)  
Bracknell F orest Le vel 1 Str ategic Flood Risk Assessment (2018) 
Bracknell F orest Le vel 2 Str ategic Flood Risk Assessment (2019) 
The Br acknell F orest Council Local Flood Risk Management Str ategy 2017-2020 (2017)  
The Thames Riv er Basin Management Plan (2015) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
19.35 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
19.36 Monitor ing 
Number of appeals allo wed when refusal is on g rounds of no/inadequate SuDS pro vision 
each y ear. 
Number of planning per missions which include SuDS pro vision each y ear 
94 https://www .bracknell-f orest.go v.uk/cr ime-and-emergencies/flooding/flood-r isk-management 
95 https://www .bracknell-forest.go v.uk/planning-and-b uilding-control/planning/planning-policy/supplementar y-planning-documents-spds/design-supplementar y-planning-document 
281 19.4 P ollution and hazards 
19.37 Pollution is an ything that aff ects the quality of land, air , water or soil which might lead 
to an adv erse impact on human health, the natur al en vironment or gener al amenity .  It includes , 
but is not necessar ily limited to , noise , vibr ation, smok e, fumes , gases , dust, steam, odour and 
artificial light pollution.   Hazards relate to land stability , such as landslides and subsidence . 
Impro vements to the quality of the en vironment in these regards can enhance health and 
well-being, helping to f acilitate sustainab le comm unities .  The planning system has an impor tant 
role in protecting the natur al en vironment and addressing pub lic health issues link ed to poor 
air and w ater quality and noise pollution. 
19.38 The pur pose of this policy is to minimise and reduce pollution and hazards from ne w 
and e xisting de velopments (including cum ulativ e impacts). 
19.39 The policy has tw o aims: 
to ensure ne w development proposals do not gener ate pollution or hazards which unduly 
impact on the surrounding en vironment;  and, 
to ensure de velopment proposals are not unacceptab ly affected b y existing pollution or 
hazards . 
19.40 It is impor tant that e xisting la wful uses do not become unab le to contin ue their oper ations 
due to subsequent ne w development.   A separ ate policy applies to de velopment of land 
potentially aff ected b y contamination which mainly relates to histor ic land uses . This policy 
applies in addition to national policy and other legislation. 
Objectives 
B - Protect/ enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
D – Le vel of de velopment/ land supply 
F – Strong comm unities 
G – Achie ving high quality de velopment 
H - Transpor t 
282 Policy LP 52 
Pollution and hazar ds 
1. Development pr oposals should: 
i. seek to minimise and reduce pollution and hazar ds, to mitigate an y adverse 
impacts and seek impr ovements where possib le; 
ii. neither individuall y nor cum ulativel y have an ad verse eff ect on human health, 
wellbeing and saf ety, residential amenity , the quality of the natural en vironment 
or landscape , either during the construction phase or when completed;  and, 
iii. avoid locating sensitive uses in areas with e xisting pollution or hazar ds or in 
areas that are likel y to ha ve them in the future . 
19.41 National policy states that both ne w and e xisting de velopment should not contr ibute 
to, be put at unacceptab le risk from, or be adv ersely aff ected b y unacceptab le levels of soil, 
air, water or noise pollution or land instability . This includes cum ulativ e effects (NPPF , paragraph 
180 and 182).  The cum ulativ e impact of de velopments will be a k ey consider ation f or 
development proposals , including both e xisting and proposed de velopments dur ing the 
constr uction phase and once oper ational. 
19.42 Whilst there is legislation to control emissions from polluting activities , the planning 
system has a complementar y role in directing the location of de velopment that ma y give rise 
to pollution or hazards . This can manif est itself either directly from the de velopment or indirectly , 
for example through the tr affic it gener ates. The NPPF is clear that the impact of pollution is a 
mater ial planning consider ation. 
19.43 The Council is committed to protecting e xisting good en vironmental quality and where 
possib le reducing adv erse eff ects on the local and natur al en vironment as a result of changes 
in activities or from ne w development.   Development proposals should seek to maintain e xisting 
good en vironmental quality and impro ve quality where possib le.  Oppor tunities f or such 
impro vements should be incor porated at the design stage or through a de velopment's oper ation. 
19.44 Development proposals should seek to a void gener ating pollution where possib le, and 
to reduce or limit the entr y of pollutants that present a significant threat to the natur al 
environment, including aquatic en vironments .  Proposals should seek to minimise the r isk and 
effects of hazards such as land stability , and where ver possib le bring unstab le land bac k into 
use.  Development proposals should not result in a hazard or hazards prejudicial to the future 
use of an y energy gener ation site or to surrounding land. 
19.45 Proposals which are either lik ely to gener ate or are sensitiv e to pollution or hazards 
will require a rele vant assessment based on current guidance and/or best pr actice upon 
submission of an application.   Where assessments cannot be made at the application stage , 
for example if the final technology decisions ha ve not been made , it ma y be required b y condition. 
283 19.46 Where mitigation measures are proposed, the Council will need to be con vinced that 
the proposed measures will be eff ective with respect to human health and w ellbeing, proper ty, 
water sources and the wider natur al en vironment.   Where possib le, impro vement is sought. 
These measures should be in place at an ear ly stage of the de velopment, f or example , SuDS 
provide an ideal oppor tunity to pro vide mitigation f or some pollutants . 
19.47 Sensitiv e uses include:  dwellings , hospitals , schools , nurser ies, residential care and 
nursing homes . 
Artificial lighting 
19.48 Many forms of ar tificial lighting can be beneficial, f or example through e xtending 
oppor tunities f or spor t and recreation.   However, in some circumstances the installation of 
lighting can be intr usive and result in light pollution.   In Br acknell F orest the amount of ar tificial 
lighting clear ly distinguishes r ural and urban areas .  The NPPF states that through good design 
and planning policies , the impact of light pollution from ar tificial light on local amenity , intrinsically 
dark landscapes and nature conser vation can be limited (NPPF , paragraph 180). 
19.49 Light pollution is caused b y a n umber of f actors including: 
a. sky glo w – the or ange glo w seen around urban areas at night, 
b. glare – the uncomf ortable brightness of a light source when vie wed against a dar k 
background, and 
c. light trespass – the spill of light be yond the target area f or a light. 
19.50 Artificial light pollution can ha ve a significant eff ect on the char acter of the area, 
particular ly in r ural areas , making them seem more urbanised, f or example spor ting f acilities 
with floodlighting.   It can also intr ude on the amenity of local residents or adv ersely aff ect the 
biodiv ersity of an area.   Man y species' natur al rhythms depend on da y-night and seasonal and 
lunar changes which can be impacted b y artificial lighting le vels.  Care should be tak en in the 
design of de velopment proposals near to sites protected f or their biodiv ersity or ecologically 
sensitiv e areas (such as ponds , lakes, watercourses , areas of conser vation v alue, habitat used 
by protected species).   Development proposals should not directly illuminate bat roosts or 
impor tant areas f or nesting birds . 
19.51 For maxim um benefit, the best use of ar tificial light is about getting the r ight light, in 
the right place and pro viding light at the r ight time .  Light pollution can be substantially reduced, 
without adv ersely aff ecting the pur pose of the equipment being installed, b y ensur ing that light 
is directed proper ly, switching off lights when not in use and a voiding ‘over-lighting’.   Reducing 
light pollution can be beneficial in making de velopments more sustainab le by using less energy . 
19.52 Development proposals f or ne w floodlighting and other e xternal lighting lik ely to ha ve 
a detr imental impact on neighbour ing occupiers , the r ural char acter of an area or biodiv ersity 
should pro vide eff ective mitigation measures . Providing data in an isolux diag ram can be used 
to demonstr ate an y such eff ects. 
19.53 Further ref erence is made to lighting in se veral policies in this plan in relation to both 
specific types of de velopment and the impact of lighting.   Related policies include , Policy LP 
41 'Equestr ian uses' , Policy LP 42 'Design' , Policy LP 43 'T all buildings' , Policy LP 
44 'Adv ertisements and shop fronts' , Policy LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and geological 
sites'  and Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity' , and site specific policies . 
284 Noise and vibration 
19.54 National policy states that ne w developments should a void noise giving r ise to significant 
adverse impacts on health and quality of lif e, and recognise that de velopment will often create 
some noise .  Existing la wful b usinesses w anting to de velop in contin uance of their b usiness 
should not ha ve unreasonab le restr ictions put on them (NPPF , paragraph 182). 
19.55 Noise can be broadly classified into tw o forms: neighbourhood noise (gener ated within 
the comm unity such as constr uction noise , licensed premises , air conditioning plants , street 
noise , excluding noise from tr affic) and en vironmental noise (noise from tr anspor t such as 
roads/ r ail/ aircr aft). 
19.56 Development proposals which ma y gener ate significant le vels of noise and vibr ation 
should include a consider ation of their impact on the quality of lif e of recipients in e xisting nearb y 
proper ties and also the intended ne w occupiers .  They should and tak e a precautionar y approach 
to ensure the y will not be subject to har m.  Development proposals that tak e oppor tunities to 
impro ve the acoustic en vironment should be suppor ted. Noise mitigation measures should also 
not compromise the amenity of occupants , e.g. if measures in volve sound insulation such as 
acoustic glazing or an alter nativ e measure of v entilation which relies upon windo ws being k ept 
closed in order to achie ve acceptab le inter nal noise le vels.  Applicants ma y be required to 
submit a w orking method statement compliant with BS 5228-1:  2009 + A1:  2014.    
19.57 Development proposals should aim to meet the f ollowing inter nal and e xternal noise 
standards(96) for residential de velopments: 
Table 14 Noise Standar ds 
Noise le vel Time Room 
30 dB LAeq Night (23.00 – 07.00) Bedrooms 
(Individual noise e vents should not e xceed 
45 dB LAmax) 
35 dB LAeq Day (07.00 – 23.00) Living rooms 
50 dB LAeq Day (07.00 – 23.00) Outside amenity space 
19.58 Reference will also need to be made to an y specific local technical P olicy Guidance 
produced b y the Council. 
19.59 Noise and vibr ation can adv ersely impact upon biodiv ersity (including designated sites) 
depending on their site specific vulner abilities . Care should be tak en in the design of de velopment 
proposals near to sites protected f or their biodiv ersity or ecologically sensitiv e areas (such as 
water bodies , areas of conser vation v alue or habitat used b y protected species).   This should 
ensure that de velopment proposals , either individually or cum ulativ ely, do not significantly aff ect 
such areas .  Fur ther assessments ma y be necessar y to assess these impacts and to inf orm 
mitigation where appropr iate.  This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 
42 'Design' , Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity'  and Policy LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and 
geological sites' . 
19.60 Development proposals in areas significantly aff ected b y aircr aft/ road/ r ail noise will 
be suppor ted where the applicant can demonstr ate eff ective mitigation measures . 
96 Based on World Health Organisation – Guidelines f or Comm unity Noise 
285 Air quality 
19.61 The planning system has a role to pla y in protecting sensitiv e uses from poor air quality . 
The NPPF states that policies should sustain and contr ibute to wards compliance with rele vant 
limit v alues or national objectiv es for pollutants .  This should tak e into account the presence of 
Air Quality Management Areas (A QMAs) and the cum ulativ e impacts on air quality from individual 
sites in local areas (NPPF , paragraph 181). 
19.62 In Bracknell F orest, all national air quality objectiv es are being met e xcept f or nitrogen 
dioxide at tw o locations , where A QMAs ha ve been declared.  These are: 
Bracknell A QMA - The A322 Bagshot Road and Do wnshire Way from Ber kshire Way to 
junction with B3430. 
Crowthor ne AQMA - P art B3348, High Street and par t of Sandhurst Road. 
19.63 It is theref ore impor tant to ensure that de velopment proposals , either individually or 
cumulativ ely, do not significantly aff ect ne w or future occupants within or adjacent to an A QMA 
by gener ating unsatisf actor y air quality .  They should include suitab le measures to pre vent and 
mitigate their air quality impact, including an y effect on A QMAs in the future .  Applicants should 
consider air quality impacts at the ear liest stage possib le.  Development which ma y have an 
impact on an A QMA should be consistent with the latest Air Quality Action Plan.    
19.64 The Pub lic Health Outcomes F ramework for England (97) includes an indicator of 
mortality associated with air pollution (based on le vels of PM2.5). It is estimated that the fr action 
of mor tality attr ibuted to par ticulate air pollution is 5.7% (2018) in Br acknell F orest.  Any reduction 
in par ticulate matter le vels will contr ibute to impro ving health.   Directors of Pub lic Health are 
encour aged to pr ioritise action on air quality in their local area to help reduce the health b urden 
from air pollution.  Local author ities are encour aged to w ork towards reducing emissions and 
concentr ations of PM2.5 . 
19.65 Development proposals should seek to impro ve air quality b y reducing reliance on 
petrol and diesel v ehicles and suppor ting alter nativ e modes of sustainab le travel.  Measures 
to pre vent and offset the impact on air quality ar ising from ne w development should be 
considered.    
19.66 In accordance with the national planning pr actice guidance , when assessing 
development proposals consider ation should be giv en to whether the proposed de velopment 
would: 
significantly aff ect tr affic in the immediate vicinity of the proposed site or fur ther afield; 
introduce ne w ‘point’  sources of air pollution or lead to deter ioration in air quality; 
expose people to e xisting sources of air pollutants or poor air quality; 
give rise to potentially negativ e impacts (such as dust) dur ing constr uction f or nearb y 
sensitiv e locations;  and,  
affect biodiv ersity . 
19.67 Pollution that aff ects air quality can also impact upon biodiv ersity and protected habitats , 
such as Special Protection Areas , Special Areas of Conser vation and SSSIs .  A precautionar y 
approach will be tak en to such areas to ensure the y are not subject to har m.  
97 Public Health Outcomes F ramework - PHE 
286 19.68 Applicants will be required to under take air quality modelling and assessment where 
necessar y to address the eff ects on human health and biodiv ersity .  This will be pro vided or 
funded b y the applicant and include consider ation of issues such as street can yons, site la youts 
and le vels and the location of sensitiv e receptors .  Guidance f or the assessment of air pollution 
effects on habitats sites has been ag reed with Natur al England and is a vailab le from the 
Council;  the Council will de velop guidelines f or assessment of air pollution eff ects on SSSIs if 
appropr iate and in consultation with Natur al England . 
19.69 Air quality also relates to situations where odour associated with par ticular uses , such 
as commercial, industr ial, ag ricultur al or se wage related activities , may affect quality of lif e. 
19.70 This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 46 'Biodiv ersity'  and Policy 
LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and geological sites' . 
Water quality 
19.71 The Water En vironment (W ater F ramework Directiv e) Regulations (2017) apply to 
surface w aters and g roundw ater, seeking to pre vent deter ioration of aquatic ecosystems and 
protect, enhance and restore w ater bodies to ‘good’  status .  National planning guidance states 
that local planning author ities m ust ha ve regard to the En vironment Agency's Riv er Basin 
Management Plans (RBMP).  These plans contain the main issues f or the w ater en vironment 
and the actions needed to tac kle them. 
19.72 The Thames RBMP identifies that all six stretches of w ater bodies in the Borough had 
an Ov erall Waterbody Status of 'moder ate' in 2015, f ailing the Water F ramework 
Directiv e objectiv e of 'good' status by 2015.  Several reasons for not achie ving 'good' status 
across the Borough are cited (98).  Several of the w aterbodies are 'hea vily modified'. 
19.73  The Borough is in a Nitr ates Directiv e Protected Area, a Dr inking Water Protected 
Area and a ‘Surface Water Saf eguard Zone’  where land use is at r isk of influencing the quality 
of water that is used f or drinking. 
19.74  In 2015, g roundw ater bodies in the Borough w ere achie ving 'good' o verall status .  The 
current RBMP identified that, across the Thames Riv er Basin as a whole , groundw ater is a k ey 
source of dr inking w ater. The nor thern par t of the Borough is in a ‘Groundw ater Source Protection 
Zone’  (water enter ing the g round in this area is presumed to reach a w ater abstr action). 
19.75 The Pr ivate Water Supplies (England) Regulations 2016 mak es Councils responsib le 
for the monitor ing and r isk assessment of pr ivate w ater supplies (including pr ivate distr ibution 
systems).   Development proposals in volving a pr ivate w ater supply should be accompanied b y 
a risk assessment to demonstr ate that dr inking w ater will be/remain wholesome . 
19.76  It is theref ore impor tant to ensure that de velopment proposals , either individually or 
cumulativ ely, do not significantly aff ect the quality of controlled w aters or impact upon biodiv ersity 
(including designated sites) through changes to w ater quality and/or w ater flo w regimes .  It is 
essential w ater quality is not compromised in the vicinity of an y private w ater supplies . 
19.77  Development proposals should seek to impro ve the quality of controlled w aters .  This 
may include the use of high quality SuDS , appropr iate dr ainage str ategies , and natur alising 
heavily modified w atercourses (such as culv erted w atercourses r unning through urban areas).   
98 Reasons cited f or not achie ving 'good' status include ph ysical modification and urbanisation aff ecting in vertebrates and fish 
migration;  physical barr iers to fish mig ration;  sewage discharge aff ecting phosphate , ammonia, macroph ytes and ph ytobenthos 
and in vertebrates;  agriculture and r ural land management;  surface w ater abstr action;  and recreation 
287 This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems 
(SuDS)' , Policy LP 47 'Designated nature conser vation and geological sites'  and Policy LP 
53 'De velopment of land potentially aff ected b y contamination' . 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 16 'Green infr astructure' 
Policy LP 17 'Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 2 Achie ving sustainab le de velopment; 
Chapter 9 Promoting sustainab le transpor t; Chapter 15 Conser ving and enhancing the 
natur al en vironment) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (Air Quality;  Noise;  Light P ollution) 
Local Transpor t Plan 3 (2011-2026) 
Air Quality Action Plan (Br acknell F orest, 2014) 
Environment Act 1995 
The Institution of Lighting Engineers ‘Guidance notes f or the reduction of obtr usive light’ 
(2011) 
The Institution of Lighting Engineers ‘Guidance notes f or the reduction of light pollution’ 
(2000) (re vised 05/03) 
Artificial light and wildlif e (Bat Conser vation Trust; June 2014) 
Guidelines f or Comm unity Noise (W orld Health Organisation) 
BS 5228-1:  2009+A1:  2014 Code of Pr actice f or Noise and Vibration Control on Constr uction 
and Open Sites 
BS8233:  2014 Guidance on Sound Insulation and Noise Reduction f or Buildings 
BS4142:  2014 Methods f or Rating and Assessing Industr ial and Commercial Noise 
The Pub lic Health Outcomes F ramework for England, 
The Water En vironment (W ater F ramework Directiv e) (England and Wales) Regulations 
(2017)  
The Pr ivate Water Supplies (England) Regulation 2016 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
19.78 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
19.79 Monitor ing 
Number of Air Quality Management Areas 
Annual a verage nitrogen dio xide concentr ation in Br acknell A QMA 
Overall status of surf ace w ater bodies (En vironment Agency Catchment Data Explorer) 
288 19.5 De velopment of land potentially aff ected b y 
contamination 
19.80 Ground contamination of land often relates to histor ic land uses . Making use of 
contaminated land benefits the en vironment b y cleaning the site and also utilising pre viously 
developed land.   However, it is impor tant that the health and quality of lif e of e xisting or future 
occupiers (‘receptors’) are not put at r isk.  The pur pose of this policy is to ensure that where 
potential contamination is a consider ation, the planning approach is eff ective and consistent.   
19.81 The policy aims to ensure that the e xtent, scale and nature of potential contamination 
is proper ly assessed and that an y potential r isks to human health, proper ty, nature conser vation 
and w ater quality are estab lished, and addressed accordingly .  The policy applies where 
development proposals are on, or near a site kno wn or suspected to be potentially contaminated, 
or if a sensitiv e use is proposed.   A separ ate policy ( Policy LP 52 'P ollution and hazards' ) applies 
to proposed land uses that ma y gener ate or be put at r isk from unacceptab le levels of pollution 
and hazards .  This policy applies in addition to national policy and other legislation. 
Objectives 
B - Protect/ enhance e xisting assets and create ne w assets 
D – Le vel of de velopment/ land supply 
F – Strong comm unities 
G – Achie ving high quality de velopment 
289 Policy LP 53 
Development of land potentiall y affected b y contamination 
1. Development pr oposals on,  or near sites whic h are kno wn, or are suspected to 
be, potentiall y contaminated,  or pr oposals f or sensitive land uses,  will be suppor ted 
where it can be demonstrated that the y will not e xpose people , the natural 
environment,  proper ty, water bodies,  or other receptor s(99) to le vels of potential 
contamination whic h give rise to unacceptab le risks or harm to health or other 
adverse impacts. 
2. Applicants will be required to submit details of: 
i. the e xtent,  scale and nature of the potential contamination;   
ii. an assessment of potential risks to human health,  proper ty, nature conser vation, 
water quality or other receptor s; and, 
iii. any pre ventative , mitigation or remedial measures and suppor ting assessments. 
3. Development pr oposals will not be suppor ted where the y would spread e xisting 
contamination,  or cause contamination of land. 
19.82 Using pre viously de veloped land (NPPF par agraph 117) can enab le de velopment in 
the most sustainab le locations .  However, if the land is potentially contaminated, it is impor tant 
that the health and quality of lif e of e xisting or future occupiers are not put at r isk, and are 
enhanced where possib le.  Failing to deal adequately with contamination could cause har m to 
human health, proper ty and the wider en vironment. 
19.83 The control of pollution and contamination is a comple x process in volving both the 
Council and other statutor y bodies .  The NPPF is clear that the impact of pollution is a mater ial 
planning consider ation when proposed de velopment ma y expose people , the natur al 
environment, proper ty, water bodies , or other receptors , to le vels of contamination which create 
unacceptab le risks to health or other adv erse impacts .   
19.84 Both surf ace w ater and g roundw ater can be ser iously aff ected b y development and 
uses occurr ing within sites .  Theref ore, adequate measures are required to protect the quality 
of water.  This is par ticular ly impor tant o ver a pr incipal aquif er and in g roundw ater Source 
Protection Zones (SPZs), which are areas identified(100)as at r isk from potentially polluting 
activities , often f ound around w ells, boreholes and spr ings.  SPZs are designated f or all 
groundw ater supplies intended f or human consumption.   Where appropr iate, the Council will 
liaise with the En vironment Agency and w ater companies in relation to measures that aff ect 
surface and g round w aters . 
19.85 For the pur poses of this policy , ‘near a site’  is usually within 250m, b ut ma y depend 
on the potential contamination identified. 
99 A receptor is something that could be adv ersely aff ected b y a contaminant e .g. a person, an organism, an ecosystem, 
proper ty, or controlled w aters (DEFRA, 2012).  Controlled Waters include g roundw ater, some of which ma y be defined 
as Source Protection Zones . 
100   The En vironment Agency identifies Source Protection Zones 
290 19.86 The possibility of contamination should alw ays be considered, par ticular ly when 
development proposals in volve sensitiv e uses .  These uses include:  housing with gardens , 
hospitals , schools , nurser ies, residential care and n ursing homes , parks and recreational spaces . 
19.87 Potentially contaminated sites will require a Phase 1 Preliminar y Risk Assessment (or 
relevant assessment based on current guidance and/or best pr actice) under taken by a suitab ly 
qualified person when submitting a planning application.  The Phase 1 assessment should 
include inf ormation on past and current uses and a Conceptual Site Model of potential 
contaminants (101), pathw ays (102) and receptors .  Assessments should include inf ormation on 
the e xtent, scale , nature and lik ely impact and r isks of an y contamination.   If the potential f or 
contamination is identified, a Phase 2 assessment will also need to accompan y the planning 
application. 
19.88 To remediate a contaminated land site , the significant contaminant linkages should be 
broken, so that no unacceptab le risks remain or r isks are reduced as f ar as pr acticab le. 
19.89 Responsibility f or secur ing a saf e development on sites aff ected b y contamination rests 
with the lando wner/ de veloper (NPPF par agraph 179).  A precautionar y approach will be f ollowed 
whereb y the b urden of proof that a de velopment on potentially contaminated land is not har mful 
lies with the lando wner/ de veloper . Development proposals should not result in a hazard or 
hazards prejudicial to the future use of an y energy gener ation site or to surrounding land. 
19.90 Where mitigation measures are proposed, the Council needs to be con vinced that the 
proposed measures will be eff ective with respect to human health, proper ty, water bodies and 
the wider natur al en vironment.  The pro vision of these measures should be in place at an ear ly 
stage of the de velopment.   For example , carefully designed SuDS could be used on sites on 
contaminated land instead of tr aditional piped systems . This policy should be read in conjunction 
with Policy LP 51 'Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS)' . 
19.91 Planning per mission should only be g ranted if the applicant can demonstr ate to the 
satisf action of the Council that adequate and eff ective remedial measures to remo ve the potential 
harm to receptors will be implemented.  Remediation measures ma y be secured b y planning 
conditions . 
19.92 The Council intends to prepare local contaminated land guidance;  reference should 
be made to the guidance once a vailab le. 
19.93 The abo ve policy should be read in conjunction with Policy LP 52 'P ollution and hazards' . 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 11 Making eff ective use of land;  Chapter 
15 Conser ving and enhancing the natur al en vironment)   
Planning Pr actice Guidance  (Land aff ected b y contamination) 
101 A contaminant is a substance which is in, on or under the land and which has the potential to cause significant har m to a 
relevant receptor , or to cause significant pollution of controlled w aters (Defr a, 2012). 
102 A pathw ay is a route b y which a receptor is or might be aff ected b y a contaminant (DEFRA, 2012). 
291 Land contamination:  risk management (DEFRA and En vironment Agency , Apr il 2016) 
Environmental Protection Act 1990:  Part 2A – Contaminated Land Statutor y Guidance 
(DEFRA, Apr il 2012) 
Model Procedures f or the Management of Land Contamination.  Contaminated Land Repor t 
11 (CRL11).  (Environment Agency and DEFRA, 2004) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
19.94 Deliv ery 
Deter mination of planning applications 
19.95 Monitor ing 
Number of sites and amount of land remediated. 
292 20 Transpor t 
20.1 Assessing tr anspor t impacts and requirements 
20.1 It is impor tant f or the eff ective planning of the Borough that the tr anspor t impacts of 
proposed de velopments are proper ly considered.   This will include consider ation of pro vision 
for non-car modes of tr anspor t and ensur ing that highw ays saf ety and the oper ation of the 
highw ay netw ork are not unacceptab le har med.   This policy sets out the requirements f or smaller 
developments requir ing transpor t assessments and larger de velopment using tr anspor t modelling. 
Objective 
H - Transpor t 
Policy LP 54 
Assessing transpor t impacts and requirements 
1. Development pr oposals will inc lude full assessment of , and measures to 
minimise , adverse transpor t impacts and will inc lude an y necessar y mitigation. 
2. Rele vant de velopments pr oposals m ust be accompanied b y a Transpor t 
Assessment or Transpor t Statement whic h: 
i. identifies all transpor t related impacts arising fr om the de velopment 
proposals; 
ii. sets out mitigation measures to o vercome the identified impacts; 
iii. shows ho w matter s of highwa ys saf ety ha ve been ad dressed;  and, 
iv. demonstrates ho w modes other than the car will be planned f or and 
delivered. 
3. Where rele vant, modelling of the transpor t impacts of the de velopment should 
be carried out. 
20.2 The o verall goal f or future g rowth is to ensure people and goods can tr avel to their 
destinations using a v ariety of modes of tr anspor t. To do this w e need to minimise the use of 
vehicles as m uch as possib le. Development will cause a tr anspor t impact which will need to 
be assessed and where necessar y, mitigated.  Policies LP 53-56 set out the necessar y mitigation 
requirements . 
20.3 Any major de velopment scheme (residential scheme o ver 10 dw ellings;  retail scheme 
over 500 m2; and emplo yment scheme o ver 1000 m2) must demonstr ate that there are no se vere 
transpor t impacts ar ising from a de velopment proposal.   A Transpor t Assessment (T A) shall 
be pro vided, suppor ted b y traffic modelling using a v alidated model which m ust comply with 
293 current Depar tment of Transpor t criteria. The modelling should consider the tr anspor t impact 
of de velopment without an y mitigation to ascer tain an y adv erse impacts it w ould place on the 
highw ay netw ork. Further testing should be under taken with necessar y mitigation measures to 
demonstr ate that the proposal will not cause an y significant tr anspor t impacts . 
20.4 The TA should assess the individual and cum ulativ e impacts of the de velopment on the 
existing tr anspor t system and tak e account of impacts from other de velopments . It will also set 
out appropr iate mitigation measures to address these identified impacts and sho w how highw ay 
safety has been addressed in the design of the de velopment.   It will e xplain ho w non-car modes 
of travel will be encour aged through the design of the tr anspor t netw ork, the use of tr avel plans , 
financial contr ibutions to off-site infr astructure or pub lic transpor t or the pro vision of appropr iate 
infrastructure f or these modes within the de velopment. 
20.5 Relevant smaller de velopments will be required to submit a Transpor t Statement with 
their proposals . 
20.6 Developments o ver 50 dw ellings should use the Council’ s validated model  in suppor t 
of their tr anspor t submissions . 
Linked Strategic P olicies 
Policy LP 1 'Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples' 
Policy LP 14 'T ranspor t principles' 
Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 9) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (T ravel Plans , Transpor t Assessments and Statements) 
Local Transpor t Plan 3 
Planning Ob ligation SPD (2015) 
Outcomes from BFC Transpor t Model 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
20.7 Deliv ery  
Deter mination of planning applications 
S106 ob ligations 
Planning conditions 
CIL 
20.8 Monitor ing 
Traffic le vel monitor ing in line with the current monitor ing regime 
Accessibility 
Use and application of the par king standards 
Use of sustainab le modes of tr anspor t 
Prog ress and deliv ery of tr anspor t schemes in the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan 
294 20.2 Transpor t infrastructure pro vision 
20.9 High quality tr anspor t infrastructure is vital to connect comm unities , facilitate access to 
work, education, leisure and other ser vices and reduce congestion.  This policy seeks to impro ve 
transpor t choice and promote sustainab le transpor t options in accordance with the NPPF . 
Objective 
H - Transpor t 
Policy LP 55 
Transpor t infrastructure pr ovision 
Where appr opriate and rele vant, developments will be permitted whic h: 
i. provide or make a financial contrib ution to wards ne w or impr oved transpor t 
infrastructure (inc luding walking,  cycling and pub lic transpor t infrastructure) 
identified b y the Transpor t Assessment or Transpor t Statement; 
ii. provide or impr ove accessib le routes that pr ovide a c hoice of transpor t mode 
to and fr om essential ser vices; 
iii. provide appr opriate infrastructure and are designed to enab le bus ser vices to 
be pr ovided to ser ve ne w de velopment; 
iv. provide or impr ove rail infrastructure inc luding related pub lic realm and car 
parking; 
v. provide or impr ove taxi infrastructure at ke y town centre and transpor t hubs; 
vi. secure w orks and other measures to impr ove the capacity and functionality of 
individual r oads,  junctions and transpor t corridor s where the need f or suc h 
impr ovements has been identified in the Transpor t Assessment or Transpor t 
Statement;  and, 
vii. ensure that infrastructure is designed and pr ovided to meet the needs of 
everyone, including those with mobility issues and those with pushc hairs.   
20.10 Development proposals should adequately mitigate adv erse impacts on tr anspor t 
infrastructure where , through detailed assessment the y require ne w or impro ved infr astructure 
provision.   Development proposals which ha ve an adv erse impact on the e xisting highw ays 
netw ork will be required to pro vide adequate mitigation in the f orm of saf e and con venient ne w 
roads or junction impro vements .  Where a de velopment w ould result in an increase in tr avel 
adequate pro vision should be made f or all modes of tr avel.  This ma y include the pro vision of 
new footpaths and cycle ways, layouts that can accommodate b uses , the pro vision of pub lic 
transpor t infrastructure such as ne w or repositioned b us stops or taxi r anks or the pro vision of , 
or impro vements to , links to e xisting f acilities . In some circumstances it ma y be appropr iate to 
make financial contr ibutions to reasonab ly related off-site pro vision, if it can be demonstr ated 
that an acceptab le and achie vable solution can o vercome the har m caused b y the de velopment. 
295 20.11 This policy pro vides a list of cr iteria which ma y all or in par t apply to de velopment 
proposals which will ha ve an adv erse impact.  However, it ma y be that some are not rele vant 
to some applications , in which case the y will not be a consider ation. 
20.12 New development should be w ell connected to e xisting b us, rail, cycle , pedestr ian and 
comm unity tr anspor t netw orks and f acilities .  They should pro vide ne w or impro ved infr astructure 
as appropr iate to help create sustainab le de velopment as required b y the NPPF . 
20.13 Public Rights of Way (PR OW) are defined routes o ver which the pub lic ha ve a right to 
pass and repass .  The PR OW netw ork pro vides a v aluab le asset f or local comm unities and 
should alw ays be protected and impro ved where possib le. Where an oppor tunity ar ises, 
commitment will be sought to impro ve the quality of a PR OW through impro ved connectivity , 
green infr astructure projects and/or accessibility impro vements . A pr iority will be to secure , 
through ne w development, impro ved access f or all including people with reduced mobility 
through better surf acing of routes , and replacing stiles and other restr icting f eatures .  
Accessib le options shall be encour aged such as openings of sufficient width and suitab ly design 
gates and kissing gate .  The creation of saf e circular routes f or horse r iders and  cyclists will 
be sought. 
20.14 Impro vements m ust not detr act from the attr active char acter of Pub lic Rights of Way. 
This is because changes such as lighting and f ormal surf acing can detr act from a leisure route’ s 
rural char acter and giv e it a more urban nature as an adopted pub lic highw ay. 
20.15 The Local Highw ay Author ity will seek to adopt highw ays on residential de velopments 
of more than six dw ellings or those which pro vide connections through the site which benefit 
gener al pub lic use b y impro ving connectivity and access . 
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 14 'T ranspor t principles' 
Policy LP 13 'Infr astructure' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (NPPF) (Chapter 9) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (PPG) 
Local Transpor t Plan 3 and Implementation Plan 2011-26 (Apr il 2011) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
20.16 Deliv ery  
Deter mination of planning applications 
S106 ob ligations 
Planning conditions 
CIL 
20.17 Monitor ing 
Traffic le vel monitor ing in line with the current monitor ing regime 
296 Prog ress and deliv ery of tr anspor t schemes in the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan 
Use of sustainab le modes of tr anspor t 
Use and application of the par king standards 
Accessibility 
297 20.3 Travel Plans and par king 
20.18 Effective travel plan and par king measures contr ibute to the str ategic tr anspor t aims 
of Policy LP 14 'T ranspor t principles'  in achie ving integ rated sustainab le transpor t to suppor t 
future sustainab le growth. The f ollowing policies pro vide the de velopment management policy 
framework for both topics . 
Objective 
H - Transpor t 
Policy LP 56 
Travel plans 
1. Development whic h is likel y to g enerate a significant amount of mo vement will 
require a Travel Plan whic h mitigates an y adverse transpor t impacts.  The Travel 
Plan will be e xpected to: 
i. have regar d to the thresholds and requirements detailed in planning guidance;   
ii. activel y promote sustainab le tra vel modes,  while reducing the need to tra vel; 
and, 
iii. include pr ovisions that it will be monitored and re viewed on an ann ual basis 
for a minim um of 5 y ears. 
2. Residential de velopment ma y be required to pr ovide ad ditional financial 
contrib utions to allo w the Council to implement Travel Plan initiatives f or the site 
and surr ounding area. 
20.19 In line with national guidance , the Council requires ne w development that is lik ely to 
have significant tr anspor t implications to implement Travel Plans . A Travel Plan sets out the 
process b y which the de velopment’ s owner or occupier will promote sustainab le travel choices 
and reduce the o verall need f or car tr avel. The Planning Ob ligations SPD sets out the 
development thresholds abo ve which a Travel Plan will be sought, and the associated f ees to 
be charged b y the Council.   Each Travel Plan m ust be monitored b y the o wner or occupier f or 
a minim um per iod of fiv e years.  As par t of this requirement, ann ual repor ts will need to be 
submitted to the Council.  A deposit will be held b y the Council, to be retur ned to the de veloper 
or occupier , if after fiv e years, the Travel Plan is successfully implemented. 
20.20 For a major de velopment, a de veloper ma y be required to pa y an additional Travel 
Plan sum to the Council in lieu of pro viding a Travel Plan.   The siz e of an y payment will be 
propor tional to the n umber of dw ellings being b uilt. In retur n, the Council will tak e responsibility 
for deliv ering and monitor ing the tr avel planning measures across the site , and in the wider 
borough area.  This option will ensure g reater consistency of sustainab le travel choices promoted 
across a wider area. 
298 Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 14 'T ranspor t principles'   
20.21 KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 9) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (T ravel plans , transpor t assessments and statements ref erence) 
Local Transpor t Plan 3 Core Str ategy and Implementation Plan (L TP3) (2011) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
Monitor ing of planning ob ligations and planning conditions 
Monitor ing of the pro visions in each tr avel plan 
Objective 
H - Transpor t 
Policy LP 57 
Parking 
1. Development will be appr oved whic h: 
i. provides vehic le and  c ycle parking (inc luding parking f or people with 
disabilities) and electric vehic le charging facilities; 
ii. impr oves the quality and/or increases the amount of parking in 
defined centres where identified as being appr opriate and needed;  and, 
iii. impr oves the pr ovision,  quality , convenience and security of pub lic parking 
facilities f or cycles. 
2. All rele vant pr oposals should ha ve regar d to the Council’ s current parking 
standar ds as guidance in the determination of planning applications. 
20.22 The Council encour ages sustainab le transpor t modes b ut also recognises that motor 
vehicles will contin ue to pla y a vital role in man y peoples’  lives and in pro viding a successful 
econom y.  Theref ore,  this policy seeks to secure the pro vision of appropr iate par king and 
servicing f acilities , while ensur ing that appropr iate pro vision is made f or more sustainab le forms 
of transpor t such as cycle par king and charging points f or electr ic vehicles where appropr iate.  
299 20.23 Where rob ust e vidence is pro vided and more sustainab le transpor t modes are both 
availab le and accessib le, parking pro vision can be considered more fle xibly, but there should 
always be disab led par king pro vision and par king f or cycles . There ma y be circumstances in 
some residential schemes where car-free elements or the pro vision of less par king than the 
relevant standard will be appropr iate subject to detailed and rob ust e vidence demonstr ating 
why there is a reduced need.  Commercial de velopment should also mak e adequate pro vision 
for lorr y par king, tur ning, ser vicing and f acilities f or deliv eries etc.   Institutions such as schools 
and care homes need to pro vide par king f or staff and visitors .   
20.24 It is impor tant that de velopments include saf e and secure cycle par king which f acilitates 
and encour ages cycling as a mode of tr anspor t. Planning guidance f or par king  has been 
adopted b y the Council.   
Linked Strategic P olicy 
Policy LP 14 'T ranspor t principles' 
KEY EVIDENCE 
National Planning P olicy F ramework (Chapter 9) 
Planning Pr actice Guidance (T ranspor t evidence bases in plan making decision taking - 
reference ID;  54-001 to 54-012 and tr avel plans , transpor t assessments and statements 
reference ID:  42-001 to 42-011)  
The Local Transpor t Plan 3 Core Str ategy and Implementation Plan 2011-26 (2011) 
DELIVER Y AND MONIT ORING 
20.25 Deliv ery; 
Deter mination of planning applications 
Implementation of the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan 
S106 Ag reements and Planning Conditions 
Section 38/278 Ag reements 
The Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy (CIL) and / or other infr astructure funding mechanisms 
The statutor y functions of the Local Highw ay Author ity 
Implementation of the Local Transpor t Plan 3 (2011) and its related str ategies 
20.26 Monitor ing 
Monitor ing of planning ob ligations and planning conditions 
Use and application of the par king standards 
300 Appendices Appendix 1:  Housing Trajector y 
Figure 5 Draft Local Plan Trajector y 2019/20 - 2036/37 
302 2020/21  2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 Total 
NetSite Status 
(as at A
pril 2020 )
Amen Corner North, Binfield 
(SALP SA6)14/00315/OUT
15/00873/REM19/00135/REM* (phase 6)5 2 4 40 0 0 0 000 00 0 000009 6 UC
Amen Corner (North), Popes Farm, 
Murrell H ill Lane, Binfield
(Includes part of SA6)(The Croft)17/00337/OUT
18/00664/REM19/00439/FUL* (Conv)1 0 2 40 0 0 0 000 00 0 000003 4 UC
Blue Mountain Golf Club & Conference 
Centre, Wood Lane, Binfield (SALP SA7)16/00020/OUT (Hybrid)
17/01363/REM (Linden 1)17/01341/REM (Bloor 1)18/01089/REM* (Linden 2)18/01010/REM* (Bloor 2)4 3 7 07 0 7 0 5 2 1 5 000 00 0 000003 2 0 UC
Land at Tilehurst Lane, Binfield            18/00758/FUL* 
(Allowed on Appeal)0 2 02 5 8 0 0 000 00 0 000005 3 NS
Land north of Tilehurst Lane and west of 
South Lodge, Binfield17/01174/OUT* 
(Allowed on Appeal)0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 1 0 0 00 0 000004 0 NS
Building 2, Technology House, The 
Boulevard, Cain Road, Binfield17/01319/FUL* & 
18/00200/PAC*0 0 8 1 1 2 0 0 000 00 0 000009 3 NS
Jennetts Park (formerly Peacock Farm), 
Peacock Lane, Bracknell98/00288/OUT (623523)
(various reserved matters 
approvals)0 4 23 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000007 2 UC
Land within Bracknell Town Centre 
(Royal Winchester House)12/00476/OUT 
13/01068/REM7 3 1 4 6 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000002 1 9 UC
Bracknell & Wokingham College, Wick 
Hill Sandy  Lane  
(Millennium Fields, Phase 1)17/00482/FUL 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000001 0 UC
Land at former Gart h Hill College Site, 
Sandy Lane (access off Hutley Drive)(Part of SALP Policy SA1)(Millennium Fields, Phase 2)17/01087/FUL 20 49 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000006 9 UC
Aspect 1-3, Wokingham Road
(Blu Bracknell)17/01093/PAC
18/00347/FUL4 2 4 23 3 2 9 0 0 000 00 0 000001 4 6 UC
Beaufort Park, South Road, Bracknell 17/01123/OUT* 
(Allowed on Appeal)0 0 0 0 0 3 4 3 4 00 00 0 000006 8 NS
Land at Lower Broadmoor Road & Cricket 
Field Grove(SALP SA2)16/00914/FUL
18/01151/FUL1 3 0 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000001 3 UC
Land at former TRL Site, Nine Mile Ride, 
Crowthorne.  (SALP SA5)(Buckler's Park)13/00575/OUT
17/00401/REM17/01380/REM19/01099/REM*5 9 7 61 0 01 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 9 8 00 0 000008 3 3 UC
Land west of Alford Close and 96-98 
High Street(SALP SA3)(Sandhurst Gardens)17/01096/FUL 23 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000003 3 UC
Land North of Harvest Ride and South of 
Forest Road and East of West End Lane, Warfield. (SALP SA9, Part of Area 2) 
NB: Phase 4, Lawrence Court 
(15/00646/REM) relates to C3: specialised  65 units
(see separate table )13/01007/OUT  15/00163/REM 15/00647/REM 16/01123/REM17/00054/REM18/00396/REM3 7 7 47 4 7 4 5 8 0 000 00 0 000003 1 7 UCHARD COMMITMENTS (C3 u ses: non- specialised)No. 
Bedrooms (C2 use - net)Application Reference/s Site Address
C3 USES (NB, this does not include C3 specialised uses relating to senior living/extra care/sheltered accommodation falling wit hin C3 use, see separate table)Projected Net Completions (April-March)
Large Sites hard commitments (C3 uses: non-specialised) (site of 1ha or more)303 2020/21  2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 Total 
NetSite Status 
(as at A
pril 2020 )No. Bedrooms (C2 use - net)Application Reference/s Site Address Projected Net Completions (April-March)
Land North of Newhurst Gardens, 
Warfield16/01004/OUT
(Allowed on appeal)0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 2 0 0 00 0 000005 0 NS
Land East of Avery Lane and North of 
Watersplash Lane, Warfield(SALP Policy SA9 Area 1)(Orchids Place)16/01195/FUL
18/01047/FUL1 2 2 52 5 2 1 0 0 000 00 0 000008 3 UC
Land south of Fairclough Farm, Newell 
Green, Warfield(SALP Policy SA9 Area 1)(Archfield)16/01253/FUL 12 25 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000005 2 UC
Land at Watersplash Lane, Warfield
(SALP Policy SA9 Area 1)(Larks Hill Place)16/01274/FUL 15 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000003 0 UC
Land adjoining Warfie ld Park , Long Hill 
Road, Winkfield15/00383/FUL
(Allowed on appeal)0 1 01 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 20 0 000008 2 NS
Kingswood, Kings Ride, Winkfield 16/00732/FUL
17/01283/FUL6 1 00 0 0 0 000 00 0 000001 6 UC
The Brackens, London Road, Ascot
(Brompton Gardens)16/01266/FUL
17/01246/FUL17/01366/FUL18/00198/FUL1 3 7 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000002 0 UC
White Gates, Long Hill Road, Winkfield 18/00336/FUL* 
(Allowed on Appeal)0 1 20 0 0 0 000 00 0 000001 2 NS
Total Large Sites
(C3 uses: non- specialised)4 4 0 7 0 1 4 6 33 2 4 2 2 0 1 7 9 1 8 4 1 4 0 1 0 8 20 0 00000 2761
Land adj. Birch Hill Medical Centre, 
Leppington, Bracknell 09/00141/FUL 
12/00492/EXT0 0 0 0 0 7 000 00 0 000007 UC
Brackworth, Broad Lane, Bracknell 16/00230/FUL 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000008 UC
Blythe House, Great Hollands Square, 
Bracknell 18/00533/FUL 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000006 NS
Racal House, Eastern Road, Bracknell  
(SALP SA1, part of Eastern Rd allocation)16/00626/FUL
18/00557/FUL0 0 2 6 3 4 0 0 000 00 0 000006 0
NS
(Demolition complete)
Amber House & Northgate House, Market 
Street, Bracknell15/01035/FUL
19/00639/FUL0 0 5 5 8 1 5 7 0 000 00 0 000001 9 3 NS
(Demolition complete)
Dennis Pilcher House, Rowley Close, 
Bracknell17/00568/FUL 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000009 NS
(demolition complete)
Building B Berkshire Court, 
Western Road, Bracknell17/00264/PAC 46 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000004 6 UC
Downside, Wildridings Road, Bracknell
(SALP SA1)17/01065/FUL 26 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000002 6 UC
Coppid Hall, Warfield  Road/Willo w Drive, 
Bracknell17/01255/FUL 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000008 UC
77 and 79 Deepfield Road, Bracknell 18/00813/FUL 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000008 UC
(demolition complete)
Bus Depot and Offices, Coldborough 
House, Market Street, Bracknell(The Grand Exchange)18/00964/FUL 0 0 106 136 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000002 4 2 NS 
(demolition 
complete)
Lavenir, Opladen Way, Bracknell 17/00457/PAC 69 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000006 9 UCMedium Sites hard commitmen ts (C3 uses: non-specialised)304 2020/21  2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 Total 
NetSite Status 
(as at A
pril 2020 )No. Bedrooms (C2 use - net)Application Reference/s Site Address Projected Net Completions (April-March)
The Braccans, London Road, Bracknell 18/00357/FUL* 0 0 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000001 4 NS
Land At East Lodge, Great Hollands 
Road, Bracknell17/00582/FUL* 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000009 NS
The Hideout, West Road
(Badgerwood Park)18/01053/CLPUD*
18/00562/CLPUD*1 0 1 21 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 000 00 0 000007 0 NS
48-50 Dukes Ride, Crowthorne
(Fleur-de-Lis)
(For C3 specialised new build, see table 
below)15/01082/FUL 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000000 UC
Manhattan House, 140 High Street, 
Crowthorne17/00250/FUL 0 0 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000001 3 NS
Crossways Residential Care Home, 306 
Yorktown Road, Sandhurst
(For C2 demolition, see table below)16/00221/FUL 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 000005 NS
Garth Works, Kennel Lane, Warfield
(Kingfisher Place)16/00391/OUT
18/00988/REM1 1 0 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000001 1 UC
Land adjacent to Breadcroft Cottages, 
Cocks Lane, Warfield18/00601/OUT
18/01236/REM5 0 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000005 UC
North Lodge Farm, Forest Road, Hayley 
Green Warfield17/00656/OUT* 0 0 0 0 0 3 15 0 0 0 0 0 000001 8 NS
Windmill Farm (incl uding Storage Barn), 
Malt Hill, Warfield19/00717/PAA* 
19/00718/PAA*0 5 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000005 NS
Furze Bank, 89 Locks Ride, Winkfield
(Furzefield)17/00160/OUT
18/00458/REM0 6 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000006 NS
(demolition 
complete)
Land at the Yard, Chavey Down Road 
(Brickfields), Winkfield17/00388/FUL
17/00389/FUL18/00386/FUL*9 5 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000001 4 UC
Heathfield School, London Road, 
Winkfield14/01001/FUL 0 0 0 0 0 -2 9 0 0 0 0 0 000007 NS
Orchard House, Priory Road, Winkfield 18/00203/FUL 0 -1 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000005 NS
Jade Farm, Winkfield Lane, Winkfield 19/00021/PAA 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000005 NS
Total Medium Sites 
(C3 uses:  non- specialised)1 7 6 6 02 5 22 6 3 6 9 2 5 2 4 00 00 0 000008 6 9
Total Small site completions
(C3 uses: non- specialised)
(For small windfall allowance, see below
)0 0 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000000
Total Large, medium and small sites 
hard commitments 
(excludes windfall allowance )6 1 6 7 6 1 7 1 55 8 7 2 8 9 2 0 4 2 0 8 1 4 0 1 0 8 20 0 00000 3630
Tamar House, Forth House and Clifton 
House, Brants Bridge, Bracknell16/01293/PAC 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000001 0 UC
Land west of Prince Albert Drive, 
Winkfield18/00961/PAA 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000005 NS
T o t a l  M e d i u m  P r i o r  A p p r o v a l  s i t e s 1 0 0 5 0 0 0 000 00 0 000001 5
TOTAL Prior Approval sites, subject to 
s.106 
(C3 uses: non-s pecialised )1 0 0 5 0 0 0 000 00 0 000001 5Medium Prior Approval sites (decision granted) pending s.106 in relation to habitat mitigation (C3 uses)305 2020/21  2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 Total 
NetSite Status 
(as at A
pril 2020 )No. Bedrooms (C2 use - net)Application Reference/s Site Address Projected Net Completions (April-March)
TOTAL HARD COMMITMENTS
(C3 uses: non- specialised)
(Large, Medium , Small & PAC s.106 )6 2 6 7 6 1 7 2 05 8 7 2 8 9 2 0 4 2 0 8 1 4 0 1 0 8 20 0 00000 3645
Windfall Allowance
Medium Windfall Allowance 
(C3 uses) (net)0 0 38 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 1116
Small Sites Completions/Windfall 
Allowance (C3 uses ) (net)24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 408
Total windfall allowance 24 24 62 101 101 101 101 101 101 101 101 101 101 101 101 101 101 1524
SITES WITH A RESOLUTION TO 
APPROVE, SUBJECT TO s.106
Land at Amen Corner South, Binfield 
(SALP SA8).(relates to part of SALP allocation)12/00993/OUT 0 0 0 0 0 25 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 25 550 NS
Winchester House, Market Place, 
Bracknell18/01060/FUL 0 0 0 0 0 27 0 0 0 0 0 0 000002 7 UC
Total Large sites subject to s.106 0 0 0 0 0 5 2 5 05 05 0 5 05 0 5 0 5 05 05 05 02 55 7 7
414 Yorktown Road, College Town 
Sandhurst19/00102/OUT 0 0 0 0 0 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 000001 3 NS
Total Medium sites subject to s.106 000 001 3 000 00 0 000001 3
Total sites (C3 use: non-specialised) 
subject to s.106 Agreements  0 0 0 0 0 6 5 5 05 05 0 5 05 0 5 0 5 05 05 05 02 55 9 0
Land North of Peacock Lane, Binfield
(SALP SA2)(Residual balance)0 0 0 0 0 2 5 2 9 00 00 0 000005 4 NS
Land North of Cain Road, Binfield
(SALP SA2)0 0 0 0 0 2 5 2 5 2 5 0 00 0 000007 5 NS
Land at Amen Corner South, Binfield 
(SALP SA8).(Residual balance)0 0 0 0 0 0 000 02 5 7 5 7 5 00001 7 5 NS
Commercial Centre (The Depot) 
Bracknell Lane West, Bracknell(SALP SA1)0 0 0 0 0 5 0 5 0 1 5 0 00 0 000001 1 5 NS
Old Bracknell Lane West, Bracknell
(SALP SA1)(Residual balance)0 0 0 0 0 5 0 5 0 3 1 0 00 0 000001 3 1 NS
Land North of Eastern Road, Bracknell 
(SALP SA1)                                             (Residual balance)0 0 0 0 0 6 8 6 0 6 0 0 00 0 000001 8 8 NS
The Football Ground, Larges Lane, 
Bracknell(SALP SA2)(Residual balance)0 0 0 0 0 0 2 8 3 0 3 0 00 0 000008 8 NS
Broadmoor, Lower Broadmoor Road, 
Crowthorne (SALP SA4)0 0 0 0 0 0 2 5 7 5 7 5 3 5 0 0 000002 1 0 NS
Land at Warfield Area 1
(SALP SA9)0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 5 4 00006 0 4 NSSOFT COMMITMENTS (C3 USES: NON-SPECIALISED)
Large sites with a resolution to approve, subject  to S106 Agreements  (C3 uses: non- specialised)
Medium Sites with a resolution to approve, subj ect to S106 Agreements (C3 uses: non- specialised) 
Site Allocations Local Plan Sites (C3 uses: non-specialised)306 2020/21  2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 Total 
NetSite Status 
(as at A
pril 2020 )No. Bedrooms (C2 use - net)Application Reference/s Site Address Projected Net Completions (April-March)
Land at Warfield Area 2
(SALP SA9)(Residual balance)0 0 0 0 0 2 5 3 5 4 0 0 00 0 000001 0 0 NS
Land at Warfield Area 3
(SALP SA9)0 0 0 0 0 5 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 4 0 0 000004 5 4 NS
Sandbanks, Longh ill Road, and Dolyhir, 
Fern Bungalow and Pa lm Hills Estate, 
London Road, Winkfield(SALP SA3)0 0 0 0 0 2 4 2 5 00 00 0 000004 9 NS
Bog Lane, Winkfield
(SALP SA3)0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 00 00 0 000004 0 NS
Total SALP 
(large) 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 7 5 1 7 4 7 6 3 0 5 2 3 9 1 2 5 1 7 5 1 2 9 0000 2283
Land at Wood Lane, Binfield
(SALP SA3)0 0 0 0 0 2 0 000 00 0 000002 0 NS
Albert Road Car Park,  Bracknell
(SALP SA1)0 0 0 0 0 4 0 000 00 0 000004 0 NS
White Cairn, Dukes Ride, Crowthorne
(SALP SA3)0 0 0 0 0 1 6 000 00 0 000001 6 NS
Land at Battle Bridge House, Warfield 
House and Garage, Forest Road, Warfield(SALP SA1)0 0 0 0 0 1 0 000 00 0 000001 0 NS
Total SALP 
(medium ) 0 0 0 0 0 8 6 000 00 0 000008 6
T O T A L  S A L P  S i t e s 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 3 5 1 7 4 7 6 3 0 5 2 3 9 1 2 5 1 7 5 1 2 9 0000 2369
TOTAL SOFT COMMITMENTS
(C3 uses: non- specialised)
(windfall , s.106 & SALP )24 24 62 101 101 569 668 627 456 390 276 326 280 151 151 151 126 4483
GRAND TOTAL (C3  uses: non -
specialised) Completions (Large, Medium and Small Sites) Projections, Small Sites windfall allowance, Medium Site Windfall Allowance, PAC s. 106, s.106 & SALP650 785 782 688 390 773 876 767 564 392 276 326 280 151 151 151 126 8128
TOTAL C3 SPECIALISED USES: Hard 
Commitments0 0 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 00000 0
Broadmoor Hospital, Lower Broadmoor 
Road, Crowthorne(SALP SA4)00 0 0 0 0 000 06 0 0 00000 60 NS
TOTAL C3 SPECIALISED USES: Soft 
Commitments0 0 0 0 0 0 000 06 0 0 00000 60
T O T A L  C 3  S p e c i a l i s e d  u s e s 0 0 0 0 0 0 000 06 0 0 000006 0
GRAND TOTAL OF ALL C3 USES 
(SPECIALISED & NON-SPECIALISED)650 785 782 688 390 773 876 767 564 392 336 326 280 151 151 151 126 8188HARD COMMITMENTS (C3 USES: SPECIALISED)
SOFT COMMITMENTS (C3 SPECIALISED)C3 SPECIALISED USES (senior living/extra care/sheltered accommodation falling within C3 use)
C2 USES
Monitoring has only taken place since the monitoring period 2015/16
(NB for C2 uses, in line with the Housing Delivery Rule Book (July 2018), a ratio of 1.8 has been applied to the number of bedr oom spaces to derive an equivalent number of 
dwellings, rounded to the nearest whole unit, for overall total).  SALP Medium Sites (C3 uses)307 2020/21  2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 Total 
NetSite Status 
(as at A
pril 2020 )No. Bedrooms (C2 use - net)Application Reference/s Site Address Projected Net Completions (April-March)
HARD COMMITMENTS (C2 uses)
Holly Cottage, London Road, Popeswood 
Binfield(12 bed = 7 ratio)18/00662/FUL*
(Allowed on Appeal)12 0.00 6.67 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7N S
Heathlands Home For The Aged, 
Crossfell, Wildridings, Bracknell
(Demolition of 41 bedspaces= 23 
dwelling equivalent and 66 new bedspaces =  37 dwe lling equivalent, net 
increase of 25 beds pace/14 dw ellings)19/01040/3* 25 -22.70 36.70 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14 NS
The Waterloo Hotel, 99 Dukes Ride, 
Crowthorne(Birch Place)
(NB: permission granted 51 apartments, 
not 51 bedspaces, therefore not 
converted)16/00943/FUL15/00440/FULn/a 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0U C
Land at former TRL Site, Nine Mile Ride, 
Crowthorne(SALP SA5)(80 bedspaces = 44 dw elling equivalent)13/00575/OUT
18/01237/REM*80 0.00 44.44 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 44 NS
Crossways Residential Care Home, 306 
Yorktown Road, Sandhurst
(9 bedspaces = 5 dw elling equivalent)
(For C3 new build see table above)16/00221/FUL -9 0.00 -5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 -5 NS
T O T A L  C 2  H a r d  C o m m i t m e n t s 9 6 - 2 3 8 30 0 0 0 000 00 0 000006 0
SOFT COMMITMENTS 
(C2 uses )
Broadmoor Hospital, Lower Broadmoor 
Road, Crowthorne
(SALP SA4 )Not known at this stage 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0
TOTAL C2 Soft Commitments 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 00000 0
GRAND TOTAL (C2  uses) - 
(Com pletions & Pro jections ) 9 6 - 2 3 8 30 0 0 0 000 00 0 000006 0
OVERALL TOTAL C2 & C3 USES 627 868 782 688 390 773 876 767 564 392 336 326 280 151 151 151 126 8248
Land south of Forest Road and east of 
Cheney Close, Binfield (BIN5)0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 0 00 0 000000 40 NS
Land previously reserved for Park & 
Ride, Peacock Lane, Bracknell (BIN20)0 0 0 0 0 3 0 3 5 3 5 00 0 000000 100 NS
Land at Beaufort Park, Nine Mile Ride 
(South Road), Bracknell (BRA4)0 0 0 0 0 00 2 0 7 5 7 5 5 6 000000 226 NS
Coopers Hill Youth and Community 
Centre, Crowthorne Road North, Bracknell (BRA13)0 0 0 0 0 3 4 3 50 00 0 000000 69 NS
The Peel Centre and The Point, Bracknell 
(BRA18)0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 100 100 100 600 NSPRE-SUBMISSION LOCAL PLAN SITES
Policy LP4
(number in brackets refers to SHELAA site reference)
Local Plan Large sites (sites of 1 ha or more)308 2020/21  2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 Total 
NetSite Status 
(as at A
pril 2020 )No. Bedrooms (C2 use - net)Application Reference/s Site Address Projected Net Completions (April-March)
Land east of Wokingham Road and south 
of Dukes Ride (Derby Field), Sandhurst (SAND5)0 0 0 0 0 00 2 0 7 5 7 5 4 7 000000 217 NS
Land at Jealott's H ill (WAR3) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 100 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 1350 NS
Land north of Herschel Grange, Warfield 
(WAR9)0 0 0 0 0 0 - 1 1 7 1 70 0 000000 33 NS
Whitegates, Mushroom Castle, Chavey 
Down Road, Winkfield (WINK15)0 0 0 0 0 0 - 1 2 2 2 10 0 000000 42 NS
Total Lar
ge Local Plan sites 0 0 0 0 0 64 88 184 288 300 253 250 250 250 250 250 250 2677
Land opposite Popes M anor, Murrell Hill 
Lane, Binfield (BIN10b)0 0 0 0 0 0 1 30 00 0 000000 13 NS
Land south of London Road (Eastern 
Field), Binfield (BIN12)0 0 0 0 0 1 000 00 0 000000 10 NS
Land between Cain Road and Turnpike 
Road (3M recreational land), Binfield (BIN16)0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 1 4 00 0 000000 27 NS
Town Square, The Ring, Bracknell  
(BRA7)0 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000 7 1 7 1 7 1 213 NS
Former Bus Depot, Market Street, 
Bracknell (BRA12)0 0 0 0 0 7 0 7 10 00 0 000000 141 NS
Jubilee Gardens, The Ring, Bracknell 
(BRA14)0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 5 0 00 0 000000 100 NS
Land east of Station Way and north of 
Church Road (Southern Gateway), Bracknell (BRA15)0 0 0 0 0 000 00 8 9 8 9 8 90000 267 NS
Bus Station, Station Road, Bracknell 
(BRA17)0 0 0 0 0 000 00 0 000 7 8 7 8 7 8 234 NS
Land adjacent to Lych Gate Close, Lower 
Church Road, Sandhurst (SAND9)0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 1 00 0 000000 23 NS
Land adjacent to Swallow Cottage, Lower 
Church Road, Sandhurst (SAND10)0 0 0 0 0 008 70 0 000000 15 NS
Land to the rear of Forest View and 
Oriana, Longh ill Road and west of Fern 
Bungalow, London Road, Winkfield (extension of site allocated through Policy SA3 of the SALP) (WINK34)0 0 0 0 0 330 00 0 000000 6N S
Total medium Local Plan sites 0 0 0 0 0 83 162 83 7 0 89 89 89 0 149 149 149 1049
TOTAL large and medium 
Pre-submission Local Plan sites0 0 0 0 0 147 250 267 295 300 342 339 339 250 399 399 399 3726
OVERALL TRAJECTORY TOTAL
(Current commitments and Local Plan sites627 868 782 688 390 920 1126 1034 859 692 678 665 619 401 550 550 525 11974Local Plan medium sites (sites less than 1ha with 5+ dwellings)309 Appendix 2:  Site profiles f or allocated sites 
310  Site Profiles for sites allocated for residential/mixed use development  
 
Large sites (more than 1ha and with 5 (net) dwellings or more) allocat ed for 
residential/mixed use development  
 
Land south of Forest Road and east of Cheney Close  
 
 
SHELAA Ref:  BIN5  
Suggested 
Capacity:  40 dwellings net (based on 30 dph)  
Site Area:  1.85 ha  
Developable 
Area:  1.34 ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 SFRA 
Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘Requirements for planning and 
NPPF’ . 
• Retain and enhance  the hedgerows and trees on site that are of 
value, provide green infrastructure  and provide biodiversity net 
gain. These measures are required to  improve the existing 
biodiversity value; improve  habitat  connectivity through the site  
and to the wider area; safeguard  the character and appearance of 
the area; and retain and strengthen a strong physical boundary 
between the defined settlement  and green wedge.  
• Be informed by an appropriate desk -based archaeological 
assessment, and where necessary, a field evaluation in order to 
avoid and mitigate any impacts . 
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan sh ould be read as a whole, 
regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning policies 
(including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the  Minerals 
and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary Planning Guidance  
and the requirements for the site set out in the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan (IDP)  in the consideration of this site. Proposals should also take 
into account the recommendations made in the evidence studies and the 
capacity assessment that informed the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the Housing Background Paper). 
It is recommended that a pre- application proposal is submitted for 
consideration prior to the submission of a planning application.  
 
 
 
 
  311  Map of Land south of Forest Road and east of Cheney Close  
 
 
 
  
312  Land previously reserved for Park and Ride, Peacock Farm  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BIN20  
Suggested 
Capacity:  100 dwellings net (based on indicative concept planning)  
Site Area:  2.66ha  
Developable Area:  0.97ha 
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Be located within the south western portion of the site, avoiding 
the electric cable easement, the AQMA and areas at risk from 
surface water flooding . 
• Fully assess the impact on the settings of the Listed Buildings 
and any harm to their significance.  
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the site’s proximity to an A -road and railway.  
• Undertake and take account of an air quality assessment to 
assess the impact of the AQMA on the health of residents.  
• Provide green infrastructure in order to  improve habitat 
connectivity through the site and to the wider area.  
• Carry out a Phase I contaminated land report and/or Landfill gas & leachate investigation and risk assessment; and if 
required a Phase II report; and if required a Remediation/Gas 
Mitigation Plan and a Remediation/Mitigation Verification 
Report . 
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘Requirements for 
planning and NPPF’ . 
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the
 
Minerals  and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the  recommendations made 
in the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed 
the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the 
submission of a planning application.  
 
  
 
 
  313  Map of l and previously reserved for Park and Ride, Peacock Farm  
 
 
 
314  Coopers Hill Youth and Community Centre, Crowthorne Road North  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BRA13  
Suggested 
Capacity:  69 dwellings net (based on 150 dph)  
 
Site Area:  1.06 ha  
Developable 
Area:  0.46 ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Provide equivalent  replacement community facilities  (including 
MUGA)  either on site , in the Town Centre  or in proximity to the 
Town Centre . 
• Undertake more detailed historic environment review in relation to development proposal.  
• Retain and enhance  the trees /treed areas  on site that are of value 
and provide biodiversity net gain. These measures are required to  
improve the existing biodiversity value and improve habitat 
connectivity through the site and to the wider area.  
• Undertake and take account of a site -specific floo d risk 
assessment, to include an assessment of groundwater flood risk.  
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the site’s 
proximity to an A -road and railway.  
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a whole, regard 
will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning policies (including 
those in any relevant Neighbourhood P lan, and the Minerals and Waste 
Local Plan), together with Supplementary Planning Guidance  and the 
requirements for the site set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)  
in the consideration of this site. Proposals should also take into account 
the recommendations made in the evidence studies and the capacity 
assessment that informed the allocation (which are summarised in the 
site’s profile within the Housing Background Paper). It is recommended 
that a pre- application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the 
submission of a planning application.  
 
 
  315  Map of Coopers Hill Youth and Community Centre, Crowthorne Road North  
 
 
 
  
316  Land north of Herschel Grange  
 
SHELAA Ref:  WAR9  
Suggested 
Capacity:  33 dwellings net (based on 30 dph)  
Site Area:  1.29 ha  
Developable 
Area:  1.12 ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Retain and enhance the trees and hedgerows on site that are of 
value, provide green infrastructure  and provide biodiversity net 
gain. These measures are required in order to  improv e the existing 
biodiversity value; improve  habitat connectivity through the site 
and to the wider area; safeguard  the character and appearance of 
the area; and retain and strengthen a strong physical boundary of 
the defined settlement. Biodiversity net gain may result in the need 
to provide offsite  after applying the mitigation strategy . 
• Undertake and take account of  an acoustic report, due to the site’s 
proximity to an A -road.  
• Preclude development from areas at risk of surface water flooding.  
• Be informed by an appropriate desk -based archaeological 
assessment, and where necessary, a field evaluation in order to 
avoid and mitigate any impacts . 
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a whole, 
regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning policies 
(including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the  Minerals 
and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary Planning Guidance 
and the requirements for the site set out in the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. Proposals should al so take 
into account the recommendations made in the evidence studies and the 
capacity assessment that informed the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the Housing Background Paper). 
It is recommended that a pre- application propos al is submitted for 
consideration prior to the submission of a planning application.  
 
  
  
  317  Map of Land north of Herschel Grange  
 
 
 
  
318  Whitegates, Mushroom Castle, Chavey Down Road 
 
SHELAA Ref:  WINK15  
Suggested 
Capacity:  42 dwellings net (based on 30 dph)  
Site Area:  2.21 ha  
Developable Area:  1.4 ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Preclude development from areas at risk of surface water 
flooding.   
• Retain and enhance the hedgerows and trees on site that are of 
value, provide green infrastructure  and provide biodiversity net 
gain. These measures are required in order to improve the 
existing biodiversity value ; improve habitat connectivity through 
the site and to the wider area; safeguard the character and 
appearance of the area ; and retain and strengthen a strong 
physical boundary between the defined settlement and strategic 
gap. Biodiversity net gain may result in the need to provide 
offsite  after applying the mitigation strategy.  
• Provide a buffer between development and the habitats along 
the western boundary  to protect the TPO trees . 
• Be informed by an appropriate desk -based archaeological 
assessment, and where necessary, a field evaluation in order to 
avoid and mitigate any im pacts . 
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Mineral s and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into accoun t the recommendations made in 
the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed the 
allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -application 
proposal is submitted for  consideration prior to the submission of a 
planning application.  
 
 
  319  Map of Whitegates, Mushroom Castle, Chavey Down Road 
 
 
 
 
 
  
320  Medium sites (less than 1ha and with 5 (net) dwellings or more) allocated for 
residential/mixed use development  
 
Land opposite Popes Manor, Murrell Hill Lane 
 
SHELAA Ref:  BIN10b  
Suggested Capacity:  13 dwellings net (at 35dph)  
Site Area:  0.74ha  
Developable Area:  0.37ha  
Requirements:  Development of BIN10b  will be expected to:  
• Conserve the significance of the Listed Buildings (including Grade 
II listed Popes Manor and associated walls) and the associated 
non-designated parkland by maintaining an appropriate setting 
through the layout of the development (including site access), the 
scale, density and design of dwellings and the retention and 
enhancement of boundary vegetation.  
• Be informed by an appropriate desk -based archaeological 
assessment, and where necessary, a field evaluation in order t o 
avoid and mitigate any impacts . 
• Retain and enhance vegetation along Murrell Hill Lane, provide green infrastructure  and provide biodiversity net gain. These 
measures are required in order to improve habitat connectivity 
through the site and to the wider area; conserve the significance of 
the heritage assets opposite;  safeguard the character and 
appearance of the area ; and retain and strengthen a strong 
physical boundary between the defined settlement and strategic 
gap. Biodiversity net gain may result in the need to provide offsite  
after applying the mitigation strategy.    
• Provide a buffer between development and the habitats along the 
western boundary  to protect the TPO trees and adjacent ancient 
woodland.  
• Undertake and take account of a site -specific flo od risk 
assessment, to include an assessment of groundwater flood risk.   
• Undertake a further review to determine the suitability and viability for prior extraction of minerals, as the overall BIN10 site is indicated to be within a proposed Minerals and Waste 
Safeguarding Area.  
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters relating 
to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a whole, regard 
will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning policies (including 
those in an y relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the Minerals and Waste 
Local Plan), together with Supplementary Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) 
in the consideration of this site. Proposals should als o take into account 
the recommendations made in the evidence studies and the capacity 
assessment that informed the allocation (which are summarised in the 
site’s profile within the Housing Background Paper). It is recommended 
that a pre- application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the 
submission of a planning application.  
 
 
  321  Map of Land opposite Popes Manor, Murrell Hill Lane  
 
 
  
322  Land south of London Road (Eastern Field)  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BIN12  
Suggested 
Capacity:  10 dwellings net (based on 35 dph)  
Site Area:  0.31 ha  
Developable Area:  0.28 ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘ Requirements for 
planning and NPPF’.  
• Carry out a Phase I contaminated land report and/or Landfill 
gas & leachate investigation and risk assessment; and if 
required a Phase II report; and if required a Remediation/Gas 
Mitigation Plan and a Remediation/Mitigation Verification 
Report . 
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the 
site’s proximity to an A -road.  
• Provide green infrastructure in order to  improve habitat 
connectivity through the site and to the wider area.  
• Be informed by an appropri ate desk -based archaeological 
assessment, and where necessary, a field evaluation in order 
to avoid and mitigate any impacts . 
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as  a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning policies (including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the
 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations  made 
in the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the 
submission of a planning application.  
 
 
  323  Map of Land south of London Road (Eastern Field)  
 
 
 
  
324  Land between Cain Road and Turnpike Road (3M recreational land)  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BIN16  
Suggested 
Capacity:  27 dwellings net (based on 51dph)  
Site Area:  0.85ha  
Developable Area:  0.52ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to : 
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the 
site’s proximity to an A -road and railway.  
• Carry out a Phase I contaminated land report and/or Landfill 
gas & leachate investigation and risk assessment; and if required a Phase II report; and if required a Remediation/Gas 
Mitigation Plan and a Remediation/Mitigation Verification 
Report.  
• Retain and enhance the hedgerows and trees /woodland on site  
that are of value, provide green infrastructure and provide 
biodiversity net gain. These measures are required to  improve 
the existing biodiversity value and improve habitat connectivity 
through the site  and to the wider area.  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘Requirements for 
planning and NPPF’.  
• Be informed by an appropriate desk -based archaeological 
assessment, and where necessary, a field evaluation in order 
to avoid and miti gate any impacts . 
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relev ant Neighbourhood Plan, and the
 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations made 
in the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed 
the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the submission of a planning application.  
 
  
 
 
 
  325  Map of land between Cain Road and Turnpike Road (3M recreational land)  
 
 
  
326  Town Square, The Ring  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BRA7  
Suggested 
Capacity:  213 dwellings net (based on 300dph)  
7,100sqm commercial floor space  
Site Area:  0.71ha  
Developable Area:  0.71ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Be informed by a masterplan that demonstrates how 
development on this site and the Town Square Development 
Area (as shown below)  will: take place in a comprehensive 
manner , consider townscape and form a high quality gateway 
to the Town Centre, and; provide green infrastructure in order to improve the area’s habitat connectivity  through  to the wider 
area.   
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘ Requirements for 
planning and NPPF’.  
• Take account of the changes in levels across the site.  
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the 
site’s proximity to an A -road.  
• Retain the pedestrian links through the site, and either retain 
underpass or replace with a street level crossing.  
• Provide a replacement library facility, either on site or 
elsewhere in the Town Centre.  
 
Please note that the above i s not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies (including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations made 
in the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed 
the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior  to the 
submission of a planning application.  
 
 
 
  327  Map of Town Square, The Ring  
 
 
 
 Map of Town Square Development Area  
 
 
328  Former Bus Depot, Market Street  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BRA12  
Suggested 
Capacity:  141 dwellings net (based on 300dph)  
4,700sqm commercial floorspace  
Site Area:  0.47ha  
Developable Area:  0.47ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘ Requirements for 
planning and NP PF’. 
• Undertake and take account of a contaminated land Phase I report, with a Phase II report, remediation  and a remediation 
verification report potentially also necessary if recommended by the Phase I report.  
• Provide green infrastructure in order to  improve habitat 
connectivity through the site and to the wider area.  
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the 
site’s proximity to a railway and A -road.  
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)  in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations made 
in the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed 
the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recomm ended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the 
submission of a planning application.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  329  Map of Former Bus Depot, Market Street  
 
 
  
330  Jubilee Gardens, The Ring  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BRA14  
Suggested 
Capacity:  100 dwellings net (based on 300dph)  
5,100sqm commercial floor space  
Site Area:  0.51ha  
Developable Area:  0.51ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Be informed by a masterplan that demonstrates how 
development on this site and the So uthern Gateway 
Development Area (including BRA15, Land east of Station Way 
and north of Church Road and BRA17, Bus Station, as shown 
below ) will:  take place in a comprehensive manner , consider 
townscape and form a high quality gateway to the T own 
Centre, a nd; provide biodiversity net gain and green 
infrastructure in order to improve the area’s  biodiversity value 
and habitat connectivity to the wider area.   
• Retain and enhance or replace the trees on site that are of 
value.  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘ Requirements for 
planning and NPPF’.  
• Take account of the changes in levels across the site.  
• Retain pedestrian links through site to other locations;  including 
retention of underpasses or replacement with street level crossings.  
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the 
site’s proximity to an A -road and railway.  
• Be sensitive to the setting of the war memorial to the north.  
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Miner als and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommenda tions made 
in the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed 
the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the 
submission of a planning application.  
 
 
 
  331  Map of Jubilee Gardens, The Ring  
 
 
 
 
Map of Southern Gateway Development Area  
 
 
332  Land east of Station Way and north of Church Road (Southern Gateway)  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BRA15  
Suggested 
Capacity:  267 dwellings net (based on 300dph)  
9,400sqm commercial floor space  
Site Area:  0.94ha  
Developable Area:  0.89ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Be informed by a masterplan that demonstrates how 
development on this site and the Southern Gateway 
Development Area (including BRA14, Jubilee Gardens and 
BRA17, Bus Station, as shown in BRA14 site profile ) will:  take 
place in a comprehensive manner , consi der townscape and 
form a high quality gateway to the T own Centre, and; provide 
biodiversity net gain and green infrastructure in order to 
improve the area’s  biodiversity value and habitat connectivity to 
the wider area .  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘ Requirements for 
planning and NPPF’.  
• Retain pedestrian links through site to other locations; including 
retention of underpasses or replacement with street level crossings.  
• Undertake and take acc ount of an acoustic report, due to the 
site’s proximity to an A -road and railway.  
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies (including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP ) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations made in the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed 
the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the submission of a planning application.  
 
  
 
  333  Land east of Station Way and north of Church Road (Southern Gateway)  
 
 
  
334  Bus Station, Station Road, Bracknell  
 
SHELAA Ref:  BRA17  
Suggested 
Capacity:  234 dwellings net (based on 300dph)  
7,800sqm commercial floor space  
Site Area:  0.78ha  
Developable Area:  0.78ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Be informed by a masterplan that demonstrates how 
development on this site and the Southern Gateway 
Development Area (including BRA14, Jubilee Gardens and 
BRA15, Land east of Station Way and north of Church Road , 
as shown in BRA14 site profile) will: take place in a 
comprehensive manner , consider townscape and form a high 
quality gateway to the T own Centre , and; provide biodiversity 
net gain and green infrastructure in order to improve the area’s  
biodiversity value and habitat connectivity to the wider area . 
• Either replace bus station on- site or at another location in 
proximity to the rail station and T own Centre in order to 
continue the provision of a multi -modal public transport hub.  
• Take the significance of the nearby heritage asset and its 
setting into account.  
• Take account of and address changes in levels on site.  
• Undertake and take account of a contaminated land Phase I report, with a Phase II report, remediation and a remediation verification report potentially also necessary if recommended 
by the Phase I report.  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘Requirements for 
planning and NPPF’.  
• Retain pedestrian links through site to other locations; including 
retention of underpasses or replacement with street level 
crossings.  
• Undertake and take account of an acous tic report, due to the 
site’s proximity to an A -road and railway . 
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations made 
in the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed 
the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is r ecommended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the submission of a planning application.  
 
 
  335  Map of Bus Station, Station Road, Bracknell  
 
 
  
336  Land adjacent to Lych  Gate Close, Lower Church Road, Sandhurst   
 
SHELAA Ref:  SAND9  
Suggested 
Capacity:  23 dwellings net (based on 25dph)  
Site Area:  0.99ha  
Developable Area:  0.9ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Conserve the significance of the Grade II* St Michael’s Church 
by maintaining an appropriate setting through a sensitive, low 
density, design and layout of the development which clearly 
respec ts and references the entrance to the church, including 
retention and enhancement of boundary vegetation. Access to 
development on this site and SAND10 will minimise harm to 
the setting of the church; this may involve a single access 
serving both sites.  
• Take the significance of the nearby locally listed heritage 
assets and their settings into account.  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 
SFRA Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘ Requirements for 
planning and NPPF sections’.   Development shall be excluded 
from the areas of site at fluvial flood risk.  
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the site’s proximity to an A -road and railway.  
• Retain and enhance the hedgerows, trees and linear habitats 
on site that are of value , provide green infrastructure and 
provide biodiversity net gain. These measures are required to  
improve the existing biodiversity value ; improve habitat 
connectivity through the site and to the wider area; safeguard  
the character and appearance of the area; retain and 
strengthen a strong physical boundary between the defined 
settlement and strategic gap to the southern boundary  and; 
conserve the significance of the heritage asset to the northern 
boundary . 
• Review potential to enhance biodiversity in this Biodiversity 
Opportunity Area (BOA), including the potential to extend 
native woodland across undeveloped parts of the site.  
• Be informed by an appropriate desk -based archaeological 
assessment, and where necessary, a field evaluation in order 
to avoid and mitigate any impacts . 
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Minerals and  Waste Local Plan), together with  Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations made 
in the evidence studies and the capacit y assessment that informed 
the allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -
application proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the 
submission of a planning application.  
 337  Map of land adjacent to Lych Gate Close, Lower Church Road, Sandhurst  
 
  
  
338  Land adjacent to Swallow Cottage, Lower Church Road, Sandhurst  
 
SHELAA Ref:  SAND10  
Suggested 
Capacity:  15 dwellings net (based on 25 dph)  
Site Area:  0.72 ha  
Developable Area:  0.58 ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Be undertaken concurrently with or after development of SAND9.  
• Conserve the significance of the Grade II* St Michael’s Church 
by maintaining an appropriate setting through a sensitive, low 
density, design and layout of the development which clearly 
respects and references the entrance to the church, including 
retention and enhancement of boundary vegetation. Access to 
development on this site and SAND9 will minimise harm to the 
setting of the church; this may involve a single access serving both sites.  
• Take the significance of the nearby local ly listed heritage assets 
and their setti ngs into account.  
• Meet the requirements for the site identified in the Level 2 SFRA 
Detailed Site Summary Tables ‘ Requirements for planning and 
NPPF  sections’.   Development shall be excluded from the areas 
of site at fluvial flood risk.  
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the site’s proximity to an A -road and railway.  
• Retain and enhance hedgerows, trees and linear habitats on site  
that are of value, provi de green infrastructure and  provide  
biodiversity net gain. These measures are required to  improve 
the existing  biodiversity value; improve habitat connectivity 
through  the site  and to the wider area; safeguard the character 
and appearance of the area; retain and strengthen a strong 
physical boundary between the defined settlement and strategic 
gap to the southern and western boundaries  and; conserve the 
significance of the heritage asset to the northern boundar y.   
• Review potential to enhance biodiversity in this Biodiversity Opportunity Area (BOA), including the potential to extend native 
woodland across undeveloped parts of the site.  
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplem entary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in the consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations made in 
the evidence studies and the capacity assess ment that informed the 
allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper). It is recommended that a pre -application 
proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the submission of a planning application.  
 
 
 
  339  Map of land adjacent to Swallow Cottage, Lower Church Road, Sandhurst  
 
 
  
340  Land to the rear of Forest View and Oriana, Longhill  Road and west of Fern Bungalow, 
London Road (extension of site allocated through Policy SA3 of the SALP)  
 
 
SHELAA Ref:  WINK34  
Suggested 
Capacity:  6 dwellings net (based on 30 dph)  
Site Area:  3.03 ha  
Developable Area:  0.19 ha  
Requirements:  Development of this site will be expected to:  
• Carry out a Phase I contaminated land report and/or Landfill gas 
& leachate investigation and risk assessment; and if required a 
Phase II report; and if required a Remediation/Gas Mitigation 
Plan and a Remediat ion/Mitigation Verification Report . 
• Preclude development from areas within the gas pipeline inner consultation zone.  
• Undertake and take account of an acoustic report, due to the site’s proximity to an A -road.  
• Provide green infrastructure in order to improve habitat connectivity through the site and to the wider area.  
• Retain and strengthen a strong physical boundary between the 
defined settlement and the strategic gap to the northern 
boundary .  
• Be informed by an appropriate desk -based archaeological 
assessment, and where necessary, a field evaluation in order to 
avoid and mitigate any impacts . 
• Site is indicated to be within a proposed Minerals and Waste 
Safeguarding Area; further review required t o determine the 
suitability and viability for prior extraction of minerals.  
 
Please note that the above is not a comprehensive list of matters 
relating to the site. As the Development Plan should be read as a 
whole, regard will need to be had to all relevant adopted planning 
policies ( including those in any relevant Neighbourhood Plan, and the 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan), together with Supplementary 
Planning Guidance and the requirements for the site set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) in t he consideration of this site. 
Proposals should also take into account the recommendations made in 
the evidence studies and the capacity assessment that informed the 
allocation (which are summarised in the site’s profile within the 
Housing Background Paper ). It is recommended that a pre -application 
proposal is submitted for consideration prior to the submission of a 
planning application.  
 
 
 
  341  Map of Land to the rear of Forest View and Oriana, Longhill  Road and west of Fern 
Bungalow, London Road (extension of site allocated through Policy SA3 of the SALP)  
 
 
 
 
342 Appendix 3:  Defined Centre maps 
343 Map 6 Brac knell Town Centre 
344 345 Map 7 Cr owthorne 
Inset 2 - Crowthorne
© Crown copyright and database rights
2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
District Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
346 Map 8 Sandhur st 
Inset 3 - Sandhurst
© Crown copyright and database rights
2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
District Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11YORKTOWN ROAD
347 Map 9 Ba gshot Road 
 Inset 4 - Bagshot Road
© Crown copyright and database rights
2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
348 Map 10 Binfield 
Inset 5 - Binfield
© Crown copyright and database rights
2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488TERRACE ROAD SOUTH
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
349 Map 11 Bir ch Hill & Bullbr ook 
Inset 6 - 
Birch Hill
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey Inset 7 - Bullbrook© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey
350 Map 12 Colleg e Town 
Inset 8 - College Town
© Crown copyright and database rights
2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
YORKTOWN ROAD
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
351 Map 13 Cr own Wood & Cr owthorne (Station P arade) 
Inset 10 - Crowthorne (Station Parade)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
DUKES RIDE
Inset 9 - Crown Wood
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
Local Centre
Primary Shopping Area
Bracknell Forest
Borough BoundaryPolicy LP11
352 Map 14 Easthampstead & Forest P ark 
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
Inset 12 - Forest Park
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey
100019488Inset 11 - Easthampstead
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
353 Map 15 Great Hollands 
Inset 13 - Great Hollands© Crown copyright and database rights
2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
354 Map 16 Hanw orth & Harmans Water 
Inset 14 Hanworth © Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
Survey 100019488
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
Survey 100019488
Inset 15 - Harmans Water
355 Map 17 Mar tins Her on & Nor th Ascot 
Inset 16 - Martins Heron
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey
100019488
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey
Inset 17 - North Ascot
(Fernbank Road)
Inset 18 - North Ascot 
 (Warren Row)
356 Map 18 Owlsmoor , Priestw ood & Sandhur st (East of Swan Lane) 
Inset 20 - Priestwood© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
Inset 21 - Sandhurst 
(East of Swan Lane)© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey
100019488Inset 19 - Owlsmoor
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey
100019488
357 Map 19 Sandhur st (Old Mill),  Whitegr ove & Wildridings 
Inset 22 -  Sandhurst
(Old Mill)© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
Inset 23 - Whitegrove
Local Centre
Primary Shopping AreaPolicy LP11
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
CROSS FELL© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance
Inset 24 - Wildridings© Crown copyright and database rights
 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
358 Appendix 4:  Green Belt villages 
Map 20 Green Belt Village - Cranbourne 
Cranbourne
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
Green Belt Village boundary
359 Map 21 Green Belt Village - Chur ch Road 
Church Road, Winkfield
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
Green Belt Village boundary
360 Map 22 Green Belt Village - Nor th Street 
North Street, Winkfield
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
Green Belt Village boundary
361 Map 23 Green Belt Village - Cheapside 
Cheapside
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
Green Belt Village boundary
Bracknell Forest Borough Boundary
Windsor and Maidenhead
362 Map 24 Green Belt Village - Maidens Green 
Maidens Green/Winkfield Street
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488
Green Belt Village boundary
363 Appendix 5:  Tall building vie wpoints maps 
Map 25 Tall Buildings Viewpoints 
364 Tall Building  View Point s in Bracknell Forest
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488Map Ref Location
TB1 A329
TB10 Sopwith Road
TB11 Ascot Road
TB2 A329
TB3 Peacock Lane
TB4 Wokingham Road
TB5 Johnstone Close
TB6 Tilehurst Lane
TB7 Binfield Road 1
TB8 Binfield Road 2
TB9 Cabbage Hill BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend365 Tall Building  View Point s 
Site Name:  TB1 (A329 )
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend366 Tall Building  View Point s 
Site Name: TB2 (A329 )
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend367 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB3 (Peacock Lane)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend368 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB4 Wokingham Road
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend369 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB5 (Johnstone Close)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend370 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB6 (Tilehurst Lane)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointsLegend371 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB7 (Binfield Road 1)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend372 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB8 (Binfield Road 2)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend373 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB9 (Cabbage Hill)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend374 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB10 (Sopwith Road)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend375 Tall Building  View Point s
Site Name: TB11 (Ascot Road)
© Crown copyright and database rights 2019 Ordnance Survey 100019488BFC Boundary 
ViewpointLegend  
376 Appendix 6:  Existing policies to be replaced 
by the Br acknell F orest Local Plan 
Table 15 P olicies to be replaced b y the Brac knell Forest Local Plan 
 Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
 'Saved' P olicies of the Brac knell 
Forest Bor ough Local Plan (2002)  
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples Policy EN1 - Protecting tree and 
hedgero w cover 
Policy LP 46 Biodiv ersity 
Policy LP 48 Protection and enhancement of trees 
and hedgero ws 
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples Policy EN2 - Supplementing tree and 
hedgero w cover 
Policy LP 46 Biodiv ersity 
Policy LP 48 Protection and enhancement of trees 
and hedgero ws 
Policy LP 17 Thames Basin Heath Special Protection 
Area Policy EN3 - Nature conser vation 
Policy LP 47 Designated Nature Conser vation and 
Geological Sites  
Policy LP 48 Protection and enhancement of trees 
and hedgero ws 
Policy LP 47 Designated Nature Conser vation and 
Geological Sites  Policy EN4 - Local Nature Reser ves, 
Wildlif e Her itage sites and Regionally 
Impor tant Geological sites 
Policy LP 48 Protection and enhancement of trees 
and hedgero ws 
Policy LP 45 Protection and Enhancement of the 
Histor ic En vironment  Policy EN6 - Ancient mon uments and 
archaeological remains of national 
impor tance 
Policy LP 47 Designated Nature Conser vation and 
Geological Sites  
Policy LP 45 Protection and Enhancement of the 
Histor ic En vironment  Policy EN7 - Other impor tant 
archaeological remains 
Policy LP 47 Designated Nature Conser vation and 
Geological Sites  
Policy LP 35 De velopment in the Countr yside  Policy EN8 - De velopment on land 
outside settlements 
377  Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 38 Separ ation of Settlements 
Policy LP 39 Dw ellings f or rural workers 
Policy LP 41 Equestr ian Uses  
Policy LP 35 De velopment in the Countr yside  Policy EN9 - Changes of use and 
adaptation of e xisting non-residential 
outside settlements , outside the Green 
Belt Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 38 Separ ation of Settlements 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) Policy EN10 - Areas of landscape 
impor tance 
Policy LP 38 Separ ation of Settlements  
Policy LP 35 De velopment in the Countr yside  
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) Policy EN11 - Warfield P ark Mobile Home 
Site 
Policy LP 38 Separ ation of Settlements  
Policy LP 45 Protection and Enhancement of the 
Histor ic En vironment  Policy EN12 - Histor ic par k and gardens 
Policy LP 16 Green Infr astructure  
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) Policy EN14 - Riv er corr idors 
Policy LP 46 Biodiv ersity  
Policy LP 52 P ollution and Hazards Policy EN15 - Floodlighting 
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples Policy EN20 - Design consider ation in 
new development 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 42 Design 
Policy LP 43 Tall buildings 
Policy LP 45 Protection and Enhancement of the 
Histor ic En vironment 
Policy LP 46 Biodiv ersity  
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples Policy EN22 - Designing f or accessibility 
378  Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
Policy LP 22 Accessib le and Adaptab le Dw ellings 
Policy LP 24 Housing Mix 
Policy LP 42 Design  
Policy LP 52 P ollution and Hazards  Policy EN25 - Noise and other pollution 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy EN26 - Energy 
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples 
Policy LP 42 Design  
Policy LP 49 Sustainab le Constr uction  
Policy LP 50 Rene wable and lo w carbon energy 
Policy LP 52 P ollution and Hazards 
Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre Policy E1 - De velopment in Br acknell 
Town Centre 
Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres 
Policy LP 28 Smaller Businesses  Policy E4 - Small b usinesses 
Policy LP 12 Hier archy and e xtent of to wn centres Policy E5 - Hier archy of shopping centres 
Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres Policy E7 - Business de velopment in 
shopping areas 
Policy LP 31 De velopment of main to wn centre uses 
outside of designated centres Policy E8 - Change of use of shop units 
(A1) to other uses outside defined 
shopping centres 
Policy LP 32 Protection of Comm unity F acilities and 
Services 
Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres Policy E9 - Non-retail uses in Br acknell 
Town Centre pr imary shopping area and 
the retail core area of Cro wthor ne Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre 
Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres 
Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre Policy E10 - Non-retail uses in Br acknell 
Town Centre secondar y shopping area, 
Crowthor ne retail area outside the retail 
core area and Sandhurst Centre 
Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres Policy E11 - Village and neighbourhood 
centres and local par ades 
Policy LP 32 Protection of comm unity f acilities and 
services 
Policy LP 36 Green Belt  Policy GB1 - Building in the Green Belt 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 39 Dw ellings f or rural workers  
379  Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
Policy LP 41 Equestr ian Uses  
Policy LP 36 Green Belt  Policy GB2 - Changes of use of land 
within the Green Belt 
Policy LP 36 Green Belt  Policy GB3 - Residential de velopment 
within Green Belt villages 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 36 Green Belt   Policy GB4 - Re-use of b uildings within 
the Green Belt 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 41 Equestr ian Uses 
Policy LP 7 Land at Jealott's Hill Policy GB5 - Syngenta - major 
development site within the Green Belt 
Policy LP 21 Protection of Existing Housing Stoc k and 
Land  Policy H3 - Residential subdivisions and 
houses in m ultiple occupation 
Policy LP 42 Design 
Policy LP 42 Design  Policy H4 - Areas of special housing 
character 
Policy LP 48 Protection and enhancement of trees 
and hedgero ws 
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples Policy H5 - Ne w dw ellings outside 
settlements 
Policy LP 35 De velopment in the Countr yside 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 38 Separ ation of Settlements  
Policy LP 39 Dw ellings f or rural workers  
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples  Policy H6 - De velopment in volving 
existing dw ellings in the countr yside 
outside the Green Belt Policy LP 35 De velopment in the Countr yside 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 9 Aff ordab le Housing  Policy H8 - Aff ordab le Housing 
Policy LP 21 Protection of e xisting housing stoc k and 
land  Policy H11 - Retention of the housing 
stock 
Policy LP 15 Design  Policy H12 - Enclosure of open land in 
residential areas 
Policy LP 15 Design  Policy H14 - Accessib le housing 
380  Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
Policy LP 22 Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings 
Policy LP 24 Housing Mix 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy M1 - Traffic management and 
Highw ay schemes 
This policy is no longer rele vant/ required.   Policy M2 - Saf eguarded road line - 
extension of the Nor thern distr ibutor road 
This policy is no longer rele vant/ required. Policy M3 - Protected road lines - 
Sandhurst - Cro wthor ne bypass road 
scheme 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy M4 - Highw ay measures e xpected 
in association with ne w development 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy M5 - Ser vice road schemes 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy M6 - Cycling and w alking 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy M7 - Access f or people with 
disabilities 
Policy LP 15 Design 
Policy LP 22 Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings 
Policy LP 24 Housing Mix  
Policy LP 42 Design pr inciples 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy M8 - Pub lic transpor t 
Policy LP 57 P arking Policy M9 - Vehicle and cycle par king 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies Policy M10 - P arking f or countr yside 
recreation 
Policy LP 35 De velopment in the Countr yside 
Policy LP 33 Play, open space and spor ts pro vision Policy R3 - Dual use of educational 
facilities 
Policy LP 33 Pla y, open space and spor ts pro vision Policy R4 - Pro vision of open space of 
public value 
Policy LP 34 Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic 
Value   
Policy LP 33 Pla y, Open Space and Spor ts Pro vision Policy R5 - Pub licly usab le open space 
for small sites 
Policy LP 34 Standards f or Open Space of Pub lic 
Value   
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy R6 - Visitor accommodation 
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples 
Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre  
Policy LP 35 Development in the Countr yside  
Policy LP 36 Green Belt  
381  Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
Policy LP 42 Design  
Policy LP 52 P ollution and Hazards  
Policy LP 35 De velopment in the Countr yside  Policy R7 - Countr yside recreation 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 41 Equestr ian Uses  
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies  Policy R8 - Pub lic rights of w ay 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) Policy R10 - Blac kwater Valley 
Policy LP 38 Separ ation of Settlements 
Policy LP 32 Protection of Comm unity F acilities and 
Services Policy SC3 - No reduction in e xisting 
comm unity f acilities 
This policy is no longer rele vant / required.   Policy SC4 - Telecomm unications 
provision 
(Telecomm unications pro vision is addressed at the 
national le vel through rele vant legislation and policy). 
Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre  Proposal PE1i - Land in the nor thern 
sector of Br acknell Town Centre 
Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre  Proposal PE1ii - Land at south of 
Bracknell Town Centre 
This policy is no longer rele vant / required. Proposal PH1.1 - The Staff College , 
Bracknell 
This policy is no longer rele vant / required. Proposal PH1.2 - Ne w housing 
development proposal at P eacoc k Farm, 
west of Br acknell Town 
This policy is no longer rele vant / required.   Proposal PM1.1 - Road junction and 
highw ay works 
(Junctions are within the highw ay boundar y and are 
theref ore under Highw ays control.  All str ategic junction 
impro vements are included in the L TP3). 
This policy is no longer rele vant / required. Proposal PM1.3 - Land protected f or 
dualling 
This policy is no longer rele vant / required  Proposal PM5 - Ser vice road schemes 
(PM5i is par tially de veloped and PM5ii and PM5iii are 
unachie vable following the implementation of a local 
housing de velopment and associated f acilities). 
Included as a project in the IDP . Proposal PR10 - Blac kwater Valley 
 Core Strategy (2008) 
Policy LP 1 Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples 
Policy LP 2 Sustainab le locational pr inciples CS1 - Sustainab le De velopment 
Principles 
382  Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
Spatial Str ategy CS2 - Locational Pr inciples 
Policy LP 1 Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples  
Policy LP 2 Sustainab le locational pr inciples 
Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre CS3 - Br acknell Town Centre 
Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres 
Covered b y SALP P olicies SA6 and SA8 CS4 - Land at Amen Cor ner (P arish of 
Binfield) 
Covered b y SALP P olicy SA9 CS5 - Land nor th of Whiteg rove and 
Quelm P ark (Parish of Warfield) 
Policy LP 13 Infr astructure  CS6 - Limiting the Impact of De velopment 
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples CS7 - Design 
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 42 Design  
Policy LP 43 Tall Buildings 
Policy LP 45 Protection and Enhancement of the 
Histor ic En vironment   
Policy LP 32 Protection of Comm unity F acilities and 
Services  CS8 - Recreation and Culture 
Policy LP 33 Pla y, Open Space and Spor ts Pro vision  
Policy LP 35 De velopment in the Countr yside  CS9 - De velopment on Land Outside 
Settlements 
Policy LP 36 - Green Belt  
Policy LP 37 Landscape char acter (outside of defined 
settlements) 
Policy LP 38 Separ ation of settlements 
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples CS10 - Sustainab le Resources 
Policy LP 42 Design  
Policy LP 49 Sustainab le Constr uction  
Policy LP 50 Rene wable and lo w carbon energy CS11 - Rene wable Energy Gener ation 
Policy LP 15 Design pr inciples CS12 - Rene wable Energy 
Policy LP 42 Design  
383  Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
Policy LP 49 Sustainab le Constr uction  
Policy LP 1 Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples CS13 - Sustainab le Waste Management 
Policy LP 13 Infr astructure 
Policy LP 42 Design 
Also see sa ved policies in the Waste Local Plan f or 
Berkshire 
Policy LP 17 Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection 
Area  CS14 - Thames Basin Heaths Special 
Protection Area 
Policy LP 47 Designated Nature Conser vation and 
Geological Sites 
Policy LP 3 Pro vision of housing  CS15 - Ov erall Housing Pro vision 
Policy LP 9 Aff ordab le housing CS16 - Housing Needs of the Comm unity 
Policy LP 22 Accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings 
Policy LP 24 Housing Mix 
Policy LP 9 Aff ordab le housing  CS17 - Aff ordab le Housing 
Policy LP 25 Gypsies , travellers and tr avelling 
showpeople CS18 - Travelling P opulations 
Policy LP 26 De velopment within designated 
Emplo yment Areas  CS19 - Location of Emplo yment 
Development 
Policy LP 27 Emplo yment De velopment outside 
Emplo yment Areas  
Policy LP 28 Smaller b usinesses 
Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre 
Policy LP 26 De velopment in designated Emplo yment 
Areas CS20 - Ne w De velopment in Emplo yment 
Areas 
Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres CS21 - Retail De velopment in Town 
Centres 
Policy LP 31 De velopment of main to wn centre uses 
outside of designated centre CS22 - Out of Town Centre Retail 
Development 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies CS23 - Transpor t 
Policies LP 14, 54-57 Transpor t policies CS24 – Transpor t and Ne w De velopment 
Site Allocations Local Plan (2013) 
This policy is no longer rele vant (co vered b y NPPF). Policy CP1 - Presumption in F avour of 
Sustainab le De velopment 
To be sa ved Policy SA1 - Pre viously De veloped Land 
in Defined Settlements 
384  Replaced b y Local Plan P olicy  Existing De velopment Plan P olicy 
To be sa ved Policy SA2 - Other Land within Defined 
Settlements 
To be sa ved Policy SA3 - Edge of Settlement Sites 
To be sa ved Policy SA4 - Land at Broadmoor , 
Crowthor ne 
To be sa ved Policy SA5 - Land at Transpor t Research 
Labor atory, Cro wthor ne 
To be sa ved Policy SA6 - Land at Amen Cor ner 
(North), Binfield 
To be sa ved Policy SA7 - Land at Blue Mountain, 
Binfield 
To be sa ved Policy SA8 - Land at Amen Cor ner 
(South), Binfield 
To be sa ved Policy SA9 - Land at Warfield 
To be sa ved Policy SA10 - Ro yal Militar y Academ y, 
Sandhurst 
Policy LP 29 De velopment in Br acknell Town Centre Policy SA11 - Br acknell Town Centre 
Policy LP 30 De velopment proposals in centres 
Policy LP 8 The P eel Centre and The P oint Policy SA12 - The P eel Centre 
This policy is no longer rele vant as changes w ere 
implemented when SALP w as adopted Policy SA13 - P olicies Map Changes 
385 Appendix 7:  Glossar y 
Glossar y 
Table 16 Glossar y 
The ability f or people of diff erent abilities to mo ve around an area and to reach places 
and f acilities with ease . Accessibility 
Activ e OSPV compr ises children’ s play areas , spor ts pitches and f acilities , golf courses , 
state par ks, allotments , jogging/w alking routes , school pla ying fields , artificial g rass 
pitches , multi-use games areas (MUGAs) and inf ormal kic k-about areas . Activ e Open Space of Pub lic Value (OSPV) 
Also ref erred to as 'aff ordab le homes' and 'aff ordab le dw ellings', this is housing f or sale 
or rent, f or those whose needs are not met b y the mar ket (including housing that pro vides 
a subsidised route to home o wnership and/or is f or essential local w orkers); and which 
complies with one or more of the related definitions pro vided within Anne x 2 of the NPPF . Affordab le housing 
Areas designated b y local author ities as the y are not lik ely to achie ve national air quality 
objectiv es by rele vant deadlines .  They have an associated air quality action plan. Air Quality Management Area (A QMA) 
An area that has been w ooded contin uously since at least 1600AD . Ancient w oodland 
One stage of a Habitats Regulations assessment.  An assessment required under the 
Habitats Regulations if a plan or project is judged as lik ely to ha ve a significant eff ect on 
a habitats site . Appropr iate Assessment (AA) 
There will be archaeological interest in a her itage asset if it holds , or potentially ma y 
hold, e vidence of histor ical human activity w orthy of e xpert investigation at some point. 
 Heritage assets with archaeological interest are the pr imary source of e vidence about 
the substance and e volution of places , and of the people and cultures that made them. Archaeological interest 
A direction which withdr aws automatic planning per mission that otherwise w ould be 
granted b y the Gener al Permitted De velopment Order . When an Ar ticle 4 direction is in 
place a planning application ma y be required. Article 4 direction 
The pub lication of monitor ing inf ormation on at least an ann ual basis to include the 
progress on the implementation of the Local De velopment Scheme and the e xtent to 
which policies in the De velopment Plan are being implemented. Author ity Monitor ing Repor t (AMR) 
These are ne w open spaces pro vided mostly b y large de velopments , where the de veloper 
upgrades par t of the land to SANG status or pro vides SANG off-site and then usually 
transfers the SANG land to Council o wnership with maintenance sums to fund its long-ter m 
management. Bespok e Suitab le Alter nativ e Natur al 
Greenspace (SANG) 
The v ariety and ab undance of all lif e. Biodiv ersity 
A plan addressing threatened species and habitats designed to protect and restore 
biological systems . Biodiv ersity Action Plan (BAP) 
 BOAs ha ve been identified b y the Thames Valley Environmental Records Centre as 
areas that off er the g reatest oppor tunities f or habitat creation and restor ation.   There are 
29 BO As in Ber kshire . Biodiv ersity Oppor tunity Area (BO A) 
Biodiv ersity net gain deliv ers measur able impro vements f or biodiv ersity b y creating or 
enhancing habitats in association with de velopment.  Biodiv ersity net gain can be achie ved 
on-site , off-site or through a combination of on-site and off-site measures . Biodiv ersity net gain 
The BFBLP w as adopted in J anuary 2002.   It contains De velopment Management related 
policies which are used to deter mine planning applications .  Although some of these 
policies ha ve been deleted, man y were ‘saved’ by the Secretar y of State be yond 27 
September 2007.   Some w ere subsequently replaced b y new policies in the adopted 
CSDPD and SALP .  Policies in the BFLP replace the remaining ‘saved’ BFBLP policies . Bracknell F orest Borough Local Plan (BFBLP) 
The BFLP guides the location, scale and type of future de velopment, as w ell as pro viding 
detailed de velopment management policies to be used in deter mining planning 
applications . The BFLP has pre viously been ref erred to as the Comprehensiv e Local 
Plan (CLP). Bracknell F orest Local Plan (BFLP) 
See 'Previously De veloped Land' ('PDL') definition. Brownfield land 
BREEAM is currently the best pr actice industr y standard f or sustainab le non-residential 
buildings .  It is recognised and quality assured scheme that independently assesses the 
environmental perf ormance of b uildings .  Offices , industr ial, retail, schools , healthcare 
and residential institutions are co vered.   The f ollowing areas are assessed: Building Research Estab lishment 
Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) 
Energy use; 
Health and w ellbeing; 
Innovation; 
Land use and ecology; 
Mater ials; 
Management; 
Pollution; 
386 Transpor t; 
Waste; 
Water. 
Built spor ts facilities include spor ts halls , swimming / leisure pools , ice r inks, ski centres , 
gyms and fitness centres , indoor tennis centres , climbing w alls, indoor bo wls and other 
indoor spor ts facilities . Built spor ts facilities 
See 'massing' definition. Bulk 
Centres are defined on the P olicies Map and include Pr imary Shopping Areas and areas 
within or adjacent to these which are predominantly occupied b y main to wn centre uses . Centre 
References to ‘centres’  apply to the Pr imary Town Centre (Br acknell Town Centre), 
District Centres and Local Centres b ut exclude small par ades of shops of purely 
neighbourhood significance . Unless defined as a centre on the P olicies Map , existing 
Edge of Centre and Out of Centre (including Out of to wn) de velopments that are 
compr ised of or include main to wn centre uses do not constitute centres . 
These are identified or planned areas with a distinctiv e and positiv e char acter , and/or 
areas where de velopment pressures ma y come f orward. They are diff erent to Landscape 
Char acter Areas (f or inf ormation on these , please see ‘Landscape Char acter’  and 
‘Landscape Char acter Assessment (LCA)’. Char acter area 
The significant and lasting change in the distr ibution of w eather patter ns over per iods 
ranging from decades to millions of y ears and the implications on the en vironment and 
comm unity. The change is largely attr ibuted to the increased le vels of atmospher ic carbon 
dioxide produced b y the use of f ossil fuels . Climate change 
The coming together of settlements to f orm one mass or whole .  The visual or ph ysical 
merging of tw o settlements b y new development within the gaps betw een them. Coalescence of settlements 
Development contr ibutions used to address demands that g rowth places on an area b y 
funding the costs of suppor ting infr astructure .  Excluding administr ation e xpenses , CIL 
income is directly attr ibuted to infr astructure . Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy (CIL) 
A comm unity hor ticultur al garden with g rowing f acilities . Comm unity landshare 
When land is remo ved from the Green Belt, this relates to off-setting resultant har m 
through impro vements to the remaining Green Belt (such as enhancements g reen 
infrastructure , new woodland, biodiv ersity impro vements , access impro vements f or 
sustainab le travel modes and recreational f acilities). Compensator y impro vements 
The Br acknell F orest Local Plan (BFLP) has pre viously been ref erred to as the 
Comprehensiv e Local Plan. Comprehensiv e Local Plan (CLP) 
An illustr ative plan indicating the potential gener al extent of diff erent uses , gener al 
locations f or key access points and an y other k ey features or requirements within a site .  
Concept plans indicate ho w a site could be de veloped b ut are not prescr iptive. Concept plan 
The process of maintaining and managing change to a her itage asset in a w ay that 
sustains and, where appropr iate, enhances its significance . Conser vation 
Areas of special architectur al or histor ic interest which are designated to off er greater 
protection to the b uilt and natur al en vironment.   Bracknell F orest has six Conser vation 
Areas , which are defined on the P olicies Map: Conser vation Area 
Binfield Village  
Church Street, Cro wthor ne 
Easthampstead, Br acknell 
Church Lane , Warfield 
Winkfield Ro w 
Winkfield Village 
CAAs ar ticulate wh y an area is special and what elements within the area contr ibute to 
this special quality . Conser vation Area Appr aisal (CAA)   
Contaminated land includes land polluted b y hea vy metals , oils, chemical substances , 
gases , asbestos and r adioactiv e substances . Contaminated land 
Controlled w aters include terr itorial waters , coastal w aters , inland freshw aters and 
groundw aters . Groundw aters ma y be defined as Source Protection Zones (SPZs). Controlled w aters 
The Core Str ategy , also ref erred to as the ‘Core Str ategy De velopment Plan Document’ 
(‘CSDPD’), w as adopted in F ebruary 2008.   It w as a str ategic document containing the 
Council’ s long-ter m aspir ations f or the Borough, and policies to guide and manage Core Str ategy 
development in Br acknell F orest until 2026.  Some of the Core Str ategy policies w ere 
subsequently replaced b y new policies in the adopted SALP . Policies within the BFLP 
replace the remaining ‘saved’ Core Str ategy policies . 
Land which is outside of the defined settlements and outside of the Green Belt, as defined 
on the P olicies Map . Countr yside 
A form of houseb uilding, where the b uilding or completion of housing is under taken by 
an individual, a g roup of individuals , or persons w orking with or f or individual(s), and the 
housing is to be occupied b y those individuals . These individuals are ref erred to as Custom b uild 
387 ‘custom b uilders’  or ‘self b uilders’.  This does not include the b uilding of a house on a plot 
acquired from a person who b uilds the house wholly or mainly to plans or specifications 
decided or off ered b y that person.   
Whilst there is no legal diff erentiation betw een custom b uild and self b uild, custom b uild 
gener ally means the e ventual occupiers tak e on a “project management”  role, coordinating 
the ser vices of designers , architects , planners and constr uction staff . They ma y get 
actively in volved in some aspects , but gener ally ph ysical in volvement is k ept to a 
minim um. 
To be considered deliv erable, sites f or housing should be a vailab le no w, offer a suitab le 
location f or de velopment no w, and be achie vable with a realistic prospect that housing 
will be deliv ered on the site within 5 y ears. In par ticular : Deliv erable sites 
a. sites which do not in volve major de velopment and ha ve planning per mission, and 
all sites with detailed planning per mission should be considered deliv erable until 
permission e xpires , unless there is clear e vidence that homes will not be deliv ered 
within 5 y ears (f or example because the y are no longer viab le, there is no longer 
a demand f or the type of units or sites ha ve long ter m phasing plans). 
b. where a site has outline planning per mission f or major de velopment, has been 
allocated in a de velopment plan, has a g rant of per mission in pr inciple , or is 
identified on a bro wnfield register , it should only be considered deliv erable where 
there is clear e vidence that housing completions will begin on site within 5 y ears. 
A suppor ting document submitted with a planning application, in which de velopers sho w 
how their proposal is appropr iate f or the site and accessib le to people who ma y use it. Design and Access Statement 
A set of wr itten and g raphic r ules that estab lish with precision the tw o and three 
dimensional design elements of a par ticular de velopment or area – and ho w these relate 
to one another without estab lishing the o verall outcome . Design code 
Designated her itage assets include World Her itage Sites , Scheduled Mon uments , Listed 
Buildings , Protected Wrec k Sites , Registered P ark and Gardens , Registered Battlefields 
and Conser vation Areas , as w ell as sites that are designated under the rele vant legislation. Designated her itage asset 
  
Bracknell F orest does not contain an y World Her itage Sites , Protected Wrec k Sites or 
Registered Battlefields . Designated Assets and listing details are a vailab le to vie w on 
the Histor ic England w ebsite . 
Habitats sites (an y site which w ould be included within the definition at regulation 8 of 
the Conser vation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended)) f or the 
purpose of those regulations , including candidate Special Areas of Conser vation, Sites Designated nature conser vation and geological 
sites 
of Comm unity Impor tance , Special Areas of Conser vation, Special Protection Areas and 
any rele vant Mar ine Sites), Ramsar Sites , Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Local Nature 
Reser ves, Local Wildlif e Sites and Local Geological Sites . 
Sometimes ab breviated to ‘neighbourhood area’, this is a boundar y designated f or the 
purposes of neighbourhood planning.  The neighbourhood areas in Br acknell F orest all 
correspond with their associated par ish boundar ies. Designated neighbourhood area 
Also ref erred to as ‘net de velopab le areas’, de velopab le areas indicate the e xtent of land 
within  allocated sites that are lik ely to be suitab le for de velopment, based on the 
application of local plan policies , evidence collected at the plan-making stage and an y Developab le area 
further mater ial consider ations that ha ve been f ound to apply . There ma y be a need to 
refine these areas on consider ation of more detailed e vidence at the planning application 
stage . 
Settlement boundar ies ha ve been adjusted/dr awn to include the de velopab le areas where 
appropr iate.  
Those sites which are in a suitab le location f or housing de velopment and which ha ve a 
reasonab le prospect of being a vailab le and viab le for de velopment within the en visaged 
timescale . Developab le sites 
DM is the end-to-end management of the deliv ery chain f or sustainab le de velopment. 
DM includes a wide n umber of planning activities such as designing, analysing, 
influencing, promoting, engaging, negotiating, decision-making  (including deter mination 
of planning applications), co-ordinating, implementation, compliance and enf orcement. Development Management (DM) 
Development plans can include adopted local plans , neighbourhood plans and an y 
regional str ategy policies that remain in f orce (the y do not include supplementar y planning 
documents).  For Br acknell F orest, the De velopment Plan currently consists of the Core Development plan 
Strategy , the Site Allocations Local Plan, the Br acknell F orest P olicies Map and Binfield 
Neighbourhood Plan, as w ell as sa ved policies from the Br acknell F orest Borough Local 
Plan, the Miner als Local Plan f or Ber kshire , the Waste Local Plan f or Ber kshire , and 
'saved' P olicy NRM6 of the South East Plan. 
388 Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsor y Purchase Act 2004 (as amended) requires 
that applications f or planning per mission m ust be deter mined in accordance with the 
Development Plan, unless mater ial consider ations indicate otherwise . 
A type of centre . The function of a distr ict centre is to ser ve a more local catchment, with 
a focus on smaller retail units , restaur ants and coff ee shops . They pro vide a v aried retail 
and leisure off er that helps meet local con venience and da y-to-da y shopping needs .  District centre 
A habitat, species or ecosystem. Ecological f eature 
A suite of high quality sites that together contain a sustainab le level of biodiv ersity , and 
which ha ve connections , or w ays of mo ving betw een core sites to ensure gene flo w 
betw een populations is maintained. Ecological netw orks 
Development consisting of emplo yment uses and/or main to wn centre uses . Economic de velopment 
A quantitativ e and qualitativ e review of land or floorspace required f or economic 
development uses (f ocusing on b usiness , industr ial and distr ibution and Stor age uses 
(BIDS)) the e xisting emplo yment land supply in the Borough and its associated Functional 
Economic Mar ket Area Economic De velopment Needs Assessment 
(EDNA) 
For retail pur poses , a location that is w ell connected to and within 300 metres of the 
primary shopping area. Edge of centre 
For all other main to wn centre uses , a location within 300 metres of a centre boundar y. 
For office de velopment, this includes locations outside the centre b ut within 500 metres 
of a pub lic transpor t interchange . 
In deter mining whether a site f alls within the definition of edge of centre , account should 
be tak en of local circumstances . 
The amount of emitted carbon dio xide (either as the carbon dio xide equiv alent or as 
greenhouse gases) associated with constr uction.  This includes emissions cause b y 
manufacture , transpor t and constr uction of the mater ials that mak e up a b uilding.    Embodied carbon in constr uction  
These are areas where emplo yment uses are concentr ated that pro vide an impor tant 
supply of land and premises which suppor t the local econom y. Emplo yment Areas that 
are the k ey areas in the Borough that contr ibute significantly to the emplo yment land 
supply f or business , industr y, distr ibution and stor age uses (BIDS) are defined on the 
Policies Map . These areas are ref erred to as ‘designated Emplo yment Areas'.   Emplo yment area 
These pr imarily relate to b usiness , industr y, distr ibution and stor age uses (BIDS) which 
include:   Emplo yment uses / emplo yment de velopment 
Businesses - Offices (other than those that f all within prof essional ser vices), 
research and de velopment of products and processes , light industr y appropr iate 
in a residential area; 
Gener al industr ial - Use f or industr ial process other than one f alling under 
'businesses' (e xcluding inciner ation pur poses , chemical treatment or landfill or 
hazardous w aste), and; 
Storage or distr ibution - includes open air stor age, 
as well as an y sui gener is uses that share a significant n umber of char acter istics with 
the uses abo ve.  
Systematic in vestigation and assessment of the lik ely eff ects of a proposed de velopment, 
to be tak en into account in the decision-making process under the Town and Countr y 
Planning (En vironment Impact Assessment) Regulations 2017 (as amended).  The process 
is under taken for a proposed de velopment that w ould significantly aff ect the en vironment 
because of its siting, design, siz e or scale . Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
If, following a sequential test, it is not possib le for de velopment to be located in z ones 
with a lo wer risk of flooding (taking into account wider sustainab le de velopment 
objectiv es), the e xception test ma y have to be applied.   For the e xception test to be Exception test 
passed it should be demonstr ated that:  a) the de velopment w ould pro vide wider 
sustainability benefits to the comm unity that outw eigh the flood r isk; and b) the 
development will be saf e for its lif etime taking account of the vulner ability of its users , 
without increasing flood r isk else where , and, where possib le, will reduce flood r isk overall. 
An assessment of the r isk of flooding from all flooding sources , the identification of flood 
mitigation measures and actions to be tak en bef ore and dur ing a flood.  The FRA should 
also demonstr ate that the de velopment will be saf e for its lif etime and will not increase 
flood r isk else where . Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) 
389 Flood Zones , also ref erred to as ‘Flood Risk Zones’  (‘FRZs’), ref er to the probability of 
fluvial (r iver) and sea flooding, ignor ing the presence of def ences .  Flood Zone 1 is lo w 
probability;  Flood Zone 2 is medium probability;  Flood Zone 3a is high probability and 
Flood Zone 3b is functional flood plain where w ater has to be stored or flo ws at time of 
flood. Flood Zones 
Considers the geog raphical e xtent of the local econom y and its k ey mar kets. Functional Economic Mar ket Area (FEMA) 
This is a defined separ ation of defined settlement areas . For more inf ormation, please 
see ‘strategic gap’  and ‘green w edge’  definitions .   Gap 
The main char acter istics of a garden comm unity are: Garden comm unity 
a pur pose b uilt ne w settlement, or large e xtension to an e xisting to wn 
a comm unity with a clear identity and attr active environment 
it pro vides a mix of homes , including aff ordab le and self-b uild 
planned b y local author ities or pr ivate sector in consultation with the local 
comm unity. 
As w ell as b uilding ne w homes , the comm unities de velop: 
job oppor tunities 
attractive green space and pub lic realm areas 
transpor t infrastructure , including roads , buses and cycle routes 
comm unity infr astructure , schools , comm unity and health centres 
a plan f or long-ter m ste wardship of comm unity assets . 
The r ange of geological (roc ks, miner als, fossils), geomor phological (landf orms, 
processes) and soil f eatures . Geodiv ersity 
An area of open land around cer tain cities and b uilt up areas where str ict planning controls 
apply .  The fundamental aim of the Green Belt is to pre vent urban spr awl, by keeping 
land per manently open.   The NPPF lists the fiv e pur poses of the Green Belt: Green Belt 
to chec k the unrestr icted spr awl of large b uilt-up areas; 
to pre vent neighbour ing to wns merging into one another ; 
to assist in saf eguarding the countr yside from encroachment; 
to preser ve the setting and special char acter of histor ic towns; and 
to assist in urban regener ation, b y encour aging the recycling of derelict and other 
urban land. 
A village in the Green Belt that meets the cr iteria set out in the Green Belt Village 
Assessment and is designated f or the pur poses of allo wing limited infilling.  The e xtent 
of Green Belt villages is defined on the P olicies Map .  Green Belt village 
Sometimes also ref erred to as ‘green routes’, g reen corr idors are linear landscaped 
features that connect ecological habitats that might otherwise be isolated b y human 
activities or str uctures , such as roads and housing de velopment.  They often include Green corr idor 
cycle ways and r ights of w ay such as br idleways, in which case the y can pro vide v aluab le 
facilities f or a r ange of recreation and car-free tr avel options , such as w alking, cycling 
and horse r iding amongst other uses . 
A netw ork of m ulti-functional g reen space in both urban and r ural locations , which is 
capab le of deliv ering a wide r ange of en vironmental and quality of lif e benefits f or local 
comm unities .  As a netw ork, it includes par ks, open spaces (including the f ormal definitions Green infr astructure 
of Open Space of Pub lic Value, Suitab le Alter nativ e Natur al Green Spaces (SANGs)), 
playing fields , woodlands , wetlands , grasslands as w ell as street trees , allotments and 
private gardens . It can also include cer tain b uilt features , such as g reen roofs and w alls, 
and b lue infr astructure , which includes streams , canals and other w ater bodies .  
This is a defined separ ation of tw o areas of the same defined settlement and is defined 
on the P olicies Map . Its pr imary function is to pre vent coalescence , rather than being 
related to landscape quality . Green w edge 
Land which does not meet the definition of ‘previously de veloped land’.   It is usually land 
that is currently unde veloped. Greenfield land 
The r unoff that w ould occur from the site in its unde veloped and undisturbed state .  
Greenfield r unoff char acter istics are descr ibed b y peak flo w and v olumes of r unoff f or 
rainfall events of specified dur ation and retur n per iod (frequency of occurrence). Greenfield r unoff 
The area of b uilding measured e xternally at each floor le vel. GEA theref ore includes the 
floorspace de voted to corr idors , toilets , stor age, etc.  within an e xisting or proposed 
building b ut excludes an y area e xternal to the b uilding. Gross Exter nal Area (GEA) 
In ter ms of emplo yment floorspace , gross need is the projected net need f or emplo yment 
floorspace (based on the projected change in the n umber of jobs that require this type 
of de velopment) min us the projected loss of emplo yment floor space . Gross need is also 
referred to as ‘gross demand’. Gross need 
390 Persons of nomadic habit of lif e whate ver their r ace or or igin, including such persons 
who on g rounds only of their o wn or their f amily’ s or dependants’  educational or health 
needs or old age ha ve ceased to tr avel tempor arily, but excluding members of an 
organised g roup of tr avelling sho wpeople or circus people tr avelling together as such. Gypsies and tr avellers 
A study which looks at e xisting and future tr aveller needs and estimates pitch and plot 
requirements o ver a per iod of time . Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 
Assessment (GT AA) 
An area of land laid out and used f or Gypsy/tr aveller car avans; often, although not alw ays, 
compr ising slabs and amenity b locks or ‘sheds’.  An author ised site will ha ve planning 
permission.  An unauthor ised de velopment lac ks planning per mission. Gypsy and tr aveller Site 
An assessment to identify an y aspects of a plan or project that w ould ha ve the potential 
to cause a lik ely significant eff ect on a habitats site (either alone or in combination with 
other plans and projects) and to identify appropr iate a voidance and mitigation str ategies 
where such eff ects w ere identified.  The need f or HRA is set out in the Conser vation of 
Habitats & Species Regulations 2017 (as amended). Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) 
Any site which w ould be included within the definition at Regulation 8 of the Conser vation 
of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) f or the pur pose of those 
regulations , including candidate Special Areas of Conser vation, Sites of Comm unity 
Impor tance , Special Areas of Conser vation, Special Protection Areas and an y 
relevant Marine Sites . Habitats site 
A sur vey of the health of a centre , taking a n umber of indicators (such as div ersity of 
uses , propor tion of v acant street le vel proper ty, commercial yields on non-domestic 
proper ty etc.) into account. Health chec k 
A building, mon ument, site , place , area or landscape identified as ha ving her itage interest 
and significance mer iting consider ation in planning decisions . Heritage assets include 
designated her itage assets and non-designated assets identified b y the local planning 
author ity (including local listing). Heritage asset 
There is a chance of flooding of 1 in 30 each y ear or g reater . High r isk of flooding 
All aspects of the en vironment resulting from the inter action betw een people and places 
through time , including all sur viving ph ysical remains of past human activity , whether 
visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and planted or managed flor a. Histor ic en vironment 
Information ser vices that seek to pro vide access to comprehensiv e and dynamic resources 
relating to the histor ic en vironment of a defined geog raphic area f or pub lic benefit and 
use. Histor ic En vironment Record (HER) 
A par k or garden identified as ha ving special histor ic char acter , and as such protected 
from inappropr iate de velopment b y planning policies . Histor ic par ks and gardens can be 
either be designated her itage assets , in which case the y carr y the same w eight as listed Histor ic par ks and gardens 
buildings in decision-making, or non-designated her itage assets , which are identified in 
a local plan or a local list.  Bracknell F orest contains six Histor ic par ks and gardens , all 
of which are designated and sho wn on the P olicies Map: 
Ascot Place , Winkfield 
Moor Close (Ne wbold College), Binfield 
South Hill P ark, Bracknell 
Broadmoor Hospital, Cro wthor ne 
Part of Windsor Great P ark, Winkfield 
Part of Bagshot P ark, Winkfield 
Land which is in some w ay committed f or housing de velopment.    For Br acknell F orest, 
the following definitions are used: Housing commitment 
Hard commitment - a site which has planning per mission f or 1 or more dw ellings . 
Soft commitment - land which has no f ormal planning per mission, b ut which has 
been identified in pr inciple as suitab le for housing (either as a resolution to g rant 
permission subject to a s .106 ag reement, or an allocated site). 
Large site:  sites of 1ha or more 
Medium site:  sites less than 1ha with 5+ (net) dw ellings 
Small site:  sites less than 1ha with under 5 (net) dw ellings 
A number of ter ms are used f or housing f or older people , man y (or all) of which are used 
interchangeab le. Housing f or older people 
Sheltered housing – sheltered homes are self-contained proper ties designated 
for older people that are link ed to and suppor ted b y sheltered housing suppor t 
staff. 
Extra care housing is designed with the needs of older , frailer people in mind and 
with v arying le vels of care and suppor t availab le on site . 
Registered care pro vision is housing f or people living in registered care homes 
which are managed and r un by a care pro vider who is responsib le for all aspects 
of their daily care needs and w ellbeing.  Such housing is not self-contained;  it can 
also be ref erred to as either residential or n ursing care . 
Older person housing can f all within Class C3 Residential or Class C2 Residential 
Institutions or ‘sui gener is’ (of their o wn kind) of the Town and Countr y Planning 
391 (Use Classes) Order 1987 depending upon such f actors as the type of 
accommodation, le vel of care and comm unal f acilities pro vided. 
Provides inf ormation on the (prog ress of) deliv ery of housing sites which f orm par t of the 
housing tr ajector y.  It is a requirement of the NPPF . Housing Implementation Str ategy (HIS)  
Measures net additional dw ellings pro vided in a local author ity area against the homes 
required, using national statistics and local author ity data.  The Secretar y of State will 
publish the Housing Deliv ery Test results f or each local author ity in England e very 
November . Housing Deliv ery Test (HDT) 
The n umber of dw ellings considered capab le of being deliv ered within a fiv e-year per iod 
(as set out in the housing tr ajector y), when compared to the housing requirement. Housing land supply (HLS) 
This is a geog raphical area defined b y household demand and pref erences f or all types 
of housing, reflecting the k ey functional linkages betw een places where people liv e and 
work. Housing Mar ket Area (HMA) 
Includes completions to date and projected completions f or large and medium hard and 
soft commitments (see housing commitments section abo ve), across the plan per iod 
(2020-2037). Housing tr ajector y 
At least 125 y ears. In per petuity 
A document that identifies , as f ar as possib le, the infr astructure needed (e .g. provision 
for ne w open space , road/junction impro vements , schools and other comm unity uses) 
to suppor t planned de velopment. Infrastructure Deliv ery Plan (IDP) 
Shows the points of equal illuminance , e.g. a line through all points on a surf ace where 
the illumination is the same .  A ser ies of such lines f or various illumination v alues is called 
an isolux diag ram. The diag ram can be used to assess the distr ibution of the luminaire 
in addition to deter mining light le vels. Isolux diag ram 
The Centr al and Easter n Ber kshire Joint Miner als and Waste Plan will pro vide deliv ery 
strategies f or miner als and w aste management and detailed de velopment management 
policies to be used in deter mining planning applications f or waste and miner als 
development. Joint Miner als and Waste Local Plan 
A study that can be used to help identify the eff ects of ne w developments on vie wpoints 
and the landscape itself . It specifically aims to ensure that all possib le eff ects of change 
and de velopment, both on the landscape itself , viewpoints and visual amenity , are tak en 
into account in decision-making. Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment 
(LVIA) 
A combination of f actors such as topog raphy, vegetation patter n, land use and cultur al 
associations that combine to create a distinct, recognisab le char acter . Landscape char acter 
A study which identifies and descr ibes v ariations in char acter of landscape , and e xplains 
the features which mak es one area distinctiv e from another . Landscape Char acter Assessment (LCA) 
The deg ree of ease to which a place can be na vigated and can be easily understood. Legibility 
A recreational pedestr ian/cycle route to access recreational f acilities and natur al features . Leisure route 
In ter ms of flood r isk, residential de velopment should be considered to ha ve a minim um 
lifespan of 100 y ears, unless there is specific justification f or consider ing a shor ter per iod. 
  Lifetime 
The lif etime of a non-residential de velopment in ter ms of flood r isk depends on the 
character istics of that de velopment.  Each proposal will be considered on a case b y case 
basis . Applicants are e xpected to justify wh y the y have adopted a giv en lifetime f or the 
development, f or example , when the y are prepar ing a site-specific flood r isk assessment. 
The impact of climate change needs to be tak en into account in a realistic w ay and 
applicants should discuss and ag ree what allo wances are acceptab le with the local 
planning author ity and the En vironment Agency .  
The de velopment of a small gap in an otherwise contin uous b uilt-up frontage , or the 
small-scale rede velopment of e xisting proper ties within such a frontage .  Limited infilling 
Buildings which are identified as ha ving special architectur al or histor ic impor tance and 
theref ore are protected from demolition or inappropr iate alter ation or de velopment b y 
legislation and planning policies .  Protection also applies to cer tain other str uctures within 
the cur tilage of listed b uildings .  The categor ies of listed b uildings are: Listed Building 
Grade I - b uildings of e xceptional interest 
Grade II – b uildings of special interest. 
Grade II* - b uildings of more than special interest. 
This is a small area of open space designed f or younger children located in close pro ximity 
(100m w alking distance) to their homes . LAPs do not necessar ily include an y formal pla y 
equipment and are designed f or inf ormal pla y and inter action with easy super vision. Local Area f or Pla y (LAP) 
A type of centre . The function of a local centre is to pla y an essential role in ser ving the 
everyday retail needs of the local comm unity, providing such uses as con venience stores 
and phar macies . They facilitate a sense of comm unity and identity , and reduce the need 
to travel by car to shop - par ticular ly impor tant to residents with limited mobility .  Local centre 
392 Sites that ha ve impor tant geological and geomor phological f eatures (f ormerly kno wn as 
Regionally Impor tant Geological and Geomor phological Sites).  LGSs are sho wn on the 
Policies Map , though their boundar ies ma y change o ver the course of the Local Plan 
period. Local Geological Site (LGS) 
Rate set b y the Valuation Office Agency that is re viewed ann ually and used to 
calculate housing benefit f or tenants .   https://lha-direct.v oa.go v.uk/search.aspx Local Housing Allo wance (LHA) 
The n umber of homes identified as being needed through the application of the standard 
method set out in national planning guidance (or , in the conte xt of prepar ing str ategic 
policies only , this ma y be calculated using a justified alter nativ e approach as pro vided 
for in par agraph 60 of the NPPF). Local Housing Need (LHN) 
A list of non-designated her itage assets , identified b y the Council, which are of local 
architectur al or histor ic interest as ha ving a deg ree of significance in decision making.   
     Local List of Buildings and Str uctures 
A non-statutor y habitat of local significance designated b y local author ities where 
protection and pub lic understanding of nature conser vation is encour aged.  LNRs are 
shown on the P olicies Map , though their boundar ies ma y change o ver the course of the 
Local Plan per iod. Local Nature Reser ve (LNR) 
A plan f or the future de velopment of a local area.   It contains planning policies to be used 
when the Council deter mines planning applications .  It is subject to Examination b y an 
independent Inspector and, once adopted, f orms par t of the De velopment Plan f or the 
Borough. Local plan 
The pub lic author ity whose duty it is to carr y out the specific planning function f or a 
particular area.   Local Planning A uthor ity (LP A) 
A wildlif e-rich site selected f or its local nature conser vation v alue (f ormerly ref erred to 
as a Wildlif e Her itage Site).  They vary in shape and siz e and can contain impor tant, 
distinctiv e and threatened habitats and species . LWSs are sho wn on the P olicies Map , 
though their boundar ies ma y change o ver the course of the Local Plan per iod.  Local Wildlif e Site (L WS) 
These include Local Wildlif e Sites , Local Geological Sites and Local Nature Reser ves. Locally designated site 
This is an area of open space that is equipped with pla y equipment and is designed f or 
children who are beginning to use pla y areas unsuper vised, with the pla y area being 
near their homes (400m w alking distance).  LEAPs can be combined with NEAPs . Locally Equipped Area f or Pla y (LEAP) 
Retail de velopment (including w arehouse clubs and f actor y outlet centres);  leisure , 
enter tainment f acilities the more intensiv e spor t and recreation uses (including cinemas , 
restaur ants, drive-through restaur ants, bars and pubs , night-clubs , casinos , health and Main to wn centre Uses 
fitness centres , indoor bo wling centres , and bingo halls);  offices;  and ar ts, culture and 
tourism de velopment (including theatres , museums , galler ies and concer t halls , hotels 
and conf erence f acilities). 
The shape , form and v olume of a b uilding or the combined eff ect of an arr angement of 
a group of b uildings . Massing 
A plan and document sho wing the la yout of land use and a de velopment based on 
analysis of the site and its conte xt including local char acter istics , topog raphy, constr aints 
and oppor tunities .  Master plans will ha ve additional inf ormation to a concept plan, including 
building heights , phasing, char acter areas etc. Master plan 
Action to address and reduce an y adv erse impacts which could be incurred as a result 
of de velopment that can be secured b y, for example , conditions or planning ob ligations .  Mitigation 
A sequential approach to addressing adv erse impacts which could be incurred as a result 
of de velopment completing each step bef ore mo ving to the ne xt. This star ts with the 
avoidance of har m, then mitigation (minimising har m) to compensation being the last 
resor t.   Mitigation hier archy 
A mix of uses within a b uilding, on a site or within a par ticular area. Mixed-use 
An enclosed area, using a synthetic g rass or hard surf ace f or pla ying spor ts, for example 
five-a-side soccer or netball. Multi Use Games Area (MUGA) 
The NPPF is a single document that sets out the Go vernment’ s economic , environmental 
and social planning policies f or England.   Taken together , these policies ar ticulate the 
Government’ s vision of sustainab le de velopment.   The NPPF pr ioritises the role of 
planning in suppor ting economic g rowth.  It w as first pub lished March 2012, and has 
been updated.   National Planning P olicy F ramework (NPPF) 
Surveillance that is pro vided b y people’ s presence (such as through the positioning of 
windo ws and/or presence of a popular pedestr ian route) in a clear line of sight, as opposed 
to sur veillance pro vided ar tificially (such as CCTV).  Natur al sur veillance can increase 
both le vels of secur ity and the sense of secur ity. Natur al sur veillance 
This is an area of open space equipped par ticular ly for older children b ut with some 
provision f or younger children as w ell. They should include passiv e and activ e open 
spaces that meet the needs f or younger and older children, with pla y equipment, f ormal 
and inf ormal spor t facilities and amenities that f acilitate social inter action (such as co vered 
benches).  NEAPs can be combined with LEAPS .  Neighbourhood Equipped Area f or Pla y (NEAP) 
Sometimes ref erred to as ‘Neighbourhood De velopment Plan’  (‘NDP’), a neighbourhood 
plan, once ‘made’, f orms par t of the De velopment Plan.  They contain de velopment 
management policies that are used to deter mine applications within a ‘neighbourhood 
area’, which nor mally matches a par ish’s boundar ies. Neighbourhood plan 
393 Net-z ero ref ers to balancing the amount of emitted carbon dio xide (either as the carbon 
dioxide equiv alent or as g reenhouse gases) with the equiv alent emissions that are offset. 
This should pr imarily be achie ved through a reduction in carbon emissions , but where 
zero carbon cannot be achie ved, carbon can be offset through sequestr ation (such as 
planting trees) or through carbon credits . Net z ero carbon 
Inspired b y Ebenez er Ho ward’s idea of the Garden City , the first w ave of ne w towns, 
which included Br acknell, w ere planned f or 10 locations in the 1940s under the Ne w 
Towns Act 1946, in order to house some of the o vercro wded population of London. New town 
Further w aves of ne w towns w ere designated in the 1960s .  The De velopment Cor poration 
set up to o versee b uilding intended to create a to wn where home , industr y, and leisure 
could be constr ucted within one to wn, representing a balanced mix of to wn lif e and the 
countr yside .  The pr inciple of the Ne w Town w as based on industr ial sectors being 
separ ated from neighbourhoods , which each had their o wn neighbourhood centre , in an 
effort to increase the quality of lif e for inhabitants and in prepar ation f or the f orecasted 
increase of pr ivate car use . 
Non-designated her itage assets are b uildings , mon uments , sites , places , areas or 
landscapes identified as ha ving a deg ree of significance mer iting consider ation in planning 
decisions , but which are not f ormally designated her itage assets .  Non-designated her itage asset 
OSPV , also ab breviated to ‘open space’, compr ises the f ormal definitions of activ e OSPV 
and passiv e OSPV and  includes land and areas of w ater which off er impor tant 
oppor tunities f or spor t and recreation and can act as a visual amenity . This can tak e Open Space of Pub lic Value (OSPV) 
many forms, from f ormal spor ts pitches to open areas within a de velopment, linear 
corridors and countr y par ks, as w ell as r ivers, canals , lakes and reser voirs.  Such areas 
can: provide health and recreation benefits to people living and w orking nearb y, by 
offering oppor tunities f or spor t and recreation and acting as a visual amenity;  have an 
ecological v alue and contr ibute to g reen infr astructure , and;  be an impor tant par t of the 
landscape and setting of b uilt de velopment. 
The b uilding that e xisted on 1 J uly 1948 or , if constr ucted after 1 J uly 1948, as it w as 
originally b uilt.  Original b uilding 
A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre b ut not necessar ily outside the urban 
area. Out of centre 
A location out of centre that is outside the e xisting urban area. Out of to wn 
Passiv e OSPV compr ises w oodland, g reen corr idors , Suitab le Alter nativ e Natur al 
Greenspace (SANG), nature areas , picnic areas and amenity open space .  Such spaces 
may typically be used f or picnics , informal games etc. Passiv e Open Space of Pub lic Value (OSPV) 
The deg ree to which the urban f abric allo ws pedestr ians to mo ve freely through an area 
in diff erent directions . Permeability 
Permitted de velopment r ights are a national g rant of planning per mission which allo w 
certain b uilding w orks and changes of use to be carr ied out without ha ving to mak e a 
planning application.   They are subject to conditions and limitations . Permitted de velopment r ights 
An area of land on a Gypsy & tr aveller site occupied b y one resident f amily . Pitch 
The process of creating quality places that people can identify with and w ant to occup y 
and use . This is achie ved by integ rating positiv e existing site f eatures , enhancing the 
positiv e char acter istics of the area and pro viding f acilities and amenities that are 
appropr iate to the role and function of the site within the conte xt of the area.     Placemaking 
Conditions help to mitigate adv erse eff ects of de velopment and can enab le de velopment 
proposals to proceed where it w ould otherwise ha ve been necessar y to refuse planning 
permission. Planning conditions 
Planning ob ligations assist in mitigating the impact of unacceptab le development to mak e 
it acceptab le in planning ter ms. Developers ma y be ask ed to pro vide contr ibutions f or 
infrastructure b y way of the Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy or S106 ag reements . Planning ob ligations 
Sets out the Go vernment’ s policy f or traveller sites and is to be read in conjunction with 
the NPPF . Planning P olicy f or Traveller Sites (PPTS) 
The PPG is a w eb-based resource which contains guidance to supplement the NPPF .  
It was first pub lished March 2014, and is regular ly updated.  It is sometimes ref erred to 
as National Planning Pr actice Guidance (NPPG). Planning Pr actice Guidance (PPG) 
An area of land on a tr avelling sho wpersons site/y ard occupied b y one resident f amily .  
Plots are mix ed use areas of land which ma y need to incor porate space or to be split to 
allow for the stor age of equipment. Plot 
This is a quality impro vement standard f or the contin uous impro vement of e xisting OSPV 
on a prog ressiv e basis . The standard requires the impro vement of e xisting OSPV using 
quality assessment cr iteria based upon Green Flag A ward assessments (f or example , Plus one pr inciple 
open space with a good quality r ating w ould require impro vements to achie ve a v ery 
good quality r ating).  It is used to calculate what financial contr ibutions are needed to wards 
the impro vement of e xisting f acilities when residential de velopment is to pro vide financial 
contr ibutions in lieu of on-site pro vision. 
A map which identifies the location and spatial e xtent of policies and proposals that are 
set out in a De velopment Plan. Policies map 
394 Anything that aff ects the quality of land, air , water or soils , which might lead to an adv erse 
impact on human health, the natur al en vironment or gener al amenity .  Pollution can ar ise 
from a r ange of emissions , including smok e, fumes , gases , dust, steam, odour , noise 
and light. Pollution 
PPTS need is those Gypsies and tr avellers that met the definition set out in the Planning 
Policy f or Traveller Sites (PPTS) when sur veyed. PPTS need 
Engagement / discussions betw een applicants (and their agents) with the local planning 
author ity pr ior to the submission of a f ormal application. Pre-application 
Also ref erred to as ‘brownfield land’, this is land which is or w as occupied b y a per manent 
structure , including the cur tilage of the de veloped land (although it should not be assumed 
that the whole of the cur tilage should be de veloped) and an y associated fix ed surf ace 
infrastructure , excluding:    Previously De veloped Land (PDL) 
land that is or w as last occupied b y agricultur al or f orestr y buildings;    
land that has been de veloped f or miner als extraction or w aste disposal b y landfill, 
where pro vision f or restor ation has been made through de velopment management 
procedures;    
land in b uilt-up areas such as residential gardens , parks, recreation g rounds and 
allotments , and;    
land that w as pre viously de veloped b ut where the remains of the per manent 
structure or fix ed surf ace str ucture ha ve blended into the landscape . 
Areas defined on the P olicies Map where retail uses  are concentr ated, which ma y include 
food, dr inks, clothing and household goods . Primary shopping area 
A type of centre . The function of the pr imary town centre is to pro vide the Borough with:   Primary town centre 
the main retail destination f or the Borough’ s residents;   
a sense of place and identity , and;   
focus f or leisure and b usiness activity ,  
all in a highly accessib le location at the centre of the Borough's pub lic transpor t netw ork.  
An aquif er is an underg round la yer(s) of w ater-bear ing per meab le roc k or dr ift deposits 
from which g roundw ater can be e xtracted.  They theref ore form drinking w ater sources 
as well as suppor t for surf ace w ater flo ws and w etland ecosystems . They are protected 
through policy designation b y the En vironment Agency .  Principle aquif er 
Principle aquif ers are those that usually pro vide a high le vel of g roundw ater stor age, and 
theref ore suppor t water supply and/or r iver based flo w at a str ategic scale .  
Any space within b uilt up areas that is not meant f or use b y the pub lic. Private realm 
Legislation protects cer tain species of wild plants , birds and animals at all times and 
some species of bird at cer tain times of the y ear.  The legislation is pr imarily in the Wildlif e 
and Countr yside Act 1981(as amended) with some amendments in the Countr yside 
Rights of Way Act 2000 (as amended).   The protection of these animal species is co vered 
by the Conser vation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended). Protected species 
Any space within b uilt up areas that is free and open to e veryone. Public realm 
This is a route which the pub lic has a legal r ight to use . They can be brok en do wn into 
4 categor ies, each with diff erent legal status:   Public Right of Way (PRoW) 
footpaths - ma y be used b y people on f oot  
bridleways - ma y be used f or walking, r iding or leading a horse , or cycling - cyclists 
must giv e way to pedestr ians and r iders  
restricted b yways - can be used b y pedestr ians, horse r iders , cyclists and 
horse-dr awn car ts and carr iages  
byways - can be used b y wheeled v ehicles of an y kind, b ut predominantly used 
for walking or f or riding horses 
Wetland of inter national impor tance , designated under the 1971 Ramsar Con vention. Ramsar site 
Investment and de velopment of an area to create a more resilient and vibr ant place in 
which people can shop , work and liv e. Regener ation 
Regulated emissions are those related to the energy used to pro vide space heating and 
cooling, hot w ater and fix ed lighting.  To achie ve net z ero carbon f or regulated emissions , 
the b uilding energy modelling can tak e account of contr ibutions of energy gener ated Regulated emissions 
from on-site and near-site rene wable and lo w carbon installations . Energy gener ated 
and supplied from off-site rene wable and lo w carbon installations cannot be used to meet 
this definition. 
Includes energy f or heating and cooling as w ell as gener ating electr icity. Rene wable 
energy is energy that occurs natur ally and repeatedly from wind, w ater, the sun, 
geother mal heat and biomass .  Low carbon technologies are those that can help reduce 
emissions (compared to con ventional use of f ossil fuels). Rene wable and lo w carbon energy technologies 
395 This plan w as adopted in 2001, and intended to ensure miner als w ere e xtracted at the 
right pace throughout the per iod to the end of 2006, and that there w ere enough planning 
permissions f or miner al extraction at the end of that per iod for a fur ther 7 y ears of 
extraction (to the end of 2013).  The plan also contains de velopment management policies .  Replacement Miner als Local Plan 
Although some of these policies ha ve been dropped, man y were ‘saved’ by the Secretar y 
of State be yond 27 September 2007 and remain in eff ect.  Once adopted, policies within 
the Centr al and Easter n Ber kshire Joint Miner als and Waste Plan will replace the 
remaining ‘saved’ Replacement Miner als Local Plan policies .  
These relate to 'C' class uses (within the Use Classes Order) including C2 (Residential 
institutions) and C3 (Dw ellinghouses). Residential uses 
The impression of a b uilding when seen in relation to its surroundings . Scale 
A nationally impor tant archaeological site .  There are se veral within Br acknell F orest, 
which are sho wn on the P olicies Map .  Scheduled Ancient Mon ument 
This is a f orm of houseb uilding, where the b uilding or completion of housing is done b y 
an individual, a g roup of individuals , or persons w orking with or f or individual(s), and the 
housing is to be occupied b y those individuals . These individuals are ref erred to as Self b uild 
‘custom b uilders’  or ‘self b uilders’.  This does not include the b uilding of a house on a plot 
acquired from a person who b uilds the house wholly or mainly to plans or specifications 
decided or off ered b y that person.    
Whilst there is no legal diff erentiation betw een custom b uild and self b uild, self b uild 
gener ally means the occupiers tak e on an activ e role , procur ing, designing and b uilding 
their o wn home . They ma y outsource elements of the project, where their skills or time 
do not allo w it.    
A way of descr ibing an attr active place that is recognisab ly distinctiv e but sim ultaneously 
strengthens local identity . Sense of place 
These include dw ellings , hospitals , schools , nurser ies, residential care and n ursing 
homes . Sensitiv e uses 
For flood r isk, the sequential test ensures a sequential approach, which steers ne w 
development to areas with the lo west probability of flooding, is tak en.  Development 
should not be allocated or per mitted if there are reasonab ly availab le sites appropr iate Sequential test 
for the proposed de velopment in areas with a lo wer probability of flooding.  The sequential 
approach should be used in areas kno wn to be at r isk no w or in the future from an y form 
of flooding. 
For main to wn centre uses , the sequential test ensures a sequential approach is tak en 
when deter mining planning applications:  main to wn centre uses should be located in 
centres , then in edge of centre locations;  and only if suitab le sites are not a vailab le (or 
expected to become a vailab le within a reasonab le per iod) should out of centre sites be 
considered.  When consider ing edge of centre and out of centre proposals , pref erence 
should be giv en to accessib le sites which are w ell connected to the centre . 
The surroundings in which a her itage asset is e xperienced.   Its e xtent is not fix ed and 
may change as the asset and its surroundings e volve.  Elements of a setting ma y mak e 
a positiv e or negativ e contr ibution to the significance of an asset, ma y affect the ability 
to appreciate that significance or ma y be neutr al. Setting of a her itage asset 
A form of inter mediate aff ordab le housing which is par tly sold and partly rented to the 
occupiers , with a Registered Pro vider (nor mally a housing association) being the landlord. 
Shared o wnership housing should nor mally off er a maxim um initial share of 25% of the 
open market value of the dw elling.  The ann ual rental charges on the unsold equity (share) 
should be no more than 2.75% of this share . Shared Ownership 
The v alue of a her itage asset to this and future gener ations because of its her itage 
interest.   That interest ma y be archaeological, architectur al, ar tistic or histor ic.  Significance 
derives not only from a her itage asset’ s physical presence , but also from its setting. Significance of a her itage asset 
The SALP w as adopted in J uly 2013 and helps implement the adopted Core Str ategy . 
 It identifies sites f or future housing de velopment, ensures that appropr iate infr astructure 
is identified and deliv ered alongside ne w development and also re vises some designations 
on the P olicies Map . Site Allocations Local Plan (SALP) 
Areas of special interest b y reason of their flor a, fauna, geological or ph ysiological 
features .  They are protected under the Wildlif e and Countr yside Act 1981.   There are 
several within Br acknell F orest, which are defined on the P olicies Map . Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) 
SPZs are areas identified by the En vironment Agency to be  at risk from potentially 
polluting activities , and often f ound around w ells, boreholes and spr ings. They are 
designated f or all g roundw ater supplies intended f or human consumption. Source Protection Zone (SPZ) 
396 The SEP sets out regional policy f or the south east of England and w as or iginally 
published in Ma y 2009.   It w as par tially re voked on 25th March 2013.   Policy NRM6, 
which deals with the Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area (SP A), remains in 
place . South East Plan (SEP) 
Housing that has been specifically designed to meet the needs of people with par ticular 
needs . It can ref er to housing that has been pur pose designed or designated f or a 
particular client g roup to assist tenants to liv e independently .   Specialist housing 
These are sites of inter national impor tance , as defined in Regulation 8 of the Conser vation 
of Species and Habitats Regulations 2017 (as amended).  Within Br acknell F orest there 
is one SA C - Windsor F orest and Great P ark. Special Area of Conser vation (SA C) 
A nature conser vation area, as defined in Regulation 8 of the Conser vation of Species 
and Habitats Regulations 2017 (as amended), designated in order to protect inter nationally 
impor tant species of birds which liv e within them.  Within Br acknell F orest there is one 
SPA – the Thames Basin Heaths SP A. SPAs are subject to the assessment procedure 
set out in the Habitats Regulations . Special Protection Area (SP A) 
Pockets of habitat that, while not necessar ily connected, f acilitate the mo vement of 
species across otherwise inhospitab le landscapes . Stepping stones 
Overseen b y Natur al England and Hampshire County Council, this implements standard 
messages and additional w ardening and education across the Thames Basin Heaths 
SPA. Strategic Access Management and Monitor ing 
(SAMM) 
A system of incor porating en vironmental consider ations into policies , plans and 
programmes as required b y the En vironmental Assessment of Plans and Prog rammes 
Regulations 2004 (as amended).  It is intended to highlight en vironmental issues dur ing Strategic En vironmental Assessment (SEA) 
decision-making about str ategic documents such as plans , prog rammes and str ategies . 
The SEA identifies the significant en vironmental eff ects that are lik ely to result from 
implementing the plan or alter nativ e approaches to the plan.  SEA is often under taken in 
conjunction with a Sustainability Appr aisal (SA). 
A strategic-le vel assessment of:    Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) 
the potential flood r isk from all sources (taking climate change into account);    
the potential cum ulativ e impact of de velopment on flood r isk, and;    
how flood r isk should be managed should sites be allocated f or de velopment. 
This is a defined separ ation of settlements that is defined on the P olicies Map . Their 
primary function is to pre vent coalescence , rather than being related to landscape quality . Strategic gap 
An assessment that pro vides a list of sites/clusters which should be assessed f or 
consider ation as allocations . It estab lishes realistic assumptions about the a vailability , 
suitability and lik ely economic viability of land to meet the identified need f or housing and Strategic Housing and Economic Land 
Availability Assessment (SHELAA) 
economic de velopment o ver the plan per iod. As a result, it f orms par t of the e vidence 
base f or making decisions about which sites (if required) should be allocated both in and 
outside settlements . Theref ore the SHELAA does not allocate sites f or de velopment; 
rather , it inf orms the prepar ation of de velopment plan documents . 
The SHMA (2016) w as a study which assessed Ber kshire and S . Bucks’ full housing 
needs . In order to achie ve this , it: Strategic Housing Mar ket Assessment (SHMA) 
identified where strong functional relationships betw een boroughs w ere present, 
in order to define Housing Mar ket Areas (HMAs), and; 
assessed projected population g rowth against the char acter istics of households 
and dw ellings are to identify the Objectiv ely Assessed Need f or housing f or each 
HMA, and the need f or diff erent types of housing (including aff ordab le) and those 
of par ticular g roups (older people , students etc) are . 
With the e xception of the w ork on the HMA’ s this document has essentially been replaced 
with the Br acknell F orest Housing Needs Assessment 2020. 
Strategic SANGs are open spaces in Br acknell F orest which, in ag reement with NE, 
have been identified as being suitab le for bringing up to SANGs standard through the 
application of de veloper contr ibutions . Strategic Suitab le Alter nativ e Natur al 
Greenspace (SANG) 
Open space , meeting guidelines on quantity and quality , for the pur pose of pro viding 
recreational alter nativ es to div ert dogw alkers and others from the Thames Basin Heaths 
Special Protection Area (SP A).  It is pro vided b y residential de velopments lying within a 
certain distance from the SP A to a void those de velopments creating additional recreational 
pressure on it. Suitab le Alter nativ e Natur al Green Space 
(SANG) 
A document which adds fur ther detail to the policies in the de velopment plan.  SPDs can 
be used to pro vide fur ther guidance f or de velopment on specific sites , or on par ticular 
issues , such as design.  They are capab le of being a mater ial consider ation in planning 
decisions b ut are not par t of the de velopment plan. Supplementar y Planning Document (SPD) 
A process that e xamines the impact of proposed plans and policies on economic , social 
and en vironmental f actors , and ensures that these issues are tak en into account at e very 
stage so that sustainab le de velopment is deliv ered on the g round.   It also appr aises the Sustainability Appr aisal (SA) 
397 different options that are put f orward in the de velopment of policies and the identification 
of sites .  Each local plan that the Council produces is accompanied b y its o wn SA, which 
also incor porates the requirement of SEA. 
This broadly is de velopment which meets the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future gener ations to meet their o wn needs . The pur pose of the planning 
system is to contr ibute to the achie vement of sustainab le de velopment. Sustainab le de velopment 
These are sustainab le engineer ing solutions which are adopted to deal with increased 
surface w ater in urban areas b y mimic king the nor mal w ater cycle in natur al landscapes . 
This is opposed to more tr aditional methods which just in volved re-routing surf ace w ater Sustainab le Dr ainage Systems (SuDS) 
to watercourses . Techniques utilised in SuDS include f acilitating increased w ater infiltr ation 
into the ear th as w ell as increased e vaporation of surf ace w ater and tr anspir ation from 
vegetation (collectiv ely called e vapotr anspir ation) to decrease the amount of surf ace 
water r un-off . SuDS tak e account of w ater quantity , water quality , biodiv ersity and amenity 
issues . 
Transpor t modes that minimise har mful eff ects on the en vironment and depletion of 
natur al resources and hence can be sustained in the long ter m. Includes w alking, cycling, 
low and ultr a low emissions v ehicles , car shar ing and fuel-efficient pub lic transpor t. Sustainab le transpor t 
A nature conser vation area in Ber kshire , Hampshire and Surre y, as defined in Regulation 
8 of the Conser vation of Species and Habitats Regulations 2017 (as amended), compr ising 
a group of heathland sites in order to protect inter nationally impor tant species of birds 
which liv e within them.  The TBHSP A is subject to the assessment procedure set out in 
the Habitats Regulations . Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area 
(TBHSP A) 
Tiny Forests are densely pac ked nativ e trees that fit into an area the siz e of a tennis 
court. They can pro vide significant biodiv ersity benefits (including species-r ich 
ecosystems), carbon capture and visual amenity in areas where open space is limited. Tiny forest 
The appear ance of a to wn or city;  an urban scene . Townscape 
A traveller site that is intended f or shor t-term accommodation while in tr ansit.  The site 
is usually per manent and author ised, b ut there is a limit on the length of time residents 
can sta y. Transit site / tr ansit pitches 
Assessment that analyses the tr anspor t issues relating to a proposed de velopment and 
identifies what measures can be tak en to deal with the anticipated tr anspor t impacts of 
the scheme . It also looks at w ays of impro ving accessibility and saf ety for all modes of Transpor t Assessment / Transpor t Accessibility 
Assessment (T A) 
travel, including alter nativ es to the car such as w alking, cycling and pub lic transpor t.  
Transpor t statements also assess the tr anspor t implications of de velopment and are 
used when de velopments are anticipated to ha ve limited tr anspor t impacts . 
A simplified v ersion of a tr anspor t assessment where it is ag reed the tr anspor t issues 
arising from de velopment proposals are limited and a full tr anspor t assessment is not 
required. Transpor t statement 
Sets out the process b y which the de velopment’ s owner or occupier will promote 
sustainab le travel choices and reduce the o verall need f or car tr avel. Travel plan 
Members of a g roup organised f or the pur poses of holding f airs, circuses or sho ws 
(whether or not tr avelling together as such).  This includes such persons who on the 
grounds of their o wn or their f amily’ s or dependants’  more localised patter n of tr ading, 
educational or health needs or old age ha ve ceased to tr avel tempor arily, but excludes 
Gypsies and tr avellers as defined abo ve. Travelling sho wpeople 
TPOs protect specific trees , groups of trees or w oodlands in the interests of amenity .  
The cutting do wn, topping, lopping, uprooting or willful damage or destr uction of trees 
which are the subject of a TPO is prohibited unless wr itten consent is giv en by the LP A. Tree Preser vation Order (TPO) 
The reduction of the 'Urban Heat Island (UHI) eff ect' through the incor poration of g reen 
and b lue infr astructure in urban areas .  Urban cooling and shading 
UHIs are urban areas that are noticeab ly hotter than surrounding areas due to human 
activity (including emissions), reduced le vels of v egetation and use of manmade surf aces 
that absorb heat dur ing the da y and emit heat at night.  Studies sho w that incor poration 
of green and b lue infr astructure can result in urban cooling and urban shading, reducing 
the impact of UHIs and global w arming.   
Urban creep is the reduction of per meab le land within urban areas , normally caused b y 
the pa ving of garden areas and erection of e xtensions , which leads to reduced infiltr ation, 
increased surf ace w ater r un-off and g reater flood r isk. These changes are often outside Urban creep allo wance 
of the de velopment management process and theref ore are not nor mally controlled.  For 
this reason, the Council’ s Local Flood Risk Management Str ategy sets out allo wances 
for urban creep to be used when assessing de velopment proposals . 
A tree that is of interest biologically , cultur ally or aesthetically because of its age , size or 
condition. Veteran tree 
Village design guides or statements pro vide descr iptions of local char acter . Village design guide 
Development/neighbourhood/wider area that is designed to encour age reduced reliance 
on pr ivate car use b y:   Walkab le neighbourhood 
398 providing legib le connected pedestr ian routes and;   
local f acilities are within w alking distance (gener ally considered to be no more 
than a 10 min ute w alk (800m r adius)). 
This plan w as adopted in 1998, and its policies control diff erent types of w aste 
management de velopment and mak e sure that w aste de velopment is in the least 
environmentally sensitiv e locations . They also secure w aste minimisation and recycling 
in ne w development.   Waste Local Plan 
Although some of these policies ha ve been dropped, man y were ‘saved’ by the Secretar y 
of State be yond 27 September 2007 and remain in eff ect.  Once adopted, policies within 
the Centr al and Easter n Ber kshire Joint Miner als and Waste Plan will replace the ‘saved’ 
Waste Local Plan policies .  
Areas of habitat connecting wildlif e populations . Wildlif e corr idor 
The predicted n umber of dw ellings that ma y come f orward each y ear on sites that ha ve 
not been identified through the Local Plan process .  Nor mally relates to pre viously 
developed sites in settlements . Windf all allo wance 
Also ref erred to as ‘windf alls’, these are sites which ha ve not been specifically identified 
in the De velopment Plan.  They nor mally compr ise pre viously de veloped sites that ha ve 
unexpectedly become a vailab le. Windf all sites 
A nature conser vation area, as defined in Regulation 8 of the Conser vation of Species 
and Habitats Regulations 2017 (as amended),  predominantly compr ising mix ed woodland 
designated f or its beech f orests , oak w oods and the violet clic k beetle (and subject to Windsor F orest and Great P ark Special Area 
of Conser vation 
the assessment procedure set out in the Habitats Directiv e), in order to protect these 
internationally impor tant habitats and species . SACs are subject to the assessment 
procedure set out in the Habitats Regulations . 
Travelling sho wpeople tr avel in connection with their w ork and theref ore liv e, almost 
universally , in w agons . During the winter months these are par ked up in what w as 
traditionally kno wn as ‘winter quar ters’.  These ‘yards’  are no w often occupied all y ear 
around b y some f amily members . Yard 
399 Copies of this booklet ma y be obtained in large pr int, Br aille, on 
audio cassette or in other languages . To obtain a cop y in an 
alternativ e format please telephone 01344 352000 
Bracknell F orest Council 
Time Square 
Market Street 
Bracknell 
RG12 1JD 
© Design and Pr int Ser vices 