 
 
  
2016 - 2033  
Adopted   
March 2022   
1 Content s 
01. Introduction         10 
Brentwood Local Plan 2016 -2033       10 
Duty to Cooperate         11 
Sustainability Appraisal        11 
Habitats Regulation Assessment       12 
Planning Policy Context        12 
Strategic and Non -strategic Policies       15 
 
02. Borough of Villages        17 
Introduction to Borough Profile       17 
Location          17 
Origin           18 
Our Story          19 
 
03. Spatial Strategy – Vision and Strategic Objectives  29 
Vision           29 
Strategic Aims and Objectives       30 
Spatial Strategy         32 
 
04. Managing Growth         35 
Delivering the Spatial Strategy       35 
Green Belt and Rural Development       38 
Health Impacts         43 
Monitoring and Delivery        51 
 
05. Resilient Built Environment      54 
Responding to Climate Change       55 
Sustainable Construction and Resource Efficiency     57 
Transport and Connectivity        75 
Design and Place -making        91 
Heritage          97 
 Brentwood Local Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
2 06. Housing  Provision        105 
Housing          105 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople     120 
 
07. Prosperous Communit ies      128 
Delivering Economic Growth        128 
Retail and Commercial Leisure       139 
Community Infrastructure        154 
 
08. Natural Environment       159 
Summary of Natural Assets        160 
Protecting and Enhancing Natural Heritage      162 
Green and Blue Infrastructure       165 
Promoting a Clean and Safe Environment      178 
 
09. Site Allocations        189 
Dunton Hills Garden Village        191 
Strategic Residential -Led and Mixed -Use Allocations    212 
Residential -led Allocations        221 
Strategic Employment Allocations       245 
Employment Allocations        247 
 
Appendices         255 
Appendix 1 : Local Development Plan Housing Trajectory    255 
Appendix 2 : Strategic and non -strategic policies and  their    259 
relationship to the Strategic Objectives        
Appendix 3 : Monitoring Framework       261 
Appendix 4: Schedule of Plans and Policies which will be    291 
superseded by the new Plan  
Appendix 5: Glossary         295 
 
 
 
  
3 Policy Index  
Strategic Policy MG01: Spatial Strategy        36 
Strategic Policy MG02: Green Belt         38 
Policy MG03: Settlement Hierarchy         40 
Policy MG04: Health Impact Assessments (HIAs)       43 
Policy MG05: Developer Contributions        48 
Policy MG06: Local Plan Review  and Update       51 
 
Strategic Policy BE01: Carbon Reduction, and Renewable Energy    57 
Policy BE02: Water  Efficiency and Management       62 
Policy BE03: Establishing Low Carbon and Renewable Energy Infrastructure Network  64  
Policy BE04: Managing Heat Risk         68 
Policy BE05: Sustainable Drainage         69 
Strategic Policy BE06: Communications Infrastructure      72 
Policy BE07: Connecting New Developments to Digital Infrastructure    73 
Strategic Policy BE08: Strategic Transport Infrastructure     76 
Strategic Policy BE09: Sustainable Means of Travel and Walkable Streets   83 
Policy BE10: Sustainable Passenger Transport       85 
Policy BE11: Electric and Low Emission Vehicle       86 
Policy BE12: Mitigating the Transport Impacts of Development     87 
Policy BE13: Parking Standards         89 
Strategic Policy BE14: Creating Successful Pla ces     92 
Policy BE15: Planning for Inclusive Communities       96 
Strategic Policy BE16: Conservation and Enhancement of Historic Environment  98 
 
 Brentwood Local Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
4 Strategic Policy HP01: Housing Mix        106 
Policy HP02: Protecting the Existing Housing Stock       109 
Policy HP03: Residential Density         110 
Policy HP04: Specialist Accommodation        111 
Policy HP05: Affordable Housing         113 
Policy HP06: Standards for New Housing        116 
Policy HP07: Regularising Suitable Existing Traveller Sites      121 
Policy HP08: Safeguarding Permitted Sites        124 
Policy HP09: Sub -Division of Pitches or Plots       125 
Policy HP10: Proposals for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople on Windfall sites  126 
 
Strategic Policy PC01: Safeguarding Employment Land     134 
Policy PC02: Supporting the Rural Economy       138 
Strategic Policy PC03: Retail and Commercial Leisure Growth     139 
Strategic Policy PC04: Retail Hierarchy of Designated Centres     141 
Policy PC05: Brentwood Town Centre        145  
Policy PC06: Mixed Use Development in Designated Centres     149 
Policy PC07: Primary Shopping Areas        151 
Policy PC08: Non -centre Uses         152 
Policy PC09: Night Time Economy         153 
Strategic Policy PC10: Protecting and Enhancing Community Facilities   154 
Policy PC11: Education Facilities         156 
 
Strategic Policy NE01: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment   162  
Strategic Policy NE02: Green and Blue Infrastructure      167 
Policy NE03: Trees, Woodlands, Hedgerows       170 
Policy NE04: Thames C hase Community Forest       171  
5 Policy NE05: Open Space and Recreation Provision      172 
Policy NE06: Allotments and Community Food Growing Space     175 
Policy NE07: Protecting  Land for Gardens        176 
Strategic Policy NE08: Air Quality         178 
Strateg ic Policy NE09: Flood Risk         181 
Policy NE10: Contaminated Land and Hazardous Substances     185 
Policy NE11: Floodlighting and Illumination        187 
 
Policy R01 (i): Dunton Hills Garden Village Strategic Allocation     197 
Policy R01 (ii): Spatial Des ign of Dunton Hills Garden Village     198 
Policy R02: Land at West Horndon Industrial Estate       212 
Policy R03: Land North of Shenfield         215 
Policy R04: Ford Headquarters and Council Depot       218 
Policy R06: Land at Nags Head Lane, Brentwood       221 
Policy R07: Sow and Grow Nursery, Pilgrims Hatch       222 
Policy R08: Land at Mascalls Lane, Warley        224 
Policy R09: Land at Warley Hill, Warley        225 
Policy R10: Brentwood Railway Station Car Park, Brentwood     226 
Policy R11: Westbury Road Car Park, Brentwood       227 
Policy R12: Land at Hunter House, Brentwood       229 
Policy R13: Chatham Way Car Park, Brentwood       230 
Policy R14: William Hunter Way Car Park, Brentwood      232 
Policy R15: Wates Way Industrial Est ate, Brentwood      234 
Policy R16: Land off Doddinghurst Road, Pilgrims Hatch      235 
Policy R19: Land at Priests Lane , Shenfield        237 
Policy R21: Land South of Ingatestone, Ingatestone       238 
Policy R22: Land Adjacent to the A12, Ingatestone       240 Brentwood Local Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
6 Policy R23: Brizes Corner Field , Kelvedon Hatch       241  
Policy R24: Land off Stocks Lane , Kelvedon Hatch       242 
Policy R25: Land North of Woollard Way, Blackmore      243 
Policy R26: Land North of Orchard Piece, Blackmore      244 
 
Policy E11: Brentwood Enterprise Park        245 
Policy E12: Childerditch Industrial Estate        247 
Policy E10: Codham Hall Farm         248 
Policy E13: East Horndon Hall         250 
Policy E08: Land Adjacent to A12 Slip Road, Ingatestone      252 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.1: Document Structure  (part 1 of 2)   
Brentwood Local Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
8 Figure 1.1: Document Structure (part 1 of 2)  
 
9  
List of Figures  
Figure 1.1: Document Structure  3-4 
Figure 1. 2: Local Plan Policy Context  16 
Figure 2.1: Brentwood Borough Location  18 
Figure 2. 2: Regional Context  20 
Figure 2.3: Metropolitan Green Belt  25-26 
Figure 2. 4: Our Story  28-29 
Figure 3.1: Key Diagram  34 
Figure 4.1: Annual housing requirement and supply buffer  36 
Figure 4. 2: Housing Requirements in Neighbourhood Planning Parish Areas   38 
Figure  4.3: How to  assess if a planning application requires to undertake an HIA and 
the steps involved  
 
 47 
Figure 5.1: Areas to be covered in the sustainability statement and recommended 
approach  61 
Figure 5.2:  Protected Lanes in Brentwood  103 
Figure 6.1: Indicative Size Guide for Market Housing  107 
Figure 6.2: Indicative Size Guide for Affordable Housing  115 
Figure 6.3: Nationally Described Space Standard  118 
Figure 6.4 Provision of Gypsy and Traveller Sites – A Sequential Approach  123 
Figure 7.1: Bre ntwood and South East Local Enterprise Partnership  (SELEP)  130 
Figure 7.2: Brentwood Functional Economic Market Area  132 
Figure 7.3: Gross Employment Land Requirement Scenarios  133 
Figure 7.4: Employment Land Need  133 
Figure 7.5: Designated Employment Land and Indicative Site Areas  135 
Figure 7.6: Uses suitable and not suitable at ground floor level in Designated Centres 
and Primary Shopping Area   153 
Figure 8.1: Brentwood Green and Blue Infrastructure Typology  167 
Figure 8. 2: Open Space Standards  174 
Figure 8. 3: Fields in Trust children’s Play Space Standards  175 
Figure 9.1: Strategic Aims and Objectives for Dunton Hills Garden Village  196 Brentwood Local Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
 
 
Brentwood Local Plan 2016 -33 
1.1 This Local Plan presents Brentwood Borough Council’s vision for how the borough will 
develop over the next 17 years , from 2016 to 2033 . It outlines the Council’s strategic 
priorities and sets out a Spatial Strategy and supporting policies  for achieving this vision.  
1.2 The P lan identifies locations to deliver local housing needs and supporting infrastructure , 
such as employment, retail, leisure, community and transport. It allocates land for  
appropriate development , sets out strategic planning policies and an overall strategy  to 
guide decisions on the location, pattern, scale, and quality of development and/or changes in 
the way land and buildings are used.  
1.3 Policies and proposals set out in this document are also illustrated on the Brentwood 
Policies Map. The map identifies ar eas of opportunity within the borough for employment 
and housing, as well as important local assets that will be protected and, where possible, 
enhanced.  
Plan Period  and Review  
1.4 The Plan period is from 2016 to 2033 inclusive. Considering the lead -up to ado ption, this will 
ensure the period shall be for a minimum of 15 years.  Nevertheless, the Local Plan will not 
01  
11 remain a static document and will, in line with the legal requirement set out in Regulation 
10A of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) ( England) Regulations 2012 (as 
amended), be reviewed at least every five years to ensure it is still delivering on its strategic 
priorities in the best way possible.  
Duty to Cooperate  
1.5 Brentwood Borough Council has a duty to enga ge constructively, actively and on an ongoing 
basis with neighbouring local planning authorities, the County Council and other statutory 
public bodies to ensure strategic issues that may impact the wider area are considered. This 
includes  cross boundary is sues such as transport, flooding, and environmental impacts.  
1.6 This legal requirement was set out in Section 110 of the Localism Act 2011 and the further 
amendment of section 33A of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. Maintaining 
effective cooper ation is also reinforced by  the NPPF (20 21, paragraphs 24 -27), which calls 
for one or more  ‘Statement s of Common Ground’ to be prepared and maintained on cross -
boundary matters being addressed and progress in cooperating to address these.  
1.7 The Council is co mmitted to cooperate with neighbouring authorities  and key organisations 
on strategic planning issues.  Since January 2018, a Memorandum of Understanding was 
signed between Basildon, Brentwood, Castle Point, Essex County, Rochford, Southend -on-
Sea and Thurr ock Councils – forming the Association of South Essex Local Authorities 
(ASELA), which agreed t o jointly work on ‘place vision’ for the region. This new venture will 
continue to look across borough boundaries. Th is work is progressing at early stages and 
Brentwood Borough Council is committed to engag ing with partners as discussions and 
evidence gathering progresses  through the plan -making process .   
1.8 In addition, the Council will continue to have regards to neighbouring authorit y plans, Essex 
County Council  plans, and strategies of other relevant bodies.  
Sustainability Appraisal  
1.9 A Sustainability Appraisal ( SA) has been  carried out at key stages in the plan -making 
process , in line with the Environmental Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations 
2004 . The Sustainability Appraisal recommendations at each stage have informed the 
production of this Local  Plan.  
1.10 The SA considered  potential impacts of the Plan on economic, social and environmental 
considerations  and how they can be mitigate d. It also considered several  reasonable 
alternatives to ensure Brentwood’s growth strategy is sound.  Brentwood Local Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
12 Habitats Regulation Assessment  
1.11 In accordance with Regulation 6 3 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 
2017, a Habitats Regulation Asses sment (HRA) screening has been undertaken to 
determine whether the Local  Plan is likely, either alone or in combination with other plans 
and projects, to have a significant adverse impact on internationally important habitat site s.   
1.12 To assess  the in-combi nation impacts of new development, a need to prepare a 
Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (RAMS) has been identified for 
the internationally important designated wildlife sites on the  coast . A RAMS has been 
prepared  (January 2019)  to deliver strategic mitigation to avoid impacts on these sites  from 
residential development within the evidenced Zone of Influence , with a view to subsequent 
adoption of a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)  by the Council  to secure per 
dwelling develope r contributions . Residential development that is likely to  adversely  affect 
the integrity of  Habitats  (European ) Sites, is required to either contribute towards mitigation 
measures identified in the RAMS or, in exceptional circumstances, identify and deliver 
bespoke mitigation measures (in perpetuity)  to ensure compliance with the Habitat 
Regulations. Mitigation is needed because these impacts, in combination with other plans 
and projects, cannot be ruled out and a strategic approach is advised by Natu ral England.  
1.13 Similar work assessing in-combination impact s on the Epping Forest is being consider ed by 
the Council  and partners .  
Planning Policy Context  
1.14 The Local Plan has been prepared in line with the relevant Acts  (Planning and Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004 , the Localism Act 2011 , and the Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning) Regulations 2012. It also takes account of the National Planning Policy 
Framework ( 2021), Planning Practice Guidance  and national planning policies  (Planning 
Polic y for Traveller Sites 2015).  
1.15 This Local Plan must be read as a whole. Proposals will be considered against all relevant 
policies set out in this Plan. Additionally, this Local Plan will sit alongside other key policy 
documents that currently exist or that may come forward during the lifespan of the Plan, 
which together will form the borough’s development framework and be used to make 
decisions on planning applications:  
a. Essex County Council plans, such as transport strategies, education plans, economic 
growt h priorities, and minerals & waste policy ; 
b. Future neighbourhood plans, which will provide more detailed planning policies to help 
shape the development of specific neighbourhoods ; and  
c. Future sub -regional plan s, such as the South Essex  Joint Strategic Plan.   
13 Minerals Local Plan  
1.16 Essex County Council is the Minerals Planning Authority for the Borough. The County 
Council is responsible for preparing planning policies and assessing applications for mineral 
development. The Essex Minerals Local Plan (2014) forms p art of the statutory 
Development Plan and should be read alongside the Brentwood Local Plan. The role of the 
Minerals Local Plan is to ensure a steady and adequate supply of mineral resources to 
facilitate development over the Plan period and beyond.  
1.17 There  are currently no active quarry sites in Brentwood. However, t here are unworked sand 
and gravel deposits which are subject to a Minerals Safeguarding policy within the Essex 
Minerals Local Plan 2014. The safeguarding policy requires that Essex County Counc il, as 
minerals planning authority, be consulted on development proposals covering five hectares 
or more within the sand and gravel Minerals Safeguarding Area.  The aim of minerals 
safeguarding is to ensure that mineral resources are not needlessly sterilis ed by non -mineral 
development by ensuring their prior extraction, where this is viable, before the non -mineral 
development is implemented.  
1.18 Requirements of the Minerals Local Plan need to be considered where a development falls 
within a Minerals Safeguardin g Area. The Minerals Local Plan also designates Mineral 
Consultation Areas at a distance of 250m around active quarries, mineral infrastructure and 
mineral deposits permitted for extraction. Essex County Council must be consulted on all 
non-mineral related  development proposed within these Consultation Areas.  
Waste Local Plan  
1.19 Essex County Council is also the Waste Planning Authority for the Borough. Essex County 
Council provides waste disposal infrastructure to ensure waste generated by households, 
and othe r wastes collected by Councils in Essex, is effectively managed. Brentwood 
borough is the Waste Collection Authority and is responsible for the collection of this 
municipal waste1.  
1.20 The County Council is responsible for preparing planning policies and ass essing 
applications for waste management development. It noted that the delivery of local plans 
which increase residential development, through both infilling and major developments, will 
impact on waste management systems on a number of levels as the resu ltant population 
growth will lead to an increase in waste arisings which require handling and disposal.  
1.21 The Essex and Southend -on-Sea Waste Local Plan was adopted in July 2017 forming part 
of the statutory Development Plan and should be read alongside the Brentwood Local Plan. 
The Waste Local Plan covers the period 2017 to 2032. It sets out where and how waste 
management developments can occur and contains the policies against which waste 
management planning applications are assessed.  
1.22 The Essex and Southend -on-Sea Waste Local Plan does not propose any new waste 
development in Brentwood.  However, the Waste Local Plan does identify a number of areas 
 
1 Municipal waste includes household waste and any other wastes collected by, or on behalf, of councils.  Brentwood Local Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
14 of search across the county where the Waste Planning Authority may support development 
outside of allocated wast e sites. These areas of search are all existing industrial estates, 
and any waste use proposed on these estates will be required to be in keeping with existing 
development. The Waste Local Plan seeks to focus any new proposals for waste 
management faciliti es, which support local housing and economic growth, within these areas 
of search before other locations are considered. Two are proposed for Brentwood Borough, 
at Childerditch Industrial Estate and West Horndon Industrial Estate.  
1.23 In addition, the Municipa l Waste Strategy  (2017 -2032)  is in the process of being updated 
and ECC is in consultation with the Essex districts, including Brentwood.  The major waste 
treatment infrastructure currently in place for managing Local Authority Collected Municipal 
Waste has  been equipped to accommodate the anticipated waste growth levels resulting 
from the proposed Local Plan growth.  The strategy will review current sites (smaller waste 
facilities and recycling centres for household waste) and may result in changes to their 
location, rationalisation, and/or increased capacity. A review of existing and potential 
facilities will be taking place during the first five -year local plan period to determine 
requirements in the 10 -15 year period. This is likely to result in a need to extend or expand 
this infrastructure offer to meet local needs. However, at this stage it is not possible to 
determine what these needs are.  
1.24 The Plan also designates Waste Consultation Areas at a distance of 250m around permitted 
and allocated waste manage ment facilities , extending to 400m in the case of Waste 
Recycling Centres . Essex County Council must be consulted on all non -waste related 
development within these areas to ensure that the proposed development would not 
adversely impact on their existing o r future operation.  
South Essex Joint Strategic Plan  
1.25 In Summer 2017 , the Leaders and Chief Executives of South Essex – Basildon, Brentwood, 
Castle Point, Rochford, Southend -on-Sea, Thurrock and Essex County Council – embarked 
on a process to develop a lon g-term growth ambition that would underpin strategic spatial, 
infrastructure and economic priorities across the sub -region. The ‘South Essex 2050 
Ambition’ is now being taken forward through a number of workstreams, including a spatial 
strategy  delivered  through a Joint Strategic Plan  (JSP).  
1.26 In January 2018, the authorities formed the Association of South Essex Local Authorities 
(ASELA) to ensure that implementation of the ambition has strong leadership and is 
managed on a truly collaborative basis.  
1.27 A key t ask arising from the new joint working  arrangements is the preparation of a Joint 
Strategic Plan. There is an ambition for this to deliver the homes and jobs needed in South 
Essex through partnership working, not just at a local level, but also with govern ment, to 
bring forward the strategic infrastructure improvements to transport, education, health and 
green infrastructure that are needed to support growth.  
1.28 Work on the Joint Strategic Plan is at an early stage with adoption expected in 2020. The 
Brentwood  Local Plan will contribute towards some of the growth requirements early in that 
Plan. However, following the adoption of the Joint Strategic Plan it may be necessary to 
review the Brentwood Local Plan, at least in parts, to ensure any opportunities for f urther  
15 growth and infrastructure provision in the Borough identified in the Joint Strategic Plan can 
be realised.  
Local Enterprise  Partnership  
1.29 The South East Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) is the business -led, public/private body 
established to drive economic growth across Essex, Kent and East Sussex. Whilst the LEP 
has no statutory land use planning powers, it is responsible for determining local economic 
priorities and undertaking activities to encourage economic growth and local job creation.   
The Council will continue to work with the LEP and partners to realise economic growth 
potential s in the borough.  
Strategic and Non -strategic Policies  
1.30 Chapter 3 sets out the borough priorities emanating from the Council’s Corporate Plan as 
well as a numbe r of supporting studies, spatial challenges and opportunities which formed 
key considerations and drivers in deriving the borough’s spatial development strategy. The 
borough’s priorities are consolidated into four strategic objectives. Figure 1.1 – Documen t 
Structure, illustrates how the policies relate to each of the strategic objectives to help 
Brentwood address its strategic priorities and meet these objectives.  
1.31 Appendix 2 lists all policies and highlights those that are strategic as well as how they re late 
to the strategic objectives.  
1.32 Chapters 4 to 8 set out the Local Plan policies under five thematic topics (Managing Growth, 
Resilient Built Environment, Housing Provision, Prosperous Communities, and Natural 
Environment). Each of these chapters is sub -divided into sub -themes and each sub -section 
begins with the strategic policies with the prefix ‘Strategic’. Non -strategic policies follow 
these and provide more details on various development management matters.  
1.33 There are currently three Neighbourhood Pl ans under development.  Further information 
about these can be found on the Council webpages2. These are required to be consistent 
with, and help support the delivery of strategic policies set out in this Local Plan.   
 
2 https://www.brentwood.gov.uk/ -/neighbourhood -planning   Brentwood Local Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
16  
Figure 1. 2: Local Plan Policy Conte xt 
 
17  
 
 
 
 
 
Borough of Villages  
 
 
 
Introduction  to the Borough profile  
2.1 The following paragraphs set out the context of the Borough  and the key issues that should 
be addressed when planning for its future. Illustrative infographic s summarising some of the 
key issues  are provided  at the end of the chapter  in Figure  2.4 (parts 1 & 2).   
2.2 The supporting document ‘Brentwood Borough Profile ’ further details the borough context, 
providing a baseline study of key borough characteristics , which can be viewed online at 
www.brentwood.gov.uk/localplan . 
Location  
2.3 Located in the south -west of the county of Essex and east of Greater London, Brentwood 
Borough is set within the E ssex Countryside. The borough has  easy access to the 
countryside as well as to London , along established road and rail networks . Our location 
offers the best of both worlds, making Brentwood  an attractive place to live, work and visit.  
2.4 Being set within Lo ndon’s Metropolitan Green Belt pose s some development constraints . 
However, it also sets a foundation for a creative and innovative response to sustainable 
development where  the principles of ‘designing and building with nature’ can be embedded 
to create a nd enhance neighbourhoods that deliver health and well -being for all.  
 
02 Brentwood Local Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
18  
Figure 2.1: Brentwood Borough Location  
Origin  
2.5 Brentwood’s hamlet origins can be traced back to the 11th Century, with its name (Burnt 
Wood) signifying the clearings made by fire of the Great Forest of Essex. Administratively, 
Brentwood evolved as a Parish, later as the Brentwood Urban District. Brentwood’s 
development was due mainly to its position on the h igher grounds in the parish, at the 
junction of the main London to Colchester road and the Ongar -Tilbury Road.  
2.6 St. Osyth’s abbey, Lord of the manor of Costed was licensed to hold the first market and fair 
here in 1227. The market grew in prominence due to  its convenient location, and Brentwood 
as a ‘market town’ started to evolve. The urban district was eventually abolished by the 
Local Government Act 1972, as the district grew to encompass the nearby parishes of 
Ingatestone, Mountnessing, Doddinghurst and  others. It gained borough status in March 
1993, characterised by the suburban core of Brentwood and Shenfield surrounded by a 
series of villages , thereby giving rise to its dominant character as a ‘Borough of Villages’  
2.7 From its hamlet to market town orig ins, Brentwood is today considered an attractive 
residential borough with a short commute to London or Chelmsford  and is also home to a 
number of notable industries.  
 
19 Our Story  
Transport and Travel  
2.8 Brentwood Borough is well connected to road and rail networks. Major roads such as the 
M25, A12 and A127 run through the borough and the M11 and Stansted Airport are within 
easy reach. Despite good accessibility and location, traffic congestion is one of t he main 
issues affecting quality of life (air quality) and local economic performance.  
2.9 Brentwood has a very high level of car ownership compared to the national average. Without 
alternative means of transport the use of cars will continue to dominate as a  mobility mode 
to access nearby  services, employment and leisure  facilities . Therefore , the delivery and 
encouragement of sustainable transport alternatives is essential.  
2.10 There are four rail stations in the borough : Brentwood, Shenfield, Ingatestone, and West 
Horndon.  Brentwood station  is located on the Great Eastern Mainline, served by both TfL rail 
services to London Liverpool Street and Greater Anglia services to Southend Victoria and 
London . Shenfield is a major interchange for the Great Eastern Main t o London Liverpool 
Street  and East Anglia. Ingatestone station is also on the Great Eastern Mainline, with a 
slightly less frequent service. West Horndon station is on the London -Tilbury -Southend Line 
to London Fenchurch Street . The Elizabeth Line will soo n serve Brentwood  and Shenfield 
stations ; it will provide the borough with an improved train service, including increased 
capacity, station improvements and new direct links through  central London, to Heathrow 
Airport and Reading .  
2.11 Bus services  generally start and terminate in Brentwood Town Centre with links to other 
parts of the borough and other places outside  the borough . However, bus services in more 
rural areas are limited, particularly at off -peak times.  
 Brentwood Local Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
20  
Figure 2. 2: Regional Context  
 
 
21 2.12 The percentage of those who cycle to work is below the national average, but more people 
walk to work than average. Some cycle routes flow through the borough, but these can 
sometimes be disconnected. Encouraging sustainable travel patterns is of key impor tance.  
Population and Housing  
2.13 The population in 2011 was 73,601 (Census), of which approximately 70% live in  the 
Brentwood urban area . The 2014 mid -year population estimate shows that this has 
increased to 75,600.  
2.14 The proportion of the population from min ority ethnic groups in the borough is well below 
average for the Eastern of England,  and England  as a whole . The largest non -white minority 
ethnic group is made up of people of Asian origin.  
2.15 Brentwood is one of the most affluent areas in England, within t he least deprived 10% of the 
country.  
2.16 There are just over 32,000 homes in Brentwood Borough. The main property type is 
detached and semi -detached houses, which makes up  almost 63% total stock compared to 
the national average of 53%. The main property size is 3 -bedrooms (35%), followed by 2 -
bedrooms (25%) and 4 -bedroom homes (23%).  
2.17 House prices in the borough are very high  in comparison with the rest of  Essex . This can 
cause issues preventing people from buying homes with entry level housing of ten too 
expensive for many newly forming households and the need for a significant deposit.  
Economy and Employment  
2.18 Brentwood Borough has a successful and buoyant local economy, providing for over 30,000 
jobs. Banking and finance are the main business sect or followed by distribution/  hotels/  
restaurants and public services. The local business structure is dominated by micro (1 -10 
employees) and small businesses (11 -49 employees), while entrepreneurial activity is high.  
2.19 Office employment areas are mainly lo cated within the Brentwood Town Centre , Brentwood 
station area and Warley Business Park.  
2.20 Despite the borough ’s rural character employment in agriculture is below the national 
average . Manufacturing sector is also under represented.   
2.21 Three quarters of the borough population is of working age (16 -65). This proportion has 
fallen over time as the population ages. There continues to be a rise in the number of people 
of working age in the borough , but a disproportionate rise in the number of older people.  
2.22 Avera ge weekly wages for those who live here but work elsewhere  are higher than for those 
who work in the borough . A high proportion of people are employed as managers, senior 
officials, and in associated professional and technical occupations, reflecting the n umber of 
people commuting to places like central London.  Brentwood Local Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
22 Retail  and Shopping   
2.23 Brentwood Borough offers a wide range of retail and commercial leisure facilities. The main 
shopping area, Brentwood Town Centre, is centred on the High Street. The Town Centre 
provides a range of retail, restaurants and cafes, including a quality independent niche 
shopping offer.  
2.24 District Shopping C entres at Shenfield Hutton Road, Ingatestone High Street, Warley Hill  
(Brentwood Station ), and many smaller local parades and individual shops serve residential 
areas and villages. Each centre plays an important role providing a range of essential local 
services.  
Sport and Leisure  
2.25 The borough benefits from extensive open areas for informal recreation. South Weald and 
Thorndon Cou ntry Parks provide 324 hectares of open space along with numerous publicly 
accessible playing fields, parks, woodlands and amenity greens.  
2.26 Brentwood Leisure Centre and Shenfield Sports Centre, along with privately run sports and 
leisure facilities, are the  focus for indoor sport and recreation. In addition, excellent sporting 
facilities are provided at several schools and can be accessed for public use.  
Heritage, Natural and Built Environment  
2.27 The borough has significant built and natural heritage . It has over 500 listed buildings, 13 
Conservation Areas, 12 scheduled ancient monuments, 100s of sites of archaeological 
interest, accessible countryside and parks, varied landscapes and numerous Local Wildlife 
Sites. Together, these features provide an attractive, sought after location  for residents, 
businesses and visitors.  
2.28 Development, whether existing or new, invariably places demands on the environment. 
Among these are unsustainable use of resources (materials, water, energy), waste disposal 
issues,  pollution (of air, water or soil) and loss of or harm to wildlife habitats,  historic 
buildings and landscapes.  
2.29 The borough , in common with other places, depends on fossil fuel energy for homes, 
business and transport, and other finite resources, such as w ater and land. Fossil fuel 
energy gives rise to greenhouse gas emissions and climate change and in future may not be 
readily available in the way it has been in the past. We therefore need alternatives, including 
renewable energy and local supplies.  
2.30 Agric ultural land grades describe the non -urban areas of the borough as Good to Moderate 
with a few areas as Very Good within the northern areas of the borough3. 
 
3 Natural England Digital Map ALC008 (2011) Eastern Region Agricultural Land Classification . Available at:  
http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/127056?category=5954148537204736    
23 2.31 This Plan places a high priority on the prudent use and good management of resources and 
effective  protection for the environment. Both the form and location of future development 
and how buildings and land are used are fundamental to safeguarding those qualities which 
make Brentwood special and ensure these continue to be available for future generati ons to 
enjoy.  
Arts and Community  
2.32 Brentwood Borough has a strong and dedicated arts community. There are over 70 arts 
organisations and societies delivering arts events throughout the  year. Participation numbers 
in the borough are high with many people regu larly taking part in an arts activity in their 
leisure time.  
2.33 Local facilities, such as parish, village and neighbourhood halls provide for a range of 
community and cultural activities, such as play groups, clubs, social activities and public 
meeting space .  
2.34 There are nine Parish Councils covering much of the borough ’s rural areas. However, the 
majority of the population live in unparished areas, such as the Brentwood Urban Area. 
Health and Well -being  
2.35 Health is defined as a state of complete physical, menta l and social well -being and not 
merely the absence of disease or infirmity. The Council is working with partners to achieve a 
healthier Brentwood, so that people can enjoy good health and a sound and vigorous 
mentality.  
2.36 The health of Brentwood Borough residents is generally better than the England average 
according to Public Heath England. Life expectancy is above average. Levels of obesity, 
diabetes and drug misuse are below the national average.  
2.37 Brentwood residents have to travel outside the borough to access main hospital facilities 
including accident and emergency. However, the borough benefits from a small NHS 
community hospital in Brentwood and other private medical facilities. GP surgeries are 
generally at capacity. NHS England has identi fied an additional need for  additional workforce  
to increase capacity to accommodate future development. Further details can be found in 
the most up -to-date strategy documents from NHS England include The Five Year Forward 
View and the NHS Long Term Plan, the emerging STP Estates Strategy and the Essex 
Health Places Advice Note for planners, developers and designers . 
2.38 Basildon & Brentwood Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) are responsible for planning, 
designing, buying and performance managing NHS services in the area. This includes a 
wide range of services such as most planned hospital care, rehabilitation care, urgent and 
community care, community health services and mental health and learning disability 
services.  Brentwood Local Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
24 Education and Schools  
2.39 Borough residents ha ve higher than average levels of educational attainment when 
compared to both the rest of England and East of England. The borough has higher than 
average levels of school pupils achieving five good GCSEs and proportion of population with 
degree level educ ation or equivalent. There is a lower than average proportion of population 
with no qualifications.  
2.40 The borough has many well performing schools and colleges. Essex County Council is the 
local education authority although many schools are now self -governi ng, managing their own 
budgets  and employing their own staff. There are also several independent or private 
schools in the borough . As academy schools are being encouraged , it will be important to 
work with partners to ensure adequate education provision i s available to existing and future 
local residents.  
2.41 In terms of Early Years and Childcare, in general Brentwood has a diverse range of 
provision to a high quality, however data suggests a large majority of areas are reaching 
maximum capacity and with the i ntroduction of the Extended Funding Entitlement in 2017, 
childcare choices are limited and new provision will be needed with the additional 
developments planned. Primary schools in the borough are generally at capacity, particularly 
within the Brentwood Urban Area, and some have limited physical space to expand. 
Secondary schools are generally performing with spare capacity.  All secondary schools 
within Brentwood have 6th form provision, learner’s wishing to study vocational subjects 
travel to South Essex C ollege (Thurrock/Basildon), Chelmsford College, with a further cohort 
travelling into Havering.  
2.42 In respect  of Special Education Needs (SEN), it is not possible to provide for every need 
within each District.  Each special school is regarded as a regional c entre of excellence for 
their type of need and children attend from a wider geographical area. In Brentwood, 
Endeavour School is a special school for children aged 5 years to 16 years with moderate 
learning difficulties and complex needs and is the only sp ecial school in Brentwood. ECC 
commissions places for local children with an Education Health and Care Plan at this school. 
ECC has developed specially resourced provision for children with speech and language 
difficulties within West Horndon Primary Schoo l in the Borough.  
Utilities, Telecoms and Media  
2.43 Power, gas and water networks will need to be considered when planning the borough ’s 
future. The Council is working with energy and water providers as part of the plan -making 
process. In addition, new develop ment will require connections to telecoms and broadband 
networks.  
2.44 Broadband internet connection and superfast speeds have become an essential everyday 
utility for homes and businesses across the country. Coverage in Brentwood varies between 
urban and rural areas. Essex County Council has committed to a significant broadband 
infrastructure upgrade with telecoms partners. Broadband speed is an important issue for 
the UK economy and international competition.   
25 Green Belt  
2.45 All of the  borough’s countryside li es within Metropolitan Green Belt  of London . That equates 
to 89%  of the borough , the sixth highest in England by percentage of total area. This helps 
protect much of the high-quality  agricultural land and countryside. However, it also 
constrains  development opportunities, making it difficult to meet development needs in full.  
 
Figure 2.3: Metropolitan Green Belt  (Part 1 of 2)  
  
Brentwood Local Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
26  
Figure 2.3: Metropolitan Green Belt  (Part 2 of 2)  
 
 
 
27 Figure 2. 4: Our Story (Part 1 of 2)  
Brentwood Local Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
28  
Figure 2. 4: Our Story (Part 2 of 2)  
 
29  
 
 
 
  
Spatial Strategy - Vision and 
Strategic Objectives  
 
 Vision   
Bearing testimony to its market town origins, Brentwood  Borough  will continue to 
thrive as a place of commerce and enterprise, strengthened by our proposals to 
protect existing employment sites, and enhance and develop new sites of 
economic opportunity, with good connectivity to wider markets.  
Brentwood will continue  to be a desirable, liveable place to live and visit  and 
encourage healthy active lifestyles . It will  provid e the ‘best of both worlds’ where 
the benefits of urban living can be enjoyed , the bustling high street can continue 
to thrive and provide opportunities for entertainment and culture , where the 
surrounding countryside and numerous Country Parks will continu e to provide 
havens to wildlife , as well as beautiful and historic locations to  be explore d 
through active recreational pursuits . 
We are a ‘Borough of Villages’ and we will continue to maintain our village 
character, ensuring development respects and enhan ces these environmental 
qualities that give Brentwood its distinctive character. We will encourage this 
through landscape -led development, where new development responds to a 
‘design and build with nature ’ approach, firm ly embedding high quality green 
infrastructure through the public realm to create a seamless transition to our 
surrounding countryside.  
03 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
30 3.1 The vision for the development  of the borough reflects and capitalises on Brentwood’s 
qualities (i.e. village character, heritage, environment), needs (i.e . liveable places, thriving 
enterprises), and opportunities (i.e. new economic opportunities, connectivity, thriving high 
streets for entertainment and culture).  
3.2 The vision  is reinforced by strategic aims and four strategic objectives and related policies.  
 Strategic Aims and Objectives  
3.3 Driven by Brentwood’s Borough of Villages character, our three  overarching  aims are to:  
i. harness the connectivity opportunities offered by the borough’s accessible transit 
corridors;  
ii. orientate proposals to consider and embe d a ‘design and build with nature’ landscape -
led approach; and  
iii. ensure that proposals demonstrate how outcomes will deliver healthy communities on 
multiple levels.  
Promoting Sustainable Mobility through Transit -orientated Growth  
3.4 A key aim is ensuring sustainable mobility is maximised given the borough’s rural setting. 
Sustainable mobility is key in achieving a healthier environment, particularly in reducing air 
pollution from vehicular travel, but also in providing the necessary c onnectivity network to aid 
the local economy. Brentwood has two key transit  / connectivity  corridors running through 
the borough  and these are identified in this Plan as the broad locations for growth to 
maximise these sustainable mobility opportunities : the ‘Central Brentwood Growth Corridor’, 
with the A12,  the Great Eastern Main Line to London Liverpool Street Station, and the 
Elizabeth Line; and the ‘Southern Brentwood Growth Corridor’, with the A127 and the 
London, Tilbury and Southend Railway to London  Fenchurch Street Station. Focusing 
growth along these axes  ensure s that future development is sustainable, maximising the 
benefits of transport infrastructure. While some investment to improve the transport network 
is necessary , this growth strategy ensur es economies of scale are reached, with the critical 
mass of development making it more viable for such investment to occur.  
Developing Naturally and Sustainably  
3.5 Given Brentwood’s village feel and countryside setting, development must be mindful of the 
ecological sensitivity and disruption to ecosystem services. For this reason, development 
should take a ‘design and build with nature’ landscape -led approach  to drive design quality 
and create places which respond to their existing environment, work with natu ral assets, and 
create Environmental Net Gain wherever possible. Opportunities to embed green 
infrastructure in the public realm should be maximised to deliver multiple benefits, including  
31 ecosystem services to address the impacts of climate change as well  as providing a liveable 
environment. . This will not only plan for resilient and smart infrastructure to future -proof 
investment against climate change but also create living environments conducive to human 
health.  
Healthy Communities  
3.6 Growing from a market  town to the diverse economy it is today, future development should 
capitalise on this evolution to ensur e a diverse balance of employment opportunities for all  
alongside  vibrant hubs of economic and social -cultural activity to provide attractive, 
connecte d, walkable, lively and stimulating destinations with  the necessary facilities and 
services required to sustain healthy  and active  communities.  
Strategic  Objectives  
3.7 This section defines four strategic objectives  which consolidate the Borough’s key priorities 
and help make the link between the vision   and the supporting policies which help to deliver 
these.  In reality there are many cross -overs between each objective and the policies which 
help delivery these, and  should therefore not be treated in isolation when developing 
proposals.  
3.8 SO1: Manag e Growth Sustainably , by directing development to the most sustainable 
locations  along identified transit growth corridors , ensuring that the characteristics and 
patterns of  our different settlements are protected and enhanced to provide a strong 
emphasis on ‘sense of place’ to be enjoyed by people living, working and visiting Brentwood.  
3.9 SO2: Deliver a Healthy and Resilient Built Environment , one where a landscape -led 
design approach helps to protect and enhance areas of environmental and heritage value ; 
creates spaces that encourage social interaction , sustainable connectivity and mobility  and 
healthy active lifestyles ; mitigates, reduces impact or adapts to conditions of a c hanging 
climate through smart infrastructure; and creates public realm and homes where both the 
internal and external spaces are conducive to human health.  
3.10 SO3: Deliver Sustainable Communities with Diverse Economic & Social -cultural 
Opportunities for All, opportunities which flexibly respond to the changing economic 
climate and employment sector trends making citizens feel economically empowered to 
enjoy and benefit from the necessary community/social infrastructure that sustains inclusive, 
informed, vibran t, active and cohesive communities.  
3.11 SO4: Deliver Beautiful, Biodiverse, Clean and a Functional Natural Environment , 
where resources are carefully managed to avoid adverse impact on, and to provide net 
gains for, the borough’s natural environment and biodi versity; and where our natural heritage 
is protected , and ecosystem services are restored, enhanced and integrated back into the 
built environment through multi -functional green  and blue  infrastructure  and opportunities 
are pursued for securing measurable net gains for biodiversity . Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
32 Spatial Strategy   
3.12 Two key growth corridors have been identified, to meet  our overarching aim to deliver 
sustainable development in accessible and connected transit corridors . Along these 
corridors, a comprehensive  sequential analysis and review of sites  has been undertaken to 
select suitable site allocations . 
Central Brentwood Growth Corridor  
3.13 The Central Brentwood Growth Corridor  runs through the main urban area of Brentwood 
(incorporating the neighbourhoods and towns of Brentwood, Shenfield, Hutton, Warley, 
Pilgrims Hatch) as well as the urban area of Mountnessing and Ingatestone villages further 
along the A12 corridor. The main central urban area is well served by public tran sport, with 
rail stations at Brentwood and Shenfield. It provides a range of shopping, employment areas, 
secondary schools, health and leisure facilities in close proximity to residential areas. It 
therefore offers scope to accommodate some growth.  Here , every opportunity to bring 
forward brownfield land for development  has been maximised and brownfield regeneration 
will continue to be prioritised as and when it becomes available in future . However, 
brownfield land is limited  and so the spatial strategy in this growth area has also focused on 
delivering  urban extensions of varying extents, including at Shenfield, Warley, Pilgrims 
Hatch and Ingatestone . Exceptional circumstances have been demonstrated to release land 
from the Green Belt  to allow these urban e xtensions .  
South Brentwood Growth Corridor  
3.14 The South Brentwood Growth Corridor  runs along the southern transit axes up to the 
borough boundary. This location has traditionally played an instrumental role in delivering 
the borough’s economic growth, with t he location of employment sites due to the good 
transport connections to wider markets. The spatial strategy continues to enhance 
employment land in this location, and  deliver s two strategic allocation s, one brownfield 
allocation at West Horndon Village and a new settlement  at Dunton Hills Garden Village , 
provid ing new residential -led mixed -use development . A strategic employment allocation at 
M25 junction 29 (Brentwood Enterprise Park) will provide for most of the new employment 
land needed, brin ging forward a modern business park in the south -west of the borough with 
excellent access to the M25. This will also act as a focus for a wider M25/A127 employment 
cluster considering existing employment uses in the area. Brownfield  development  of 
existin g industrial land in West Horndon  will creat e a new village centre with supporting 
services and facilities close to the village rail station. Developing here provides an 
opportunity to address conflicts arising from heavy freight traffic passing through th e village .  
3.15 The new Garden Village will be in keeping with the Borough’s character as a ‘Borough of 
Villages’ and is of sufficient scale to provide the necessary infrastructure to support a self -
sustaining community in the south -east of the borough. The Ga rden Village will be in line 
with the Government’s prospectus for garden communities, delivering the necessary quality 
and a significant contribution to meeting housing needs. It also provides an opportunity to  
33 contribute to the wider infrastructure invest ment requirements to support long -term growth 
within this Southern Growth Corridor, along with some capacity for future growth beyond the 
plan period to meet the evolving housing and economic needs of Brentwood.  Exceptional 
circumstances have been demonst rated to release Green Belt to allow a new settlement in 
this location . 
Development Outside Growth Corridors  
3.16 Development in areas outside these growth corridors will be limited , to retain the local 
character , with allocations at Kelvedon Hatch and Blackmor e villages .  
3.17 The spatial strategy is set out in Strategic Policy MG01 Spatial Strategy . 
Key Diagram  
3.18 The Key Diagram shows the main aspects of the spatial strategy , illustrating the broad 
locations and pattern of development and how these relate to the two main transit growth 
corridors and borough gateways . 
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
34  
Figure 3.1: Key Diagram  
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
Managing Growth  
 
 
 
Delivering the Spatial Strategy  
4.1 This chapter sets out two Strategic Policies and a number of supporting cross -cutting 
development management policies. Strategic Policy MG01 Spatial Strategy is the 
overarching strategic policy for the Local Plan to achieve the borough’s Spatial Strategy and 
vision. It sets out the quantum and distribution of growth as described in Chapter 3. Strategic 
Policy MG02 Green Belt is also a key policy that informs the appro priate distribution of 
growth, given the predominance of Green Belt in the Borough.  
04 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
36  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.1: Annual housing requirement and supply buffer  
STRATEGIC POLICY MG01 :  SPATIAL STRATEGY  
Quantum of Development  
1. The Council will work positively and proactively with development industry and 
wider stakeholders to enable the development of the allocated sites identified 
on the Policies Map in order to meet the borough’s housing and employment 
needs and targets. To facilitate a significant  increase in the delivery of new 
homes as well as jobs to promote sustainable communities, provision is made 
for: 
a. 7,752 new residential dwellings (net) to be built in the borough over the 
Plan period 2016 -2033 at an annual average rate of 300 dwellings per 
year to 2023 /24, followed by 400 dwellings per year  to 2029/30 and then 
984 dwellings per year to 2032/33 ; 
b. 13 permanent pitches to accommodate Gypsy and Traveller 
accommodation n eeds, distributed across the borough as set out in Policy 
HP07 ; 
c. about  46.64 ha of new employment land, 1,604 square metres (net) of 
comparison retail floorspace and 4,438 square metres (net) of Annual housing supply buffer 
456 dpaBased on a 20% uplift to the 380 annual housing figure identified in SHMA. 
Allows for an additional housing supply in the borough to be mainitained 
throughout the plan period .Annual housing requirement 
350 dpaCalculated using the standard method set out in national planning 
guidence, this is the starting point in establishing the amount of 
housing to be planned for. 
37 convenience floorspace, to enable the creation of at least 5,0 00 additional 
jobs. 
Growth Distribution  
2. The majority of new development is directed to the borough’s two strategic 
transit growth corridors, as illustrated in the Key Diagram, ensuring the 
benefits resulting from their proximity to existing sustainable tra nsport 
infrastructure.  This strategy has required the release of land from the green 
belt. The geographic distribution and pattern of growth is planned as follows : 
a. Central Brentwood Growth Corridor comprising mainly brownfield infill 
and urban extension s. Three strategic residential -led, mixed -use sites in 
this location are allocated ;  
b. South Brentwood Growth Corridor comprising largely of employment 
provision, brownfield redevelopment and a new Garden Village settlement. 
Two strategic residential -led, mixed -use development sites in this location 
are allocated;  
c. Limited growth is planned at suitable sites in two northern villages of 
Kelvedon Hatch and Blackmore;  
d. The housing requirements for designated neighbourhood plan areas in 
the borough are out lined in the table of Figure 4.2.  
Sequential Land Use  
4.2 The spatial strategy informs the allocation of sites for development. This considers each 
location in terms of a sequential land use test, in line with guidance and best practice, and 
should be a key consideration in determining applications. It prioritises growth based on 
brownfield land  and land in urban areas first; and only then brownfield land in Green Belt 
areas  where deemed appropriate according to policies in the Plan.  
4.3  A range of economic evidence has informed the employment land and job growth need, 
including the Brentwood Economic Futures Report (2018) and Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment (2018).  
Growth in Designated Neighbourhood Planning Areas  
4.4 Brentwood currently has three designated  neighbourhood plan areas covering parish council 
areas as outlined on the Council ’s Neighbourhood Planning webpages. Housing 
requirements in the designated neighbourhood planning areas are set out in the table in 
Figure 4.2 below.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
38 Parish/Designated 
Neighb ourhood Plan Areas  Date of Designation  Housing 
Requirements  Site 
Allocations  
West Horndon CP  Designated November 2014  2530  R01, R02  
Ingatestone and Fryerning 
CP Designated October 2017  57 R22 
Doddinghurst CP  Designated December 2012  0 None  
 
 Figure 4. 2:  Housing Requirements in Neighbourhood Planning Parish Areas  
Green Belt and Rural Development  
Green Belt Local Context  
4.5 London Metropolitan Green Belt was established by the Town and Country Planning Act 
1974 to control the outward spread of Lon don into surrounding counties such as Essex . This 
designation has provided an important protection to the borough’s countryside. The Council 
strongly supports the continued preservation of the Metropolitan Green Belt.  With Brentwood 
borough being the sixth  highest Green Belt area in England , this significantly limits land 
available for development . 
4.6 However, given Brentwood’s proximity to London and good connectivity, there is huge 
demand and pressure for development. The Council has had to make some difficu lt, but 
informed decisions around the alternation of the Green Belt boundary, in line with national 
planning policy. Through the Green Belt review process and alongside the Sustainability 
Appraisal process, exceptional circumstances were established to rel ease of a number of 
sites to meet housing, employment and Gypsy and Traveller needs, as described in Policy 
MG01 Spatial Strategy . The Policies Map illustrates the Green Belt boundary as established 
by this Local Plan, with defensible boundaries around the  allocation sites.  
STRATEGIC  POLICY MG02: GREEN BELT  
A. The Metropolitan Green Belt within Brentwood Borough (as defined in the 
Brentwood Policies Map) will be preserved from inappropriate development so 
that it continues to maintain its openness and serve its key functions. Planning  
39 permission will not be granted for inappropriate development in the Green Belt 
other than in very special circumstances.  
B. All development proposals within the Green Belt will be considered and 
assessed in accordance with the provisions of national planning policy.  
C. The Council will seek t o enhance the beneficial use of the Green Belt to 
provide or improve access to it; to provide or enhance opportunities for 
outdoor sport and recreation; to retain and enhance landscapes, visual 
amenity and biodiversity and; to improve damaged and derelict land. 
Development proposals in or adjacent to the Green Belt (including those the 
subject of allocations in this plan) will be expected to include measures to 
achieve these objectives so far as it is possible and appropriate.  
D. For site allocations which are  being released from the Green Belt, 
development proposals should set out ways in which the impact of removing 
land from the Green Belt are to be offset through compensatory improvements 
to the environmental quality and accessibility of the remaining Green  Belt land.  
Purpose of the Green Belt  
4.7 The National Planning Policy Framework sets out the five main purposes of the Green Belt:  
i. to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas;  
ii. to prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another;  
iii. to assist in  safeguarding the countryside from encroachment;  
iv. to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns; and  
v. to assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban 
land.  
Encouraging the Beneficial Use of Green Belt  
4.8 The NPPF (2021, paragraph 145) promotes the beneficial use of the Green Belt. It states 
that once Green Belts have been defined, local planning authorities should plan positively to 
enhance their beneficial use, such as looking for opportunities  to provide access, to provide 
opportunities for outdoor sport and recreation, to retain and enhance landscapes, visual 
amenity and biodiversity, or to improve damaged and derelict land. In Brentwood, there are 
many areas of the Green Belt which also perfo rm other key environmental and recreational 
functions that must also be maintained in accordance with the relevant policies. For 
example, there are large areas of woodlands, golf courses, playing pitches, parks, extensive Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
40 areas important for nature conserv ation including Hutton, Weald and Thorndon Country 
Parks, three Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and 147 Local Wildlife Sites. There is 
also an extensive network of public rights of way providing public access to open 
countryside. Enhancement of  these features will be supported in line with Strategic Policy 
MG02 Green Belt, to maintain the beneficial use of the Green Belt.  
4.9 Furthermore, the NPPF states that any development proposals within Community Forests in 
the Green Belt should be subject to t he normal policies for controlling development in Green 
Belts. The Thames Chase Community Forest reaches across much of the south western 
area of the borough. The Thames Chase Community Forest offers a valuable opportunity for 
improving the environment by upgrading the landscape and providing for recreation and 
wildlife and this will be supported in line with national policy and guidance.  
Proposals Affecting the Green Belt  
4.10 All proposals coming forward in non -allocated Green Belt locations will be assessed in 
accordance with Strategic Policy MG02 Green Belt and national policy on Green Belt. 
Development will be considered inappropriate and refused unless very special 
circumstances are demonstrated and/or where the exceptions apply, in line with para graph 
145 and 146 of the NPPF. One of the Council’s objectives is to support the rural economy 
and sustainability of villages. Where proposals align with these exceptions, proposals will be 
supported.  
POLICY MG0 3: SETTLEMENT HIERARCHY  
Settlement Category   Settlement 
Name   
Settlement Category 1  
This incorporates the towns and neighbourhoods that 
collectively form the main urban area of 
Brentwood Borough. They provide a wide range of 
existing community infrastructure, services and 
opportunities for employment, retail, education, health 
and leisure facilities in designated Town, District and 
Local Centres for the immediate residential areas as well 
as to the wider population in the borough. They are 
typically highly accessible and well served by publi c 
transport provision, including rail services.  Main urban area 
of Brentwood 
comprising:   
Brentwood   
Shenfield   
Hutton   
Pilgrims Hatch   
Warley   
Brook Street   
Settlement Hierarchy 2  West  Horndon    
Ingatestone   
41 This includes the larger villages in a rural setting , with 
high levels of accessibility and public transport provision, 
including rail services. They provide a range of services 
and facilities to the immediate residential areas and 
nearby settlements in designated District and Local 
Centres.     Dunton 
Hills (when 
delivered)  
Settlement Hierarchy 3  
Villages in a sparse rural setting that provide day -to-day 
needs for  local residents  in small local centres. These 
relatively l arger villages also tend to have a primary 
school. They generally have limited, often shared, 
community and health facilities, local jobs and a variable 
bus service.  Blackmore  
Doddinghurst    
Herongate    
Ingrave  
Kelvedon Hatch  
Mountnessing    
Settlement Hierarchy 4  
Remote and small rural villages and hamlets, with poor 
public transport, limited or no shops, jobs and community 
facilities; some of these settlements rely on nearby 
settlements for services.   Wyatts  Green  
Hook End  
Stondon  Massey  
Fryerning   
Great Warley   
Little Warley   
South Weald   
 
 
4.11 Brentwood borough is characterised by a central urban area, and a number of scattered 
villages north and south of this main urban core. This has given rise to its principal character 
as a ‘Borough of Villages’ and the spatial strategy seeks to preserve thi s historic 
development pattern and the character of the villages. The main urban area includes the 
towns of Brentwood, Shenfield, Hutton, Warley, Pilgrims Hatch and Brook Street. Inset 
villages from the Green Belt include West Horndon, Ingatestone, Mountne ssing, Ingrave, 
Herongate, Blackmore, Doddinghurst, Kelvedon Hatch, Wyatts Green, Hook End and 
Stondon Massey. Each village is considered a separate settlement each with its distinct 
settlement characteristics, the boundaries of which are wholly demarcated  by the Green 
Belt. Other smaller more rural dispersed villages and hamlets remain washed over by the 
Green Belt and include Fryerning, Great Warley and others. New development should seek 
to enhance historic patterns and settlement characteristics of sign ificance. For those 
settlements which are removed from the Green Belt, their boundary and category is shown Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
42 on the Policies Map.  Their distribution is also illustrated on the Key Diagram to aid an 
understanding of how each relates to sustainable growth loc ations.  
4.12 The Borough Profile4 provides a general assessment of the different services and facilities 
across Brentwood’s settlements. This broad settlement hierarchy assessment describes the 
role, function and prominence of villages within a broad hierarchy . The hierarchy is divided 
into four categories providing a broad indication of the settlement’s ability to accommodate 
growth and reflects the indicative prominence of each village by its size (indicatively based 
on population and settlement area), and th e range of services each village offers. The 
Settlement Hierarchy is tabulated and set out in Policy MG03.  The vitality of rural 
communities to ensure villages grow and thrive, in line with paragraph 78 of the NPPF, was 
a key consideration in defining the spatial strategy and where it was deemed possible, 
proportionate growth at key northern villages has been identified, as indicated in the Key 
Diagram.  
4.13 The settlement hierarchy should not be confused with the retail hierarchy detailed in Chapter 
7.  
4.14 Brentwo od Urban Area, made up of semi -connected settlements such as Brentwood, 
Shenfield, Hutton, Warley, Brook Street, and Pilgrims Hatch, is the borough’s largest 
settlement. Accessible and well served by public transport, with rail stations at Brentwood 
and Sh enfield, Brentwood Urban Area provides a range of shopping, employment areas, 
secondary schools, health and leisure facilities in close proximity to residential areas .  
4.15 Within this settlement category, Brentwood and Shenfield offer the most scope to develo p in 
accordance with sustainable development principles. Urban extensions into Green Belt are 
proposed in specific locations with clear physical defensible boundaries and accessible to 
local services and transport links. Release of land for development in these locations will in 
time enable a five -year supply of housing to be achieved, boosting local housing needs 
swiftly in line with national policy and guidance . 
4.16 Ingatestone is the borough’s largest village; facilities here serve a significant catchment 
beyond the immediate area. Public transport accessibility is relatively good. The village has 
a rail station and secondary school. While Ingatestone has relatively good facilities, a 
modest level of development is envisaged here, due to a lack of suitable si tes.  
4.17 Future development as guided by the Plan will result in changes to the hierarchy, adding 
West Horndon and Dunton Hills Garden Village to this category. Brownfield residential 
development at West Horndon is proposed to be of a size to provide for a ne w village centre 
along with new retail and job opportunities, and to assist with improvements at West 
Horndon railway station. Development at Dunton Hills Garden Village will create a new self -
sustaining village with provision of new schools alongside reta il, job opportunities and health 
facilities. Policies for the delivery of Dunton Hills Garden Village will set the precedent for 
new accessible connections to be made with West Horndon railway station nearby, providing 
a new transport interchange, among ot her aspirations .  
 
4 https://www.brentwood.gov.uk/ -/evidence -base#borough -profile    
43 4.18 Larger villages in the borough are served by a local shopping parade and a primary school. 
They generally have limited, often shared, community and health facilities, local jobs and a 
variable bus service .  
4.19 Brownfield redevelopment opport unities will be encouraged to meet local needs and policies 
in this Plan will help to bring forward nearby redevelopment of brownfield sites in the Green 
Belt where appropriate. Minimal amendments are proposed to the Green Belt boundaries 
surrounding large r villages in order to retain the character of the borough in line with the 
spatial strategy .  
4.20 Remote smaller villages and hamlets, some within the Green Belt. These settlements have 
limited local services and facilities and poor public transport links, re liant on other 
settlements nearby in many cases. Development in these locations will be encouraged only 
in brownfield locations, steered by the policies in the Plan  
Health Impacts  
4.21 Local planning policy has a crucial role to play in ensuring that the opportunities exist for 
people to be able to make healthier life choices and addressing health inequalities  (as per 
the role of health and well -being in plan -making 2017, plan -making guidance 2018 and the 
NPPF) . The policies within  the Brentwood Local Deve lopment Plan use both local and 
national evidence, strategy and policy with the aim to create and support strong , vibrant, 
sustainable and healthy communities . These will be delivered  by promoting and facilitating 
healthy living , and creating environments which offer opportunities for healthy choices  
across generations . The health and well -being of communities must begin with the planning 
process,  and it  is agreed that if a community has access to well-designed places, access to 
appropriate health and community  services and facilities set out above, health and well-
being should be positively influenced . 
POLICY MG04: HEALTH IMPACT ASSESSMENTS (HIA s) 
A. To ensure new development  is designed to promote good health, a Health 
Impact Assessment, will be required  for residential proposals  of 50 or more 
units (or less than 50 units at the discretion of the planning authority where the 
number of units could propose a significant impact on the community and 
infrastructure) and non -residential developments of 1,000m2, or more, and hot 
food takeaways that are not within a designated town, district or local centre 
and are within 400 metres of a school entrance. The Health Impact 
Assessment will be prepared in accordance with the advice and best practice 
as published by P ublic Health England and locally through  the EPOA HIA 
Guidance Note, using the most up to date guidance. The purpose of the Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
44 Health Impact Assessment is to identify opportunities of positive health 
impacts and potential negative impacts and how they might b e mitigated .  
B. Where significant impacts are identified, planning permission will be refused 
unless  reasonable mitigation or planning controls can be secured .  
4.22 The NPPF acknowledges that the planning system can play an important role in facilitating 
social  interaction and creating healthy, inclusive communities. Local planning authorities 
(LPAs) are expected to use their planning powers to ensure that health and well -being 
inequalities are reduced and mitigated where appropriate , to ensure positive social, 
economic, and environmental benefits are achieved. Brentwood Borough Council is 
committed to ensuring all new developments promote healthier and inclusive environments. 
This includes regeneration proposals. The design of the built environments and use of t he 
natural environments play a key role in ensuring that health inequalities are not exacerbated 
and can support people to live healthier lives. The following issues impact on the physical, 
social, and mental health and well -being of communities and should  be addressed in 
accordance with policies within this Plan:  
i. the location, density and mix of land use;  
ii. street layout and connectivity;  
iii. access to public services, employment, local fresh food, education, leisure and 
recreation activities, and other communit y services;  
iv. safety and security;  
v. open and green space;  
vi. affordable and energy efficient housing;  
vii. air quality and noise;  
viii. extreme weather events and climate change;  
ix. community interaction; and  
x. transport.  
4.23 Health and well -being inequalities have been recognised as having a significant impact on 
communities. The government has clearly signalled its commitment to promoting Health 
Impact Assessment since 2003 with the publication on Tackling Health Inequalities by the 
London D epartment of Health, followed by Choosing Health White Paper (2004), the 
Department of Health Guidance on Planning for NHS staff, and the inclusion of Health and 
Well-being requirements as set out in the NPPF.  
4.24 In response to  the government ’s priorities pl aced on health and well -being , the Essex 
Planning Officers Association (EPOA) published a guidance note on Health Impact  
45 Assessments (2008) which set out targets for all local authorities to ensure that their Local 
Development Frameworks (or equivalent dev elopment plan documents) contain a policy 
requiring HIA for relevant planning applications. The EPOA Guidance Note was update in 
2019; once published, Public Health England (PHE) also published further guidance on 
Health Impact Assessments in spatial plann ing (2020)5 which provides information on the 
process for undertaking an HIA and additional resources which may be helpful to applicants 
required to prepare an HIA as part of their planning application.  Developers should refer to 
the most up to date guida nce to ensure that health and well -being impacts have been fully 
considered as part of the proposal.      
4.25 The updated Essex Design Guide (EDG) includes the principles of health and wellbeing and 
a common theme embedded throughout the document. The EDG encou rages all 
developments to employ the principles of Building Regulations Part M4 Category 2 
(Accessible and Adaptable Dwelling) so as to promote independent living. The provision of 
access to open spaces, natural environments and informal and formal recreat ion 
opportunities contributes significantly to prevention of ill health. Transport corridors should 
be well -established to encourage cycling and walking as safer, more active alternatives to 
the car for local journeys.   
4.26 PHE’s guidance Using the Planning Sy stem to Promote Healthy Weight Environments 
(February 2020) suggests that limiting the availability of takeaways within walking distance 
of schools can contribute to tackling the rising levels of obesity and other health impacts 
such as cardiovascular dise ase. 400 metres has been considered a reasonable walking 
distance and is outlined within the Urban Design Compendium 2 and CIHT Guidelines for 
providing journeys on foot.  
4.27 PHE’s Obesity Profile illustrates that where there are concentrations of hot food tak eaways 
within Brentwood Borough, there is an increase in the number of children who are 
overweight and obese. The Borough’s current obesity rates are approximate 14% which is 
below the National average of 20%. However, in areas where there is a concentrati on of hot 
food takeaways, the average overweight and obesity rates increase to 15 -24%, which is 
higher than the National average.  
4.28 Each application will be considered on its own merits and the 400m zone must be 
considered in the context of the local topogr aphy and context of the individual application. 
There are mitigating factors that can be considered, for example the potential for natural or 
man-made barriers that limit accessibility from schools, even within the 400m direct line 
exclusion zone.  
4.29 The joint Essex health and wellbeing strategy 2018 -2022 is supported by  partners including 
district councils and health. The priorities within this are:  
i. improving mental health and wellbeing;  
ii. addressing obesity, improving diet and increasing physical activity;  
 
5 Public Health England. Health Impact Assessment in spatial planning. A guide for local authority public health 
and planning teams (2020). 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/a ttachment_data/file/929230/HIA
_in_Planning_Guide_Sept2020.pdf   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
46 iii. influencing conditions and behaviours linked to health inequalities; and  
iv. enabling and supporting people with long -term conditions and disabilities.  
4.30 Developers will be expected to contact the Council at pre -application stage to complete the 
Healthy Communi ties Checklist (as part of the validation checklist), to enable joint 
discussions to take place on the likely health and well -being impacts and environmental 
impacts of proposals. This is an opportunity to strengthen the process of spatial planning 
through  partnership working, community engagement, evidence sharing and coordination.   
47  
Figure 4.3: How to assess if a planning application requires to undertake an HIA and the steps involved  
 
HIA is required. Contact the LPA at the 
pre-app stage. LPA to advise what type of 
HIA is required  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submit required 
assessment s 
alongside planning 
application  
 
Internal and external 
consultation  
Decision notice  
Committee d ecision  
Identify if  an Environmental Impact 
Assessment ( EIA) is required  
Complete either  a full or rapid HIA  as 
identified by the LPA  
EA not required  
 EA required  
HIA not required  
 HIA required  
Local 
authority ‘s 
Environment 
Team to 
provide 
guidance  
Is your planning application:  
•50 or more dwellings;  
•1,000m2 or more (any use class); or  
•Hot food takeaways that are not 
within a designated town, district or 
local centre and are within 400 
metres of a school entrance  
 
No 
 Yes 
No 
 Yes 
LPA to contact 
Public Health Team 
for guidance  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
48 POLICY  MG05 : DEVELOPER CONTRIBUTIONS  
1. All new development should be supported by, and have good access to, all 
necessary infrastructure. Permission will only be granted  if it can be 
demonstrated that there is sufficient appropriate infrastructure capacity to 
support the development or that such capacity will be delivered in a timely and, 
where appropriate, phased manner by the proposal.  
2. Where a development proposal requ ires additional infrastructure capacity, to 
be deemed acceptable,  mitigation measures must be agreed with the local 
planning authority and the appropriate infrastructure provider. Such measures 
may include (not exclusively):  
a. financial contributions towards new or expanded facilities and the 
maintenance thereof;  
b. on-site provision  of new facilities ;  
c. off-site capacity improvement  works; and/or  
d. the provision of land.  
3. Developers and land owners must work positively with the Council, 
neighbouring authorities and other infrastructure providers throughout the 
planning process to ensure that the cumulative impact of development is 
cons idered and then mitigated, at the appropriate time, in line with their 
published policies and guidance.  
4. Applicants proposing new development will be expected to make direct 
provision or contribute towards the delivery of relevant infrastructure  as 
required  by the development either alone or cumulatively with other 
developments , as set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and other policies 
in this Plan, where such contributions are compliant with national policy and 
the legal tests. Where necessary,  developers will be required to:  
a. enter into Section 106 (S106) agreements to make provisions to mitigate 
the impacts of the development where necessary or appropriate . Section 
106 will remain the appropriate mechanism for securing land and works 
along with fina ncial contributions where a sum for the necessary 
infrastructure is not secured via CIL ; and/or  
b. make a proportionate contribution on a retrospective basis towards such 
infrastructure as may have been forward -funded from other sources where 
the provision of  that infrastructure is necessary to facilitate and/or mitigate 
the impacts of their development (including the cumulative impacts of 
planned development),   
49 5. For the purposes of this policy the widest reasonable definition of infrastructure 
and infrastructur e providers will be applied. Exemplar types of infrastructure 
are provided in the glossary appended to this Plan. 
6.  Exceptions to this policy will only be considered if : 
a. it is prove n that the benefit s of the development proceeding without full 
mitigation ou tweigh the collective  harm;  
b. a fully transparent open book Viability Assessment  has proven that the full 
mitigation cannot be afforded, allowing only the minimum level of 
developer profit and land owner receipt necessary for the development to 
proceed . The  viability assessment may be subject to an independent  
scrutiny by appointed experts, at the applicant’s cost  and will be required 
to be updated upon completion of the development through a planning 
obligation ; 
c. a full and thorough investigation has been undertaken to find innovative 
solutions to issues and all possible steps have been taken to minimise the 
residual level of  harm ; and  
d. enter into planning obligations to provide for appropriate additional 
mitigation  and/or contributio ns (as the case may be)  in the event that 
viability improves prior to completion of the development.  
 
4.31 The spatial vision and strategic objectives emphasise the importance of managing growth 
and shaping change  sustainably . Planning for appropriate and adequate infrastructure  is at 
the heart of sustainable development . Provision of appropriate and timely strategic 
infrastructure will be central to the continuing prosperity, attractiveness and sustainability of 
Brentwood. Plan -led growth p rovides the opportunity to address infrastructure needs, 
maximise the efficient use of existing infrastructure capacities and explore opportunities for 
new sustainable infrastructure.   
4.32 In addition, t he Council has prepared an Infrastructure Delivery Plan ( IDP) to inform the 
Local Plan, this sits alongside the Local Plan and identifies the main items of infrastructure 
needed to mitigate the cumulative impacts of and support planned development; the site 
allocation policies also identify key pieces of site -specific infrastructure needed to support 
the development. New development will be expected to deliver or contribute to the 
necessary infrastructure requirements of the development as identified by the Council’s IDP 
and site specific requirements, where such  contributions are compliant with national policy 
and the legal tests. The Council will seek contributions from developers to fund  the 
necessary infrastructure requirements through the use of planning condition and/or planning 
obligation and/or financial c ontributions through Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) 
charges in accordance with the Community Infrastructure Regulations 2019.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
50 4.33 The Council will work collaboratively with appropriate infrastructure providers , our partners 
and developers to  facilitate th e timely  deliver y of the infrastructure necessary to support the 
level of growth required.  
4.34 The IDP Part B (Schedule) identifies the types of infrastructure required to support the 
anticipated growth in the borough and includes a summary of the currently i dentified 
infrastructure projects and their phasing, costing, delivery mechanism, priority ranking and 
relevant site allocations .  
4.35 The IDP will be updated in consultation with both the internal and external stakeholders such 
as other service areas and infr astructure providers.   
4.36 In negotiating planning obligations, the Council will also take into account strategic 
infrastructure (category 1 items in the IDP). The Council will use planning conditions or legal 
agreements to facilitate the provision of strategi c infrastructure. Where necessary this will 
involve suitable phasing of development and forward funding of its supporting infrastructure. 
In addition to developer funding, where necessary, the Council will collaborate with its 
partners to lobby central Gov ernment and funding partners for additional funding sources for 
strategic infrastructure projects.  
4.37 Early delivery of certain strategic and necessary infrastructure (category 1 and category 2 
items in the IDP) in advance of all contributions having been co llected may be required to 
support the level of growth planned. It will therefore be necessary to obtain funding from 
alternative sources and to collect developers’ contributions retrospectively for these projects. 
In those instances, the Council and its p artners including relevant landowners/developers 
will consider forward -funding wholly or partly to deliver critical infrastructure items. 
Therefore, in order to appropriately recover such forward -funding, when planning 
applications for development which wi ll be enabled by and/or benefit from such infrastructure 
do come forward, the Council may seek retrospective planning obligation contributions from 
all relevant development, at the appropriate contribution rate, even if those applications are 
not made unti l after the relevant infrastructure has been completed and/or fully or partially 
funded. Where an item of infrastructure has been forward funded or provided by a relevant 
landowner/developer, the retrospectively collected planning contributions may be used  to 
reimburse to such landowner/developer. As the final costs of the relevant item of 
infrastructure may not be known at the time, planning obligations requiring a contribution 
towards that infrastructure may also, where appropriate, contain a mechanism fo r review 
once the relevant item(s) of infrastructure has been fully paid for and constructed so as 
to secure payment of the appropriate level of contributions to cover the costs of the 
infrastructure. The CIL Regulations prohibit borrowing against future C IL receipts, so this 
method of forward -funding only applies to planning obligations.   
4.38 Applicants should refer to Essex County Council’s Developers’ Guide to Infrastructure 
Contributions which sets out ECC’s standards for the receipt of relevant infrastruc ture 
funding.  
4.39 The Council will take into account financial viability to ensure that the cumulative impact of 
planning policy, standards and infrastructure requirements do not render the sites and 
development identified in the Local Plan unviable and there fore undeliverable . 
4.40 This policy must be read in conjunction with Policy NE01 .  
51 4.41 The Council intends to progress the introduction of the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) 
as soon as possible after the Local Plan Examination. CIL is a charge, used to fund bo rough 
wide and local infrastructure projects for the benefit of local communities. The CIL Charging 
Schedule is subject to independent Examination. CIL is payable upon the granting of 
planning consent. This enables the Council to raise funds from developer s and provide 
some certainty 'up front' about how much money developers will be expected to contribute.  
Monitoring and Delivery  
Local Plan Review Requirements  
4.42 The NPPF (20 21) states that the preparation and review of all policies should be 
underpinned by relevant and up -to-date evidence , and that this evidence is adequate and 
proportionate, taking into account relevant market signals. The NPPF ( 2021, paragraph 33) 
also states that reviews should be completed no later than five years from the  adoption date 
of the plan, especially to take into account changing circumstances affecting the area, or any 
relevant changes in national policy.  
4.43 The Council recognise s that continuous ‘horizon scanning’ is necessary to maintain a long -
term view of the r elevance of the policies, in light of the fast -paced technological advances 
of the built environment sectors  and market efficiency in delivering planned development . 
This includes joint working on initiatives such as the South Essex Joint Strategic Plan. T his 
is in addition to the day -to-day monitoring of the strategic objectives and policy 
implementation to reflect on how effective the Plan is in delivering and maintaining a 
sufficient supply of housing to meet need s.   
4.44 Therefore, we will monitor the imple mentation of policies and proposals of the Local Plan 
using key indicators and targets set out in the Monitoring Framework ( Appendix 3). The 
Council are committed to undertaking an early update  of the Local Plan to ensure it looks 
ahead over a minimum 15 -year period from adoption.  Such a  review may also be required to 
address the implications of the national standardised approach to calculating local housing 
need, when adopted.  
POLICY MG06: LOCAL PLAN REVIEW  AND UPDATE  
The Council will bring forward a part ial update  of the Plan with the objective of 
meeting the full Objectively Assessed Housing Needs. Th e review  will commence 
immediately upon the adoption of this Plan with submission of the review for 
examination within 28 months. Specific matters to be add ressed by the update  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
52 shall include the following (amongst all other matters that need to be assessed and 
taken into account for the purposes of plan preparation):  
1. An update of Objectively Assessed Housing Needs in accordance with the 
NPPF 2021 and related guidance;  
2. An updated full green belt review and an updated spatial strategy (informed by 
the green belt review) in turn to inform the sustainable allocation of further 
sites to meet the full Objectively Assessed Housing Needs as assessed in part 
A above;  
3. The allocation of further sites to meet as a minimum the full Objectively 
Assessed Housing Needs in accordance with the updated spatial strategy for 
the full period of the plan review;  
4. A review of transport and highway issues to cater for local plan growth 
throughout the period of the review (in consultation with National Highways 
and Essex County Council) taking into account:  
a. the optimisation of existing, and the introduction of further, sustainable 
transport measures where appropriate along with the need t o provide 
improvements to and around:  
i. A12 junction 12;  
ii. M25 Junction 28;  
iii. M25 junction 29;  
b. any additional transport and highways infrastructure that will be needed to 
meet in full the updated Objectively Assessed Housing Needs and 
facilitate the further allo cations taking into account implemented and 
committed highway schemes.  
Managing Development  
4.45 This Plan will be the main vehicle through which planning applications are determined. In 
some circumstances, policies will be supplemented with supporting evidence and/or 
additional development management documents in the form of Supplementary Planning 
Docume nts or other types of guidance. Where considered necessary, we will also use 
special legislative tools such as Article 4 directions.  
4.46 The Council will continue to develop the use of masterplans to guide the design and layout 
of new development in collaborat ion with infrastructure providers and other relevant 
organisations.   
53 4.47 The broader process for determining planning applications encompasses pre -application 
discussions and Planning Performance Agreements.  
4.48 In some circumstances, particularly in the case of ma jor developments, strategic allocations 
or with complicated sites, we will also consider the use of independent review panels.  
Pre-Application Engagement  
4.49 We encourage the pre -application engagement process with applicants. This can help 
achieve effective d ecisions, and good quality and acceptable development. While the 
outcome of an application cannot be guaranteed, a planning application is more likely to 
succeed if it is well prepared, accords with the Local Plan , and addresses the relevant 
challenges rai sed at the pre -application stage.  
4.50 When preparing planning applications, applicants and developers should have regard to the 
requirements set out in the latest validation checklist.  
4.51 Where considered necessary, and as a last resort, legal powers through th e Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (as amended) may be used to enable development , in line 
with the growth strategy . Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
54  
 
 
 
 
Resilient Built Environment  
 
 
 
 
5.1 It is increasingly recognised that the design and layout of our built environment can impact 
our well -being and the opportunities to live a healthy lifestyle .  
5.2 The role of planning policies and decisions in enabling and supporting healthy lifestyles is 
recognised in the NPPF (20 21, paragraph 9 2). 
5.3 The NPPF (20 21, section  14) emphasises the need to take a proactive approach to 
mitigating and adapting to climate change. Our built environment is often put under strain 
during extreme weather conditions. The policies in this section seek to avoid increased 
vulnerability to extreme weather conditions , to ensure infrastructure is built to be resilient 
under conditions of a changing climate , and to ensure development is planned in ways that 
reduce  carbon emissions, providing a positive strategy for resource efficiency . The Council 
seeks to improve our built environment so that it can support the future resilience of 
communities and infrastructure, as well as create strong, vibrant and healthy commu nities.  
5.4 Infrastructure plays a critical role in enabling communities and businesses to survive and 
flourish in the face of climate and other threats. The concept of resilience in a planning 
context can be understood as the ability to reduce exposure to, pr epare for, cope with, 
recover better from, adapt and transform as needed, to the direct and indirect consequences 
of climate change, where these consequences can be both short -term shocks and longer -
term stresses6.  
 
6 Joseph Rowntree Foundation (2015) Community Resilience to Climate Change: An Evidence Review. Available at: 
https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/community -resilience -climate -change   
05  
55 5.5 Resilience -building strategies can be c onsidered to be ‘reactive’ or ‘proactive’7. A reactive 
approach focuses on mitigating consequences, maintaining stability and the status quo, 
whereas a proactive approach focuses on change and adaptation and looks more towards 
addressing long term stresse s. Both approaches are incorporated in this Plan.  
5.6 A holistic approach to sustainable development that reduces the environmental impact of 
development and promotes  healthy communities should be embedded within all 
development proposals from the outset.  
5.7 The policies in this section aim to increase the efficiency and resilience of our infrastructure, 
making our borough smarter and better prepared for climate impacts and other threats.  
Responding to  Climate Change  
5.8 Climate change and its consequences including flooding, heatwave and drought are 
significant environmental challenges and mitigating them is key to sustainability. Globally, 
the average concentration of CO 2 now exceeds 400 parts per million, the highest in recorded 
history8. Sixteen of the seventeen warmest years on record have occurred since 20019. The 
Environment Agency predicts an average sea level rise around the UK of at least a metre by 
2115 from a 1990 baseline10.  
5.9 The Climate Change Act (2008) legislates for a n 80% reduction in greenhouse gas 
emissions against 1990 levels by 2050. In June 2019, parliament passed the Climate 
Change Act 2008 (2050 Target Amendment) Order 2019 committing the UK to reduce net 
emissions of greenhouse gases to zero by 2050. This requires everyone to be engaged, 
from national and local government to businesses, households and communities.  
5.10 Building the resilience of wildlife, habitats and ecosystems to climate change, to put our 
natural environment in the strongest position to  meet the challenges and changes ahead is 
one of the objectives of the National Adaptation Programme 201811 based on key 
recommendations from the Climate Change Risk Assessment 201712. This is addressed 
further by a number of policies, such as  Policy BE 18 Green and Blue Infrastructure , Policy 
NE01 Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment , NE02 Recreational Disturbance 
 
7 Dovers, S.R. and Handmer, J.W. (1992) Uncertainty, sustainability and change, in Global Environmental Change , 
2(4): 262 –276; developed further in the context of flooding by Twigger -Ross et al., (2014) Resilience Community 
Pathfinder Evaluation: Rapid Evidence Assessment, Project Report, London: DEFRA  
8 NASA, Carbon Dioxide Hits New High . Available at: http://climate.nasa.gov/climate_resources/7/   
9 NASA, NOAA Data Show 2016 Warmest Year on Record Globally . Available at: https://www.nasa.gov/press -
release/nasa -noaa -data-show -2016 -warmest -year-on-record -globally   
10 Enviro nment Agency (2017) Flood Risk Assessments: Climate Change Allowances. Available at:  
http://bit.ly/2w5Zo4o  United Kingdom Climate Projections 2018 (UKCP18) has started to consider revised risk 
associated with sea level  change.  
11  DEFRA (2018) The National Adaptation Programme and the Third Strategy for Climate Adaptation Reporting. 
Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/727252/national -
adaptation -programme -2018.pdf   
12 HM Government (2017) UK Climat e Change Risk Assesment 2017. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/584281/uk -
climate -change -risk-assess -2017.pdf   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
56 Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (RAMS) , Policy NE03 Trees, Woodlands, Hedgerows , 
NE05 Air Quality , and NE0 6 Flood Risk.  
5.11 The policie s in this chapter  require decision takers and developers to give an appropriate 
consideration to addressing the  climate change , including : 
a. climate change mitigation  measures which  focus on reduc ing the impact s of human 
activit ies on the climate system, by means such as : 
i. designing new communities and buildings to be energy and resource efficient ; 
ii. incorporating renewable technologies ;  
iii. reduc ing existing and potential source of pollution ; 
iv. reduc ing transport related carbon emissions through the promotion of sustainable 
modes of transport ; and  
b. climate change adaptation measures which focus  on ensuring that new developments 
and the wider community are adaptable and resilient to the changing climate, by 
means such as : 
i. buildings, infrastructure and construction techniques  that are designed to adapt to 
a changing climate and to avoid contributing to its impacts , including urban heat 
island effect ; 
ii. safe and secure environment which is resilient against the  impacts of climate 
change long term stresses and extreme weather events ;  
iii. enhanc ing biodiversity and ecological resilience where possible ;  
c. efficient resource management measures that take into account issues such as,  
i. allocation and density of development ; 
ii. resource  consumption (including  water, energy, construction materials)  during 
construction and operation  as well as  the environmental, social and economic 
impacts of the construction process itself and how buildings are designed and 
used .   
57 Sustainable Construction and Resource 
Efficiency  
Renewable Energy and Low Carbon Development  
5.12 The NPPF requires the planning system to support the transition to a low carbon future in a 
changing climate, encourage the use of renewable and low carbon energy and associated 
infrastructure in line with the Climate Change Act 2008.  
5.13 The Brentwood Renewable Energy Study (2014)13 states that around half of all energy used 
in the borough is from road transport, with a third from domestic use and about a fifth from 
the commercial and industrial sector.  
5.14 Statistical information from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 
(BEIS) 14, indicates that Brentwood Borough has relatively high levels of domestic gas and 
electricity consumption. Over the period 2010 - 2015, Brentwood had the highest level of 
domestic customer mean gas consumption in the County and was also s ignificantly higher 
than the England and East of England averages for the same period.  Electricity usage for 
Brentwood ranks about 4th in the County and also significantly higher than the England and 
East of England averages for the period 2010  - 2015. One of the reasons for the higher 
domestic energy use in Brentwood maybe that homes in the borough are 13% larger than 
homes in England on average.   
5.15 Over the period of the Plan, energy use and carbon emissions may increase by 10% 
following a ‘busine ss as usual ’ trajectory.  
STRATEGIC POLICY BE 01: CARBON REDUCTION  AND  RENEWABLE ENERGY  
1. Carbon Reduction and Construction Standards  
Development should meet the minimum standards of sustainable construction and 
carbon reduction  as set out below : 
a. All major development  will be required to achieve  at least a 10% reduction 
in carbon dioxide emissions above the requirements of Part L Building 
Regulations; and  
 
13 University of Exeter (2014) Brentwood Renewable Energy Study  
14 BEIS Sub -national co nsumption statistics  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
58  
b. New Non -residential development  will be required to achieve a certified 
‘Excellent’ rating under the BREEAM New Construction (Non -Domestic 
Buildings) 2018 scheme, or other equivalent standards . 
The version of BREEAM that a building must be assessed under should be the 
latest BREEAM scheme and not be based on scheme versions that have been 
registered under  at the pre -planning stages of a project. Other construction 
standards, such as LEEDs or Passivhaus, will be supported provided that they 
are broadly at least in line with the standards set out above.  
2. Renewable Energy  
Wherever possible,  application of majo r development will be required to 
provide a minimum of 10% of the predicted energy needs of the development 
from renewable energy . Where on -site provision of renewable technologies is 
not appropriate, or where it is clearly demonstrated that the above targ et 
cannot be fully achieved on -site, any shortfall should be provided through:  
a. ‘allowable solutions contributions’ via Section 106 or CIL. These funds will 
then be used for energy efficiency and energy generation initiatives or 
other measure(s) required to  offset the environmental impact of the 
development; or  
b. off-site provision, provided that an alternative proposal is identified, and 
the measures can be secured.  
3. Application of major development, including  proposals involving the  
redevelopment of existing floor space, should be accompanied by a 
Sustainability Statement outlining their approach to the following issues:  
a. adaptation to climate change;  
b. carbon reduction;  
c. water management;  
d. site waste management;  
e. use of materials;  
4. Where  it is not possible to meet  these standards , applicants must demonstrate 
compelling reasons and provide evidence, as to why achieving the 
sustainability standards would not be technically feasible or economically 
viable . 
   
59 5.16 The Climate Change Act 2008 (2050  Target Amendment) Order 2019  commits the UK 
Government by law to reducing greenhouse gas emissions to zero  by 2050.  
5.17 Improvements in resource efficiency to meet the government’s carbon target were  made 
through Building Regulations which set standards for design and construction that applies to 
most new buildings, regardless of type.  
5.18 However, local authorities can still require energy efficiency standards above Building 
Regulation, as allowed by the Planning and Energy Act 2008  and confirmed by the 
government in its summary response to the NPPF 2018 consultation . 
5.19 As such , this policy requires an on -site reduction of at least 10 per cent  beyond the baseline 
of part L of the current Building Regulations  on major development . This takes into account 
the Local Plan Viability Assessment (2018)’s recommendation for the Council to only seek 
standards that are over and above those set out in Building Regulation in the case of major 
development where there is a requirement for 10% renewable energy .  
5.20 According to the Brentwood Renewable Energy Study (2014), an international analysis of 
certified buildings has shown that the additional cost of achieving BREEAM ‘Very Good ’ is 
expected to be minor and therefore should not be burdensome for developers. The version 
of BREEAM that a building must be assessed under should be the latest BREEAM scheme 
and not be based on scheme versions that have been registered under at the pre -planning 
stages of a project.  
5.21 There are many approaches that can be taken to meeting the const ruction standards 
required by this policy. The Council will be supportive of innovative approaches to meeting 
and exceeding the standards set out in the policy. Where other construction standards are 
proposed for new developments, for example Leadership in  Energy and Environmental 
Design (LEED)  or construction methods such as Passivhaus Standard , these will be 
supported, provided that it can be demonstrated that they are broadly in line with the 
standards set out above, particularly in relation to carbon re duction and water efficiency.  
5.22 Consideration of sustainable design and construction issues should take place at the earliest 
possible stage in the development process. This will provide the greatest opportunities for a 
well designed and constructed developm ent and at the same time enable costs to be 
minimised. Therefore, developer s should consider sustainable construction issues in pre -
application discussions with the Local Planning Authority. Proposals should be captured 
within a Sustainability Statement, w hich can form part of the Design and Access Statement.  
5.23 Sustainable design and construction are concerned with the implementation of sustainable 
development in individual sites and buildings. It takes account of the resources used in 
construction, and of th e environmental, social and economic impacts of the construction 
process itself and how buildings are designed and used.  
5.24 The choice of sustainability measures and how they are implemented may vary substantially 
from development to development. However, the  general principles of sustainable design 
and construction should be applied to all scales and types of development.  The 
Sustainability Statement should demonstrate how proposals avoid increased vulnerability to 
the impacts arising from climate change thro ugh sustainable and resilient design. The 
Sustainability Statement should be proportionate to the proposed scale of development and Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
60 clearly set out, providing sufficient detail on how sustainable design solutions have been 
integrated for both the construct ion and operation phases of the development.  More 
guidance on areas to be covered in the Sustainability Statement is set out in  Figure 5.1.  
  
Adaptation to climate change  
Adaptation measures can be implemented at a variety of scales, from individual buildings 
up to community and conurbation scale. Measures that will have benefits beyond site 
boundaries, and that will have a cumulative impact in areas where development is to be 
phased, should also be pursued. Applicants should refer to best practice guidance.  
Carbon reduction  
Proposals should demonstrate how the carbon reduction target will be met, in particular 
how the proposals:  
a. minimises the energy demand of new buildings by means such as fabric first 
approach and design;  
b. utilises energy e fficient supply through low carbon technologies;  
c. supplies energy from new, renewable energy sources;  and 
d. where on -site provision of renewable technologies is not appropriate, confirmation 
of offsite arrangement should be submitted.  
Proposals for major deve lopment should contain a  calculation of the energy demand and 
carbon dioxide emissions covered by Building Regulations and, separately, the energy 
demand and carbon dioxide emissions from any other part of the development, including 
plant or equipment, tha t are not covered by the Building Regulations (i.e. the unregulated 
emissions) .  
Proposals should also explain  how the site has been future -proofed to achieve  zero-
carbon on -site emissions by 2050.  
Water management  
Development must optimise the opportunities for efficient water use, reuse and recycling, 
including integrated water management and water conservation.  
Site waste management  
Developments should be designed in a way that reduces the amount of construction 
waste and maximises the reuse a nd recycling of materials at all stages of a development’s 
lifecycle.  
All new development should be designed to make it easier for future occupants to 
maximise levels of recycling and reduce waste being sent to landfill. In order to do so, 
storage capacit y for waste, both internal and external, should be an integral element of the 
 
61 design of new developments. The Council will be supportive of innovative approaches to 
waste management.  
Use of materials  
Although this is not a policy requirement, the Council will encourage all developers to 
maximise resource efficiency and identify, source, and use environmentally and socially 
responsible materials. There are four principal considerations that should influence the 
sourcing of materials:  
a. Responsible sourcing  – sourcing materials from known legal and certified 
sources through the use of environmental management systems and chain of 
custody schemes including the sourcing of timber accredited by the Forestry 
Stewardship Council (FSC), or the Programme for the Endor sement of Forest 
Certification (PEFC);  
b. Secondary materials  – reclaiming and reusing material arising from the 
demolition of existing buildings and preparation of sites for development, as well 
as materials from other post -consumer waste streams;  
c. Embodied i mpact of materials  – the aim should be to maximise the specification 
of major building elements to achieve an area -weighted rating of A or B as 
defined in the Building Research Establishment (BRE) Green Guide to 
Specification. Consideration should also be given to locally sourced materials; 
and 
d. Healthy materials  – where possible developers should specify materials that 
represent a lower risk to the health of both constructio n workers and occupants. 
For example, selecting materials with zero or low volatile organic compound 
(VOC) levels to provide a healthy enviro nment for residents.  
Other  
As well as the consideration of the above issues, the sustainability statement in support of 
the application should also address how the proposals meet all other policies relating to 
sustainability throughout the plan, including : 
a. biodiversity and ecology;  
b. land, water, noise and air pollution;  
c. transport, mobility and access;  
d. health and well -being, including provision of open space;  
e. culture, heritage and the quality of built form, including efficient use of land.  
Figure 5.1: Areas  to be covered in the sustainability statement and recommended approach  
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
62 Allowable Solution  
5.25 As part of the government’s policy for achieving zero carbon performance, the policy seeks 
to establish realistic limits for carbon compliance (on site carbon target for buildings) and 
allows for the full zero carbon standard to be achieved through the use of ‘allowable 
solutions ’. These are envisaged as mainly near site or off-site carbon saving projects which 
would compensate for carbon emissions reductions that are difficult to achieve on site. Local 
authorities can explore opportunities for using carbon offset funds and community energy 
funds as a way of delivering the concept of allowable solutions in their areas.  
Renewable Energy Generation  
5.26 Incorporating renewable energy generation and energy efficiency measures into new 
development will be essential in order to achieve carbon re duction targets.  
5.27 All developments should maximise opportunities for on -site electricity and heat production as 
well as use innovative building materials and smart technologies to reduce carbon 
emissions, reduce energy costs to occupants and improve the borough’s energy resilience.  
POLICY BE02: WATER EFFICIENCY AND MANAGEMENT  
Water Efficiency  
1. Development should incorporate water conservation measures in the 
proposals and meet the minimum standards for water efficiency as set out 
below:  
a. New residential devel opment will be required to achieve limits of 110 litres 
per person per day.  
b. New non -residential development is expected to meet BREEAM 
‘Excellent’ rating in category Wat 01.  
c. Major developments and high or intense water use developments (such as 
hotels) is expected to provide more substantial water management 
measures such as rain/ and grey water harvesting.  
Waste Water and Sewage  
2. Development proposals should:  
a. seek to improve the water environment and demonstrate that adequate 
wastewater infrastructure capa city is provided;  
b. ensure that misconnections between foul and surface water networks are 
eliminated and not easily created through future building alterations;   
63 c. incorporate measures such as smart metering, water saving and recycling, 
including retrofitting and rain/grey water harvesting, to help to achieve 
lower water consumption rates and to maximise futureproofing;  
3. Applications will need to demonstrate that the sewerage network has adequate 
capacity both on and off -site to serve the development and to asse ss the need 
to contribute to any additional connections for the development to prevent 
flooding or pollution of land and water courses. Where sewerage capacity is 
identified as insufficient, development will only be permitted if it is 
demonstrated that imp rovements will be completed prior to occupation of the 
development.  
Water Quality  
4. All development proposals should have regard to the Water Cycle Study and:  
a. seek to improve water quality;  
b. not cause deterioration in the quality of a water course or groundwa ter; 
c. not lead to adverse impacts on the natural functioning of the watercourse, 
including quantity, flow, river continuity, groundwater connectivity, or 
biodiversity impacts;  
d. where development is likely to have an impact, proposals must set out 
how impacts will be mitigate d. 
 
5.28 Brentwood Water Cycle Study 2018  identifies the borough as lying within an area of Serious 
Water Stress. A semi -arid climate and succession of dry winters can lead to groundwater 
levels within Brentwood being susceptible to mu lti-season droughts. The quality of the 
borough’s watercourses is generally poor, while sewerage infrastructure in the north of the 
borough is operating at full capacity. The study recommends requiring all new developments 
to submit a water sustainability assessment and developers to demonstrate that they will 
achieve the water consumption reduction to Level 3/4 of the Code for Sustainable Homes for 
all residential developments and for non -residential developments to achieve BREEAM ‘Very 
Good’ standard for water consumption targets. As the Code for Sustainable Homes has 
been withdrawn, water conservation measures will be required to ensure a 110 litres per 
person per day limit, at the level formerly considered at Level 3 -4 in line with the Water 
Cycle Study 2018.  
5.29 Major developments are encouraged to incorporate more substantial water management 
measures, such as grey water harvesting. This is supported by the Interim Sustainability 
Appraisal (2016, paragraph 21.1.4 and 2018, paragraph 10.8.3).  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
64 POLICY BE 03: ESTABLISHING LOW CARBO N AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
INFRASTRUCTURE NETWORK  
Renewable energy infrastructure  
1. Innovative approaches to the installation and/or construction of energy 
generation facilities or low carbon homes which demonstrate sustainable use 
of resou rces and high energy efficiency levels will be supported.   
Decentralised energy infrastructure  
2. New development proposals of over 500 dwelling units , including brownfield 
and urban extensions, or where the clustering of new sites totals more than 
500 units,  should include energy masterplans  to incorporate decentralised 
energy infrastructure in line with the following hierarchy:  
i. where there is an existing decentra lised heat network  with sufficient 
capacity or the capacity to expand , new development will be expected 
to connect to it;  
ii. where there is no existing decentralised heat network  with sufficient 
capacity or the capacity to expand , new development will be expe cted 
to deliver an onsite heat network, unless it can be demonstrated to the 
Council’s satisfaction that this would render the development unviable;  
iii. where a developer is unable to deliver a decentralised heat network,  it 
will need to be  demonstrate d to the satisfaction of the Council  that the  
applicant  has fully assess ed all reasonably available options for its 
incorporation and delivery and has  designed  the development  to allow 
future connection to a heat network unless it can be demonstrated that 
a low er carbon alternative has been put in place  
3. New development will be expected to demonstrate that the heating and 
cooling system s have been selected according to the following heat hierarchy:   
i. connection to existing CHP/CCHP distribution network;  
ii. site-wide renewable CHP/CCHP;  
iii. site-wide gas -fired CHP/CCHP;  
iv. site-wide renewable community heating/cooling;  
v. site-wide gas -fired community heating/cooling;  
vi. individual building renewable heating .   
  
65 5.30 According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA , 2018 )15, renewable 
energy will be cheaper than fossil fuels by 2020 as a result of  improvements in technology. 
Renewables are experiencing a virtuous cycle of technology improvement and cost 
reduction.  
Stand -alone renewable energy  
5.31 It is acknowledged that standalone technologies such as large -scale  wind turbines and 
photovoltaic (PV) arrays could be significant sources of energy. The resource assessment in 
the Brentwood Renewable Energy Study (2014) demonstrated that the borough’s renewable 
energy target will not be possible without deploying large commercial scale renewable 
technologies. However, stand -alone renewable energy schemes would occur within and 
could impact on the Green Belt and would also be constrained by prox imity to suitable 
connection to the national electricity grid. Therefore, whilst the Council would encourage 
opportunities for stand -alone renewable energy schemes within Brentwood, this will need 
careful consideration and be assessed on a case -by-case  basis. Selection of the most 
appropriate locations would depend on balancing technical factors (such as proximity to 
substations) with minimising the impact of those developments through careful siting and 
mitigation measures. The Council would also support c ommunity -led initiatives for renewable 
and low carbon energy, including developments outside areas identified in local plans or 
other strategic policies that are being taken forward through neighbourhood planning, in line 
with the NPPF.  
Decentralised ener gy 
5.32 Decentralised energy broadly refers to energy that is generated off the main grid, including 
micro -renewables, heating and cooling. It can refer to energy from waste plants, combined 
heat and power, district heating and cooling, as well as geothermal, b iomass or solar 
energy. Schemes can serve a single building or a whole community, even being built out 
across entire cities. Decentralised energy is a rapidly  deployable and efficient way to meet 
demand, whilst improving energy security and sustainability at the same time. Other benefits 
of decentralised energy include:  
i. increased conversion efficiency (capture and use of heat generated, reduced  
transmission losses) ; 
ii. increased use of renewable, carbon -neutral and low -carbon sources of fuel ; 
iii. more flexibility for generation to match local demand patterns for electricity and heat ; 
iv. greater energy security for businesses that control their own generation ; 
v. greater awareness of energy issues through community -based energy systems, driving  
a change in social attitude s and more efficient use of our energy resources . 
5.33 District heating and cooling systems (DH) are an important enabling technology for the use 
of renewables and need to be a central component of the decentralised system. DH can 
combine different sources of h eat and can play a positive role in the integration of variable 
renewable energy. In ‘the Future of Heating ’16 the government  highlighted the role for heat 
 
15 IRENA (2018) Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2017, International Renewable Energy Agency  
16 DECC (2013) The Future of Heating: Meeting the challenge    Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
66 networks for delivering low carbon heat. District heating can be retrofitted for existing heat 
custo mers or installed in developments as part of a site wide low or zero carbon energy 
solution.  
5.34 The East of England resource assessment and the Brentwood Renewable Energy Study 
2014 suggest that there are unlikely to be major anchor and high heat density areas in the 
borough suitable for retrofit -only DH networks. New development will therefore play an 
important role in heat network development in the borough. Strategic allocations could  play a 
key role in establishing a decentralised energy network, offering great opportunities to create 
or expand the borough’s decentralised energy infrastructure . 
5.35 According to the Brentwood Renewable Energy Study (2014 ), DH is a viable low and zero 
carbon energy solution for new development; the viability of DH and CHP schemes are 
improved with increased scale, density and mix of uses. Smaller sites close to large exiting 
loads, on the other hand, provide opportunities f or collaboration which provides cost 
effective, energy efficient, low carbon heat and electricity. Therefore, applicants of strategic 
sites should engage at an early stage with the Council, stakeholders and relevant energy 
companies to establish the future  energy requirements and infrastructure arising from large -
scale development proposals and clusters of significant new development.  
5.36 The financial opportunity from DH schemes exists as there are economies of scale where 
the costs of providing a central heat  source that also generates power, together with the 
associated distribution infrastructure, outweighs alternative means of complying with Part L. 
Where development occurs piecemeal, it is likely that individual developers for each site 
would ch oose tradit ional means of meeting Part L Building Regulations, which may result in 
a loss of opportunity.  
5.37 Energy masterplanning at the large scale offers a unique opportunity to consider and plan 
for a robust infrastructure that will support the aspirations of a sust ainable community – not 
only in terms of demand reduction, energy efficiency and renewable energy supply, but also 
in relation to water and waste management, transport and biodiversity. All these issues must 
be considered from the earliest stage and will h ave a major influence on the energy 
masterplan concept. Particular attention should be given to opportunities for utilizing existing 
decentralised and renewable or low -carbon energy supply systems and to fostering the 
development of new opportunities to su pply proposed and existing development. Such 
opportunities could include co -locating potential heat customers and heat suppliers. Using 
the masterplanning process to map out zero -carbon and renewable energy opportunities in 
the area will help in identifyin g the potential for renewables at all scales, including 
community -scale schemes (TCPA , 2016 , Practical Guides for Creating Successful New 
Communities, Guide 4: Planning for Energy and Climate Change).  
5.38 An Energy Masterplan should identify:  
i. major heat loads (including anchor heat loads, with particular reference to sites such as 
schools, hospitals and social housing) ; 
ii. heat loads from existing buildings that can be connected to future phases of a heat 
network major heat supply plant ; 
iii. opportunities to utilise e nergy from waste ;  
67 iv. secondary heat sources ; 
v. opportunities for low temperature heat networks ; 
vi. land for energy centres and/or energy storage ; 
vii. heating and cooling network routes ; 
viii. opportunities for futureproofing utility infrastructure networks to  minimise the i mpact from 
road works ; 
ix. infrastructure and land requirements for electricity and gas supplies ; 
x. implementation options for delivering feasible projects, considering issues of 
procurement, funding and risk.  
Building scale technologies  
5.39 Brentwood Borough has re latively high levels of domestic gas and electricity consumption, 
therefore building -scale technologies have the potentials to meet the borough’s domestic 
energy demands. Building scale technologies often comprise permitted development and  
can be included in new development or retro -fitted to existing units. Building scale 
technologies with the greatest potential include rooftop solar technologies and biomass 
boilers in the commercial and industrial sector.  
POLICY BE04: MANAGING  HEAT RISK  
1. All development proposals should minimise internal heat gain and the risks of 
overheating through design, layout, building orientation and use of appropriate 
materials.  
2. Major development proposals should demonstrate how they will reduce the 
potential for overhe ating and reliance on air conditioning systems by:  
a. minimising internal heat generation through energy efficient design;  
b. reducing the amount of heat entering a building through orientation, 
shading, albedo, fenestration, insulation and the provision of green roofs 
and walls;  
c. managing the heat within the building through exposed internal thermal 
mass and high ceilings;  
d. maximising  passive ventilation;  and 
e. where necessary, providing mechanical ventilation and  active cooling 
systems . Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
68  
5.40 For some,  climate change and severe weather events could cause them discomfort; for 
others, especially children, the elderly , and those who have certain health conditions, the 
effects can be potentially lethal. According to the first UK Climate Change Risk Assessme nt 
(CCRA) in 2012, there are around 2,000 heat -related deaths in the UK ; it projects that this 
number could more than double by the 2050s.   Much of this increased risk is thought to be 
caused by exposure to high indoor temperatures. Overheating risks to he alth also emerged 
as one of the top six key risks where more action is required in the most recent UK Climate 
Change Risk Assessment 201717. 
5.41 The Climate Change Act (2008) and the NPPF (20 21, paragraph 153) also require planning 
to take a proactive approach  to mitigating and adapting to the risk of overheating from rising 
temperatures.  
5.42 Many aspects of building design can lead to increases in overheating risk, including high 
proportions of glazing and an increase in the air tightness of buildings. There are a  number 
of low -energy -intensive measures that can mitigate this risk; these include but not limit to 
solar shading, building orientation, solar -controlled glazing, living walls and green roof. For  
major developments, a landscape scheme integrating multi -functional green and blue 
infrastructure  should be developed along the built form as this can be part of a sustainable 
and energy efficient development.  
5.43 Developers should refer to most up to date guidance and best practice examples. The 
Chartered Institution  of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) produce s a series of guidance 
on assessing and mitigating overheating risk in new developments, in particular:  
i. TM 59: Design Methodology for the Assessment of Overheating Risk in Homes - is 
relevant for domestic developments; and  
ii. TM52: The Limits of Thermal Comfort: Avoiding Overheating in European Buildings - is 
relevant for non -domestic developments.  
These can also be applied to refurbishment projects.  
 
17 UK Climate Change Risk Assessment, HM (2017) 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/5842 81/uk -
climate -change -risk-assess -2017.pdf    
69 Sustainable Drainage  
POLICY BE05: SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE  
1. All developments should incorporate appropriate Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (SuDS) for the disposal of surface water, in order to avoid any 
increase in  surface water  flood risk or adverse impact on water quality.  
2. Developm ent within areas identified as a Critical Drainage Area (CDA) on the 
policies map, should optimise the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems by 
providing an individually designed mitigation scheme to address the site -
specific issues and risk, as informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment. 
This could be provided as part of the Drainage Strategy and must address any 
issues highlighted in the Surface Water Management Plan, where relevant . 
3. Greenfield developments, major development and all development with in a 
Critical Drainage Area must achieve a greenfield runoff rate. Where it is 
demonstrated that this is not possible  on brownfield developments  then a 
runoff reduction of  50% minimum should be achieved. The technical approach 
should be justified in the Dr ainage Strategy.   
4. Applicants are required to submit a surface water Drainage Strategy  and a 
Flood Risk Assessment for all major development as well as for all 
development within a Critical Drainage Area. The Drainage Strategy must 
include a SuDs Management  Plan setting out the long -term management and 
maintenance arrangements . 
5. SuDs will be required to meet the following design criteria:  
a. the design must follow an index -based  approach when managing water 
quality. Implementation in line with the updated CIRIA SuDS Manual18 is 
required. Source control techniques such as green roofs, permeable 
paving and swales should be used so that rainfall runoff in events up to 
5mm does not leave the site ; 
b. SuDS should be sensitively designed and integrated into the Green and 
Blue infrastr ucture to create high quality public open space and 
landscaped public realm, in line with Strategic  Policy NE02: Green and 
Blue Infrastructure ; 
c. maximise opportunities to enhance biodiversity  net-gain;  
 
18 CIRIA (2017) The SuDS Manual  (C753) . Available at: 
https://www. ciria.org/CIRIA/Bookshop/Free_Publications/Books/Free_CIRIA_Publications.aspx?hkey=ca8794b
8-b1b3 -4742 -880d -6c7a27719afb   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
70 d. improve the quality of water discharges and be used in conjunction with  
water use efficiency  measures ; 
e. function effectively over the lifetime of the development ; 
f. the preferred hierarchy of managing surface water drainage from any 
development is through infiltration measures, secondly attenuation and 
discharge to watercourses, and if these cannot be met, through discharge 
to surface water only sewers ; 
g. have regard to Essex County Council SuDS Design Guide 2020, or as 
amended . 
6. When discharging surface water to a public sewer, developers will be required 
to provide evidence that capacity exists in the public sewerage network to 
serve their development , in line with policy requirements in BE02 Water 
Efficiency and Management.  
7. Development proposals should be designed to include permeable surfaces 
wherever possi ble. Proposals for impermeable paving, including on small 
surfaces such as front gardens and driveways, will be strongly resisted unless 
it can be suitably demonstrated that this is not technically feasible or 
appropriate.  
 
5.44 Sustainable Drainage Systems (S uDS) are the primary means by which increased surface 
run-off can be mitigated. They can manage run -off flow rates to reduce the impact of 
urbanisation on flooding, protect or enhance water quality and provide a multi -functional use 
of land to deliver biod iversity, landscape and public amenity aspirations. They do this by 
dealing with run -off and pollution as close as possible to its source and protect water 
resources from point pollution. SuDs allow new development in areas where existing 
drainage systems are close to full capacity, thereby enabling development within existing 
urban areas.  Reference must be made to the criteria outlined in the Essex County Council 
SuDS Guide.  
5.45 Wherever possible, Sustainable Drainage Systems techniques must be utilised to di spose of 
surface rainwater so that it is retained either on site or within the immediate area, reducing 
the existing rate of run -off. Such systems may include  green roofs , rainwater attenuation 
measures , surface water storage areas, flow limiting devices and infiltration areas or 
soakaways. This approach is commonly known as the ‘surface water management train’ or 
‘source -to-stream’.   
5.46 SuDS must have regard to the criteria outlined in the Essex County Coun cil SuDS Guide  . 
5.47 Essex County Council is the Lead Local Flood Authority. Applicants will need to prove 
compliance with  the above drainage hierarchy and ensure sustainable drainage has been  
71 adequately utilised, taking into account potential land contaminati on issues and protection of 
existing water quality, in line with local and national policy and guidance.  
5.48 The applicability of SuDS techniques for use on potential development sites will depend 
upon proposed and existing land -uses influencing the volume of water required to be 
attenuated, catchment characteristics and the underlying site geology.  
5.49 When run -off does occur, treatment within SuDS components is essential for frequent 
rainfall events, for example up to 1:1 year return period event, where urban co ntaminants 
are being washed off urban surfaces, for all sites .  
5.50 For rainfall events greater than the 1:1 event, it is likely that the dilution will be significant 
and will reduce the environmental risk. It is important that the SuDS design aims to minimise  
the risk of re -mobilisation  and washout of any pollutants already captured by the system.  
5.51 Developers are encouraged to refer to the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2018 (which 
maps infiltration areas ) and guidance provided by the Construction Industry Res earch and 
Information Association ( CIRIA ) for design criteria, technical feasibility , to ensure the future 
sustainability of the borough’s drainage system. Essex County Council ha s produced a 
SuDS Design Guide (2015) to help steer what is expected from dev elopment to complement 
national requirements and prioritise local needs.  
Communications Infrastructure  
5.52 The Council recognises the growing importance of modern, effective telecommunications 
systems to serve local business and communities and their crucial role in the national and 
local economy.  
5.53 High quality communications infrastructure  including  ultrafast broadband and mobile 
communication will be provided by working collaboratively with Essex County Council, 
communications operators and providers, and supporting initiatives, technologies and 
developments which increase and improve coverage and quality thro ughout the borough.  
STRATEGIC POLICY BE06: COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE  
1. The Council will support proposals for high quality communications 
infrastructure and superfast broadband, including community -based  networks, 
particularly where alternative technologies need to be used in rural areas of 
the borough.  
2. Proposals from service providers for new or the expansion of existing 
communications infrastructure (including telecommunications masts, Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
72 equipment and associated development, and superfast broadband) will be 
supported subject to the following criteria:   
a. evidence is provided to demonstrate, to the Council’s satisfact ion, that the 
possibility of mast or site sharing has been fully explored and no suitable 
alternative sites are available in the locality including the erection of 
antennae on existing buildings or other suitable structures;  
b. evidence is provided to confir m that the proposals would cause no harm to 
highway safety;  
c. the proposal has  no unacceptable impact on the character and 
appearance of the area, landscape or heritage impacts or unacceptable 
impacts on the natural environment ;  
d. the proposal has been design ed to minimise disruption should the need for 
maintenance, adaption or future upgrades arise;  
e. the proposal will not cause significant and irremediable interference with 
other electrical equipment, air traffic services or instrumentation operated 
in the na tional interest;  and 
f. the proposal conforms to the latest International Commission on Non -
Ionising Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) guidelines, taking account of the 
cumulative impact of all operator equipment located on the mast/site 
where appropriate ( i.e. prevent location to sensitive community uses, 
including schools).  
 
5.54 The government has committed to improving broadband access. As part of this commitment 
the Superfast Essex Programme aims to extend the fibre broadband network as far as 
possible in Essex. The Council will work  with broadband infrastructure providers and Essex  
County Council to ensure as wider coverage as possible . Upgrades to existing and new 
communications infrastructure, including ultrafast  broadband and mobile communication will 
be strongly supported, including masts, buildings and other related structures, to harness the 
opportunities arising from new  high-quality  communications.  
5.55 The objective of this policy is  to ensure the right balance is struck  between providing 
essential telecommunications infrastructure , conserving  and preserving the environment and 
local amenity, particularly in the borough ’s sensitive areas. By its nature, 
telecommunications development has the potential to have a significant impact on the 
environment and raises issues of visual and residential amenity. Mast and site sharing, 
using existing buildings and structures and a design led approach, disguising equipment 
where necessary, can help address these concerns.  Therefore,  planning applications must 
be accompanied by detailed supplementary information which provide s the technical  
73 justification for the proposed development including the area of search, details of any 
consultation undertaken, the proposed structure and measures to minimise its visual impact.  
5.56 Although the impact from telecommunications equipment on hea lth is a source of public 
concern, the government has indicated that the planning system is not the place to 
determine health safeguards. However, the Council will nevertheless require all applicants to 
demonstrate their proposed installation complies with  the latest national and international 
guidelines. This currently requires applicants to demonstrate they comply with the 
International Commission of Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP)19 which should take 
into account the cumulative impact s of all operators’ equipment located on the mast/site.  
POLICY BE07: CONNECTING NEW DEVELOPMENTS TO DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE  
1. To support Brentwood’s economic growth and productivity now and in the 
future, all development proposals should:  
a. Provide up to date communications infrastructure as an integral part of 
development proposals. As a minimum, all new developments must be 
served by the fastest available broadband connection, installed on an 
open access basis. This includes installation of appropriate cablin g within 
dwelling s and business units and full connection of the developed areas to 
the main telecommunications network;  
b. ensure that sufficient ducting space for future digital connectivity 
infrastructure (such as small cell antenna and ducts for cables, t hat 
support fixed and mobile connectivity and therefore underpins smart 
technologies) is provided where ver possible ; 
c. support the effective use of the public realm, such as street furniture 
andother installations , to accommodate new state of the art well-designed 
and integrated mobile digital communication infrastructure;  
2. When installing new and improving existing digital communication 
infrastructure in new development, proposals should:  
a. identify and plan for the telecommunications network demand and 
infrast ructure needs from first occupation;  
b. take into account the Highway Authority’s land requirements so as not to 
impede or add to the cost of the highway mitigation schemes where the 
location and route of new utility services in the vicinity of the highway 
network or proposed new highway network;  
 
19 https://www.icnirp.org/   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
74 c. ensure the scale, form and massing of the new development does not 
cause unavoidable interference with existing communications 
infrastructure in the vicinity. If so, opportunities to mitigate such impact 
through appro priate design modifications should be progressed including 
measures for resiting, re -provision or enhancement of any relevant 
communications infrastructure within the new development;  
d. demonstrate that the siting and design of the installation would not hav e a 
detrimental impact upon the visual and residential amenity of neighbouring 
occupiers, the host building (where relevant), and the appearance and 
character of the area;  
e. seek opportunities to share existing masts or sites with other providers; 
and 
f. all digital communication infrastructure should have the capacity  to 
respond to changes in technology requirements over the life of the 
development.  
3. Where applicants can demonstrate, through consultation with broadband 
infrastructure providers, that superfast b roadband connection is not practical , 
or economically viable:  
a. the developer will ensure that broadband service is made available via an 
alternative technology provider, such as fixed wireless or radio broadband ; 
and 
b. ducting to all premises that can be acce ssed by broadband providers in 
the future, to enable greater  access in the future . Only where this is not 
practicable or viable, the Council will seek  developer contribution towards 
off-site works  to enable those properties access to superfast broadband, 
either via fibre optic cable or wireless technology in the future  to provide 
like capacity . 
 
5.57 Fast, reliable digital connectivity is essential in today’s economy and especially for digital 
technology and creative sector. The provision for digital infrastructure is important for the 
functioning of development and should be treated with importance.  
5.58 Digital connectivity supports smart technologies in terms of the collection, analysis and 
sharing of data on the performance of the built and natural environment, including for 
example, water and energy consumption, air quality, noise and congestion. Where it is 
appropriate and viable to do so, development should be fitted with smart infrastructure, such 
as sensors, to enable better collection and monitoring of such data. As digital connectivity 
and the capability of these sensors improves, and their cost fa lls, more and better data will 
become available to improve monitoring of planning agreements and impact assessments.   
75 5.59 Digital connectivity also supports smart technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
wireless motion sensors and Virtual Reality (VR ) which are increasingly used to assist an 
ageing population and people living with dementia, by reducing isolation, promoting 
independent living and assisting and complementing care and support.  
5.60 Provision of high capacity broadband will support businesses  and attract investment to 
Brentwood. It allow s residents and businesses to  access essential online services , social 
and commercial networks . It also has the potential to increase opportunities for home -
working and remote -working, reducing the demand on travel networks at peak periods. The 
importance is demonstrated by recent census returns which show that the biggest change in 
journey to work patterns in the last 20 years has been the increase in people working from 
home.  
5.61 The Council aspires to have ultr afast broadband or fastest available broadband at all new 
employment areas and all new residential developments through fibre to the premises /home  
(FTTP /H). Fibre to the curb , copper connections to premises and additional ducting for future 
provision will be considered if developers can show that FTTP /H is not viable  or feasible . 
5.62 It is recognised that at present, in some rural areas of the borough, fast, reliable broadband 
is not available as it is uneconomic or unviable to serve small numbers of properties  in 
isolated locations. These places generally have poor access to other facilities and as such 
would not be expected to provide significant levels of growth. Lack of fast, reliable 
broadband or lack of scale to deliver broadband may be considered as unsus tainable in 
these locations.  
5.63 Where new development is proposed in rural areas, investment in superfast reliable 
broadband will be required, subject to viability. This means that developers should explore 
all the options, and evidence of this engagement sho uld be submitted with a planning 
statement.  
Transport and Connectivity  
Sustainable Transport  
5.64 Sustainable transport is a key component of sustainable development, for its many benefits 
go beyond helping the environment. It encourages an active lifestyle, co ntributes to 
improving air and noise quality, helps improve public health, provides safer environments for 
children, increases social interaction in the neighbourhoods and can save travel time by 
reducing congestion.  
5.65 Sustainable transport refers to:  
i. Trans port strateg ies that increases accessibility/mobility while minimising traffic volume 
and overall parking levels, for example allocating development in highly accessible 
locations, or providing public transport and a cycling network ( Strategic Policy BE08 
Strategic Transport Infrastructure, Strategic Policy BE 09 Sustainable Means of Travel Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
76 and Walkable Street, Policy BE10 Sustainable Passenger Transport, Policy BE13 
Parking Standards ) 
ii. Means of transport which reduces the impact on the environment such as sustainable 
public transport, low emission vehicles, vehicle charging points and car sharing, as well 
as non -motorised transport, such as walking and cycling ( Policy  BE10 Sustainable 
Passenger Transport, Policy BE11 Electric and Low Emission Vehicle, ). 
iii. Mitigating the transport impact of development ( Policy BE1 2 Mitigating the Transport 
Impacts of Development ) 
5.66 Many aspects of transport and travel need to be considered, including reducing the need to 
travel, encouraging walking and cycling to reduce dependency on car travel and to improve 
public health, making public transport cleaner and more a ccessible to all users.  
5.67 It is also important that we consider car ownership and be realistic about the fact that most 
households in the borough will own a car.  While public transport links into London are good 
for Brentwood town and other areas along the transport corridors, villages are more remote 
with less good access. Therefore, it is acknowledged that some level of car travel and 
parking considerations will  remain important for Brentwood as we consider the future.  
POLICY BE 08: STRATEGIC TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE  
In order to support and address the cumulative impacts of planned and other 
incremental growth, allocated development within the Local Plan and any o ther 
development proposals shall (where appropriate) provide reasonable and 
proportionate contributions to required mitigation measures to strategic transport 
infrastructure, including:  
a. circulation arrangements, public realm and multimodal integration arou nd 
Brentwood, Shenfield and Ingatestone stations;  
b. circulation arrangement and public realm around West Horndon station, 
and the creation of associated multimodal interchange through phases to 
support new residents and employees;  
c. improvements to the highw ay network as deemed necessary by transport 
evidence or as agreed by National Highways and Essex County Council 
as appropriate, other statutory bodies, stakeholders and passenger 
transport providers; and  
d. additional and/or improved pedestrian, cycling infr astructure and bus 
services connecting development to key destinations such as railway 
stations, education facilities, employment, retail and leisure.  
  
77 5.68 Strategic transport infrastructure is that which is critical to the delivery of the Local Plan as 
such their timely provision must be in place in order to support development. Strategic 
transport infrastructure are assigned a priority category 1 in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
5.69 This policy seeks to align strategic transport infrastructure improveme nts with Brentwood’s 
proposed allocations and economic growth and to contribute to health and well -being whilst 
preserving  the environment. This would be achieved by maximising the value of Elizabeth 
Line, improving the capacity of the stations and road ne twork, ensuring the main settlements 
and new development have convenient access to high quality and frequent public transport 
services which connect to the town centre, main employment centres , rail stations,  ports and 
airports in the wider region.  
5.70 Develop ment proposed within this Plan will only be deliverable and supported if suitable 
transport measures and investment are led, coordinated and, where appropriate, delivered 
by Brentwood Borough Council and strategic partners. Development should seek to 
enhan ce transport, particularly public transport, and wider connectivity between new and 
existing employment areas.  The Council’s positive approach to planning may require it to 
use its compulsory purchase powers under section 226 of the Town and Country Planni ng 
Act 1990. That power gives the Council a positive tool to help bring forward necessary works 
to support planned growth in the borough, where strong planning justifications for the use of 
the power exist and statutory requirements are satisfied.  
Maximisi ng the value of  railway connectivity and  Elizabeth Line  
5.71 Previously known as Crossrail, the new Elizabeth Line is a 118  km railway under 
development crossing through the heart of London, enabling access between Reading and 
Heathrow in the west, through cent ral London to Shenfield and Abbey Wood in the east. The 
full route is expected to be fully operational by May 2023 . The arrival of Elizabeth Line will 
provide an improved and more frequent service to Brentwood’s residents and visitors thus 
benefiting busin esses and facilitating growth. The Council will work with partners to improve 
the station environment at both Brentwood and Shenfield stations, specifically in terms of 
non-motorised users and enhanced public transport access, with improved forecourt and 
pedestrian crossing facilitie s. 
5.72 It is expected that the introduction of this new railway w ill have both positive  impacts , as a 
result of additional rail trips , and potentially negative  impacts , with potential for increased 
travel by car to access the stations  (Transport Assessment, PBA, 2021). There will be a 
need to monitor and review the situation once the services are operational. Any impacts 
identified should be addressed through the implementation and promotion of sustainable 
transport measures, f or example the provision for non -car modes and the implementation of 
parking restrictions and pedestrian wayfinding system.  
5.73 The proximity of new housing developments close to railway stations can provide the 
opportunity to improve cycling and walking infra structure for shorter distance trips, to access 
rail services. Improving links to Brentwood and Shenfield stations will benefit both existing 
population as well as the new Local Plan developments within easy access of the stations. 
Proposed allocations and  future development near Brentwood and Shenfield stations are 
required to demonstrate that the planning and design for movement connect well to the 
surrounding walking, cycling and public transport links to the station, and give priority to 
pedestrians and  cyclists.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
78 Improvements to the train stations  
5.74 In order to support a transit -oriented growth strategy and support projected travel demands 
from future development as well as provide the opportunity for non -motorist travel, it is 
important to achieve integra tion of transport modes. This should support regional trips by 
public transport and reduce pressure on the road network at the critical peak period. The 
Council will encourage improvements to the public realm surrounding existing train stations 
and look to  improve access, interchange facilities, installation of wayfinding signs and 
introduce parking control where appropriate. Park and Ride / Cycle/  Stride schemes to 
improve access to the stations will be considered subject to a future  detailed feasibility st udy 
prepared by the Council . 
5.75 The railway stations in the borough have potentials to assist in providing additional benefits 
to sustainable travel . New development should seek to provide new or improved links and 
access to  the s tation. Where appropriate con tributions will therefore be sought from nearby 
developments :  
a. Brentwood station: located on the Great Eastern Mainline, Brentwood station is served 
by TfL rail services operating between Shenfield and London Liverpool Street and 
Abellio Greater Anglia ser vices operating between Southend Victoria and London. The 
emphasis on accessibility to both Shenfield and Brentwood stations will be on 
sustainable travel as a means of access, with improvements to pedestrian and cycle 
infrastructure and bus services, link ing both new and existing developments near the 
stations, and on introducing new parking controls where needed to discourage parking 
around the stations, therefore reducing car travel.  
b. Shenfield station: also located on the Great Eastern Mainline, Shenfiel d station is 
served by TfL and Greater Anglia rail services to Stratford and London Liverpool Street 
station  and Greater Anglia services to Southend Victoria, Colchester Town, Ipswich, 
Braintree and Clacton -on-Sea, as well as some services to Norwich . From  May 2023 it 
will be the terminus of the Elizabeth Line which will run from Reading and Heathrow 
Airport in the west through London. During 2014 JMP Associates undertook a station 
parking study for Shenfield prior to the development of the Elizabeth line. From the 
Rail User Survey carried out as part of the study, the study demonstrates that with the 
introduction of better bus services to the station, a reduction in the number of people 
who park at Shenfield who live in the vicinity as well as from any futu re Local Plan 
developments in the region could be witnessed, reducing overall traffic on the local 
network. As mentioned above, enhancement to Shenfield station would centre around 
improving pedestrian and cycle infrastructure and bus services and where ne cessary, 
parking controls.  Where appropriate contributions will therefore be sought from nearby 
developments.  
c. West Horndon station: West Horndon station is on the London, Tilbury and Southend 
Railway line and is served by C2C with two trains per hour to Lo ndon Fenchurch 
Street and Shoeburyness. It is currently identified that parking capacity is fully utilised 
most weekdays for commuters into London from the A127/A13 corridors. The location 
of a number of the Local Plan development sites will mean that West  Horndon Station 
will play an important role in future transport provision. The Transport Assessment 
(PBA, 20 21) proposed that over the lifetime of this Plan , the improvements to the 
station, bus and cycle infrastructure and interchange facilities are phased to create a  
79 new integrated transport hub. An increased capacity on the existing train service will 
be central to the new cycling, walking and bus movements  of the new residents and 
employees. To ensure the new development will provide convenient access to the 
future interchange at West Horndon, the Transport Assessment (PBA, 20 21) proposed 
that interim bus service(s) connecting the developments sites to the interchange 
should be built into the development agreements to be funded. This should allow time 
for enough customer demand for a commercial operator to take on the routes. This is 
particularly the case with Dunton Hills where new opportunities will exist.  
d. Ingatestone station: Ingatestone railway station is on the Great Eastern Main Line, 
currently served  by Greater Anglia. New development should seek to provide new or 
improve links  and access  to Ingatestone station . 
Delivering improvements  to the highway i nfrastructure capacity  
5.76 As the backbone of our transport system, roads keep the population connected and the 
economy flowing. In light of planned development, it is important to grasp the opportunity to 
transform our roads and the experience of driving on t hem, whilst also addressing strategic 
imperatives such as economic growth and climate change.  
5.77 It should be noted , however,  that providing additional highway capacity will only have a 
short -term impact and may be quickly taken up by suppressed traffic. The refore, investment 
in providing alternatives is important.  Non-highway measures20 such  as sustainable 
transport measures and behavioural change that go beyond physical improvements could  
assist in alleviating pressures on the highway network . These measure s are embedded in 
other policies in this Plan.  
5.78 The Council is working with Associations of South Essex Local Authorities (ASELA) to 
prepare a statutory Joint Strategic Plan (JSP) which will identify ways to transform transport 
connectivity, among other req uired work to deliver growth. This work will inform public 
transport services needed to follow suit if the wider development needs of south east 
England are to be sustainably provided.   
5.79 In Brentwood, the strategic highway infrastructure includes:  
i. the A12 which connects the market town and major settlements in central Brentwood 
Borough to London and the wider region, providing access to services, jobs and 
recreation;  
ii. the A127 which travels through the south of Brentwood Borough and connects it to 
London, Basildon, Rochford, Southend, Southend Airport and surrounding employment 
areas. The A127 corridor is a vitally important primary route for the south of Essex;  
iii. the M2 5 in the west which connects Brentwood Borough to London and Stansted 
Airport;  
iv. and associated key junctions.  
5.80 The Transport Assessment (PBA, 2021 ) assessed how the highway network within the 
borough copes at a strategic level as a result of the new Local Pl an Development and 
 
20 More details on non -highway measures can be found in the Transport  Assessment (PBA, 20 21). Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
80 committed developments within adjacent local authorities that would likely have an impact 
on Brentwood Borough highways. This work identified a number of junctions that may 
require mitigation as well as a  number of non -highway21 related mitigation measures . The 
results of the modelling and junction assessments highlight the need to continue to monitor 
throughout the Local Plan period to identify any additional impact from other schemes on the 
highway network in Brentwood, such as the Lower Thames Crossing project, the A127 and 
any highway effect from the opening of the Elizabeth Line. Since the level of growth planned 
along the A127 and A12 are reliant on new and improved strategic infrastructure of regional 
and national importance  (including the Lower Thames Crossing), the Council will continue to 
work with the highway authority (Essex County Council), statutory bodies (including National 
Highways), the  Essex  Heart and Haven Strategic Transport Boards22 other partners 
(including the ASELA and the  A127 Task Force ), and developers to secure the mitigation 
measures to the highways and related junctions to deliver growth. The impact of individual 
access junctions for individual sites would be expected to be undertaken by promoters of 
individual sites.  
5.81 It is recognised that existing mitigation undertaken by third parties is being considered and  
will assist in improving capacity of the highway network in the borough. These include:  
i. A127/A128: several  studies , led by Essex County Council,  have been progressing on 
the A127 corridor between Southend -on-Sea in the East to the M25 in the west , the final 
section of this road is within Brentwood Borough. Within the A127 Corridor for Growth 
study23 there are individual pieces of work currently at v arious stages of planning and 
development, many of which are focussed on interchange capacity and/or safety 
improvements. Continued joint working with ECC and other neighbouring authorities will 
be important, so any outcomes from this study can feed throug h to the South Brentwood 
Growth Corridor Masterplan;  
ii. M25 Junction 28: National Highways are currently undertaking work to develop 
improvements at M25 Junction 2824. Further engagement will be required with National 
Highways on this scheme;  
iii. M25 Junction 29: mitigation measures at this junction are being considered with the aim 
to improve the junction’s operation with the introduction of the Brentwood Enterprise 
Park.  Proposals for the Lower Thames Crossing route that impact M25 Junction 29 will 
need further consideration as part of these overall aims.  
iv. The A127 Task Force has representation from all South Essex authorities including 
BBC. This Task Force will oversee much of the public affairs interaction between the 
Councils and Government to ensur e that the route is seen as strategic and as a 
 
21: Non-highway measures within this Plan include sustainable transport measures  and behavioural change  that go 
beyond physical improvements to  assist in reducing the impact of developments on the overall road network . More 
details on non -highway measures can be found in the Transport Assessment (PBA, 20 21), and under Policy BE16 
Mitigating the Transport Impacts of Development.  
 
22: The Heart and Haven Strategic Transport Boards was established by ECC with the primary roles to determine 
infrastructure priorities, encourage partnership working on transport and growth issues, and fulfil the duty to co -
operate on transport planning and delivery in the  context of Local and National Plans.  
 
23 https://www.essexhighways.org/uploads/docs/nevendon -a127 -corridor -for-growth -paper2.pdf   
 
24 https://highwaysengland.co.uk/projects/m25 -junction -28-improvements/    
81 potential candidate for re -trunking in order to bring about the long -term improvement 
required for an area of South Essex with over 600,000 residents. The planning and 
design work for any improvement of this s cale will of necessity require a short -term, 
medium and long term phasing. Whilst the A127 is the main focus ECC would be 
looking to work collaboratively with BBC and other councils in the area.  
5.82 Brentwood high schools and some primary schools are very attr active not only to residents 
within the borough, but also for many children from the surrounding Essex and London 
authorities. The five high schools located in the central area of Brentwood Borough generate 
a significant volume of parents dropping off and picking up their children ; therefore, t he 
impact of  an increasing population of  children  and school related traffic  should be  taken  into 
consideration as a part of mitigation measures to the highway network. Development in 
proximity to schools and educatio n facilities should be designed with priority given to safety 
and convenience of pupils ’ walking, cycling to school, as well as other measures that can 
address the impacts of school run traffic , in line with ECC’s Developers Guide to 
Infrastructure Contrib utions.  
5.83 For Central Brentwood Growth Corridor , the Council is considering  a sustainable transport 
strategy to help address traffic and associated air quality issues , based on non -highway 
measures  identified in the Transport Assessment ( PBA, 2021 ), options including  but not 
limited to School Clear Zones and Low Emission Zone :  
i. The School Clear Zones concepts seeks to remove school related trips from the town 
centre and to encourage greater use of non -car modes for such trips. In these zones, 
vehicles will be  restricted from stopping, parking for drop off during AM/PM peak hour. 
The pupils will be encouraged to walk or cycle from drop off zones to relieve pressure on 
the highway network. The measure has the added benefit of encouraging more physical 
activity f or children their parents, and all other users to walk or cycle from a reasonable 
distance. In addition, it would help improve air quality and address illegal car parking 
affecting residents living close to the schools. The Council intends to  continue exploring 
the potential and deliverability of this concept ;  
ii. A Low Emission Zone is a defined area where access by polluting vehicles is restricted 
or deterred with the aim of improving the air quality. This may favour vehicles such as 
alternative fuel vehicles, electric vehicles, or zero -emission vehicles.  Currently feasibility 
analysis is being considered for Low Emission Zone as part of a long-term assessment  
(Brentwood IDP) . 
iii. Other measures and behavioural change measures are detailed under Policy BE1 6 
Mitigating the Transport Impacts of Development , and can also be found in the 
Transport Assessment ( 2021 ). 
5.84 For South  Brentwood Growth Corridor , there is a recognition that provision of sustainable 
transport in th is area  is poor. To mitigate the impact of  future development on the highway 
network in the South, the Council will work proactively with developers, key stakeholders 
and service providers to implement new area -specific sustainable transport measures, which 
would seek to mitigate transport impacts  of sites on the highway infrastructure , improve bus 
links across the area  and improve capacity of West Horndon station. The measures would 
also seek to reduce the impacts of northward movements into central Brentwood. Where Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
82 northward movement happens, the y should be undertaken by electric car club vehicles, 
electric bikes or bus.  
5.85 It is considered that the preferred route of the Lower Thames Crossing , developed by 
National Highways,  will have impacts on opportunities as well as cumulative impact on the 
local and strategic transport network. The Lower Thames Crossing is a proposed new road 
crossing of the River Thames which will connect the counties of Essex (north) and Kent 
(south). The planned route is expected to run from the M25 near North Ockendon, cross the 
A13 at Orsett before crossing under the Thames east of Tilbury and Gravesend. A new link 
road will then take traffic to the A2 near Shorne, close to where the route becomes th e M2. 
At this stage, information on the impact of this scheme on the highway network in Brentwood 
is limited. The impact of the scheme on travel in the borough will need to be reviewed as the 
scheme progresses, in particular , if delivery of the scheme come s forward during the Plan 
period.  
5.86 The Lower Thames Crossing Statutory Consultation commenced on October 10th 201825, 
the forecast reporting released as part of the consultation evidence  does not provide 
detailed analysis of flow changes on the A128 and A12 7; however,  the non -technical 
summary identifies a reduction in traffic  on these links , demonstrating that this is likely to 
have a beneficial effect in the operation at these junctions. Currently, National 
Highwaysanticipate that, subject to funding and p lanning consent, the scheme would open in 
2027, within the Plan period . However, there is still uncertainty regarding the timescales for 
the delivery of this scheme (Transport Assessment 2021 , PBA).  
POLICY BE 09: SUSTAINABLE MEANS OF TRAVEL AND WALKABLE STREETS  
1. Sustainable modes of transport should be prioritised in new developments 
to promote accessibility and integration with the wider community and 
existing networks. Priority should be given to cycle and pedestrian 
movements and access to publ ic transport.  
2. Development proposals should provide the following sustainable 
measures  as appropriate : 
a. the provision of pedestrian, cycle, public transport and where 
appropriate , bridleway connections within development sites and to 
the wider area, includin g key destinations ; 
b. the creation of safe, secure, well connected and attractive layouts 
which minimise the conflicts between traffic, cyclists and pedestrians, 
and allow good accessibility for passenger transport  within sites and 
between sites and adjacent areas , and where appropriate improv e 
 
25 https://highwaysengland.citizenspace.com/lt c/consultation/    
83 areas where passenger transport, pedestrian or cycle movement is 
difficult or dangerous;  
c. the provision of community transport measures promoting car pools, 
car sharing, voluntary community buses, cycle schemes ; 
d. safeguarding existing and proposed routes f or walking, cycling, and 
public transport, from development that would prejudice their 
continued use and/or development;  and 
e. any development requiring a new road or road access, walking and 
cycling facilities and public transport , will be required to have regard to 
the adopted Essex County Council’s Development Management 
Policies or successor documents, in order to assess the impact of 
development in terms of highway safety and capacity for both access 
to the proposed development and the wider highway netw ork. 
 
5.87 Securing public transport improvements and better provision for walking and cycling would 
reduce pollution, make it safer and easier for people to travel to jobs and services and lead 
to better health, less congestion and more pleasant streets.  
5.88 This policy seeks to ensure that development proposals will be designed to promote 
sustainable travel choices by improving choices and making development easily accessible 
by different modes of transport, especially walking, cycling and public tra nsport. An 
important policy tool to achieve this is the modal hierarch y. All development should follow 
the modal hierarchy by providing access for all of the following (most preferable first, least 
preferable last):  
a. walking and providing access for all, in cluding people with mobility impairment ; 
b. cycling ; 
c. public transport ; 
d. powered two wheelers ; 
e. commercial vehicles  and taxis; 
f. car sharing ; 
g. electric and low emission vehicles ; 
h. private cars.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
84 5.89 Barriers to walking should be addressed in development proposals, to ensure that walking  is 
promoted and that street conditions, especially safety/security and accessibility for disabled 
people, are enhanced. Walking networks and facilities in and around all new developments 
should be direct, safe, attractive,  accessible and enjoyable.  
5.90 Cycling is a space efficient mode compared to cars so making streets attractive for cycling 
can bring benefits to all road users while also improving the experience of living, working 
and getting around.  
5.91 Cycling should be promot ed through the provision of improved cycle parking and other 
facilities and new cycle routes as part of highway infrastructure improvements/traffic 
management measures. When providing for cycle parking, cycle parking areas should  be 
secure and covered,  and allow easy access for occupiers and their visitors, and provide 
facilities for all, including disabled cyclists. This could include identifying and reserving 
specific spaces which provide step -free cycle parking and opportunities for people using 
adapted cycles, as well as providing facilities for other non -standard cycles such as tricycles, 
cargo bicycles and bicycles with trailers. Space for folding bicycles should be provided as 
well as space for conventional bikes to cater for rail commuters. However,  space for folding 
bicycles is not an acceptable alternative to conventional cycle parking as these are less 
popular in some areas, tend to be less affordable and present difficulties for some users. 
Surface level parking is preferable to stacked parking wh ich may be difficult for some people 
to use. Visitor parking should be quickly and easily accessible to front entrances of buildings 
and not require cyclists to visit parts of a site restricted to occupiers only.   
5.92 The Council strongly supports contribution s to and provision for car clubs at new 
developments to help reduce the need for private car parking.  
5.93 The Council will work with partners and stakeholders to facilitate and promote sustainable 
transport links from new development to key destinations and th e wider network. This 
include new or improved infrastructure, services and promotion to support walking, cycling 
and public transport, and provision of charging points for electric vehicles. The Sustainable 
Modes of Travel Strategy (SMOTS) produced by E ssex County Council  provides a 
framework for the Council and its partners to co -ordinate the provision of services and 
infrastructure to achieve its objectives.   
5.94 The design of streets, parking areas, and other transport elements should reflect current 
nationa l guidance, including the National Design Guide and the National Model Design 
Code. The Essex County Council ’s Transportation Development Management Policies 
provide further detail on requirements relating to accessibility and access , including 
Transport A ssessment and Statement thresholds for each land use category.   
85 POLICY BE10: SUSTAINABLE PASSENGER TRANSPORT  
The Council will facilitate and support sustainable passenger transport 
services operating in Brentwood to help deliver the vision of the Local Plan . 
Development proposals should protect and enhance existing passenger 
transport and their capacity.  Proposed new community facilities, schools, and 
specialist older persons housing, where reasonable and proportionate, are 
required to provide pick -up and dr op-off facilities  (with appropriate kerbs)  for 
passenger transport close to the principal entrance suitable for minibuses,  
school buses,  taxis, and/or ambulances.  
 
5.95 Passenger transport, including bus, school bus, rail, taxis and private hire vehicles play a 
significant role in enabling access to facilities and services across the borough and to 
destinations in other authorities’  areas. They also provide people with tr avel choices and can 
contribute to addressing congestion and offsetting the environmental impacts of travel.  
5.96 Consideration should be given to sustainable passenger transport provision as set out within 
Essex County Council Development Management Policies.  
5.97 The Council, in consultation with relevant partners, will seek the retention of existing bus and 
rail services and, where viable , encourage improved and new services. Support will be given 
to the refurbishment of rail station buildings and other improvemen ts in facilities for public 
transport users including transport interchange improvements.  
5.98 Brentwood and the surrounding area are served by multiple bus operators ; the most 
frequent are First Bus, Stagecoach and Ensign Bus. There is potential in future, wi th the 
pattern of development, to provide improved bus services linking key residential areas, both 
existing and those proposed through the local plan, employment and railway stations. The 
Transport Assessment (PBA, 2021 ) highlights that there is an opport unity to provide services 
that will link Dunton Hills Garden Village (and Basildon), West Horndon Station, Brentwood 
Enterprise Park, Childerditch Business Park and Brentwood (including the station), which if 
providing a high-quality  express service betwee n these key origins and destinations would 
provide a realistic alternative to the private car.  Moving forward , in addition to traditional bus 
services , demand responsive services could be considered as a part of sustainable transport 
measures.   
5.99 The Council  would support the commencement of passenger transport in large scale 
developments at the earliest opportunity, which should be considered to be the responsibility 
of the developer. The Council will seek to secure additional passenger transport facilities 
and service funding to enable the existing routes to be enhanced in terms of frequency, 
quality, connectivity and coverage where appropriate.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
86 POLICY BE11: ELECTRIC AND LOW EMISSION VEHICLE S 
All development proposals should wherever possible maximise the op portunity 
of occupiers and visitors to use  electric and low emission vehicle s, and 
maximise the provision of electric vehicle charging / plug -in points and/or the  
space and  infrastructure required to provide them  in the future.  
 
5.100  According to the Brentwood Renewable Energy Study26, transport emissions in Brentwood 
are higher than the national average, due to increased car ownership and access to 
vehicles. Electric or other low emission vehicles will help reduce pollution, climate change 
impacts, oi l use from the transport sector while improving energy independence, air and 
noise quality, thus well -being of Brentwood residents.  
5.101  The development of a robust infrastructure network is widely considered a key requirement 
for a large -scale transition to el ectromobility. Research27 has found that the availability of 
public charging is generally linked with electric vehicle uptake as providing charging stations 
can help meet charging demand and increase electric vehicle consumer confidence. 
National Highways has plans to install charging infrastructure every 20 miles along the major 
road network as part of its Road Investment Strategy28.  
5.102  The Council may seek infrastructure for electric and low emission vehicle where it is 
appropriate and viable. This could be in the form of public charging infrastructure or make -
ready infrastructure for charging stations. The design and operation of such infrastructure 
should follow best practice so that their operation would not undermine the quality of public 
realm n or refract from the shift towards active travel.  
5.103  In addition, the provision of private charging infrastructure at home and at workplace will be 
encouraged:  
i. Home charging stations could help to make electric vehicles more accessible. In multi -
unit dwellings , where residents frequently do not have dedicated parking spots, 
installation of charging infrastructure in shared parking facilities or public curbside 
charging stations could be sought. The UK Government’s Office for Low Emission 
Vehicles currently offe rs incentive programs towards the up -front cost of each electric 
vehicle charge point purchased and installed  to defray the added costs of charging 
infrastructure at home29. 
 
26 University of Exeter (2014)  Brentwood Renewable Energy Study.  
27 Hall D., Lutsy N (2017) Emerging Best Practices for Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure, the International 
Council on Clean Transportation. Available at: https://www.theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/EV -charging -
best-practices_ICCT -white -paper_04102017_vF.pdf  
28 Jones A. (2015) Off Road Trials for ‘Electric Highways’ Technology, Highways England   
29 Office for L ow Emission Vehicles (OLEV) (2016). Electric Vehicle Homecharge Scheme Guidance for Customers: 
Version 2.1. UK Department for Transportation . Available at:  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/electric -
vehicle -homecharge -scheme -guidance -for-customers -version -22   
87 ii. Workplace charging can serve as the primary charging opportunity for drivers witho ut a 
dedicated home charge point, allowing increased flexibility for drivers who commute with 
their electric vehicle. Since cars charging at a workplace tend to be plugged in for many 
hours during the middle of the day, it is an ideal setting for smart cha rging programs and 
could further the integration between electric vehicles and daytime renewable energy, 
especially solar. Pilots projects in the UK30 and elsewhere31 have shown that people are 
much more likely to switch to electric vehicles if there is ac cess to charging 
infrastructure at their workplace. The UK Government’s Office for Low Emission 
Vehicles offers financial support32 towards the cost of installing EV charging to 
encourage organisations to install electric vehicle charging facilities at the ir workplace.  
POLICY BE 12: MITIGATING THE TRANSPORT IMPACT S OF DEVELOPMENT  
1. Developments  must not have an unacceptable impact on the transport 
network in terms of highway safety , capacity and congestion.  
2. New development proposals will be required to  be supported by : 
a. Travel Plans, Transport Assessments and/or Statements in 
accordance with the thresholds and detailed requirements for each 
land use category  as set out in the Essex County Council’s 
Development Management Policies  or its successors ; and engag e in 
an appropriate and proportionate assessment process with National 
Highways where development has a likelihood to have a material 
impact on the Strategic Road Network which is not otherwise catered 
for by programmed works or improvements;  
b. where necessa ry, reasonable and proportionate financial contributions  
and/or take reasonable measures to: 
i. mitigate the cumulative transport impact of the development to an 
acceptable degree , including relevant highways measures 
identified in the IDP Part B; and  
ii. accommo date the use of sustainable modes of transport  including 
borough -wide sustainable transport measures identified in the IDP 
Part B,  investment in infrastructure , services , Low Emission Zone , 
 
30 https://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/3007028/could -workplace -charge -points -trigger -electric -vehicle -demand   
31 Olexsak, S. (2014) Survey Says: Workplace Charging Is Growing in Popularity and Impact, U.S. Department of 
Energy. Available at: https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/survey -says-workplace -charging -growing -popularity -and-
impact   
32 Office for Low Emission Vehicles (OLEV) (20 16) Workplace Charging Scheme Guidance for Applicants, Installers 
and Manufacturers , UK Department for Transportation. Available at:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/workplace -charging -scheme -guidance -for-applicants -installers -and-
manufacturers   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
88 or measures to promote behavioural change (including 
enforcement) . 
 
5.104  Development resulting in an unacceptable impact on highway safety, or significant and 
harmful residual cumulative impacts on the road network will be prevented or refused on 
highways grounds, unless any impact will be effectively mitigated to an acceptable degree, 
in line with the NPPF.  
5.105  Traffic congestion and road capacity remain key issues on the borough’s transport network 
and the need to mitigate their impacts and to promote modal shift remains imperative, 
especially as growth in and around Bre ntwood increases . 
5.106  Joint working has been undertaken with National Highways, Essex County Council 
(highways authority), developers and all relevant partners to identify necessary mitigations at 
key junctions, to address the cumulative impact of growth within the borough over the Plan 
period.  In addition to strategic transp ort infrastructure, a number of highways junction 
improvements will need to be made to facilitate new growth, these are assigned a priority 
category 2 in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
5.107  As noted earlier in this chapter,  providing physical improvements to  the highway will only 
have a short -term impact therefore it is important to  invest in long term  alternatives.  The 
Council will work with developers , highways authority  and service providers to  consider 
potential sustainable transport measures that could a ssist in reducing the impact of 
developments on the overall road network . The Transport Assessment (PBA, 2021 ) 
identifie s a sustainable transport measures package that could be implemented in 
Brentwood Borough . These   are lis ted in the IDP with priority ca tegory 3 which may be 
revised from time to time . 
5.108  Applicants are expected to consult with the Highways Authority on transport matters and 
adhere to Essex County Council’s development management policy requirements (or 
equivalent) in respect of Travel Plans,  Residential Travel information Packs and other 
highways considerations. Please refer to the Essex County Council Highways Authority 
Development Management Policies.  
Managing Parking  
5.109  The Council will continue to promote lower levels of private car parking to help achieve 
modal shift, particularly for non -residential developments where more sustainable transport 
alternatives such as walking, cycling and public transport exist. This will be particularly 
important in the Town Centre, where the transport strategy  is to increase access without a n 
increase in overall parking levels.   
89 5.110  Car parking standards are an important means of managing traffic levels in and around a 
development, especially when combined with measures to increase access to transport 
alternatives t o the private car.  
POLICY BE 13: PARKING STANDARDS  
1. Development proposals must take account of the Essex Parking 
Standards  – Design and Good Practice (2009), or as subsequently 
amended . The decision -maker will have regard to these standards when 
determining planning applications .  
2. Proposals which make provision below these standards should be 
supported by evidence detailing the local circumstances that justify 
deviation from the standard.  
 
5.111  Developers should account for the following when proposing the level of car parking for a 
site: 
a. the location of the development, in terms of whether the site has convenient walkability 
and cyclability to the Town Centre, District Shopping Centres, major employment 
centres, and whether or not it has high public transpo rt accessibility;  
b. the type of development (fringe site, infill site, etc.) - infill sites are much more likely to 
be located in areas with existing travel patterns, behaviours and existing controls, and 
may be less flexible;  
c. the type of residence (houses, flats, etc.) - houses tend to have higher car ownership 
than flats, even if they have the same number of habitable rooms;  
d. local car ownership levels;  
e. for developments requiring a Transport Assessment, it should be demonstrated that 
the level of parking pr oposed is consistent with the recommendations of this Transport 
Assessment;  
f. the need to ensure an adequate provision of spaces for charging plug -in and other 
ultra-low emission vehicles. Electric vehicle charging points or the infrastructure to 
ensure the ir future provision should be provided within a development where 
reasonable and proportionate; and  
g. adequate provision should be made for efficient deliveries and servicing.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
90 5.112  Brentwood Borough Council adopted the Essex Parking Standards – Design and Good 
Practice (2009)  as a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) in 2011 and will expect 
these standards to apply until such time as they are revoked or superseded by other 
standards. This document sets out a range of standards to be applied depending on the 
propos ed use of new development, such as minimum parking for residential development to 
address issues of on -street parking and maximum standards for parking in non -residential 
developments in order to encourage more sustainable transport methods. This document is 
subject to revision by Essex County Council in light of changes made to the NPPF  (July 
2021 ). 
5.113  Parking associated with offices has the potential to generate car travel in the morning and 
evening peaks when streets are the most congested. This makes bus t ravel less reliable and 
active travel less attractive and road network more congested in some parts of the borough. 
Office parking also has the potential to induce car dependence even where alternatives to 
the car exist. Census 2011 origin and destination statistics indicate that workers commuting 
to Brentwood from the surrounding local authorities mainly commute by car.  Reduced office 
parking provision where alternative choices are convenient and available  can facilitate 
higher -density development and supp ort the creation of mixed and vibrant places that are 
designed for people rather than vehicles. Applicants should ensure that the use of non -car 
modes are provided for where appropriate .  
5.114  It is important that local retail and leisure sector businesses are provided with suitable 
facilities to continue to thrive. Current parking provision in Brentwood Town Centre, District 
Shopping Centres and Local Centres often have negative visual impacts yet does not 
always meet parking space demands of shoppers and visit ors. The Council seeks to 
improve the quality of parking so that it is convenient, safe and secure, alongside measures 
to promote accessibility for pedestrians and cyclists.  
5.115  The shared parking provision in the Town Centre and District Shopping Centres is 
encouraged to allow visitors, shoppers and commuters to share parking facilities at different 
times of the day and week and to relieve the current high parking demands in thes e areas.  
5.116  Free commuter parking could contribute to congestion and pollution, it also undermines 
public transport, including park -and-ride and rural bus services. Reducing free commuter 
parking will therefore reduce congestion and pollution and create dema nd for public 
transport. The net effect will be to start a virtuous circle of more convenient and reliable bus 
services attracting more passengers, creating demand for an expansion in services.  
5.117  The quantum of any parking provision, as well as its design a nd implementation, should 
have regard to the need to promote active modes and public transport use. The operation of 
car and cycle parking and the associated public realm should be designed and managed in 
a way that it would not have negative transport, vi sual and safety impacts on the surrounding 
areas, and that under -utilised parking space is converted to other uses such as additional 
cycle parking, amenity space or green and blue infrastructure . Parking provision should be 
flexible for different users an d adaptable to future re -purposing in the context of changing 
requirements, including technological change. Applicants should refer to best practice and 
guidance on the design, layout, landscaping and lighting of parking as set out in the Essex 
Design Guid e, Brentwood Town Centre Design Guide and British Parking Association.   
91 5.118  While the aim will be to offer a choice of transport, reducing dependency on the car will 
reduce congestion and pollution and improve resilience in the face of future fuel shortages or 
price rises. The government’s Active Travel Strategy (Dep artment  of Health and Dep artmen t 
for Transport, 2010) aims to get more people walking and cycling in recognition of the many 
benefits these bring. As the Strategy notes, walking or cycling can be quicker and cheaper 
than driving or taking public transport for many short trips and are an easy w ay to become 
more physically active thereby improving health and well -being.   
5.119  The dominance of vehicles  on streets is a significant barrier to walking and cycling and 
reduces the appeal of streets as public places. When properly implemented in appropriate 
locations, car -limited  development could have significant benefits including:  
a. accommodating more dwellings on a given site, without overdeveloping;  
b. leaving more space for landscaping and green space;  
c. safer streets for children’s play, and more social inter action;  
d. reduced car dependency, while supporting walking, cycling, public transport and local car 
clubs;  
e. less traffic congestion and pollution associated with the new development.   
Larger car -limited  developments will be encouraged to incorporate a car clu b, which can 
be an attractive alternative to private car ownership and boost the attractiveness of car -
limited  housing.  
Design and Place -making  
Good Design  
5.120  The Council attaches great importance to high quality and inclusive design for all 
development, irre spective of size - including individual buildings, public and private spaces 
and wider area development schemes.  
5.121  Good design is a key aspect of sustainable development and is intrinsic to good planning. 
The form, layout and character of buildings and publi c spaces contribute greatly to creating 
quality of life, improving health and well -being, making effective use of land, and facilitating 
activities and services.  
5.122  The term ‘high quality design’ is frequently used yet is frequently misunderstood as 
architec tural styles. Although visual appearance and the architecture of individual buildings 
are very important factors, high quality and inclusive design go beyond aesthetic 
considerations and address the connections between people and places and  the coherent  
integrat ion of  new development into the natural, built and historic environment.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
92 5.123  The Essex Design Guide 2018 is a useful starting point for a development and provides 
guidance regarding amenity standards, layouts and case studies. The Essex Design Guide 
contains five cross cutting themes (ageing population, digital & smart technologies, health & 
wellbeing, active design, garden communities ). For developments within or in the vicinity of 
Brentwood Town centre, applicants should take into account the Brentwood Town Centre 
Design Plan and Design Guide  SPD . The Design Plan sets out how future development 
opportunities can collectively enhance Brentwood Town Centre, whilst the Design Guide  
SPD provide specific design guidance for development proposals in the area.  Proposals 
should also take into account the  most up to date design guidance, including Manual for 
Streets, Building for a Healthy Life, and Secured by Design.  
STRATEGIC POLICY  BE14 : CREATING SUCCESSFUL PLACES  
1. Proposals will be required to meet high design standards and deliver safe, 
inclusive, at tractive and accessible places. Proposals should:  
a. provide a comprehensive design approach that deliver s a high quality, 
safe, attractive, inclusive, durable and healthy places in which to live and 
work;  
b. make efficient use of land and infrastructure;  
c. deliver sustainable buildings, places and spaces that can adapt to 
changing social technological, economic , environmental and climate 
conditions;  
d. create permeable, accessible and multifunctional streets and places that 
promotes active lifes tyles; 
e. respond positively and sympathetically to their context and build upon 
existing strengths and characteristics, and where appropriate, retain or 
enhance existing features which make a positive contribution to the 
character, appearance or significance  of the local area (including natural 
and heritage assets);  
f. integrate and enhance the natural environment by the inclusion of features 
which will endure for the life of the development, such as planting to 
enhance biodiversity, the provision of green roof s, green walls and nature 
based sustainable drainage;   
g. where applicable, ensure that new streets are tree -lined and opportunities 
are taken to incorporate trees elsewhere in developments;   
93 h. employ the use of high-quality  street furniture, boundary treatment s, 
lighting, signage, high quality materials and finishes to help create a 
durable development with local distinctiveness;  
i. avoid unacceptable overlooking or loss of privacy;  
j. safeguard the living conditions of future occupants of the development and 
adjace nt residents;  
k. sensitively integrate parking places and functional needs for storage, 
refuse and recycling collection points;  
l. mitigate the impact of air, noise, vibration and light pollution from internal 
and external sources, especially in intrinsically da rk landscapes and  
residential areas . 
2. Proposals for major development  should be supported by an area specific 
masterplan . Where appropriate, the Council will consider the use of a 
complementary design guide/code, to help guide the necessary design 
coherence  across the entire development site . Design proposals will be 
expected to:  
a. demonstrate early, proactive, inclusive and effective engagement with the 
community and other relevant partners;  
b. have regard to Supplementary Planning Documents and Guidance 
publish ed by the Council, Essex County Council and other relevant 
bodies;  
c. address feedback from the Council through its Pre -application Advice 
Service and where appropriate, feedback from an independent Design 
Review Panel.  
3. Development proposals should be support ed by a statement setting out the 
sustainable long -term governance and stewardship arrangements for the 
maintenance of supporting infrastructure including community assets, and 
open spaces; the statement should be proportionate to the scale of the 
scheme a nd quantum of infrastructure being delivered.  
 
5.124  Achieving well -designed places is fundamental to creating distinctive and sustainable 
communities. It also ensures the development will function well over the lifetime of the 
development, ensuring that the design of the buildings and places have taken a proactive 
approach to mitigating and adapting to climate change. All proposals must clearly 
demonstrate that a comprehensive design approach has been used to inform the 
development and  that all issues within this policy are positively addressed through the 
Design and Access /Planning Statements that accompany applications. Additionally, Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
94 sustainable development must also factor in how supporting infrastructure will be maintained 
throughou t the life -time of the development. The design should therefore, factor in the 
lifespan of materials being used, and provide details for how these assets will be maintained 
over time, such as stewardship arrangements, where necessary.  
5.125  The Council will requ ire design to be addressed through early engagement in the pre -
application process on major and strategic developments and in connection with all heritage 
sites. Where appropriate, the Council will require the use of masterplans and design codes 
to clearly  set out the design rationale of the development site. Applicants should work 
collaboratively with those affected by their proposals to evolve designs that take account of 
the views of the community  and ensure proposals have responded positively to local 
knowledge and context of the site . The NPPF is clear that applicants will be expected to 
work closely with those directly affected by their proposals to evolve designs that take 
account of the views of the community. Therefore, early discussion with the Cou ncil and the 
local community about the design of emerging schemes is important for clarifying 
expectations and reconciling local and commercial interests. Applicants that can 
demonstrate early, proactive, inclusive and effective engagement with the communi ty will be 
looked on more favourably than those that cannot.  Design codes will usually be prepared 
between outline and reserved matters stage on larger sites, especially those whose 
development will be spread over long periods. Where a site involves more t han one 
developer, a collaborative masterplanning approach is expected to  ensure the coherent 
application of design principles across the whole  development site. The level of prescription 
will vary according to the nature of the site  and the development pr oposed . The Council 
may, at its discretion, appoint an independent Quality Design Review Panel to review the 
detailed design proposals, to help provide additional rigour to the design -thinking process, 
thereby ensuring the longer -term sustainable success o f the development.   
Local Character  and Context  
5.126  An important part of making successful places is to ensure that new buildings are attractive, 
appropriate in their setting and fit for purpose.  Their massing, scale and layout should 
enhance, activate and ap propriately frame the public realm, complement the existing 
streetscape and surrounding area.  
5.127  Where development is in the vicinity of any of Brentwood’s distinctive natural, cultural or 
historic assets, delivering high quality design that complements the asset will be essential. 
These natural and historic features are of high value and need to be protected and 
enhanced by the quality of development. Proposals that show a thorough understanding of 
the context of the site and demonstrate how the design propo sal is sympathetic to its 
context, reinforcing local distinctiveness and sense of place are more likely to be successful.  
5.128  The Design and Access Statements should clearly  show an analysis of the site context, 
indicating the opportunities and constraints, an d justify  the principles that have informed the 
design rationale.  
5.129  Existing landscape features on site such as trees, ponds and built -forms of value could also 
be integrated in the layout to establish a sense of place and/or a sense of legibility. The 
incorporation of existing landscape features is particularly important to people with dementia, 
as familiar landmarks can serve as visual cues to aid in wayfinding.   
95 5.130  Proposals should either enhance local distinctiveness  or seek to introduce distinctiveness to 
poor quality areas . When undertaking context appraisals , applicants should consider and set 
out in the Design and Access Statement the following:  
i. the built context: providing a demonstrable appreciation of built form in the vicinity 
covering analyses of bui lding style, form, height and as well as the pattern of streets and 
spaces, morphology, skylines and landmarks;  
ii. the environmental context: open spaces, bio -diversity structure, landscape character, 
areas liable to flood;  
iii. the functional context: examining t he existing activities and functions in the vicinity of the 
site including the existing pattern of uses, economic development initiatives, health, 
education & community facilities and public art;  
iv. the spatial context: identifying the development site’s posi tion within the urban hierarchy;  
v. the operational context: showing how infrastructure and facilities are used and their 
capacity to accommodate further demands;  
vi. the community context: seeking to determine the reasonable and realisable needs and 
demands for space within an area and to associate these demands with the known 
existence of vacant or under -used space and the potential for creating new space; and  
vii. the historic context: seeking to encourage new development that respects, incorporates 
and is informed by the character of and traditional historic form of the settlement in 
which the development will take place.  
Design Considerations  
5.131  Permeable and legible layout is at the heart of good design and making successful places. 
Applicants are encoura ged to optimise the layout, including spaces between and around 
buildings, to form a legible, safe and coherent pattern of streets and blocks. The overarching 
layout of a site should be informed by its context rather than technical demands of traffic.  
5.132  Attention should be paid to the design of the parts of a building that people most frequently 
see or interact with, i.e. the ground plane and its legibility, use, detailing, materials and 
entrances.  
5.133  New developments should be designed and managed so that onlin e deliveries and goods 
deliveries can be received without causing unacceptable disturbance to residents and traffic.  
5.134  Bin storage for dry recyclables and waste should be considered in the early design stages to 
help improve recycling rates, reduce smell and  vehicle movements, and improve street 
scene and community safety.  
5.135  Stimuli targeted at each of the senses (sight, scent, touch, sound and taste) should be 
incorporated into the landscape structure from the outset, to ensure that the development 
caters for people of all physical and mental abilities. This relates to both the natural, soft 
elements of the landscape – such as planting – and hard elements like sculptures, water 
features and furniture. Planning for users of all abilities and ages from the beginn ing can 
reduce the need for costly future adaptations.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
96 5.136  The lighting of the public realm needs careful consideration to ensure it is appropriate to 
address safety and security issues and make night -time activity areas and access routes 
welcoming and safe, w hile also minimising light pollution.  
5.137  Trees that line new streets are considered part of the GBI of the developments and as such 
proposals should provide appropriate long -term maintenance of newly -planted trees 
throughout the life of the development, in li ne with Strategic Policy NE02 Green and Blue 
Infrastructure.  
POLICY  BE15 : PLANNING FOR INCLUSIVE COMMUNITIES  
To plan for and build inclusive environment that supports our residents and 
communities, the Council will require new development proposals to: 
a. provide access to good quality community spaces, services and amenities 
and infrastructure that accommodate, enc ourage and strengthen 
communities  and social interaction for all users ; 
b. create places that foster a sense of belonging and community , where 
individuals and families can develop and thrive;  
c. ensure that streets and public spaces are planned for everyone to m ove 
around and spend time in comfort and safety, are convenient and 
welcoming with no barriers  to the disabled or  impaired , providing 
independent access without additional undue effort, separation or special 
treatment;  
d. ensure buildings and places are desig ned in a way that everyone 
regardless of their ability, age, income, ethnicity, gender, faith, sexual 
orientation can use confidently, independently, with dignity and without 
engendering a sense of separation or segregation;  and 
e. ensure that new buildings a nd spaces are designed to reinforce inclusivity 
of neighbourhoods and are resilient and adaptable to changing community 
requirements.  
 
5.138  A key aspect of design that should be integral in all development proposals is its role in 
creating a safe and accessible environment. Inclusive and safe design principles should 
therefore be integral to the design and layout of the scheme, ensuring that p eople of all ages 
and abilities are able to benefit from high quality, accessible, safe and secure environments. 
This can be achieved by good natural surveillance, accessible and legible walkways, 
appropriate lighting,  and active frontages . The Council str ongly encourage the use of 
‘Secured by Design’ principles to help reduce crime and improve perceptions of safety.   
97 5.139  Enabling everyone to have safe access to places regardless of their age, ability, ethnicity, 
gender, faith, economic circumstance will create more inclusive communities, and improve 
the quality of life for people with a range of health conditions and older people. The Essex 
Design Guide 2018 provides guidance on residential development which is flexible and 
adaptable throughout its lifetime.  
Heritage  
5.140  Brentwood Borough is rich in heritage assets - built, landscape and cultural. Brentwood’s 
organic growth is recognisable by the historic settlement patterns for its villages and 
hamlets, these are largely sited on routes to and from London and East Anglia and often 
interspersed by high quality green infrastructure.  
5.141  Brentwood’s landscapes and villages are well documented by the Historic Environment 
Records33, its places, green areas and distinctive characteristics are often joined by historic 
thoroug hfares which have grown over centuries into main routes following the urban 
expansion in the town at the end of the 19th century.  
5.142  The Council positively encourages the enhancement and understanding of the significance 
of heritage assets and apportions gre at weight to the protection of the heritage assets in any 
decision -making process for future development.  
Heritage  Assets  
5.143  In Brentwood Borough, there are more than 500 entries on the statutory list of buildings of 
architectural or historic interest34, 12 s cheduled monuments and 2 Grade II* registered parks 
and gardens. In addition, the borough contains 13 designated Conservation Areas.  
5.144  Understanding the significance of heritage assets whether of national designation or local 
significance is fundamental to t heir care, protection and long -term conservation. The term 
‘heritage assets’ refers to those buildings, places or areas of national importance, registered 
on the Statutory list, but also includes those buildings, places or areas that are of local 
significa nce, these are referred to as non -designated heritage assets.  
5.145  Designation affords a building, site or area of special interest and value which is protected 
under law or policy.  
5.146  Non-designated heritage assets can include buildings, places, lanes or areas o f cultural 
and/or local significance, or non -designated archaeological sites and deposits which whilst 
not nationally designated make a positive contribution to the Historic Environment and its 
understanding. In decision making, proposals which affect loca lly listed heritage assets 
 
33 http://www.heritagegateway.org.uk/gateway/   
34 https://historicengland.org.uk/listing/the -list/  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
98 and/or their setting, must take into account the strong requirement for their retention and the 
enhancement of their significance locally .  
5.147  Locally listed buildings within the borough are to be recorded on a live database. Whilst the 
Local Listing Programme is at embryonic stage, this list and its future enrichment is essential 
in conserving local distinctiveness and community engagement in th e historic environment. 
The Council supports the ethos of local listing and the opportunities it brings to engage a 
diverse range of stakeholders into the management and education of the local historic 
environment.  
5.148  The Council will apply a level of protec tion to and keep under review its heritage assets in 
order to preserve, and where appropriate enhance their special architectural or historic 
interest. A high standard of design for all new development affecting Heritage Assets and 
their setting is require d. 
POLICY BE16 : CONSERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT  
A. All Designated Assets  
1. Great weight will be given to the preservation of a designated heritage asset 
and its setting. Development proposals  affecting a designated asset, including 
a listed building, conservation area, registered parks and gardens, or 
scheduled monument , will be required to:  
a. sustain and wherever possible enhance  the significance of the assets and 
its settings (including views into and out of conservation ar eas and their 
settings) ; 
b. be supported by a Heritage Statement providing sufficient information on 
the significance of the heritage asset (according to its importance), the 
potential impacts of the proposal on the character and significance of the 
asset and  its setting, and how the  proposal has been designed to take 
these factors into account. The Statement should make an assessment of 
the impact of the development on the asset and its setting and the level of 
harm that is likely to result, if any, from the proposed development;  
c. provide clear justification for any works that would lead to  any harm to the 
asset . 
2. Proposals that make sensitive and appropriate use of heritage assets, 
particularly where these bring redundant or under used buildings or buildings  
on the At Risk Register, into appropriate use consistent with their conservation 
status will be supported .  
99 3. Proposals designed to enhance an asset and/or its setting and which reinforce 
its significance and contribution to the character of an area will be sup ported.  
4. Development proposals that would be likely to cause either less than 
substantial or substantial harm to, or loss or partial loss of, a designated asset 
or its setting will be assessed in accordance with the statutory framework and 
national planning  policy.  
5. Where a proposed development involves the loss or partial loss of a 
designated asset, applicants will be required to record and advance 
understanding of the asset in a manner proportionate to its importance and the 
impact which will be caused.  
B. Conservation Areas  
In addition to satisfying the relevant criteria in A above:  
1. Permission for proposals which involve the demolition or partial demolition of a 
building in a conservation area will only be granted subject to a condition 
and/or a planning obligation (as appropriate) that no demolition will take place 
until an enforceable contract has been let for the carrying out of the new 
development.  
2. Development will be permitted in a conservation area where the siting, design 
and scale of the p roposed development would preserve or enhance its 
character or appearance and important views into and out of the area are 
preserved or enhanced.  
C. Non -Designated Heritage Assets  
Development proposals that affect non -designated heritage assets and their 
settings, including protected lanes, should seek to preserve and wherever 
possible enhance the asset and its setting. When considering proposals which 
are likely to cause harm to such an asset consideration will be given to:  
a. the significance of the asset an d its setting; and 
b. the extent to which the scale of any harm or loss harm has been 
minimised . 
D. Specific Requirements  
Specific requirements in relation to particular heritage assets identified in 
housing allocation policies should be read alongside the overarching 
requirements of this policy.  
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
100 Historic Records  
5.149  All development proposals should be based on a full understanding of the significance of 
heritage assets, both within the proposed development site and within the surrounding area. 
This should be established by reference to relevant and available sources o f historic 
environment information. Heritage assets are depicted on the Policies Map, however 
applicants are advised to consult the Essex Historic Environmental Record held by Essex 
County Council as well as any records held by Historic England and other s ources to ensure 
the most up to date records are reviewed before submitting an application. It is also advised 
that early engagement is sought with the Council’s Historic Buildings Advisor through pre -
application consultation.  
5.150  The Council recognise that o n occasion heritage assets are not always documented o r fully 
understood and could be identified through the development process; for example revealed 
by local groups through the consultation process or during preliminary site investigations 
undertaken by an applicant. In these circumstances the Council expect a positive approach 
to ensure the significance of these non -designated heritage assets are appropriately 
conserved and enhanced.  
Heritage Statement  
5.151  All development proposals that are likely to have an  impact on a heritage asset or its setting 
must be accompanied by a Heritage Statement that  clearly describes the significance of 
both the asset and the setting as well as proportionately  assesses how the proposal impacts 
upon it, in relation to its form, fabric, setting, architectural or historic relevance. The level of 
detail needed should be proportionate to the scale and nature of the proposal and the 
importance of the asset itself.  A schedule of works should be included .  
5.152  The Council advise that applic ants seek advice from specialist historic environment 
consultants where necessary, to carry out appropriate assessments.  
5.153  In respect of the loss of any asset the Council will require applicants to record the 
significance of any asset to be lost in a manner proportionate to its importance and the 
impact. The applicant should deposit such evidence to the Essex Historic Environment 
Record.  
5.154  Listed buildings are defined under Section 1 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and 
Conservation Areas) Act 1990, as ‘buildi ngs of special architectural or historic interest’. The 
Secretary of State is required to compile or approve listed buildings for the guidance of local 
planning authorities. There are 512 listed buildings35 within the borough, consisting of:  
• 12 buildings o f Grade I (buildings of exceptional interest)  
• 27 buildings of Grade II* (particularly important buildings of more than special interest)  
• 473 buildings of Grade II (buildings of special interest, which warrant every effort being 
made to preserve them).  
 
35 The current list for Brentwood was approved on 9 December 1994, following a comprehensive resurvey of 
buildings in the Borough, originally co nsisted of 512 listed buildings.   
101 5.155  This policy addresses the statutory considerations of the Planning (Listed Buildings and 
Conservation Areas) Act 1990 which provides specific protection for buildings and areas of 
special architectural or historic interest as well as relevant polities within t he NPPF.  
5.156  Where there is evidence of deliberate neglect of , or damage to a heritage asset , the 
deteriorated state of the heritage asset will not be taken into account in any decision.  
5.157  Works such as the demolition, alterations (both internal and external) or extensions that 
would affect a listed building’s character will require listed building consent.  
5.158  Proposals affecting listed buildings should refer directly to the statutory list of Buildings of 
Special Architectural or Historic Interest36. Under the Planning (Listed Buildings and 
Conservation Areas) Act 1990 owners have a responsibility to look after listed buildings in 
order to prevent deterioration and damage. The Council will inte rvene, where necessary, by 
issuing an Urgent Works or Repairs Notice.  
5.159  National policy and guidance promotes the use/reuse of heritage assets for viable uses 
consistent with their conservation and the positive contribution that they can make towards 
econom ic vitality. Changes of use of a listed building need to be compatible with the 
building’s character and should not have an adverse impact on its context. Proposals for the 
change of use of a listed building in the Green Belt will also be assessed against 
development in the Green Belt policies within this Plan.  
5.160  Proposals will be required to take a practical approach towards the alteration of listed 
buildings to comply with the Equality Act 2010 and subsequent amendments, provided that 
proposed alterations and changes to access are sympathetic and ensure the building’s 
special interest remains unharmed. Applicants should refer to the Historic England Easy 
Access to Historic Buildings (2015) as a basis for practical guidance.  
5.161  The Council intends to compile a  local list of buildings which contribute positively to the 
character of the area due to their townscape value and merit, type of construction, 
architectural quality or historic association. The Council will apply similar levels of 
preservation to its loca lly designated heritage assets and their settings in line with national 
policy and guidance to ensure a high standard of design for all new development affecting 
the character or setting of its built, natural and historic environment. Whether a building is  
locally listed will be a material consideration in determining planning applications in order to 
retain important original features and fabric, and control alteration or extension to maintain 
the character of the buildings in recognition of their contribu tion to local distinctiveness, 
sense of place, identity and character.  
5.162  Conservation Areas are defined under Section 69 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and 
Conservation Areas) Act 1990, as ‘Areas of Special Architectural or Historic Interest the 
character  or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance’. With a rich and 
varied cultural heritage, Brentwood has 13 designated Conservation Areas within the 
borough. Conservation Areas are shown on the Brentwood Policies Map.  
5.163  The Council will seek to promote high quality new development of exceptional design that 
makes a positive contribution to local character and respects the historic context. 
 
36 www.historicengland.org.uk   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
102 Development proposals in a Conservation Area should make reference to the relevant 
Conservation Area appr aisal.  
5.164  There will be a presumption against the demolition of buildings or other features that 
positively contribute to the character or appearance of a Conservation Area, in the absence 
of detailed and acceptable proposals for replacement development. Use of non -traditional 
materials, will not normally be permitted on, or in proximity to, listed buildings or in 
Conservation Areas. For advice on this matter, applicants should consult local expertise and 
refer to published guidance, such as Valuing Places: Go od Practice in Conservation Areas 
by English Heritage (2011).  
5.165  In order to ensure a high standard of design and materials, outline applications will not be 
accepted.  
Local List  
5.166  Locally listed buildings will be a material consideration in determining plannin g applications: 
the retention of important features and fabric and the impact of proposals upon the local 
significance and understanding of a locally listed building will be a material consideration.  
5.167  There are a number of country lanes and byways which are  of historic and landscape value, 
and which make an important contribution to the rural character of the borough. The Council 
will seek to prserve these lanes and byways as far as possible, including their trees, 
hedgerows, banks, ditches and verges, which  contribute to their character, and by resisting 
development proposals which have a detrimental effect upon them.  
Protected Lanes  
5.168  The greater part of the road network in the Essex countryside derives from at least as far 
back as the medieval period. Much of it undoubtedly existed in Saxon times. These lanes 
are part of what was once an immense mileage of minor roads and track -ways connecting 
villages, hamlets and scattered farms and cottages. Many were used for agricultural 
purposes, linking settlements to  arable fields, grazing on pasture, heaths and greens; and 
other resources such as woodland and coastal marsh.  
5.169  Before metalled road, with wide verges and linear roadside green with ditches and 
interspersed with ponds for transporting, feeding and watering livestock on route to market. 
These lanes are an important part of the Essex landscape, providing insight into the 
development of a landscape and the relationship of features within it over time. They have 
considerable ecological value as habitats for plan ts and animals, serving as corridors for 
movement and dispersal for some species and acting as vital connections between other 
habitats; and promoting well -being.  
5.170  The Protected Lanes in Brentwood are listed below:  
 
 
  
103 National Street Gazetteer 
Name (NSG)  Location  Lane ID  
Days Lane  Doddinghurst  BRWLANE1  
Wenlocks Lane  Blackmore  BRWLANE2  
Lincolns Lane  Coxtie Green  BRWLANE3  
Hay Green Lane  Wyatt’s Green  BRWLANE4  
Mill Lane  Navestock Health  BRWLANE5  
Sabines Road  Sabines Green  BRWLANE6  
Dark Lane  Great Warley  BRWLANE8  
Little Hyde Lane  Fryerning  BRWLANE10  
Mill Green Road  Mill Green Common  BRWLANE11  
Ivy Barns Lane  Mill Green Common  BRWLANE12  
Ingatestone Road  Mill Green Common  BRWLANE13  
Chivers Road  Stondon Massey  BRWLANE14  
Figure 5.2: Protected Lanes in Brentwood  
5.171  Recent assessment of the Protected Lanes37  and update38  in Brentwood has confirmed that 
these features remain and in the majority of instances, the designation for protection is 
recommended for retention. Two lanes, Back Lane and Sandpit Lane were identified by 
Essex County Council as no longer meeting the req uired criteria and have been removed 
whilst Chivers Road has been added as a Protected Lane39. 
5.172  Material increases in motorised traffic using a Protected Lane due to development proposals 
must be assessed and action/infrastructure to influence user behaviou r and encourage more 
sustainable modes of transport, will be required.  Any proposals that would have a materially 
adverse impact on the physical appearance of Protected Lanes or generate traffic of a type 
or amount inappropriate for the traditional landsca pe and nature conservation character of a 
Protected Lane, will not be permitted.  
5.173  The Council would consider exploring options and partnerships for influencing user 
behaviour and applying intelligent and positive measures of highway management that will 
serve to encourage local journeys to be made on bicycle or foot, and for recreation, and 
reduce the impact of vehicles on the historic fabric of lanes, whilst maintaining their local 
character.  
Mitigating Impacts  
5.174  The heritage environment should be considered as an integral component of Brentwood’s 
public realm and contribute positively to maintaining sustainable communities and must 
therefore, meaningfully inform the design of development. Any harm to, or loss of, the 
significance of a designated heritage asse t (from its alteration or destruction, or from 
development within its setting), requires clear and convincing justification. Applicants are 
expected to demonstrate how the heritage assessment (as documented in the Heritage 
Statement) has appropriately info rmed and guided the design of the proposal to ensure they 
do not impact the architectural details and qualities of the asset. Proposals should be of the 
 
37 Brentwood Borough Protected Lane Assessment (2016) Essex County Council  
38 Brentwood Borough Protected Lane Assessment Update (Letter) (2018) Essex County Council  
39 Protected Lane Assessment, Chivers Road, Additional Lane (2020), Essex County Council  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
104 highest architectural and urban design quality, having regard to and respecting local 
character and oth er policies in this plan. Development proposals that appropriately preserve 
or help to better reveal and enhance heritage assets and their setting will be supported.  
Heritage -led Regeneration  
5.175  A Heritage at Risk programme has been implemented by Historic En gland. It protects and 
manages the historic environment so the number of ‘at risk’ historic places and sites across 
England is reduced. The Heritage At Risk Register identifies those sites that are most at risk 
of being lost as a result of neglect, decay o r inappropriate development.  Proposals which 
seek to bring such assets back into appropriate use and help revitalise neighbourhoods in 
accordance with national policy will be supported.  
Archaeological Heritage  
5.176  The historic environment of Brentwood has dev eloped through a history of human activity 
that spans over 450,000 years. Much of the resource lies hidden beneath the ground in the 
form of highly sensitive and non -renewable archaeological deposits. Other elements such as 
the historic landscape, the patt ern of field, farms, woods and historic settlements which 
characterise the borough are a highly visible record of millennia of agriculture, industry, 
settlement and commerce.  
5.177  Brentwood has a large number of sites of archaeological importance that are wort hy of 
preservation for the future. Essex Historic Environment record identifies 636 sites within the 
borough of known archaeological interest. These include isolated discoveries like Stone Age 
flint axe, below ground evidence of prehistoric, Roman, Saxon a nd medieval occupation and 
upstanding post medieval and modern structures. Of known sites, 12 are scheduled ancient 
monuments, maintained by the Secretary of State under Section 1 of the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979, ensuring ultimat e responsibility for the 
preservation, treatment, repair and use of each monument.  
5.178  For applications affecting a scheduled monument and its setting, early stage consultation 
with English Heritage will be required to gain scheduled monument consent. For non -
statutory historic environment assets applicants should consult the Council and as 
appropriate, Essex County Council historic environment advisors, regarding the nature, 
setting and management of the borough’s historic environment.  
5.179  As a finite and non -renewable resource, archaeology can become highly fragile and 
vulnerable to damage or destruction. The Council will need to be satisfied by the applicant 
that the significance of the archaeological remains adopt a presumption against proposals 
which would harm  the setting of archaeological remains of national or local importance, 
whether scheduled or not, are conserved.   
5.180  In cases where development will impact upon sites of known archaeological interest or 
potential, the results of a field evaluation/assessment will be necessary prior to the 
determination of the application. Applicants will be required to arrange for an archaeological 
investigation setting out appropriate measures of protection, management or mitigation 
including excavations and recording prior t o development.   
105  
 
 
 
Housing  Provision  
 
 
Housing  
Housing Mix  
6.1 It is important  that new housing development addresses local needs and contributes to the 
creation of mixed and balanced communities. A core planning principle in the NPPF is that 
every effort should be made objectively to identify and then meet the housing needs of an 
area. This means providing sufficient good -quality housing of the right types, mix, sizes, and 
tenure in the right places, which will be attractive to and meet the identified needs of different 
groups in society, including families with children, first -time buyers, older people, people with 
disabilities, and people wishing to build their own homes. Well-designed  housing should also 
be accessible and adaptable to meet people’s changing needs and helping to sustain 
independent living.  
6.2 The amount  and distribution of housing to be delivered in the borough over the Plan period 
is established through Strategic Policy  MG01 Spatial Strategy . Policy HP01  Housing  Mix 
seeks to ensure that residential development proposals deliver housing in a way that 
contributes to the rebalancing of the housing stock to ensure it better reflects the identified 
needs and demands for housing of the existing and future communities of the borough.  
06 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
106 STRATEGIC POLICY HP01: HOUSING MIX  
1. All new residential development should deli ver an inclusive, accessible 
environment throughout.  
2. On residential development proposals of 10 or more (net) additional dwellings 
the Council will require:  
a. an appropriate mix of dwelling types, sizes and tenures to meet the 
identified housing needs in th e borough as set out in the Council’s most up 
to date housing need evidence to provide choice, and contribute towards 
the creation of sustainable, balanced and inclusive communities; and  
b. each dwelling to be constructed to meet requirement  M4(2) accessible and 
adaptable dwellings , unless it is built in line with  M4(3)  wheelchair 
adaptable dwellings  of the Building Regulations 2015 , or subsequent 
government standard.  
3. On developments of 60 or more (net) dwellings the Council will require all of 
the a bove, and:   
a. a minimum of 5% of new affordable dwellings should be built to meet 
requirement  M4(3) wheelchair accessible  dwellings  of the Building 
Regulations 2015 , or subsequent government standard.  
4. On development sites of 100 or more dwellings the Counci l will require all of 
the above, and:  
a. a minimum of 5% self-build  homes which can include custom 
housebuilding  provided there is a need as justified within the Council’s 
most up to date evidence ; and  
b. provision for  other forms of  Specialist Accommodation taking account of 
local housing need in accordance with the criteria set out in Policy HP04  
Specialist Accommodat ion. 
5. Where a development site has been divided into parts, or is being delivered in 
phases, the area to be used for determining whether this policy applies will be 
the whole original site.  
6. The inclusion of self -build and custom build homes and Specialist Residential 
Accommodation on smaller sites will also be encouraged.  
 
6.3 The NPPF requires local planning authorities to plan for a mix of housing based on current 
and future demographic trends, market trends and the needs of different groups in the 
community , including, but not limited to, those who require affordable housing, families with  
107 children, older people, people with disabilities, travellers, people who rent their homes and 
people wishing to commission or build their own homes. Across the borough , there is a need 
to rebalance the housing market to provide a range of housing that will meet the changing 
needs of communities.  
6.4 The Council’s Strategic Housing Marke t Assessment (SHMA) Part 2 (2016)  provides a 
detailed assessment of the housing required to meet existing and future needs across the 
borough. Proposals should respond to other up -to-date and relevant local evidence where 
available, such as the Council’s Housing Strategy.  
6.5 The Council’s l atest SHMA indicates that the greatest need for Market housing is two-
bedroom  units, closely followed by a need for family housing consisting of three or more 
bedrooms. Figure 6.1 below will be used to inform negotiations between the Council and 
developers  to determine the appropriate mix of housing. The final mix of housing/types will 
be subject to negotiation with the applicant.  
 
Size of new Market housing required up to 2033  
Dwelling Size  Indicative Mix  
One bedroom  3.8%  
Two bedrooms  35.8%  
Three bedrooms  30.2%  
Four or more bedrooms  30.2%  
Total  100%  
Figure 6.1: Indicative Size Guide for Market Housing  
 
6.6 Census data40 indicates an above average proportion of the borough’s households contain 
older persons, at 24.1% compared to 22.3% regionally and 20.5% nationally. The proportion 
of the borough’s population living beyond 65 years of age is set to rise during the Plan 
period, from 14,564 residents in 2013 to 21,093 r esidents in 2033, a rise of 44.8%, meaning  
a significant proportion of projected households  are likely to have a household 
representative aged 65 or over.  
6.7 The government position is that older persons should remain at home rather than enter  
residential fa cilities  (use class C2 ) where appropriate . This combination of factors shows the 
need for homes that are adapted and further adaptable for a less mobile population.  It is 
 
40 As referenced within the Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) Part 2 (2016)  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
108 expected that all  dwellings on major residential schemes achieve  requirement M4(2) 
accessible and adaptable dwellings, or M4(3) wheelchair adaptable dwellings of the Building 
Regulations 2015 . 
6.8 Government research41 shows that, based on English Partnerships figures from 2011 -2012, 
nearly 30% of households have at least one person with a long -term illness and over 3% 
have one or more wheelchair user.  
6.9 While nationally 3.3% of households have a wheelchair user, for hous eholds living in 
affordable housing this rises to 7.1%. The rates are also higher for older households ; and 
given that the number of older person households in the borough is set to increase over the 
period to 2033, the Council seeks to ensure 5% of afford able housing development on 
proposals of 60 or more dwelling s archives requirement M4(3) wheelchair accessible 
dwellings.  
6.10 The development of self -build properties by individuals or community groups (including 
Community Land Trusts) can also contribute to m eeting the need for additional housing 
within the district and  provide a more diverse housing stock. Self -build plots are plots of land 
which are made available for individuals to design and build their own home whereas 
custom build plots are provided by s ite developers to the specification of individuals which 
may or may not follow a basic design pattern.  
6.11 To assist in the delivery of a choice of accommodation, the provision of self and custom 
housebuilding plots is required to be made available on resident ial schemes of 100 dwellings 
or more. A figure of 5% of the total dwelling numbers shall be made available for sale as self 
or custom housebuilding plots whilst there is an identified need on the Council’s Self -build 
and Custom Housebuilding Register. The Council will have regard to the information in its 
Self & Custom Housebuilding Register when negotiating the mix of plots to come forward as 
self or custom build and will secure this through S106 or other legal agreements. Self -
build/custom build homes wil l not be considered as an alternative to, or replacement for, the 
affordable housing requirements set out in Policy HP05  Affordable Housing  
6.12 Where a site has five or more self or custom build dwellings the Council may require these 
dwellings to be developed  in accordance with an agreed design code. Where plots have 
been available at market value and marketed appropriately for at least three years  and have 
not sold, the plot(s) may remain on the open market as self or custom build or be offered to 
the Council or a Housing Association before being built out by the developer.  
6.13 The Council will also seek the provision of Specialist Accommodation on res idential 
schemes of 100 dwellings or more, to ensure there will be sufficient housing to 
accommodate identified local need as set out in Policy  HP04  Specialist Accommodation.  
The Council will have regard to the information in its AMR ‘Specialist Accommodat ion 
Report’ when negotiating the mix and type of units  to come forward as Specialist 
Accommodation and will  seek to  secure this through S106 or other legal agreements.  
6.14 Where an applicant considers that it is not feasible or viable to meet the requirements as set 
out in Policy HP01,  the Council will expect this to be demonstrated with robust evidence and 
 
41 Guide to available disability data DCLG 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/416475/150323_
Guide_to_disability_data___final_web_version.pdf    
109 may negotiate a proportionate housing mix which is achievable, account will be taken of the 
nature, constraints, character and context of the site.  
6.15 Conditi ons may be used to ensure particular housing types provided, remain available in 
perpetuity and by tenure.  
6.16 The Essex Design Guide 2018 seeks to provide residential development which is flexible 
and adaptable throughout its lifetime . The Design Guide includ es guidance  on cross cutting 
themes, one of which is specifically in relation to the ageing population.  
Protecting the Existing Housing Stock  
POLICY HP02: PROTECTING THE EXISTING HOUSING STOCK  
1. To ensure that housing supply is protected , the net loss of existing dwellings 
will be resisted . The Council will only support development proposals that 
would result in the net loss in the number of dwellings where one or more of 
the following criteria are met:  
a. the continued use of the building as  a dwelling is undesirable due to 
proven environmental constraints ; and 
b. the loss of the dwellings would be outweighed  by the provision of an 
essential community service or another form of residential 
accommodation.  
2. In justifying any change of use between r esidential use classes, proposals 
must demonstrate how they are responding to  established  housing  need as 
demonstrated in  the Council's most up -to-date housing need evidence . 
 
6.17 As demonstrated in this Plan, there are substantial needs for additional housing in the 
borough. The Council’s work to determine land supply has demonstrated that to meet this 
need the release of some of the Green Belt is necessary and justified. Taking these factors 
together, the Council considers that it is importa nt to resist the net loss of  existing dwellings.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
110 Residential Density   
POLICY HP03: RESIDENTIAL DENSITY  
Proposals for new residential developments not allocated in the Plan:  
a. should take a design led approach to density which ensures schemes are 
sympathetic to local character and make efficient use of land ; 
b. be expected to achieve  a net density of at least  35 dwellings per hectare 
net or higher , unless the character of the surro unding area suggests that 
such densities would be inappropriate , or where other site constraints 
make such densities unachievable ; and  
c. be expected to achieve  a higher density , generally above 65 dwellings per 
hectare net  in the Town Centre  and District Sho pping Centres listed below  
Strategic Policy PC04 Retail Hierarchy of Designated Centres , or other 
locations with good public transport accessibility, subject to  Strategic 
Policy BE14 Creating Successful Places . 
 
6.18 Efficient land use is essential in a borough like Brentwood where land is scarce and enables 
new homes to be provided without encroaching on the countryside. Good design makes it  
appropriate  to develop in a way that is sympathetic to local character, uses land efficiently 
and creates or maintains a high -quality living and working environment. The right density will 
depend on the scheme, dwelling mix, site characteristics and location.  
6.19 Proposals for housing developments should promote an effective use of lan d in line with the 
NPPF. Policy HP03  Residential Density sets out the Council ’s expectations on the net 
density of sites in the borough, supporting development proposals that make efficient use of 
land and discouraging low density development to ensure opt imal use of each site.   
6.20 The Council considers it reasonable to expect proposals to achieve densities of at least 35 
dwellings per hectare except where this would harm the special character of an area, have 
an adverse transport impact or cause harm to residential amenities. Densities of 65 
dwellings to the hectare or more will generally be expected in locations  well served by retail, 
commercial and community facilities and services , and/or locations  with good public 
transport accessibility.  
6.21 To determine  how much land is required to meet housing requirements, consideration has 
been given to the number of homes a given area can sustainably accommodate based on 
site and location characteristics. Efficient land use is critical to the delivery of this Plan.  
Without it , there will be more pressure to release Green Belt to accommodate new  
111 development or, alternatively, the number of new homes delivered will fall short of that 
planned and what would otherwise have been provided.  
Specialist Accommodation  
POLICY HP04: SPECIALIST ACCOM MODATION  
1. The Council will  grant permission for proposals which contribute to the delivery 
of Specialist Accommodation, provided that the development:  
a. meets demonstratable need;  
b. is readily accessible to public transport, shops, local s ervices, community 
facilities and social networks and, where appropriate, employment and day 
centres;  and 
c. would not result in the over concentration of any one type of 
accommodation . 
2. Subject to viability, where accommodation falls within use class C3 an 
appropriate proportion of affordable housing in accordance with Policy HP05  
Affordable Housing will be required with a mix of tenures  to meet identified 
needs . 
3. A condition may be impose d restricting occupation to persons requiring 
specialist accommodation where deemed necessary.  
4. Where a need for Gypsy and Traveller pitches are identified by the Council, 
Policy HP10: Proposals for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
Windfall Sit es would apply.  
 
6.22 The NPPF requires local planning authorities to plan for a mix of housing based on current 
and future demographic trends, market trends and the needs of different groups in the 
community.   
6.23 There are certain groups of people within the com munity that need specialist residential 
accommodation that caters for their specific needs. This form of accommodation includes, 
but is not limited to, housing for older people such as Independent Living schemes for the 
frail elderly, homes for those with disabilities and support needs, residential institutions and 
culturally appropriate accommodation for those Gypsies and Travellers or Travelling 
Showpeople who no longer exercise a nomadic lifestyle and where the Planning Policy for Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
112 Traveller Sites does no t apply. Policy HP04  Specialist Accommodation  is intended to 
support the delivery of this national policy requirement.  
6.24 The Council’s SHMA  Part 2  provides a detailed assessment of the housing required to meet 
existing and future needs across the borough. T he SHMA indicates that if occupation 
patterns of specialist residential accommodation for older people remain at current levels, 
there will be a requirement for 494 additional specialist units to 2033. Essex County Council  
(ECC) ’s Independent Living Programme is encouraging the provision of specialist residential 
accommodation in Essex as a means to provide housing for people over the age of 55 
whose current home no longer meets their needs.  Brentwood has an ageing population 
which has clear implications for the future delivery of housing over the Local Plan period. 
ECC  is the provider of adult social care in Brentwood.  Their  approach to Independent Living 
(Extra Care) encourages the provision of specialist accommodation in Essex as a means by 
which older people can continue to live healthy and active lives within existing communities. 
This approach to meeting the specialist accommodation needs of older people is intended to 
reduce the demand for residential/nursing home care acros s the County. Independent Living 
schemes are part of a wider accommodation pathway to enable older people to remain as 
independent as possible with the right housing and support to meet their needs . The Council 
will work with ECC  to secure provision of sui table sites .  
6.25 In terms of housing, new potential builds for Supported Living could be beneficial to supply 
demand for this type of accommodation, and any specialist accommodation provision for 
people with disabilities could meet the need of the local popul ation or individuals who would 
move to this area. The demand for adults with disabilities is considered under the 
Independent Living programme.  
6.26 The SHMA Part 2 will be used alongside other relevant local evidence, such as the 
Brentwood Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment and Housing Strategy, to 
inform a ‘Specialist Accommodation Report’ , produced and updated regularly as part of the 
Councils ongoing Authority Monitoring commitments.  
6.27 The Council will refer to the latest ‘Specialist Accom modation Report’ during negotiations 
with developers in establishing local need and securing the provision, and where relevant 
location, of the most appropriate Specialist Accommodation. The final  type, tenure and 
quantum  of specialist accommodation provis ion will be determined through negotiations on 
individual planning applications  and will be secured through S106 or other legal agreements.   
6.28 In the monitoring of this policy there will be a need to ensure the Council is satisfied with the 
provision of spec ialist accommodation being delivered , if a shortfall in provision is identified 
the policy will be reviewed as necessary.  
Affordable Housing  
6.29 Affordable housing is defined as housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met 
by the market (includi ng housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or 
is for essential local workers); the definition includes, but is not limited to, social 
rented/affordable rented and intermediate housing as well as starter homes. To be 
‘affordable’, the  cost of housing must be low enough for eligible households to afford based 
on local incomes and house prices.   
113 6.30 A growing number of households in the borough cannot afford to buy or rent on the open 
market. House prices in Brentwood are among the highest in  Essex. A shortage of 
affordable housing leads to overcrowding, poor health, inability to achieve a decent standard 
of living and personal aspirations such as living independently, having children, being part of 
family or social network of choice – all fac tors that contribute to the sustainability of 
neighbourhoods.  
6.31 The provision of affordable housing to meet identified need is an important objective of the 
Local Plan. To assess this need, the Council, commissioned consultants to produce a 
Strategic Housin g Market Assessment (SHMA) Part 2, which was published in June 2016, 
and uses the national planning practice guidance to calculate the level of affordable housing 
need. This assessment identified that the annual level of need for affordable housing in the 
borough is 107 households per year . 
 POLICY HP05: AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
1. The Council will require the provision of 35% of the total number of residential 
units to be provided and maintained as affordable housing within all new 
residential development sites on proposals of 10 or more (net) units . 
2. In considering the suitability o f affordable housing, the Council will require that:  
a. the tenure split be made up of 86% Affordable/Social Rent and 14% as 
other forms of affordable housing (this includes starter homes, 
intermediate homes and shared ownership and all other forms of 
afforda ble housing as described by national guidance or legislation) or 
regard to the most up to date  housing evidence ;  
b. the affordable housing be designed in such a way as to be seamlessly 
integrated to that of market housing elements of a scheme (in terms of 
appearance, build quality and materials) and distributed throughout the 
development so as to avoid the over concentration in one area; and  
c. the type, mix, size and cost of affordable homes will meet the identified 
housing need as reported by the Council’s mos t up-to-date housing 
evidence . 
3. In seeking affordable housing provision,  the Council will have regard to 
scheme viability ; only where robust viability evidence demonstrates that the full 
amount of affordable housing cannot be delivered , the Council will neg otiate a 
level of on -site affordable housing that can be delivered taking into account the 
mix of unit size, type and tenure and any grant subsidy received.  
4. The Council will only accept off-site provision, or an appropriate financial 
contribution in lieu of  on-site provision where it can be robustly demonstrated 
that on -site provision is  not possible and that, in the individual case and to the Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
114 satisfaction of the Council, the objective of creating mixed and balanced 
communities can be effectively and equally  met through either off -site 
provision or an appropriate financial contribution in lieu or a combination of the 
two. 
5. Where a site has been sub -divided or is not being developed to its full potential 
so as to fall under the affordable housing threshold , the Council will seek a 
level of affordable housing to reflect the provision that would have been 
achieved on the site as a whole had it come forward as a single scheme for 
the allocated or identified site.  
6. Planning obligations will be used to ensure that the  affordable housing will 
remain at an affordable price for future eligible households, or for the subsidy 
to be recycled to alternative affordable housing provision.  
7. The requirement to provide affordable housing will apply to all residential 
development fa lling under use class C3 with the exception of Gypsy & 
Traveller Pitches or Travelling Showman Plots.  
 
6.32 Chapter 5 of the NPPF sets out that in delivering a sufficient supply of homes, local planning 
authorities  should (amongst other things, where they have identified that affordable housing 
is needed) set policies for meeting this need, specifying the type o f affordable housing 
required, and expect it to be met on -site unless off -site provision or a financial contribution of 
broadly equivalent value can be robustly justified and the agreed approach contributes to the 
objective of creating mixed and balanced c ommunities.  
6.33 There is a significant need for affordable housing in the borough as evidenced in the 
Council’s SHMA which supports an affordable housing target of 35% on major 
developments.  
6.34 The local plan viability assessment demonstrates that the thresholds  of affordable housing 
contributions identified in the Local Plan are achievable and the cumulative impact of 
policies in the local Plan will not put development at risk. The use of further viability 
assessments at the decision -making stage should not be n ecessary. It is up to the applicant 
to demonstrate whether particular circumstances relevant to the characteristics of the site 
and the proposed development justify the need for a viability assessment at the application 
stage.  
6.35 Where an applicant formally r equests the Council to consider a reduced level of affordable 
housing, it will need to demonstrate that it is not possible to meet the full quota of affordable 
housing without prejudicing the delivery of housing on the site. It will also need to 
demonstrat e to the satisfaction of the Council that, in the individual case, the objective of 
creating mixed and balanced communities can be effectively and equally met through either 
off-site provision or an appropriate financial contribution in lieu or a combinati on of the two. 
To this end, and in demonstrating the above, a full viability assessment would need to be  
115 submitted with a planning application which is based upon, and refers to, the Brentwood 
Local Plan Viability Assessment.  Such an assessment should inc lude evidence of what has 
changed since the adoption of the Plan which has impacted on viability and should reflect 
the government’s recommended approach to defining key inputs as set out in National 
Planning Guidance.  
6.36 The Council’s SHMA indicates that wit hin the affordable housing sector there is a need for 
86% affordable/social rent. Figure 6.2 below will be used to inform negotiations between the 
Council and developers to determine the appropriate tenure and mix of affordable housing.  
 
Size & Tenure of all affordable housing required up to 2033  
 
Tenure   
% Split  Indicative Size  
One 
bedroom  Two 
bedrooms  Three 
bedrooms  Four/+ 
bedrooms  Total 
Size 
Affordable rent / 
Social rent  86% 31% 24% 19% 26% 100%  
Other forms of 
affordable housing  14% 28% 36% 24% 12% 100%  
Total Tenure  100%  
Figure  6.2: Indicative Size Guide for Affordable Housing  
 
6.37 Whilst the Council’s starting point in any affordable housing negotiations is that a scheme is 
viable at the percentages and tenure splits set out within Policy HP05 , the policy recognises 
that there may be sites on which the provision of affordable housin g to the percentages or 
tenure splits set out, would render a development unviable or would prejudice the realisation 
of other planning objectives that need to be given priority.  
6.38 In these circumstances, the applicant will be required to provide a level of on-site affordable 
provision which can be viably delivered. In doing so, the percentage of on -site provision not 
met may be made up from financial contributions in lieu of the on -site requirement subject to 
viability. The Council will normally take into account exceptional site costs and the existing 
use value of the site but would not consider the price paid for the site to be a relevant factor 
as this should have taken account of policy requirements. The Council will take an ‘open 
book’ approach to  negotiation and may require viability assessments to be scrutinised by 
independent consultants at cost to the developer.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
116 6.39 Only where it can be demonstrated that providing any affordable housing on -site is not 
viable or feasible will the Council consider ac cepting financial contributions in lieu of on -site 
provision.  
6.40 The Council encourages applicants to work with registered provider s and to engage with 
them and the Council’s housing department at an early stage in the planning process, further 
guidance on ea rly engagement and preferred partner registered providers  is provided in the 
Housing Strategy.  
Standards  for New Housing  
POLICY  HP06: STANDARDS FOR NEW HOUSING  
Internal Residential Space  
1. All new build housing will achieve appropriate internal space throug h 
compliance with the nationally -described space standard  as summarised in 
Figure 6.3 or as may be superseded .  
External Residential Space  
2. New residential units will be expected to have direct access to an area of 
private and/or communal amenity space. The form of amenity space will be 
dependent on the form of housing and could be provided in a variety of ways, 
such as a private garden, roof garden, communal garden, courtyard balcony, 
or ground -level patio with defensible space from public access. In providing 
appropriate amenity space, development proposals should  be design ed to 
provide  amenity space of a shape, size and location to allow eff ective and 
practical use of and level access to the space by residents.  
 
Internal Space Standards  
6.41 The government’s Housing Standards Review 2015 published internal space standards 
which local authorities could apply to new build residential development us ing planning 
policy. The council requires the use of these standards for new build development as set out 
in Policy HP06  and supports these standards for all new residential development.  
6.42 The provision of sufficient space within new homes is an important el ement in improving the 
quality of life and well-being  of Brentwood residents and new dwellings should provide 
sufficient space for basic daily activities and needs.  The need for minimum internal space 
standards in the Borough is reported in the Council’s A MR.  
117 6.43 In order to  ensure that homes meet the needs of local residents, regardless of their income 
level, it is important that internal space standards are improved alongside the overall 
housing mix. New homes created through residential conversions and homes created by 
changes of use from non -residential land uses should seek to meet or exceed the standards 
as far as it is practicable to do so.  
6.44 To meet the needs of occupiers, all new residential development should be built in 
accordance with the nationally described space s tandard. The standard requires that:  
a. A dwelling provides at least the G ross Internal Area (GIA)  and built -in storage area set 
out in Figure 6.3 
b. A dwelling with two or more bedspaces has at least one double (or twin) bedroom  
c. In order to provide one bedspace , a single bedroom has a floor area of at least 7.5 
sqm and is at least 2.15  m wide  
d. In order to  provide two bedspaces, a double (or twin bedroom) has a floor area of at 
least 11.5 sqm  
e. One double (or twin bedroom) is at least 2.75  m wide and every other double (or twin) 
bedroom is at least 2.55  m wide  
f. Any area with a headroom of less than 1.5m is not  counted within the GIA unless used 
solely for storage (if the area under the stairs is to be used for storage, assume a 
general floor area of 1 sqm within the GIA)  
g. Any other area that is used solely for storage and has a headroom of 900 -1500  mm 
(such as u nder eaves) is counted at 50% of its floor area, and any area lower than 900  
mm is not counted at all  
h. A built -in wardrobe counts towards the GIA and bedroom floor area requirements, but 
should not reduce the effective width of the room below the minimum wi dths set out 
above. The built -in area in excess of 0.72 sqm in a double bedroom and 0.36 sqm in a 
single bedroom counts towards the built -in storage requirement  
i. The minimum floor to ceiling height is 2.3  m for at least 75% of the GIA.  
 
Minimum gross intern al floor areas of storage (square metres)  
Number of 
bedrooms  Number of 
bedspaces  1-storey 
dwellings  2-storey 
dwellings  3-storey 
dwellings  Built-in 
storage  
Studio  1 person  39(37)  N/A N/A 1.0 
1 Bedroom  2 person  50 58 1.5 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
118 2 Bedroom  3 person  61 70 2.0 
4 person  70 79 
3 Bedroom  4 person  74 84 90 2.5 
5 person  86 93 99 
6 person  95 102 108 
4 Bedroom  5 person  90 97 103 3.0 
6 person  99 106 112 
7 person  108 115 121 
8 person  117 124 130 
5 Bedroom  6 person  103 110 116 3.5 
7 person  112 119 125 
8 person  121 128 134 
6 Bedroom  7 person  116 123 129 4.0 
8 person  125 132 138 
Figure  6.3: Nationally Described Space Standard  
 
External Residential Space  
6.45 External amenity space can make an important contribution in improving the quality of life 
and well -being of Brentwood residents as well as supporting and enhancing local 
biodiversity. Gardens, in particular, are an important environmental resource and are a 
component of Brentwood’s greenery character. They form part of an area's  development 
pattern, providing a setting for buildings, which in turn informs the prevailing privacy and 
amenity enjoyed by residents. They provide a semi -natural habitat for local wildlife and 
corridors for the movement of wildlife through the urban envi ronment. Collectively, they help 
to mitigate fluvial and surface water flooding in the more built -up parts of the borough.  
6.46 The NPPF sets out the need to secure high -quality design and a good standard of amenity 
for all existing and future occupants of land  and buildings.   
119 6.47 External amenity space should be sufficient to accommodate:  
• a table and chairs suitable for the size of dwelling;  
• where relevant, provision of a garden shed for general storage (including bicycles if garage 
provision or cycle storage to the  frontage of the dwelling is not possible);  
• space for refuse and recycling bins;  
• an area to dry washing;  
• circulation space; and  
• an area for children to play in.  
6.48 External residential space would not include car parking or turning areas. Suitable 
arrangement s for access to refuse and recycling bins should be made to prevent bins/bags 
being transported through dwellings.  
6.49 One-bedroom dwellings would not be expected to provide space for children to play, due to 
the lower likelihood of children occupying these u nits. Dwellings with more than one 
bedroom would need to take space for children to play into account.  
6.50 Where it is appropriate and viable to do so, developments with flats will need to provide 
high-quality shared amenity areas on site to meet the needs of  residents, including play 
space for children, in addition to private amenity space  and cy cle storage.  
6.51 Applicants are also encouraged to consider external residential space size specifications as 
set out by the most up to date Essex Design Guide:  
a. New devel opment on sites larger than 0.1 hectares or at densities above 50 dwellings 
per hectare should provide at least 25 sqm of private external space for each home;  
b. Exceptionally, apartments adjacent to and overlooking a park or other large public 
space of high  amenity value could be provided with a smaller amount of communal 
space. In this instance, apartments should also have balconies with a floor area of at 
least 5 sqm;  
c. At least 60% of the private communal space should receive direct sunlight for a 
minimum o f four hours a day in June;  
d. A gross floor area of 5 sqm per balcony should be provided for houses or apartments 
with more than one bedroom if private external space size specifications cannot be 
met. 
6.52 Applicants should refer to best practice and guidance on achieving quality  design  for all new 
residential development, as set out in the Essex Design Guide.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
120 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  
6.53 The Council has a duty to identify land to meet the local needs of Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeo ple; national planning policy seeks to ensure fair and equal treatment for 
travellers.  
6.54 In doing so, government guidance sets out the approach Local Authorities should take when 
making provision for Gypsy and Travellers. It requires Local Authorities to ma ke their own 
assessment of need, develop fair and effective strategies to meet need through the 
identification of land for sites, to plan for sites over a reasonable timescale, to increase the 
number of traveller sites in appropriate locations in order to address under provision and 
maintain an appropriate level of supply.  
6.55 In August 2015, a new definition of Gypsy and Traveller was introduced into the Planning 
Policy for Traveller Sites (PPTS):  
 ‘Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on 
grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs or old age 
have ceased to travel temporarily, but excluding members of an  organised group of travelling 
showpeople or circus people traveling together as such.’ (PPTS) (DCLG, 2015)  
6.56 Responding to the new guidance and the need to update evidence on the level of need, the 
Council alongside other Essex Local Authorities undertook a  Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) in 2016.  
6.57 This identified those Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople which should be 
planned for in accordance with the PPTS, as they retain a nomadic lifestyle, and those which 
should otherwise  have their specific cultural needs of living accommodation met in 
accordance with the Equalities Act 2010, the Children’s and Families Act 2014 and the 
Human Rights Act 1998, but no longer exercise a nomadic lifestyle and where the PPTS 
does not apply.  
6.58 In respect of those Gypsies and Travellers or Travelling Showpeople, who do not meet the 
PPTS definition, who may be able to demonstrate a need for culturally appropriate 
accommodation under Equalities legislation, the Council will continue to assess and pla n to 
meet their needs through Policy HP04  Specialist Accommodation, as part of its wider 
responsibilities to plan to meet the accommodation needs of its settled community.  
6.59 The Brentwood GTAA covers the period 2016 to 2033 and identifies a requirement of 11  
additional Gypsy and Traveller pitches to be developed by 2033 for those who meet the 
PPTS definition of ‘travelling’.  
6.60 Despite achieving a good response rate for the completion of interviews, it is acknowledged 
in the GTAA that it was not possible to dete rmine the travelling status of all Gypsy and 
Traveller households in the borough, and a proportion of these may meet the definition  
121 provided in the PPTS. The Council’s GTAA consultants O pinion Research Services  
therefore advise in the GTAA that an allowance of 10% is a realistic assumption of those 
that are recorded as ‘unknown’ who may in fact comply with the revised definition; this 
increases total need to 12 pitches.  
6.61 Since completion of the GTAA a Gypsy and T raveller pitch at Cottage Garden, Pilgrims 
Hatch, has been granted planning consent for the change of use to a detached dwelling 
(14/01069/FUL), to replace this lost traveller site a requirement for an additional pitch is 
added to the total requirements of  Gypsy and Traveller pitches identified in the GTAA, 
further increasing the total need to 13 pitches.  
6.62 No current need has been identified in the borough for accommodation for travelling 
showpeople, however , any need that arises over the life of the Plan wi ll be addressed using 
the criteria based Policy HP10 Proposals For Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople on Windfall sites . 
6.63 The Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment finds no evidence of need for a 
transit site specifically within Brentwood Borough. Further work is currently being undertaken 
by Essex County Council to consider the need for transit provision across Essex as a whole. 
Should such a need be identified within Brentwood in the future this will be considered 
through the review of th e Local Plan , taking into account the Essex Planning Officers' 
Association Protocol for Unmet Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Needs 2018 
which has been developed collaboratively across Essex under the Duty to Cooperate . 
Provision for Gypsies and  Travellers  
POLICY HP07: PROVISION FOR GYPSIES AND TRAVELLERS  
1. In order to meet identified need, a total of 13 permanent pitches for Gypsies 
and Travellers as defined by national planning policy for the period 2016 -2033 
will be provided . 
2. The following sites  are removed from the Green Belt and are allocated for 
permanent Gypsy and Traveller accommodation, as shown on the Brentwood 
Policies Map. Proposals for these sites must comply with the specified 
requirements:  
a. Site Ref GT16  
i. Site Address: Oaktree Farm (Gre enacres), Chelmsford Road  
ii. Allocated for 7 pitches  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
122 iii. Proposals for development at this site  require  a landscape framework 
to be submitted to provide suitable boundary treatment to include a 
mixture of native trees and shrubs around the site to safeguard the 
character and appearance of the area.  
b. Site Ref GT17  
i. Site Address: Hunters Green, Albyns Lane, Navestock  
ii. Allocated for 1 pitch  
c. Site Ref R01 (I) Dunton Hills Garden Village Strategic Allocation  
i. Site Address: Dunton Hills Garden Village, West Horndon, Brentwood  
ii. Allocated for 5 pitches  
iii. Proposals for development at this site should comply with the site -
specific requirements set out in policy R01(I).  
 
6.64 The PPTS requires local planning authorities to identify and update annually, a supply of 
specific deliverable sites sufficient to provide five years’ worth of sites against their own 
locally set targets. The Council’s GTAA identifies the need for Traveller pitches in the 
borough over the period of the Local Plan.  
6.65 In identifying the provision of sites to meet Gypsy and Traveller needs , a sequential 
approach to site identification has been adopted, based upon best practice, as set out in 
Figure 6.4. 
6.66 The sequential approach sets out a clear s trategy to minimise the use of greenfield Green 
Belt land for development, existing sites are promoted before new sites are identified. The 
approach also shows that there is insufficient suitable land located outside the Green Belt to 
meet the identified n eed of Gypsy and Traveller pitches.   
6.67 A total of 13 permanent pitches for Gypsies and Travellers as defined by national planning 
policy for the period 2016 -2033 will be provided through the incorporation of a minimum of 5 
serviced Gypsy and Traveller pitche s as part of the Dunton Hills Garden Village allocation, to 
be delivered in the first five years of development. A further 8 existing pitches are to be 
regularised in accordance with Policy HP07.  
6.68 The Council has carried out an assessment of potential Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling 
Showperson sites for allocation through its Housing and Economic Land Availability 
Assessment (HELAA) and found some to be suitable in HELAA terms. However, it is 
recogn ised all were in the Green Belt.  To be consistent with national planning policy, these 
sites have been removed from the green belt for the use as gypsy and traveller pitches only.   
123 Sequential Approach  Commentary  
Step 1 - use of vacant pitches  No vacant pitches available to meet needs  
Step 2 - potential additional provision from 
existing expired temporary sites  GTAA does not count tolerated pitches as 
components of need therefore the 
identification of pitches on all expired 
temporary sites within the borough cannot 
be counted towards meeting need  
Step 3 - un-authorised sites that may 
potentially be suitable for regularisation  8 pitches identified on two suitable sites 
through HELAA and site assessment 
process  
Step 4 - potential intensification of  existing 
sites The HELAA and site assessment process 
identify potential however delivery of such 
sites cannot be guaranteed  
Step 5 - potential extension of existing 
Traveller sites or sites which could be 
regularised  Discounted as extension on all existi ng 
sites would result in development in Green 
Belt 
Step 7 - new Traveller sites in non -Green 
Belt areas  No suitable sites identified through HELAA 
and site assessment process  
Step 8 – new Traveller sites in Green Belt 
areas with a focus on strategic larger 
allocations  5 pitches identified through HELAA and site 
assessment process as part of Dunton Hills 
Garden Village Strategic Allocation  
Figure 6.4: Provision of Gypsy and Traveller Sites – A Sequential Approach  
6.69 The approach not only secu res the planning status of the sites for the current occupants, 
contributing to the specified need, but also provides certainty in relation to the delivery of 
sites to meet the needs of the borough (13 pitches as identified in policy HP07) . 
6.70 The sites ident ified through Policy HP07  will still be subject to the usual planning legislation 
and applications will need to be submitted to formally authorise their permanent Traveller 
use. Applicants will be expected to comply in full with the requirements of the policy ; it will 
also be necessary  to restrict the occupancy to ensure that the site as a whole is retained for 
traveller occupation.   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
124 Safeguarding Permitted Sites  
POLICY HP08 : SAFEGUARDING PERMITTED SITES  
1. The existing Gypsy and Traveller sites listed below  are removed from the 
Green Belt  and will be safeguarded from alternative development, unless  it 
can be demonstrated that  the site is no longer required to meet any identified 
Traveller need across the borough , or acceptable replacement 
accommodation can be provided . 
2. Any other site that is subsequently granted a permanent planning permission 
for Gypsy and Traveller use shall be safeguarded in accordance with this 
policy.  
Gypsy and Traveller Sites  
Site Ref  Location  No of Pitches  
GT1 Clementines Farm, Murthering Lane, 
Navestock  1 
GT2 Deep Dell Park (Willow Farm), Ingatestone  6 
GT3 Lilliputs, Blackmore  2 
GT4 Meadow View, Blackmore  2/3 
GT5 Pond End, Kelvedon Hatch  1/2 
GT6 Ponderosa, Kelvedon Hatch  1 
GT7 Poplar Farm, Ingatestone  2/3 
GT8 Roman Triangle, Mountnessing  5 
GT9 Rye Etch, Navestock  3 
GT10  The Willows’, Kelvedon Hatch  3 
GT11  Tree Tops, Navestock  3 
GT12  Warren Lane, Doddinghurst  1 
GT13  Wenlock Meadow  1 
GT14  Hope Farm, Navestock  3  
125 GT15  Orchard View, Navestock  4 
 
3. Of the sites listed above , applications for the removal of temporary personal 
planning permissions for Gypsy and Traveller sites to permanent planning 
permissions for Gypsy and Traveller sites will be supported by the local 
planning authority provided th e occupant meet the definiti on of a Gypsy, 
Traveller or Travelling Showperson as defined in national planning policy.  
 
6.71 Across the borough , there are many existing sites which have planning permission for 
traveller use. Most of these were granted permission several years ago with con ditions 
limiting occupation to those falling within the traveller definition applicable at the time and 
often specific to named occupants.  
6.72 Policy HP08 ensures  that existing sites which have planning permission or lawful use for 
gypsy or traveller use, wil l be safeguarded to guarantee that the permitted use as a traveller 
site is not lost through the grant of any subsequent planning permission, or relaxation of 
planning conditions, to allow for other types of development.  
Sub-division of Pitches or Plots  
POLICY HP09: SUB -DIVISION OF PITCHES OR PLOTS  
1. The local planning authority will allow the sub -division of allocated or 
authorised Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople sites  on a case by 
case basisprovided that all the following criteria are met:  
a. the living environment of residents on the proposed site and neighbouring 
land is protected;  
b. sites are of a suitable size to enable the creation of additional pitches or 
plots;  
c. there is no significant loss of soft and hard landscaping and amenity 
provision  within the existing site, particularly where conditioned by a 
previous consent;  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
126 d. there is no significant adverse impact on the intrinsic character and beauty 
of the countryside ; and 
e. there is no adverse impact in terms of highways access and vehicle 
movemen t. 
2. The sub -division of plots/pitches on additional sites that might come forward 
within the green belt will be considered against green belt policy.  
 
6.73 It is recognised that during the Plan period , there may be a demonstrable need for additional 
pitches on those sites safeguarded or allocated through the Local Plan, to meet the 
changing needs of the households on the sites.  This policy applies to existing pitches and 
plots listed in Policy HP08 as well as those identified for allocation in Policy HP07.  
6.74 With 89% of the borough within the Green Belt, serving to limit development opportunities , 
the sub -division of existing sites to provide more pitches could be a suitable way to increase 
provision within existing lawful sites without the need to consider the all ocation of additional 
sites upon plan review . 
6.75 All safeguarded sites are being removed from the Green Belt, as required by the National 
Planning Policy Framework and Planning Policy for Traveller Sites .  
Proposals for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople on 
Windfall Sites  
POLICY HP10 : PROPOSALS FOR GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS AND TRAVELLING 
SHOWPEOPLE ON WINDFALL SITES  
1. Planning permission for Gypsy and Traveller caravan sites and sites for 
Travelling Showpeople (as defined in the governments Planning Policy for 
Travellers) on unallocated land outside the Green Belt, will only be granted in 
accordance with  all the followi ng criteria:  
a. the site is well related to existing communities and accessible to local 
services and facilities, such as shops, primary and secondary schools, 
healthcare and public transport;   
127 b. safe and convenient vehicular access to the local highway network can be 
provided;  
c. essential services (water, electricity and foul drainage) are available on 
site or can be made available on site;  
d. there is no significant adverse impact on the intrinsic character and beauty 
of the countryside;  
e. the site would not lead to t he loss of, or adverse impact on, important 
historic and natural environment assets;  
f. there is no significant risk of land contamination or unacceptable risk of 
flooding;  
g. the site provides a suitable living environment for the proposed residents 
and there i s no significant adverse impact on the amenity of nearby 
residents;  
h. the site is of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed number of 
caravans, vehicles and ancillary areas;  and 
i. plots for Travelling Showpeople should also be of sufficient size to enable  
the storage, repair and maintenance of equipment.  
2. Sites within the Green Belt will need to demonstrate very special 
circumstances which clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt and any 
other harm in addition to the criteria A above.  
 
6.76 It is recognised that during the Plan period, there may be a demonstrable need for additional 
pitches to those safeguarded or allocated through the Local Plan.  This policy applies to non -
allocated  or safeguarded  sites which may come forward during the Plan perio d in built -up 
areas and the countryside.  
6.77 National planning policy establishes a general presumption against inappropriate 
development in the Green Belt. The definition of inappropriate development includes Gypsy 
and Traveller sites and Travelling Showpeop le sites. Subject to the best interests of the 
child, personal circumstances and unmet need are unlikely to clearly outweigh harm to the 
Green Belt and any other harm so as to establish very special circumstances.  
6.78 When permission is granted, appropriate co nditions or planning obligations will be imposed 
to ensure occupation of the site is restricted to those persons falling within the appropriate 
definition of Gypsies and Travellers and may also include conditions relating to landscaping 
and boundary treatm ents.   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
128  
 
 
 
 
 
Prosperous Communit ies 
 
 
 
Delivering  Economic Growth   
7.1 Brentwood is an attractive business location with a high -quality environment, within close 
proximity  to London, a well -qualified workforce and good transport links. It has a diverse 
economic base and total employment in the borough has risen to 43,200 in 2016. The 
borough is well known for its entrepreneurial culture with above average rates of business 
start-ups and  is home to a number of major national firms whose regional headquarters are 
located within the borough.  
7.2 Figure 2.2 depicts  how well Brentwood is placed in terms of transport links to surrounding 
centres in Essex, London and Kent, legacy oppor tunities from the Queen Elizabeth II 
Olympic Park, and airports at Stansted and Southend. The Elizabeth Line will improve links 
with Central London and open new direct links to West London and Heathrow airport. The 
borough is close to competing retail cent res such as Basildon, Romford and Chelmsford, as 
well as Lakeside, Bluewater, and Stratford City Shopping Centres.  
7.3 The Council’s Economic Strategy sets out a series of economic aims and strategic priorities 
which are reflected in the vision and strategic o bjectives of the Local Plan: 
Economic Aims:  
• A1. Promote a mixed economic base and a discerning and sustainable approach to 
economic growth;  
• 2. Encourage high value, diverse, employment uses that will provide a significant number of 
skilled and high -quality jobs;  
07  
129 • A3. Encourage better utilisation, upgrading and redevelopment of existing land and 
buildings; and  
• A4. Enable the growth of existing  business, the creation of new enterprises and encourage 
inward investment.  
Strategic Priorities:  
• P1. Support business development and growth;  
• P2. Facilitate and deliver skills and employability support;  
• P3. Facilitate and encourage business workspace, i nfrastructure and inward investment;  
• P4. Facilitate and support stronger and more vibrant town & village centres;  
• P5. Develop and support the borough’s rural economy; and  
• P6. Promote Brentwood Borough as a place to visit and invest, encouraging the visi tor 
economy.  
7.4 To maximise opportunities for economic growth and development, the Council is working 
closely with the South East Local Enterprise Partnership (SELEP), the Essex Business 
Board (EBB) and the Brentwood Business Partnership (BBP). The Council’s Economic 
Strategy, and Economic Futures Report42 provides the local evidence to support the relevant 
Local Plan policies.  
7.5 To meet future needs and maintain a competitive successful local economy, we will plan for 
new jobs and new homes. We will work with existing businesses through partnerships and 
attract new businesses by ensuring the borough remains an attractive place to work. The 
importance of striking the right balance between meeting development needs and retaining 
our Borough of Villages character is critical when considering the future of the local 
economy.  
 
42 Lichfields (2018) Brentwood Economic Futures Report, available at: 
https://document.brentwood.gov.uk/pdf/29012018122226000000.pdf   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
130  
Figure 7.1: Brentwood and South East Local Enterprise Part nership  (SELEP)  
 
7.6 The Council  and its partners will seek to maintain high and stable levels of local economic 
growth, enabling the borough’s economy to diversify and modernise through the growth of 
existing business es and the creation of new enterprises. Su pport will be given to proposals 
that secure job growth with ‘high value’ business and retail.  This will be secured by:  
a. improving access to a range of employment opportunities for borough ’s residents ; 
b. providing sufficient employment and industrial space in sustainable locations to 
support economic development and regeneration ; 
c. intensification  of vacant and underutilised employment floorspace and sites  and the 
regeneration of previously developed land in  sustainable locations;  
d. renewal and improvement to the quality of business premise  and office space of 
different sizes;  
e. enhancing and protecting the important role of small and medium sized commercial 
enterprises;  
f. directing major new retail, office and l eisure investment to the borough’s Designated 
Centres according to their significance on the retail hierarchy , stimulating improvement 
and regeneration;  
 
131 g. supporting the borough’s rural economy and growing agricultural enterprises ; 
h. maintaining current touris t attractions and encouraging new opportunities to increase 
the number of visitors to the borough ; and  
i. maximising the value of existing and future public transport, walking and cycling 
network, to support economic activity . 
New Jobs  
7.7 Policies are required t o plan for future jobs growth on our employment land and ensure new 
employment land is provided where needed. For the purposes of planning policy , the 
simplest way to measure and plan for new job creation is through planning use classes. B -
Class uses gener ally comprise employment land types, such as B1 business (offices, 
research and development, light industry appropriate in a residential area), B2 general 
industrial, and B8 storage or distribution.  
7.8 The borough has recorded strong levels of job growth, the number of B -class jobs has 
increased by 40% over the last 17 years.  This employment growth has been driven by 
consumption sectors including residential care and social work, business services, 
education, healthcare and construction. Job losses have been recorded within public 
administration and defence, utilities, accommodation and food services and retail.  
7.9 According to Enterprising Essex: Meeting the Challenge (E ssex County Council , 2018)43, 
potential occupiers looking for office space in the N orth East quadrant of the M25 would 
most likely locate to Chelmsford or Brentwood, which are seen as more established office 
locations . Reflecting the borough's desirable location, high quality and distinctive locational 
offer, the Council's preference is for efficient land use and provision for high value business.  
Functional Economic Market Area  
7.10 Economic evidence includes an assessment of the Functional Economic Market Area 
(FEMA) for the borough, which considers a number of evaluation factors including t ravel to 
work areas, commuting flows, the commercial property market area; retail market areas, 
local economic partnership areas and strategic transport routes to define the key economic 
linkages and spatial relationships. Producing a FEMA is not an exact science and often 
represents just a snapshot in time but  is useful in indicating the borough’s broad core 
economic geography and connections. Figure 7.2 sets out the Brentwood FEMA.  
 
 
43 http://www.essexgrowth.co.uk/media/1036/eec -final-report -march -2018.pdf   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
132  
Figure  7.2: Brentwood Functional Economic Market Area  (FEMA)  
 
7.11 In considering employment site allocations and growth, the Council has also taken into 
account  commercial agent feedback on employment sites to ascertain the level of market 
interest, views on strategic locations and commentary on employment land take -up and 
overall deliverability.  
Employment land provision  
7.12 The calculation of new  B-use employment land required to inform Draft Plan allocations  is 
summarised below:  
i. The proposed amount of land the Council needs to provide to achieve sufficient growth 
in jobs r ange from 8.1  ha to 20.3  ha (Economic Futures Report, 2018)44.  
ii. Redeveloping existing employment land in central or residential locations for new homes 
(i.e. Wates Way Industrial Estate , Brentwood; Council Depot, Warley; Ford offices, 
Eagle Way and West Ho rndon Industrial Estates , West Horndon ) means the loss of 
almost 21.01  ha of employment land that will need to be re -provided.  
iii. Before arriving at a final employment land requirement , consideration has also been 
given to the forecast loss of existing employment allocations through structural change, 
planning permissions and changes to permitted development rights allowing office to 
residential conversions. This loss of employment space  equates to about 9.3 ha. 
 
44 Lichfield (2018) Economic Futures Report. Available online at: 
https://document.brentwood.gov.uk/pdf/29012018122226000000.pdf   
 
133 iv. These elements combined result in a total additional employment land requirement 
range from 38.41  to 50.61  ha. 
7.13 Overall a total of circa  46.64  ha of new employment land is proposed to be allocated , in 
addition to existing commitmen ts. At a high -level, the amount  of employment land allocations 
is broadly sufficient to ensure that the Council meets its overall forecast employment land 
needs up to 2033 . It is also recognised that the future restructuring of employment sites and 
busines ses may change floorspace requirements.  
 
Employment Land (ha)     
Uses  Scenario A: 
Experian  Scenario B: 
EEFM  Scenario C: 
OAN (380)  Scenario D: 
Past rates  
Offices  9.4 7.7 5.6 0.4 
Manufacturing ( coming 
within classes E and B2) 4.4 0.1 3.1 3.5 
Warehousing (B8)  6.5 0.7 4.4 4.2 
Total  20.3 8.5 13.1 8.1 
Figure 7.3: Gross Employment Land Requirement Scenarios  
 
New Requirements  (ha) 
Forecast requirement for employment land for the 
specified employment uses above   +  8.1 ha to 20.3  ha 
Forecast loss of employment land by re -allocations for 
other uses  +  21.01 ha 
Forecast loss of existing employment allocations through 
structural change , changes in allocation threshold and 
permitted development  + 9.3 ha 
Combined Requirement  → 38.41  ha to 50.61  ha 
Figure 7.4: Employment Land Need  
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
134 STRATEGIC POLICY PC01: SAFEGUARDING EMPLOYMENT LAND  
1. In order to maintain sufficient employment land supply to meet identified 
needs, w ithin those areas designated for general employment development , 
as shown  on the Brentwood Policies Map, the Council will  only approve 
redevelopment proposals  from offices, light industrial, research and 
development (within Class E), B2, B8 or sui generis employment uses to non -
employment uses where one or more of the following criteria apply : 
a. the proposal is for ancillary  non-residential uses that provide employment, 
and there is no reasonable prospect for the site to be used for the above 
purposes ; or 
b. the proposal is for any other use and the application i s supported by 
reliable evidence of reasonable efforts made to secure re -use for all of the 
above uses including ancillary non-residential use s that provides 
employment  and which evidence demonstrates there is no realistic 
prospect of the site or buildings  being used or re -used  for these purposes 
in their own right or , through refurbishment , adaptation,  subdivision  or 
redevelopment .  
2. Development proposals (including the redevelopment of existing developed 
areas) on designated employment land within the Gree n Belt will be 
considered in line with national and local green belt policy.  
 
7.14 A thriving and entrepreneurial business community is vital for the success of the Borough’s 
economy. Therefore, in areas allocated for general employment and office development, 
identified on the Policies Map, the presumption is that employment uses and 's ui generis' 
uses of a similar employment nature will be retained, and that proposals entailing loss of 
employment premises and sites without replacement will be resisted.   
7.15 To enable flexibility for business operation, it is recognised that complementary a nd ancillary 
uses to support employment uses can be appropriate where they provide employment, 
adding to the character, mix and vitality of the area.  As offices, research and development 
and light industrial uses are now falling under use class E together  with retail and other main 
town centre uses, this may result in unintended consequence where they can either 
individually, or collectively, harm other policy objectives of the Local Plan including the 
objective to protect the retail function of Brentwood Town Centre and other designated 
centres. A proliferation of retail uses therefore will be resisted, with the exception of small 
scale proposals (in terms of floorspace) and it being ancillary in nature by supplementing the 
predominant employment offering within the employment area. It may be necessary to 
impose planning conditions to restrict movement within use class E as necessary, a 
judgement will be made on a case by case basis. The scale of new employment allocations 
and acceptable uses are set out in  the relevant site allocation policies.   
135  
Site Ref   Site Name   Indicative employment 
area (ha)   
111  Upminster Trading Park   2.6  
228  Peri Site, Warley Street, Great Warley   5.36  
E02  Brook Street Employment Area   1.25  
E03  BT Offices, London Road, Brentwood   3.5  
E04  Hubert Road Industrial Estate   3.78  
E05  Warley Hill Business Park (excl. Regus)     2.5  
E06  OCE offices, Chatham Way, Brentwood   0.45  
E07  Hutton Industrial Estate   10.48   
E08  Land adjacent to Ingatestone by -pass (part bounded by 
Roman Road)   1.6  
E09  Hallsford Bridge Industrial Estate   3.41  
E10  Land at Codham Hall   9.62  
E11  Brentwood Enterprise Park (M25 Junction 29 works)   25.85   
E12  Childerditch Industrial Estate   20.54   
E13  Land at East  Horndon Hall   5.5  
Part of 
R01  Dunton Hills Garden Village Strategic Allocation   5.5  
Part of 
R02  West Horndon Industrial Estate   2.0  
Part of 
R03  North of A1023   2.0  
Part 
of R05  Ford Offices and Council Depot  2.0  
Total:   107.94   
Figure 7.5: Designated Employment  Land and Indicative Site Areas   
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
136 Existing  and Regularised  Employment Sites  
7.16 The presumption for existing and proposed employment sites  for general employment and 
office development  shall be for existing uses to be retained  and that pro posals entailing loss 
of employment premises and sites without replacement will be resisted. The Council will 
work with businesses within these areas to encourage them to adapt and respond to 
changing economic conditions to support business growth and ensu re continuing economic 
vitality.  
7.17 Where an application is made under PC01 (criterion 1 .b), the applicant should provide 
information regarding:  
a. length of time the property has been unused for employment purposes;  
b. period during which it has been actively marketed for such purposes, which includes 
the possibility of redevelopment and provides evidence (not less than 24 months). 
Evidence should show w here the property has been publicly marketed including 
publications and property journals as well as clear advertisement on site;  
c. prices at which the land and buildings have been marketed during this period, which 
should reflect similar property in the locality;  
d. a list of all expressions of interest during this period; and  
e. an evaluation of why it is considered that the property has fa iled to attract interest from 
potential occupiers or for redevelopment for B -class use.  The applicant should  provide 
an independently commissioned viability assessment to demonstrate that the use is 
unlikely to be economically viable in the foreseeable fut ure. The assessment should be 
undertaken by a reputable and suitably experienced company to be determined by the 
Council in agreement with the applicant, to be funded by the applicant.  
New Employment Allocations  
7.18 Informed by the spatial strategy , the select ion of employment sites aims to retain  the 
borough’s character  and encourage employment growth in suitable available  locations . In 
employment terms , it is also beneficial to consider modern business needs, such as access 
to the transport  network.  The selec tion process can be summarised as followed:  
a. Brentwood and Shenfield will be the focus to attract economic growth in the  Central 
Brentwood Growth Corridor  given their excellent geographic position. From the 
available sites coming forward through the HEL AA process, n ew employment land is 
proposed at Ingatestone where the southbound A12 junction with the village creates 
suitable land for new employment premises. This will help create a range of choice for 
employment land and encourage competition from existin g premises to improve the 
quality of the local offer.  
b. Partly due to difficulties in accommodating the quantum of employment land within 
other parts of the borough , the opportunity is taken to capitalise on the strategic 
connections of the South Brentwood G rowth Corridor to key economic  centres  in the 
region (including  Tilbury  Port, Southend Airport  and those in Greater London ), by: 
i. redeveloping brownfield land at Brentwood Enterprise  Park ( Site E 11);  
137 ii. extending employment land around Childerditch Industrial Estate  (par of Site 
E12); 
iii. provi ding new employment land at land south of East Horndon Hall ( Site E 13); 
and 
iv. delivering mixed -use employment opportunities within Dunton Hills Garden Village 
as part of a self -sustaining new community ; 
c. Considering that other parts of the borough  including larger villages are in a position to 
accommodate a limited amount of employme nt and retail development , the emphasis  
regarding employment land  in these  places  will be on the provision of local services.  
7.19 The proposed land at Brentwood Enterprise  Park and land south of East Horndon Hall  will 
accommodate mixed office , light industria l and research and development and B-uses. The 
excellent access onto the strategic highway network, makes them a very desirable place for 
certain businesses. In addition , the size of Brentwood Enterprise  Park provides benefits by 
way of supplying for a large amount of employment  need while bringing along new 
infrastructure and supporting services.  Brentwood Enterprise Park will provide an 
opportunity for high -end modern premises at a key gateway to the borough and into Essex.  
Appropriate accompanying uses will be considered appropriate where these meet local 
needs, such as hotel and associated restaurant options. Retail will not be considered 
appropriate, in line with the retail strategy and sequential approach.  Specific site policies  for 
the Enterprise Park are within Policy E 11, in Chapter 9. 
7.20 The Lower Thames Crossing will open up opportunit ies for goods and services to flow more 
easily between Brentwood and the area of Kent and beyond across the Thames, 
streng thening links to a market area that is currently less accessible from the borough. This 
could extend the borough’s FEMA to the south into Kent. However, it should be noted the 
crossing would be most beneficial to distributors who may use it to avoid conges tion at the 
Dartford Crossing. For the borough to take advantage of the distribution movements, it is 
likely Brentwood Enterprise Park will need to be delivered to provide premises that are of the 
scale required by distributors (Economic Futures,  Lichfield , 2018)45. 
7.21 The potential relocation of industrial activities from London could create additional demand 
for offices, light industrial, research and development, and B2 and B8 premises in wider 
South East  local authorities. Brentwood is well located to take advantage if firms do relocate 
outside of London. Delivery of the Brentwood Enterprise Park could provide a significant 
area of the floorspace that meets the needs of relocating businesses4. 
7.22 The Economi c Futures report  (2018)  indicates that in terms of manufacturing and 
warehousing / logistics  uses  the portfolio of sites put forward  is likely to be attractive to the 
market and provide a sufficient range and high -quality offer.  
7.23 The Essex Grow -on Space Fea sibility Study (2016) has highlighted a gap in supply and 
demand in the borough in relation to the availability of smaller sized office and industrial 
units for emerging small businesses, curtailing the potential growth of these businesses. 
This identifies  a concealed need for employment floorspace of 9ha arising from local 
businesses looking for room to grow into. The Council will encourage  the provision of  flexible  
 
45 Lichfield (2018) Economic Futures Report  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
138 working  space , incubation units  and grow -on46 space in the proposed employment 
allocations  where appropriate.  
7.24 There is a clear need to ensure that strategic investment sites are well connected through 
public transport an active travel infrastructure to support their overall sustainability. The 
Council will work with developers and service provid ers to ensure e mployment sites such as 
East Horndon and Dunton Hills will be well connected to existing and new housing sites, 
including Dunton Hills Garden Village.  Work has been  undertaken to assess the cumulative  
impacts of planned development on the A1 27 and suitable highway measures. More details 
can be found in Chapter 5.  
7.25 There is a recognised  need to effectively manage the period of transition for a number of 
current employment sites (such as West Horndon) moving from traditional employment uses 
to residential led -developments . This is  to ensure a clear pipeline of available employment 
land is achievable to meet the needs of businesses relocating to new premises within the 
borough. The early delivery of strategic sites within the A127 corridor will be important to 
maintain an effective stock of employment land.  
7.26 Other site-specific  policies for employment allocations in this policy can be found in Chapter 
9. 
POLICY PC02 : SUPPORTING THE RURAL ECONOMY  
Proposals to diversify the range of economic activities on a farm or in a rural area 
will be supported where proposals  do not comprise retail uses unless they are of a 
limited nature, small -scale and intended to support the farming enterprise. This is 
subject to compliance with green belt policy where relevant . 
 
7.27 One of the Council’s objec tives is to support economic growth in the rural area by 
encouraging the diversification and expansion of agricultural and other businesses and 
enterprise in the rural area.  
7.28 The Council recognises it can be beneficial for farms to diversify use of land and  buildings 
for other suitable activities or development. These might include converting redundant barns 
for office use or workshops, storage, farm shops, bed and breakfast, energy crops, or 
acceptable sport and leisure uses like campsites. These can be imp ortant in supplementing 
agricultural business income to ensure long -term viability and, alongside suitable small -scale 
rural enterprise and provide rural job opportunities. Suitable uses will allow more efficient 
 
46 Grow -on space could be understood as space for small growing businesses with around ten employees pl us; that 
is, businesses that have grown to the extent that they are too large to be accommodated in incubator space or 
enterprise centres, but are still too small to occupy large, often freestanding, offices or factory/workspace units. 
Essex County Council  (2016) Grow On Space Feasibility Study .   
139 use of buildings and land while fitting in with farming practices, rural surroundings and 
maintaining openness of the Green Belt.  
7.29 Proposals may be required to safeguard the employment function of the development from 
other uses through planning conditions/planning gain mechanisms.  
Retail and Commer cial Leisure  
7.30 Brentwood Borough is made up of the market town of Brentwood, village centres and 
several local shopping parades providing services to its nearby settlements. These areas 
are where people go to access their employment, leisure, shopping and ev en housing 
needs; many have become the heart of the local community’s activities.  
7.31 Focusing people’s day to day activities within these centres have multiple benefits to both 
businesses as well as local communities: businesses benefit from linked trips wher e people 
visit more than one activity as part of a single journey whilst the community benefits from 
having a wide choice of activity within a concentrated area47. 
7.32 This Plan seeks to achieve a good balance of mixed uses in the borough’s centres to meet 
the needs of those who live, work, shop and spend leisure time here. The following policies 
provide the Council’s proposed way forward, separating Brentwood Town Centre as the 
focus for economic growth while emphasising the importa nce of retaining and enhancing its 
District Shopping Centres and Local Centres.  
7.33 The revised NPPF  (2021) removed the requirement to identify  primary and secondary 
shopping frontages and acknowledged t he significant challenges facing town centres and in 
particular the retail sector. It recognised that diversification is key to the long -term vitality and 
viability of town centres to ‘respond to rapid changes in the retail and leisure industries ’. As 
such , the following policies also aim to clarify  the range of uses permitted in Designated 
Centres , as part of a positive strategy for the future of each centre . 
STRATEGIC  POLICY PC03:  RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL LEISURE GROWTH  
 In order to meet identified retail f loorspace needs as set out in Policy MG01, retail 
floorspace will be provided on the following sites as part of mixed -use 
development:  
a. Dunton Hills Garden Village (R01);  
 
47 Association of Convenience Stores (2015) Planning for Diverse Local Centres. Available at: 
https://www.acs.org.uk/sites/default/files/ planning -guide.pdf   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
140 b. Land at West Horndon Industrial Estate (R02);  
c. William Hunter Way Car Park (R14);  
d. Wates  Way Industrial Estate (R15).  
 
7.34 The NPPF states  that in meeting anticipated needs for retail, leisure, office and other main 
town centre uses, planning polices should look at least ten years ahead , so that the local 
economy is not constrained,  and potential investment is not diverted elsewhere or lost.   
7.35 The Council is required to positively promote competitive town centre environments and 
manage their growth. It is important to provide for Retail, Commercial and Leisure uses that 
are appropriate and realistic to the role of centres in the borough's settlement hierarchy, set 
out in Policy  MG03 , and the retail  hierarchy, set out in Strategic Policy PC04 Retail 
Hierarchy of Designated Centres . These sh ould be based on the current state of centres and 
opportunities to meet development needs in full. In this regard, meeting retail needs and 
planning for the future of town and district centres are intrinsically linked.  
7.36 Retail needs are traditionally split  into two categories; convenience goods and comparison 
goods. More recently , the proportion of restaurants and cafes has also increased in  the High 
Streets . 
• Comparison goods: often products from High Street shops clustered together, purchased 
relatively in frequently by consumers and so prices, features and quality levels are often 
compared before purchasing. Examples include clothing and appliance stores.  
• Convenience goods: often products of habit or impulse, easily found by consumers and 
inexpensive enough for most to purchase. A prime example is goods sold in foodstores.  
7.37 Medium term capacity figures up to 202 8 suggest surplus of available convenience goods 
expenditure could support an additional 4,061  sqm net ( 5,801 sqm gross), primarily 
concentrated in Brentwood Town Centre  and in new centres proposed at West Horndon and 
Dunton Hills . In the long term, surplus expenditure at 203 3 could support 4,438 sqm net of 
sales floorspa ce (6,339 sqm gross) in the borough as a whole.  
7.38 For comparison goods , the surplus expenditure could support an additional 972 sqm net 
(1,296 sqm gross) by 2020 across the borough. The surplus expenditure at 203 3 could 
support 1,604 sqm net ( 2,139 sqm gross). The vast majority of this surplus is for Brentwood 
Town Centre  and new centres proposed at West Horndon and Dunton Hills , with only a very 
limited amount identified for the rest of the borough.  
7.39 There is also requirement for 2,286 sqm gross of f ood and drink (pubs, bars, restaurants and 
takeaway)  floorspace and 1,196  sqm gross of other non-retail (including commercial leisure) 
service up to 2033 primarily concentrated in Brentwood Town Centre and in new centres 
proposed at West Horndon and Dunton  Hills.   
141 7.40 The identified retail floorspace needs  would be meet via windfall development in the  
Designated Centres  as well as provision of retail floorspace as part of development 
proposals on the following sites . New retail floorspace will serve the local c ommunity  and 
complement rather than compete directly with the existing local shops.  
a. Site R01: Dunton Hills Garden Village  
b. Site R02: West Horndon Industrial Estate  
c. Site R14: William Hunter Way Car Park  
d. Site R15: Wates Way Industrial Estate  
STRATEGIC POLICY PC04: RETAIL HIERARCHY OF DESIGNATED CENTRES  
The retail hierarchy  and Designated Centres  
1. The Council will promote the continued roles and functions of the Designated 
Centres to positively contribute towards their viability, vitality, character and 
structure. The following c entres and their associated Primary Shopping Area , 
as shown on the Bren twood Policies Map, are designated for retail, leisure and 
other main town centres uses .  
Designated Centres   Primary Shopping Area   
Town Centre   
The principal market town of Brentwood Borough that provides a wide range of social, 
cultural and economic facilities and services for local residents as well as visitors. The 
Town Centre must have good access to major roads and public transport links and 
benefits from a high quality retail environment.  
Brentwood Town Centre    Brentwood  High Street   
District Shopping  Centres   
Groups of shops often containing at least one supermarket or superstore, and a range of 
non-retail services, such as banks, building societies, and restaurants, as well as local 
public facilities such as a library.   
Shenfield  Hutton Road   Hutton Road   
Warley Hill   n/a  
Ingatestone High Street   Ingatestone High Street   
The main service centre  of Dunton Hills 
Garden Village  (DHGV)10  to be considered by the future 
Local Plan review  10  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
142 Local  Centres   
A range of small shops of a local nature, serving a small catchment. Typically, Local 
Centres might include, amongst others, shops, a small supermarket, a newsagent, a s ub-
post office and a pharmacy. Other facilities could include a hot food takeaway and a 
laundrette.    
West Horndon Village Centre    
Blackmore Village Centre   
245-267 Ongar Road   
Brook Street Post Office   
Church Lane   
Doddinghurst  Post 
Office,  Doddinghurst  Road   
Herongate Post Office, Brentwood 
Road   
1-23 Eastham Crescent   
200-216 Rayleigh Road   
60-74 Woodland Avenue   
Hanging Hill Lane Post Office, Hanging 
Hill Lane   
Blackmore Road   
Kelvedon Common Post Office, Church 
Road   
Danes Way/Hatch Road   
2-8 Harewood Road   
245-267 Ongar Road   
Stondon  Post Office, Ongar Road   
The Keys, Eagle Way   
The two neighbourhood hubs at 
Dunton Hills Garden village48  n/a  
 
2. The retail hierarchy of Designated Centres in Brentwood Borough is as 
follows:  
a. Brentwood Town Centre  should be the first choice for retail, leisure and 
main town centre uses.  
 
48 The boundary of DHGV District Shopping Centre and two  Local Centres and any subsequent Primary Shopping 
Area will be  considered as part of the future Local Plan review.   
143 b. District Shopping Centres will be a focus of more localised retail, 
commercial , flexible work space , community facilities and services that 
reduce the need to travel and contribute towards more sustainable and 
neighbourhood -scale living.  
c. Local Centres  include small shops of a local nature, serving a small 
catchment. They have an impo rtant role in providing day to day shops and 
services that are accessible to residents in villages and rural parts of 
Brentwood, especially in areas more remote from the larger centres.   
The sequential approach and impact assessment  
3. Retail, leisure, office and other main town centre uses will continue to be 
directed to these centres in line with the sequential approach to retail 
development locations set out in the NPPF .  
4. Development should contribute positively to  the attractiveness,  vitality, safety, 
environmental quality, historic character, employment opportunities and social 
inclusiveness of these  centres.   
5. Change of use of upper floors above commercial premises to working space 
and/or residential will be encouraged provided  that reasonable facilities and 
amenities are provided for , that  development does not result in in the loss of 
ancillary storage space or other beneficial use to the extent that it would make 
a ground floor unit unviable , and that the development would not preve nt off 
street  servicing of any ground floor unit . 
6. Any reta il and leisure developments proposed outside these centres must be 
subject to a retail impact assessment, where the proposed gross floorspace is 
greater than 2,500 sqm. A retail impact assessment ma y be required below 
this threshold where a proposal could have a cumulative impact or an impact 
on the role or vitality of nearby centres within the catchment of the proposal.  
 
7.41 The NPPF places emphasis  on the sequential approach with regard to the locatio n of new 
retail provision . It also promotes mixed -use development (particularly the incorporation of 
residential uses) and the retention of main town centre uses49. The sequential approach is 
reflected in the  network of centres  set out in this policy, defined to meet retail and service 
needs and support the local businesses and communities. The position of a centre in the 
 
 
49 Main town centre uses are retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, 
entertainment and more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive -through 
restaurants, bars and pubs, nightclubs,  casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres and bingo halls); 
offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels 
and conference facilities).  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
144 hierarchy reflects its size and range of services and facilities, as well as the size of its 
catchment. In particular:  
a. Brentwood Town Centre  is the  social, cultural and economic focus of the borough 
and attracts many visitors. It has good access to major roads and rail links and 
benefits from a refurbished, high quality shopping environment. The sequential 
appro ach suggests that  it should be the first choice or retail, leisure , community , 
employment and main town centre uses . 
b. District Shopping Centres  will be a focus of more localised retail, commercial and 
community facilities and services that reduce the need t o travel. Shenfield, Ingatestone 
and Warley Hill fit this category due to their size and range of services.   
i. Shenfield is home to a major railway station with fast train services into central 
London. It will be the terminus for Elizabeth Line and it is vit al that the most is 
made of this opportunity to invest in improving Shenfield’s retail offer.  
ii. The increased number of passengers travelling through and using Elizabeth Line 
at Brentwood Station and hence Warley Hill could lead to a demand for additional 
or improved retail and service facilities over and above the identified floorspace  
requirements. There are limited short term opportunities for additional 
development in the vicinity of this stations and Warley Hill, but in the longer term, 
sites could become available to meet anticipated future needs.  
iii. Ingatestone has the largest village centre in the borough, an attractive local 
service and convenience centre with a train station.  
iv. There is potential for DHGV  to have  a District Shopping Centre  and/or additional  
Local Centre(s) . An appropriate amount of retail floorspace  would also be 
required to meet local needs in the south of the borough, reduce generated trips 
by car to other centres as well as contribute to the local economy. The 
designation  of a District Shopping Centre and/or additional Local Centre(s) and 
any subsequent Primary Shopping Area at DHGV will be informed by the South 
Brentwood Growth Corridor Masterplan and further retail evidence, and 
considered as part of future Local Plan re view.  
In the existing District Shopping Centres,  development options for additional retail 
floorspace are  currently  limited. The future strategy for these centres should focus on 
the reoccupation of vacant units and small -scale  intensification and extensio ns 
(Brentwood Retail and Commercial Leisure Study, 2014  and Brentwood Retail Study 
Update Addendum , 2020 )50. 
c. Local Centres  include shopping parades , individual shops  and facilities  such as small 
supermarket, newsagent, post office, takeaways and pharmacy  providing for the day -
to-day needs of local communities.  Such facilities are often valued by elderly people 
and those without access to private transport who often rely on facilities being 
available locally. These facilities provide a convenient and sustain able choice within 
 
50 Nathaniel Lichfield & Partners  (2014)  Retail and Commercial Leisure Study  and (2020) Brentwood Retail 
Study Update Addendum . Available at: https://document.brentwood.gov.uk/pdf/29012018122226000000.pdf   
and https://document.brentwood.gov.uk/pdf/07092020121851000000.pdf    
145 walking distance. Local Centres are therefore an important component of community 
life and must be afforded proper planning protection and support, with regard to any 
related development proposal that may affect their provision.  
7.42 Aside from the Designated Centres identified above, small parades comprising of less than 
ten units, albeit not covered by this policy, are still an important feature within a 
neighbourhood and could be included within a Neighbourhood Plan.  
7.43 The Council wil l look favourably upon the change of use to office space, flexible working 
space, incubation units or grow -on51 space above existing commercial development, as and 
where appropriate. These types of development would not only provide a re -use of under -
used or unused floor space that can lead to neglect and deterioration of a building, but also  
address the retail trend, demand of commercial workspace and facilitate business 
expansions .  
7.44 Residential development often plays an important role in ensuring the vit ality of centres ; 
therefore , residential development on appropriate sites and/or above existing commercial 
premises are encouraged.    
7.45 New development should be of a type and scale appropriate to the centre it is located within 
and/or close to.  
7.46 While greate r use of public transport, cycling and walking  is central to sustainable 
development , it is recognise d that in order to maintain the viability of shopping centres , there 
will continue to be a justification for appropriate levels of  shoppers’ short -stay and/or on 
street  car parking. It is necessary to ensure that the economic viability of the Town Centre 
and its ability to continue to compete with other shopping centre is not undermined by the 
inability of shoppers being able to find a secure, safe, well lai d out parking space in 
reasonably proximity to the shops . At the same time , car parking provision must not be 
made at the expense of the local character. Current parking provision in and around some 
existing Designated Centres  currently have negative visua l impacts yet not always meet 
parking spaces demands of shoppers and visitors . Therefore , proposed retail parking 
provision must  be carefully managed so that it meet s local demands without adding to 
congestion or undermining the streetscape and the attract iveness of alternatives to the car.  
Developers should refer to Policy BE13 Parking Standards  for further information.  
POLICY PC05: BRENTWOOD  TOWN CENTRE  
1. The Council will require development to conserve the positive qualities of 
Brentwood Town Centre while enhancing and improving negative aspects of 
function and appearance where relevant. Development in the Town Centre 
 
51 Grow -on space could be understood as space for small growing businesses with around ten employees plus; that 
is, businesses that have grown to the extent that they are too large to be accommodated in incubator space or 
enterprise centres, but are still too small to occupy large, often freestanding, offices or factory/workspace units. 
Essex County Council (2016) Gro w On Space Feasibility Study, available online.  
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
146 should contribute to the Council’s aim  of improving the capacity and quality of 
the public realm throughout Brentwood Town Centre, contribute to a vibrant 
High Street and the surrounding Conservation Area in line with the Town 
Centre Design Guide SPD.  
2. Shopfronts and signage have significant i mpacts on its surroundings therefore 
proposals are required to incorporate high quality, attractive shopfronts that 
enhance the street scene, in line with the Council’s adopted Town Centre 
Shopfront Guidance SPD.  
3. Chapel Ruins, Baytree Centre and South Str eet areas:  This area provides 
a link to strategic sites on the High Street therefore improving its permeability 
and integration into the wider public realm network will create a more 
welcoming and flexible space at the heart of the Town Centre, enable its 
historical settings to be celebrated. Proposals should:  
a. contribute to the enhancement of public realm around Chapel Ruins and 
the Conservation Area, retain and enhance their significance and 
character;  
b. complement the retail function and maintain or add to  the vitality, viability 
and diversity of the Town Centre, by means such as mixed -use schemes 
that include retail, leisure and residential;  
c. facilitate safe and pleasant pedestrian movement through improved 
alleyways, lighting, wayfinding and landscaping; and 
d. assist in uplifting and transforming the Baytree Centre and integrate it with 
the other parts of the Town Centre.  
4. William Hunter Way, Chatham Way Car Park and Crown Street:  The 
Council will work with developers and partners to improve the public realm 
links in these areas, and through the redevelopment of the car parks, create a 
mixed -use scheme to provide new residential, retail, flexible working space 
and commercial floors pace. Proposals in these areas should:  
a. contribute to the improvements to frontages and public realm through 
landscaping and redevelopment;  
b. provide additional shopfronts and double fronted shops, if development 
involves the rear of premises on the north si de of the High Street; and  
c. facilitate safe and pleasant pedestrian movement through improved 
alleyways lighting, wayfinding and landscaping.  
5. Linkages to Brentwood station:  Improvements to the rail service to London 
will increase Brentwood Town Centre’s reg ional public transport accessibility. 
The Council will seek to enhance public realm and way finding around  
147 Brentwood station, foster a stronger sense of place and sense of arrival, 
improve the linkages from the Town Centre to the station, with Kings Road 
being the primary focus. Proposals should:  
a. contribute to the enhancement of public realm around Brentwood station, 
Kings Road and Kings Road junction through design, landscaping and 
redevelopment;  
b. facilitate safe and convenient traffic movement with priori ty given to 
passenger transport, pedestrians and cyclists, by means such as 
improved junctions, cycle paths, lighting and wayfinding; and  
c. add to the vitality and vibrancy of the Town Centre by providing an 
appropriate mix and balance of uses including resi dential, employment, 
commercial and amenity spaces.  
 
7.47 The Retail and Commercial Leisure Study  (2014)52 outlines that Brentwood Town Centre 
has the largest quantum of convenience and comparison goods floorspace in the borough 
and offers a number of other se rvices including restaurants, banks and evening venues. It 
has a high-quality  shopping environment, distinctive offer, ‘niche’ independent shops, as well 
as a variety of evening entertainment.  These must be supported and developed further.   
7.48 In line with na tional guidance the Council aims to support the viability and vitality of the Town 
Centre by directing new retail, commercial and leisure provision here and encouraging new 
investment and improvements. Development should balance the requirements of those w ho 
live, work, shop, and enjoy leisure time via a diverse range of use and an efficient, 
convenient network of public transport, cycling and walking routes.  
7.49 The Brentwood Town Centre Design Plan (2017)53 establishes a vision and consider how to 
deliver new development that contributes to enhancing the town through improved links and 
key opportunity sites. William Hunter Way car park and the Chapel Ruins, Baytree Centre 
and South Street areas, among others , are key development opportunities identified in the 
Brentwood Town Centre Design Plan. This policy points towards the need for development 
proposals to achieve these aims.  
7.50 The redevelopment of sites along William Hunter Way offers an excellent opportuni ty for the 
Town Centre to grow and meet local needs. It is a former service road north of Brentwood 
High Street that faces directly onto the rear of High Street premises. The car park and 
servicing spaces on the southern side of William Hunter Way are unde rutilised and untidy. 
Opportunities exist to redevelop the car park for a mix of uses including residential improve 
this frontage and public realm. It will be important to enhance the local environment through 
improved pedestrian links, encouraging double fronted units, and high-quality  design. This 
 
52 Nathaniel Lichfield & Partners (2014) Retail and Commercial Leisure Study.  
53 Levitt Bernstein (2017) Brentwood Town Centre Design Plan. Available at: 
http://www.brentwood.gov.uk/designplan   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
148 would attract more visitors and additional investment. To achieve this, it is vital that the 
development is carefully integrated with the High Street and not seen as a separate 
destination. The loss of public pa rking provision on William Hunter Way car park should be 
re-provided with an appropriate quantum for the same reasons identified above.  
7.51 Travelling north, from the south of Brentwood Town, Brentwood railway station serves as a 
gateway into the Town Centre.  However , currently links to the Town  Centre are hindered by 
a number of physical barriers such as car dominated public realm, a lack of wayfinding 
support, and undefined pedestrian and cycle routes. T here is a poor sense of arrival at 
Brentwood Station. In addition, t he layout of junctions at other  gateways  into the Town 
Centre  also favour car rather than pedestrian movement . Movement within the Town Centre 
is a key issue to address, the High Street is fairly weak in terms of providing a positive 
pedestria n experience to use, move through and congregate within the Town Centre. 
Therefore,  it is important to enhance the public realm and encourage pedestrian movement, 
starting with improving the Town Centre’s connectivity with Brentwood station and its 
immedia te surroundings, and address the current ‘drop off’ experienced by pedestrians 
reaching either end of the High Street.  
7.52 In addition, parking space design and provision near Brentwood railway station should take 
into account the potential impacts of t he Eliz abeth Line . The Elizabeth Line  once completed 
will provide very frequent services from Brentwood (and Shenfield)  Stations  to and through 
London . Whilst it is expected that this will have impacts on the local highway network  both 
positive (as a result of ad ditional rail trips ) and potentially negative  (with potential for 
increased travel by car to access the stations ), at this stage the impact of the scheme is 
unknown  and there will be a need to monitor and review the situation once the services are 
operatio nal54. Any impacts identified should be addressed through the implementation and 
promotion of sustainable transport measures, for example promote use of non -car modes 
and the implementation of parking restrictions in the area. Developers should also refer to 
Policy BE13 Parking Standards and Policy BE1 2 Mitigating the Transport Impacts of 
Development . 
7.53 Congestion at peak times and air quality are key issues around the Town Centre, innovative 
measures that incorporate technology and property management to mitigate the impacts of 
traffic and congestion would be favourably considered. For example,  flexible office hours 
that avoid peak times, design and s pacing of drive ways , introducing electrical parking points 
to encourage use of such vehicles, planning and delivering IT infrastructure to allow future 
implementation of emerging smart  systems, smart car hire , etc.  
7.54 It is vital that an appropriate mix of uses contribute to a vibrant Town Centre. Where 
appropriate, higher density development can help meet the need for more housing and local 
jobs. Efficient use of previously developed land and buildings should be made, such as 
making good use of upper floors  above shops. High quality retailers should be attracted to 
compete with retail centres outside the borough. Major drivers of footfall in suitable locations 
will help increase the number of ‘linked trips’ to benefit all local services.  
7.55 Development should r espond to the character of Brentwood Town Centre Conservation 
Area, amended in 2010 to include the southern frontage of William Hunter Way in 
 
54 Stantec  (2021) Transport Assessment   
149 recognition of this underutilised land and to encourage high quality redevelopment that is 
sympathetic to the wide r Conservation Area.  
POLICY PC06: MIXED  USE DEVELOPMENT IN DESIGNATED  CENTRES  
Within the boundary of Designated  Centres as set out in Policy PC04 Retail 
Hierarchy of Designated Centres  and defined on the Brentwood Policies Map: 
1. Mixed use development will be supported if  it:  
a. is in proportion to the scale and function of the centre ; 
b. contain s an appropriate mix of ground floor uses ; and 
c. makes efficient use of the site  and is considered to be of sufficient density . 
2. Proposals resulting in the loss of  main town  centre uses at ground floor level to 
non-centre uses, as defined in Figure 7.6, which results in an unacceptable 
mix of uses will not be permitted . Proposals resulting in the loss of main town 
centre uses at ground floor must demonstrate that:  
a. the use is no longer viable, by evidence of active marketing to the public 
for at least 12 months, showing that the premises are not reasonably 
capable of being used or redeveloped for a main town centre use; and  
b. development would not result in 3 or more adjacent non -centre use units.  
3. Non-retail development that are classed as main town centre uses, as defined 
in Figure 7.6, should:  
a. complement the retail  and service  function and maintain or add to the 
vitality, viability and diversity of the centre;  
b. provide  an active frontage, such as a window display, which is in keeping 
with the character of the shopping area; and 
c. not give rise to a detrimental effect, individually or cumulatively, on the 
character or amenity of the area through smell, litter, noise or traffic 
problems . 
4. Changes of use from class E  to another  main town  centre use as set out in 
Figure 7.6 will only be permitted where the development would satisfy the 
above criteria and retain an appropriate mix and balance of uses which will 
provide for  the needs of local residents . 
5. Proposals for separate units of retail, offices, leisure, cultural, community 
facilities and residential on upper floors are supported provided that the use Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
150 would have a safe and convenient access, a separate refuse and recyc ling 
store, and would not inhibit the functioning of the ground floor use. Main town 
centre uses  and employment uses should be given priority over residential 
uses unless it can be demonstrated that this would lead to an imbalance of 
uses.  
 
7.56 The NPPF recogni ses that diversification is key to long -term vitality and viability of town 
centre, to ‘respon d to rapid changes in the retail and leisure industries . Locating a variety of 
land uses close together reduces the need to travel , bring s jobs and essential services 
closer to where people live and enhances community safety. For example,  uses such as 
building societies, banks, estate agents, restaurants, takeaways etc., attract people into the 
centre s for services and entertainment and are often linked to a shopping trip ; restaurants, 
takeaways and public houses contribute to the attractiveness and vitalit y of an area, 
providing variety and activity during and outside normal business hours.   
7.57 The nature of mixed -use development varies depending on location. The variety of uses 
increase and physical distribution of uses becomes more concentrated closer to Bre ntwood 
Town Centre. This is also true to a lesser extent in the borough’s District Shopping Centres  
and Local Centre . In these areas , the mix of uses will be assessed at a local level. In 
Brentwood Town Centre , the mix of uses will be addressed on individu al sites. In all cases, 
successful mixed -use development depends on the complementary nature of uses within the 
development itself and its immediate surroundings. Residential development can also give 
rise to demand for additional community facilities. For  example, a community hall, medical 
facilities, education or local shopping provision may be required, or improvements to existing 
provision made, to meet the needs of new and existing residents.  
7.58 Too great a concentration of non-centre  uses can undermine t he role of Designated  Centre s 
as the main locations for  retail, leisure and business uses . It is therefore important to 
consider  their location and siting and ensure  incorporat ion of window displays to overcome 
potential problems associated with the creation of ‘dead frontages ’. 
7.59 Policy PC06 is written in the context of th e need to retain a mix of appropriate uses for the 
benefit of a centre.  
7.60 Proposals resulting in the loss of centre uses at ground floor level to non -centre uses would 
only be considered when there is substantial  evidence of non -viability showing that the 
premises are not reasonably capable of being used or redeveloped for a cen tre use despite 
active marketing to encourage potential occupiers. An economic assessment of the sale or 
lease price the property is offered at may form such evidence.   
151 POLICY PC07 : PRIMARY SHOPPING AREAS  
Retail use should remain the predominant use in Prim ary Shopping Areas as set 
out in Policy PC04 Retail Hierarchy of Designated Centres,  and defined on the 
Brentwood Policies Map. Proposed retail development  should : 
a. contribute to the area’s attractiveness, accessibility and vibrancy by 
adding to or providing a range of shops to meet local needs, including 
opportunities for small, independent shops;  
b. not result in subdivision of an existing large retail unit;  
c. be fully integrated with the existing shopping area;  and 
d. facilitate safe, convenient  and pleasant  pedestrian movement through 
improved  lighting  and landscaping.  
 
7.61 Primary Shopping Area is defined in the NPPF as an area where retail development is 
concentrated.  
7.62 In addition to providing opportunities for small, independent ‘niche’ shops, the Council seeks 
to retain existing large retail units in Primary Shopping Area s. These should not be 
subdivided as they can be a major driver of footfall. Subdivision would redu ce the ability to 
attract major retailers, potentially increasing pressure for out of -town retail floorspace which 
in turn would undermine the Town Centre viability. This policy aims to strike a balance 
between these potentially competing market forces , ensure a broad range of dynamics and 
shopping opportunities . 
7.63 Retail developments are significant trip attractors and should be located in places that are 
well-connected by public transport, many retail trips are potentially walkable or able to be 
reached by cycling , improving the attractiveness of these modes through improved public 
realm will support the vitality of the Primary Shopping Areas. Proposals that contribute to 
such aim will be considered positively.  
7.64 Historically, non -retail uses were resisted in Primary Shopping Area; however, changes in 
retail trends and technology need to be taken into account as part of future development 
assessment.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
152 POLICY PC08: NON -CENTRE USES  
Proposals for non -centre uses in the Designated Centres  will only be permitted if :  
a. complement the retail  and service  function and makes a positive 
contribution to the vitality, viability and diversity of the Designated Centre it 
is located within;  
b. would not create an over -concentration of non -centre  uses which are 
harmful to the function of the  centre ; 
c. provide  an active frontage in keeping with the character of the Designated 
Centre ;  
d. would not give rise, either alone or cumulatively, to a detrimental effect on 
the character or amenity of the area through smell, litter, noi se or traffic 
problems. Demonstrates any potential related problems can be overcome 
satisfactorily to protect amenities of surrounding residents. Details of 
extraction, filtration, refrigeration or air conditioning units should be 
submitted with any applic ation ; and  
e. for proposals creating more than two residential flats above ground floor 
level, the development would not result in the loss of ancillary storage 
space or other beneficial use to the extent that it would make a ground 
floor unit unviable , and t he development would not prevent off street  
servicing of any ground floor unit . 
 
7.65 To avoid an overconcentration of non -centre uses this policy aims to strike a balance 
between competing uses, ensure a broad range of businesses , provide for a reasonable 
dispersal of uses throughout the centre s and integrate non -retail uses into the general 
shopping environment.  
7.66 Proposals in and around Brentwood Town Centre area should be in line with the adopted 
Shopfront Guidance SPD, the Town Centre Design Plan and the Town Centre Design 
Guide.  
Main town centre uses (uses suitable at ground 
floor level in the Designated Centres and Primary 
Shopping Area s) Non-centre uses (uses not suitable at 
ground floor level in the Designated 
Centre s and Primary Shopping Area s) 
• Shops  
• Financial and professional services  
• Cafés and restaurants  • General industry ( class B2) 
• Storage and distribution ( class 
B8)  
153 • Business uses, including offices and 
research and development  
• Hotels  
• Learning and n on-residential institutions 
such as schools, museums, public libraries , 
 public hall,  and places of worship  
• Creche, day nurseries or day centre  
• Provision of medical or health services  
• Assembly and leisure  
• Other uses typically found in centres, 
including hot food takeaways, pub or drinking 
establishment, cinemas, concert halls, bingo 
halls, dance halls, theatres, nightclubs, 
amusement arcades, launderettes, tattooists, 
beauty parlours  • Resident ial institutions ( class C2 
and class C2a)  
• Residential ( class C3) 
• Houses in multiple occupation 
(class C4) 
• Other uses  which do not provide 
services direct to the public  
Figure 7.6: Uses suitable and not suitable at ground floor level in Designated Centres  and Primary Shopping Area  
POLICY PC09: NIGHT TIME ECONOMY  
Development proposals for cultural, entertainment and leisure uses in Designated 
Centres should  where appropriate, contribute to the diversity  of the evening and 
night -time economy. Proposals are re quired to : 
a. not give rise, either alone or cumulatively, to a detrimental effect on the 
character or amenity of the surrounding residential area through smell, 
litter, noise or traffic problems. Proposals are required to demonstrate any 
potential related problems can be overcome satisfactorily to protect 
amenities of surrounding residents;  and 
b. provide evidence of responsible management and stewardship 
arrangements to ensure there is no disturbance to surrounding properties 
and residents or harm to surrounding area amen ity. 
 
7.67 ‘Main town centre uses’ as defined in the NPPF include those that are part of the evening 
and night time economy (ENTE). ENTE is recognised to allow town centres to diversify and 
is an opportunity for economic and social development. This policy the refore seeks to strike 
the right balance between supporting the evening economy and protecting the living 
conditions of residents and nearby uses in terms of anti -social behaviour, noise pollution, 
health and wellbeing and other issues.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
154 Communit y Infrastr ucture  
STRATEGIC  POLICY PC10: PROTECTING AND ENHANCING COMMUNITY FACILITIES  
The Council recognises the importance of community  facilities , including those 
registered as  Assets of Community Value (ACV), as part of social infrastructure 
and seeks to ensure that:  
a. existing community assets will be protected from inappropriate changes of 
use or redevelopment;  
b. new facilities should be easily accessible by public transport, cycling and 
walking;  
c. development proposals that provide high quality, inclusive community 
assets that addresses a local or strategic need and supports service 
delivery strategies will be suppo rted; 
d. development proposals should make best use of land, including , where 
possible , the co -location of different forms of community facilities and the 
rationalisation or sharing of facilities;  
e. development proposals that would result in the unnecessary loss of 
community facilities will not be permitted unless  it can be demonstrated 
that: 
i. they will be replaced by alternative and well located facilities that will  
continue to serve the similar needs of the neighbourhood and wider 
community; or  
ii. the loss is a consequence of the genuine need to rationalise existing 
facilities in an area in order to provide for existing and future 
community needs.  
f. the development or change of use of redundant community facilities  
should be considered  only after it is established that there is no 
reasonable prospect of them being put to alternative community uses . 
 
7.68 Community facilities and services can include any provision that provides social, recreational 
and cultural facilities to meet the day -to-day needs of the c ommunity . It can include facilities 
such as village  halls, community centres, libraries , and buildings  for sports , leisure , 
health care, and arts venues, amongst others. Applicants should take into account the  
155 Council’s Built Facilities Strategy and Leisure  Strategy when considering indoor sports and 
leisure facilities. While recreational facilities can include those outdoors in parks and open 
spaces, Policy PC1 0 applies to facilities and services related to buildings only; it excludes 
any outdoor sport or r ecreation facilities, which is covered by Policy NE05  Open Space and 
Recreation Facilities . 
7.69 Community facilities  are a part of social infrastructure and play an important role in providing  
good quality of life, stimulating and supporting social cohesion an d interaction, as well as 
developing strong and inclusive communities. They provide opportunities to bring different 
groups of people together, contributing to social integration and the desirability of a place.  
7.70 Good quality leisure and sport facilities support and encourage people to lead healthy 
lifestyles, raising the quality of life for local residents. Leisure, cultural and entertainment 
facilities help attract people to the borough as a place to work, visit and live.  It is therefore 
important that new and replacement facilities support new and existing communities, 
respectively. These should also facilitate the growth of the borough by providing sufficient 
capacity to accommodate community need and demand.  
7.71 The Council will work collaboratively with service providers, developers and relevant 
stakeholders, including the local community, to fully understand existing and future social 
infrastructure needs and plan appropriately for these, including through the Com munity 
Infrastructure Levy.  
7.72 The loss of social infrastructure can have a detrimental effect on a community. The Council 
seeks to protect its existing community facilities . Where a development proposal leads to the 
loss of a facility, a replacement that con tinues to meet the needs of the neighbourhood it 
serves will be required.  
7.73 Proposals for new and replacement facilities will be supported where there is a local need. 
This need will be demonstrated through a local need assessment. This is particularly 
impor tant where existing deficits in community or leisure provision have already been 
identified  in line with the Council’s Leisure Strategy and Built Facilities Strategy . 
7.74 When new developments generate the need for new community facilities, the need should 
be met by on and off -site provision, in line with Policy MG05 Developer Contributions . 
Assets of Community Value  
7.75 Assets of Community Value (ACV) as designated under the  Localism Act 2011  will be a 
material consideration in any proposal for redevelopment . The Localism Act  2011 introduced 
the Community Right to Bid  which  provides a new right for residents to nominate certain 
local public or privately -owned buildings or land as being an Asset of Community Value. The 
Council is  obliged to consider all nominations received and include the building or land on 
the ACV  list, if  the current use or a recent past use of the asset has furthered the social well -
being or social interests  of the community and can continue to do so.  Once an asset is 
included in the  ACV list it will remain on that list for five years,  after that  re-application will be 
necessary.  During this time,  the owner cannot dispose of the asset without giving the  
commu nity interest group  the opportunity to bid for it.. T he community are then given  six 
months to put together a bid to buy the asset.  The Brentwood most up to date ACV list and  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
156 how to nominate an asset are  available to view in the Council's information datab ase, 
DataShare55. 
7.76 This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy MG05  Developer Contributions  and 
Policy BE15  Planning for Inclusive Communities . 
POLICY PC11: EDUCATION  FACILITIES   
1. The change of use or re -development of  existing or proposed  educational 
establishments  and/or their grounds  for alternative purposes  will not be 
permitted unless:  
a. it can be clearly demonstrated that the use of the site is genuinely 
redundant  for educational purposes  and no other alternative ed ucational 
or community use can be found  for the site in question ; or 
b. satisfactory alternative and improved facilities will be provided;  or 
c. in the case of playing fields or open space associated with educational 
establishments, any proposals that involve th eir loss or change in use will 
be subject to Policy NE05 . 
2. Where there is a demonstrable need for new educational  facilities, planning 
permission will be granted for appropriate and well -designed proposals which 
broadly meet the criteria for new education f acilities set out in the ECC’s 
Developers’ Guide to Infrastructure Contributions.  
3. Developments that generate a need for additional education facilities should 
make appropriate provision for their timely delivery as part of the development 
or through financ ial contributions if appropriate and in accordance with ECC’s 
Developers’ Guide to Infrastructure Contributions . 
4. New educational establishments should plan and design their playing fields 
and sports facilities to be used for community use when not required  for their 
own use, provided always that any such use must not detract from the safety 
of pupils or their learning environment.  
 
 
7.77 Further information regarding requirements for educational facilities  over the Plan period  is 
detailed  in the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan . This policy should be read in 
conjunction with  Policy MG05 Developer Contributions  and Policy NE05 Open Space and 
 
55 http://opendata.brentwood.gov.uk/    
157 Recreational Facilities , as well as  infrastructure requirements set out under site -specific 
policies in Chapter 9. Applicants should engage with the Local Education Authority at the 
earliest opportunity and work cooperatively to ensure educational requirements are identified 
early on and are delivered at the appropriate time in line with the phasin g of development.  
7.78 Education in this section relates to early years  and childcare , primary, secondary and further 
education provision for all children and young people, including those with special 
educational needs and/or disabilities, and where residential elements may form part of the 
provision. Higher education and other types of e ducation such as language schools are not 
included in this policy.  
7.79 New and e stablished schools and  their related educational facilities , including playing field 
and sports facilities , make a major contribution to community use and provide essential 
support  to increased housing growth. Education providers and institutional users will be 
encouraged to improve facilities and make efficient use of their assets and landholdings. 
Where feasible , providers will be encouraged to share their assets with the wider co mmunity 
to improve health and social well -being, subject to site specific context and wider impacts.  
7.80 Easy access to good quality educational provision is important for supporting economic 
growth, developing strong sustainable communities, promoting econom ic prosperity and 
sustaining quality of life. It is therefore appropriate for new residential development to 
contribute towards the cost of education provision, either towards the expansion of existing 
facilities, or , in some cases , towards the funding of a new school, through planning 
obligations and the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) as appropriate.  
7.81 Essex County Council (ECC) as the Local Education Authority has the responsibility for early 
years and childcare and school place planning. Through this  process, ECC identifies the 
need for  school places and identifies surpluses or deficits through a 10 Year Plan for School 
Places currently covering the period 2019 -2028. Whether the change of use or 
redevelopment of independent schools would be considere d surplus to educational 
requirements will be considered on a case by case basis.  
7.82 The Council will continue to work with ECC to determine what additional education facilities 
and local education services will be needed as a result of planned future develop ment.  The 
Council  will seek contributions from developers to fund  required infrastructure, in line with 
Policy SP04 Developer Contribution.  
7.83 Regard should be given as to how teachers, parents and pupils will access the nearest 
primary and secondary school a nd encourage sustainable travel to and from the school. 
Development should seek to ensure that children and young people can walk or cycle to 
school safely on designated safe routes through new developments in line with Policy BE09 
Sustainable Means of Tra vel and Walkable Streets , and Policy BE10 Sustainable Passenger 
Transport. Such routes should be planned from the outset of development and not retrofitted 
into a scheme's design.   
Early years and childcare  
7.84 The Council, as advised by ECC , will seek new ea rly years and childcare facilities preferably 
co-located with new primary schools, where appropriate, and which will be funded through 
developer contributions. Sufficient early years and childcare provision also needs to be 
considered alongside other essen tial services and infrastructure. It may prove necessary to Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
158 locate new early years and childcare facilities close to major new employment locations, 
where demand is identified.  
Primary and secondary schools  
7.85 The NPPF stresses the importance on ensuring sufficient and choice of school places to 
meet existing and future needs. Where growth is to be located , it will be essential to ensure 
the delivery of education facilities is undertaken in a timely and phased manner. Additional 
school places can be provided either by the expansion of existing schools/ academies or the 
opening of new “free schools” or academies. However, existing primary schools, especially 
in the Brentwood urban area are generally close to capacity, with limited space on site to 
expand, but there is generally a high level of capacity at secondary schools.  
7.86 Whilst faith schools and academies may have sufficient site area to expand this would need 
the agreement of the Anglican Diocese of Chelmsford/Roman Catholic Diocese of 
Brentwood or the academy trusts responsible for these schools/ academies. This is 
particularly relevant as a significant proportion of schools/ academies located within the 
borough are faith schools.  
7.87 When considering the housing applications, the interests of school s will be taken on board. 
This is likely to involve reserving suitable sites for new schools on strategic allocation. 
Developers should refer to the required site areas set out in the ECC’s Developers’ Guide 
Education Supplement.   
159  
 
 
 
 
Natural Environment  
 
 
 
  
8.1 The policies in this chapter  seek to ensure future development avoids and/or positively 
mitigates the impact on the natural environment and achieves sustainable, well -designed 
places that promote community well -being. The policies help deliver Strategic Objective 4.  
SO4: Deliver Bea utiful, Biodiverse, Clean and a Functional Natural Environment, where 
resources are carefully managed to avoid adverse impact  on and to provide net gains for, 
the borough’s natural environment and biodiversity ; and where our natural heritage is 
protected , ecosystem services are restored , enhanced and integrated back into the built 
environment through multi -functional green  and blue  infrastructure  and opportunities are 
pursued for securing measurable net gains for biodiversity . 
 
8.2 The borough of Brentwood currently enjoys a varied built and natural landscape. At its core 
is the main urban area with the settlements of Brentwood , Shenfield, Pilgrims Hatch and 
Hutton , along with the dispersed, yet neighbouring northern villages and the more  distant 
villages in the south ; it is set within the varied landscape of intrinsic character and beauty 
within the Essex countryside. This enables Brentwood residents to enjoy the best of both 
worlds – the urban and the rural benefits - leading to the desc riptive reference as the 
Borough of Villages.  
8.3 While Brentwood currently enjoys this rich and varied natural landscape, the pressure to 
grow and accommodate change must not be complacent to this privileged position. The 
policies in this section, therefore, aim to ensure this natural heritage is protected and 
enhanced for future generations to enjoy. The policies aim to:  
08 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
160 a. maintain the character of Borough of Villages, while improving public access in 
between through ecological networks and green infrastructure ; 
b. harness the characteristics and intrinsic value of the landscape to inspire landscape -
led developments throughout Brentwood;  
c. Conserve  and enhance sites of significant international, national and local geological, 
ecological and landscape value;  
d. minimisin g the impacts and providing opportunities for net gains for biodiversity 
through habitat improvements and establishing ecological networks and green 
infrastructure provision;  
e. maintaining the character and ecology of the Essex Wildlife Trust living landsca pes; 
and 
f. preventing unacceptable levels of soil, air, water, noise and land pollution, ensuring 
development contributes to improvements in local environmental conditions.  
8.4 The Council is committed to the conservation  and enhancement of the natural environme nt 
in line with the NPPF (2021, Section 15 ). The Council has a duty under the Natural 
Environment and Rural Communities (NERC) Act 2006 and the Wildlife and Countryside Act 
1981 to have regard to biodiversity conservation including the positive conservatio n 
management of Local Wildlife Sites (LWS) within the borough.  
8.5 Future growth is planned in sustainable locations to ensure that the quality of our 
environment is valued and sustained. Consideration for integration, conservation and 
enhancement of the natu ral and built environment to promote the health and well -being of 
inhabitants is paramount. This will be achieved through the considered management of 
development in line with the g overnment’s 25 Year Environment Strategy56 and NPPF  with a 
commitment to improving green infrastructure connectivity for wildlife and people in line with 
Green and Blue Infrastructure and Open Space policies .  
Summary of Natural Assets  
8.6 The borough has a number of landscape, biodiversity and geodiversity areas of i nterest 
which contribute to local distinctiveness. These should be retained and protected and their 
enhancement and restoration will be encouraged . The majority of the landscape is 
dominated by Wooded Farmland comprising of undulating areas of deciduous an d mixed 
woodland interspersed with arable fields, mature hedgerows, smaller pastures and 
paddocks, and narrow lanes. Brentwood has 15 areas of ancient woodland  along with 
veteran trees and lowland fen . The Thames Chase Community Forest Area covers the sout h 
and south -west of Brentwood. The Thames Chase Plan (201 4)57 describes the landscape as 
 
56 HM Government (2018) A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment . Available at : 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/25 -year-environment -plan  
57 The Thames C hase Trust  (2014) The Thames Chase Plan. Available at : 
http://www.thameschase.org.uk/uploads/TC_Plan_Summary.pdf    
161 ‘Land of the Fanns’, comprising of marshy land  - a low lying district with fens, forests and 
farming  made up of large field patterns with hedgerows, often called the H orndon Fens . 
Fanns is a Saxon term for low marshy land or a low -lying district. This area provides an 
inspirational image of a forest landscape that is being developed to Community Forest 
principles. Taking into account the age, uniqueness, species diversi ty and rarity of these 
habitats, their re -creation, once destroyed, will be difficult to achieve. Therefore, proposals 
which impact these irreplaceable habitats will be refused unless there are wholly exceptional 
reasons and a suitable compensation strateg y is set out.  
8.7 The Roding River Valley in the north -west comprises of linear patches of woodland along the 
valley with mature hedgerows.  
8.8 Amongst this backdrop are a number of interspersed Country Parks, namely St Faith’s, 
Weald, Hutton, Warley, Thorndon  and Merrymeads.  
8.9 The country parks of Warley, Weald and Thorndon are also on Historic England’s Register 
of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England.  
8.10 The borough contains three Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI): Curtis Mill Green,  
Thorndon Park and The Coppice  in Kelvedon Hatch. Hutton Country Park is also a statutory 
Local Nature Reserve . The 2012 Local Wildlife Site Review identified 147 Local Wildlife 
Sites (LWS), identified for their value as semi -natural habitats and for their  role in 
environmental education and public engagement with wildlife. In the Mill Green area , lies the 
Forest of Writtle , which is a designated Ancient Landscape. All these sites are important 
landscapes recognised for their special cultural, horticultural , historic and landscape 
qualities.  
8.11 Other natural features of conservation interest include commons, small copses, trees, tree 
belts, woodlands, ponds and watercourses and hedgerows. Recreational impacts already 
pose a challenge to conserving these sites. Ancient hedged landscape of narrow lanes link s 
historic farmsteads and hamlets in the Brentwood countryside.  
8.12 A number of sites within or partly within Brentwood are also classed as the Living 
Landscapes58: Havering and Brentwood Ridge (19) , Thorndon Woods  (23), Ramsden Heath 
and Woods (34) , Writtle Forest (36) , Upper Roding: Abbess to M25 (18) , Lower Roding: M25 
to Chigwell (17) and Tylers Common (22).  
 
58 https://www.essexwt.org.uk/living -landscapes   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
162 Protecting and Enhancing Natural 
Heritage  
STRATEGIC  POLICY NE01 : PROTECTING AND ENHANCING THE NATURAL 
ENVIRONMENT  
1. The Council will require development proposals to use natural resources 
prudently and protect and enhance the quality of the natural environment. All 
proposals should, wherever possible, incorporate measures to secure a net 
gain in biodiversity, protect an d enhance the network of habitats, species and 
sites (both statutory and non -statutory) and avoid negative impacts on 
biodiversity and geodiversity. Compensatory measures will only be considered 
if it is not possible fully to mitigate any impacts.  
2. When det ermining planning applications, the council will apply the principles 
relevant to habitats and biodiversity as set out in National Planning Policy.  
International Designated Sites  
3. Where a proposed development is likely to have an adverse impact on 
European Designated Site (whether individually or in combination with other 
plans or proposals) permission will not be granted unless there is due 
compliance with the requirements of the Habitats Regulations.  
4. New residential development within the Essex RAMS and Ep ping Forest SAC 
Zones of Influence will be required to provide appropriate on -site measures for 
the avoidance of, and/or reduction in, recreational disturbance on European 
Designated Sites through the incorporation of recreational opportunities, 
including the provision of green space and footpaths in the proposals. 
Proposals will be required to follow the mitigation hierarchy by seeking to avoid 
creating recreational impacts first and foremost, with mitigation measures 
considered separately to avoidance.  
Nationally Designated Sites  
5. Development proposals within or outside a SSSI, likely to have an adverse 
effect on a SSSI (either individually or in combination with other 
developments), will not be permitted unless, exceptionally, the benefits of the 
proposed development clearly outweigh both the adverse impacts on the 
features of the site that make it of national importance and any impacts on the 
wider network of SSSIs.    
163 Sites of Local Importance  
6. Development proposals that are likely adversely to affect locall y designated 
sites, including their functional status within any identified ecological network, 
will only be permitted where the applicant can demonstrate that:  
a. the ecological coherence of the site and any local ecological network is 
maintained; and  
b. it can  be demonstrated that the benefits of the development clearly 
outweigh the loss.  
 
8.13 All stages of development must be considered when assessing the impact and cumulative 
impact  on wildlife sites both within and in proximity to the borough of Brentwood.  
8.14 The Council acknowledge s the sensitive biodiversity sites just beyond the borough 
boundary, including Basildon Meadows SSSI, Norsey Wood SSSI and Epping Forest SSSI 
and Special Ar ea of Conservation. Proposals likely to have an adverse effect on these 
neighbouring sites will be assessed per in accordance with Strategic Policy  NE01  Protecting 
and Enhancing the Natural Environment . 
8.15 Where there is a confirmed presence, or reasonable likelihood, of a legally protected species 
or priority species on an application site, the applicant will be required to demonstrate that 
adverse impacts upon the species have been avoided, and where they cannot be avoided 
adequately mitigated. Mitigation must conform to the requirements of relevant legislation and 
Natural England Standing Advice. Where impacts cannot be adequately mitigated, the 
proposal will not be permitted.  
8.16 The Council will take a precautionary approach where insufficient inf ormation is provided 
about avoidance, management, mitigation and compensation measures  and refuse such 
planning applications . The Council will secure management, mitigation and compensation 
measures through planning conditions/obligations where necessary.  
8.17 Where Priority Habitats are likely to be adversely impacted by the proposal, the developer 
must demonstrate that every effort has been made to avoid adverse impacts . Mitigation and 
compensation measures will only be acceptable where it has been demonstrate d impacts 
cannot be reasonably avoided in the first place. Impacts that cannot be avoided are to be 
mitigated onsite. Where residual impacts remain, offsite compensation will be required so 
that there is no net loss in quantity and quality of Priority habi tat in the borough of 
Brentwood.  
8.18 The Council supports the Essex Wildlife Trust Living Landscape ’s vision to ‘restore, recreate 
and connect wildlife habitats ’. Within each Living Landscape, opportunities for the 
preservation, restoration and recreation of p riority habitats, ecological networks and 
populations of priority species will be supported in order to conserve  and enhance strategic 
wildlife corridors and habitats in Essex. Development proposals that would deliver these Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
164 opportunities will in principle be supported, subject to other policies within this Plan. 
Development resulting in a significant adverse impact on the ecological function of these 
Living Landscapes will be refused.  
8.19 In addition to the statutory protections and obligations for designated s ites, proposals must 
also demonstrate how they are responding to:  
a. the Essex Wildlife Trust Living Landscapes vision; and  
b. the Thames Chase Plan.  
Essex Coast RAMS  
8.20 Development in the borough has the potential to increase the recreational pressures and 
disturb ance on existing European level sensitive habitats  such as  the Essex Estuaries 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC), the Crouch and Roach Estuaries Special Protection 
Areas (SPA) , and the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation.  
8.21 Recreational disturbance has been further considered in an Appropriate Assessment which  
has identifie d the need to prepare a Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation 
Strategy (RAMS) for these locations  to deliver the mitigation necessary to avoid significant 
adverse effects from ‘in -combination’ impacts of residential development that is anticipated 
within the zone of influence . 
8.22 Following consultation with Natural England, a Recreational Disturbance Avoidance and 
Mitigation Strategy (RAMS) has been prepared and adopted to include all coastal European 
sites. The strategy identifies where recreational disturbance is happening and th e main 
recreational uses causing the disturbance. Development that is likely to have a significant 
effect on European sites will be required to contribute towards the implementation of the 
mitigation.  It is considered that development in this zone of influ ence will be required to pay 
for the implementation of mitigation measures to protect the interest features of European 
designated sites along the Essex Coast which include  the Essex Estuaries Special Area of 
Conservation ; the Crouch and Roach Estuaries Special Protection Area , and the Colne and 
Blackwater Estuaries Special Protection Area s, and Ramsar sites. The appropriate 
mitigation mechanisms are identified in the RAMS. The Zones of Influence affecting 
Brentwood are shown on the Policies Map.  
8.23 Any reside ntial development within the Zone of Influence of the Essex Coast RAMS  is likely 
to affect the integrity of these European sites. The developer  will be required to either 
contribute towards mitigation measures identified in the RAMS or, identify and implem ent 
bespoke mitigation measures at the Essex Coastal Habitats sites to ensure compliance with 
the Habitat Regulations.  
Epping Forest RAMS  
8.24 A similar assessment process is being carried out for the Epping Forest Special Area of 
Conservation involving the lo cal planning authorities that have been identified as having the 
potential for impact by their geographical proximity to Epping Forest. The detailed evidence  
165 base has now been prepared and has identified the new residential development Zones of 
Influence (ZOI) of these internationally important protected biodiversity sites.  
8.25 Prior to the adoption of a Supplementary Planning Document, or similar,  in respect of the 
Epping Forest SAC , development in the Zones of Influence will be required to make  an 
appropriate  assessment of the in combination  impact of the development and identify 
suitable mitigation proposals, in line with Natural England advice. Areas within Brentwood 
Borough fall just inside this ZOI; the Council will however, carefully consider the impacts,  if 
any, of development that falls adjacent to this ZOI .   
Green and Blue Infrastructure  
8.26 Green and Blue Infrastructure (GBI ) is a network of multi -functional  natural or semi -natural 
networks of green (soil covered or vegetated) and blue (water covered) spaces and 
corridors , in either an urban or rural setting, that connects, maintain s and enhance s 
ecosystem services . GBI should thread through and surround the built environment and 
connect the urban area to its wider rural hinterland. It is capable of delivering a wide range of 
environmental and quality of life benefits for local communities by providing recreational or 
cultural experiences . It can also help sup port a number of strategic objectives across policy 
areas, such as promoting public health and wellbeing, mitigating and adapting to climate 
change (heat risk, flood risk, sustainable drainage), improving water and air quality, as well 
as conserving habita ts and contributing to biodiversity net -gain. Figure 8.1 defines the 
different types of GBI. They include those found in Brentwood, but also additional types that 
could be delivered as part of new development.  
8.27 In Brentwood, GBI includes open space, woodlan ds, wildlife habitat, parks, commons, 
villages and town greens, nature reserves, recreational sports facilities, cemeteries, 
allotments, gardens, waterways and bodies of water, registered  parks and gardens. Figure 
8.1 sets out the GBI typology which is bas ed upon the Green Infrastructure Strategy59, 
Sport, Leisure and Open Space Assessment60, Natural England’s Green Infrastructure 
Guidance61. 
8.28 A well connected GBI network will play a crucial role in maintaining the Borough’s distinctive 
‘Borough of Villages’  character. The Council will take a strategic approach to maintaining 
and enhancing networks of GBI, ensuring a variety of managed, multi -functional open 
spaces, coherent ecological green corridors, water courses and water bodies to promote a 
resilient and  sustainable built environment,  in line with the Council's Green Infrastructure 
Strategy (2015) . The Council will work with statutory bodies , and wider stakeholders,  
including developers to conserve, enhance and maintain the natural environment . 
8.29 Open space s take many forms and all are an integral component of the GBI network, 
forming key destinations. The designated Urban Open Spaces, as depicted on the Policies 
 
59 Groundwork (2015) Brentwood Green Infrastructure Strategy  
 
60 PLC (2016) Sport, Leisure and Open Space Assessment Final Report  
 
61 Natural England (2009) Green Infrastructure Guidance  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
166 Map, represent green spaces in urban settlements that provide an important multi -functional 
local resource to residents and therefore, are to be protected. They are made up of different 
types of open spaces, including parks, sports grounds and playing fields (including playing 
fields forming part of an education establishment), woodlands, and amenity  green space. 
However, Brentwood has direct access, via the Public Rights of Way network, to extensive 
publicly accessible parks, including Country Parks such as Hutton, South Weald and 
Thorndon within the surrounding countryside also identified on the Pol icies Map. There will 
be a presumption against the development of open spaces which provide a significant 
amenity resource.  
 
GBI Typologies  GBI sub -types  
Urban Open Spaces  Designated green spaces in existing settlement (urban) areas, of 
various typologies that are to be protected.  
NB. These were previously partly identified by the ‘Protected 
Open Space’ designation i n the replacement Local Plan 2005.  
Parks and Gardens  Coun try Parks, Borough parks and Recreation Grounds, 
Registered  Parks and Gardens.  
Ecological assets and 
natural and semi -
natural greenspaces 
(urban / rural)  Special Sites of Scientific Interest (SSSI), Local Nature Reserves 
(LNR), Local Wildlife Sites ( LoWS), Woodlands, Geological 
Assets, Thames Chase Forest.  
Green Corridors  Hedgerows, amenity grasslands/greenspace or green verges 
along major road corridors and major rail corridors,  rights of way, 
and Protected Lanes.  
Blue corridors  Main rivers  (e.g. R ivers Roding, Ingrebourne, Wid and Mardyke) , 
large ordinary/ non -main river watercourses, major tributaries, 
wetland . 
Sports and Recreation 
Grounds  Play pitches that are green/permeable in nature such as : tennis 
courts, bowling greens, sports pitches, golf courses, school and 
other institutional playing fields, and other outdoor sports areas. 
Green formal/ informal recreation areas.  
Allotments  Statutory and Non -statutory allotments; community gardens . 
Cemeteries and 
churchyards  Public and pri vately -owned facilities.   
167 Landscapes and 
accessible urban fringe 
countryside  Ancient Landscapes , fringe countryside . 
Garden Land  Private back gardens, private amenity green space on estates or 
private communal gardens that are entirely to the rear or with in 
the curtilage of a dwelling or dwellings, as originally designed  
Other GI  Green walls, green roofs, estate greenspace, etc  
 Figure 8.1:  Brentwood Green and Blue Infrastructure Typology  
STRATEGIC POLICY  NE02 : GREEN AND BLUE INFRASTRUCTURE  
1. Brentwood’s network of green and blue infrastructure (GBI) will be protected, 
enhanced and managed to provide a multi -functional, high quality open space 
resource, capable of delivering opportunities for recreation, health and 
wellbeing, eco logical connectivity, biodiversity net -gain as well as wider 
ecosystem services for climate change adaptation.  
2. New development is expected, where possible and appropriate, to maximise 
opportunities to enhance or restore existing GBI provision and/or create new 
provision on site that connects to the wider GBI network. Its design and 
management should also respect an d enhance the character and 
distinctiveness of the local area.  
3. Developments on sites containing or are adjacent to a water course or water 
body (Blue Infrastructure) are required to ensure there is no adverse impact on 
the functioning or water quality of the Blue Infrastructure. Proposals that 
maximise opportunities to enhance or restore Blue Infrastructure and 
incorporate these features into the public realm of the development will be 
supported. An adequate undeveloped buffer zone should be applied as 
necessary to mitigate flood risk, in line with Policy NE09 and/or support 
sustainable drainage, in line with Policy BE05.  
4. Proposals should provide appropriate specification and maintenance plans for 
the proposed green and blue infrastructure throughout the li fe of the 
development.  
 
8.30 This policy is in line with the NPPF, as well as the government’s latest environment plan: A 
Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment which sets out a vision for Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
168 England’s environment post -Brexit. The 25 Year Envir onment P lan stresses the importance 
of good -quality green and blue infrastructure (GBI) and commits to creating a ‘national 
framework of green infrastructure standards, ensuring that new developments include 
accessible green spaces and that any area with l ittle or no green space can be improved for 
the benefit of the community’. Th is policy seek s to achieve achieve well managed, high 
quality multi -functional Green and Blue Infrastructure to ensure opportunities are maximised 
for recreation, health and wellb eing,  net gain for biodiversity as well as help achieve 
additional benefits for air quality and climate adaptation.  High quality green  and blue  
infrastructure should be built into the design  proposals  and/or masterplans of new 
development , wherever possibl e. 
8.31 It is vital that the right infrastructure is in place to support future growth in the borough, and 
this includes GBI. There is a need to better link formal and informal open spaces in the 
borough to improve their wider use and value, as highlighted by t he Brentwood Green 
Infrastructure Strategy (2015). Existing GBI should be protected and enhanced and where 
opportunities arise, e.g. in conjunction with new development, additional provision made.  
8.32 There is a growing and compelling body of evidence substant iating the potential for GBI to 
contribute to the economic, social and environmental well -being of individuals and society; 
for example, access to the countryside, sport and recreation facilities can promote active 
and healthy lifestyles through the enhanc ement of walking and cycling. Strategic scale and 
more local GBI can make a vital contribution to quality of place and health outcomes if 
properly integrated into the design and delivery of new development.  
8.33 It is widely acknowledged that GBI and open space  has a major role to play in mitigating 
against and adapting to climate change, for example, urban cooling, encouraging 
sustainable travel choices, flood alleviation and supporting habitats. Through the provision of 
GBI the policy can help overcome habitat  fragmentation and improve the ability of the 
natural environment to adapt to climate change and habitat loss by improving ecological 
connectivity.  
8.34 Landscape, parks and open space often have heritage interest, and can play a key role in 
enhancing and cons erving the historic environment. It can be used to improve the setting of 
heritage assets and to improve access to it. Likewise, heritage assets can help contribute to 
the quality of green spaces by helping to create a sense of place and a tangible link wi th 
local history. Opportunities can be taken to link GBI networks into already existing 
landscapes or green spaces in towns or existing historic spaces such as church yards, town 
paths, verges etc. as well as larger designed landscapes to improve the setti ng of and 
access to historic buildings or historic townscape. Maintenance of GBI networks and spaces 
should also be considered so that they continue to serve as high quality places which remain 
beneficial in the long term.  
8.35 Brentwood rivers and their valley s form an attractive and important ecological, leisure and 
recreation resource. The rivers are valued by residents and used as corridors of movement 
by people and wildlife. They also contain floodplains that provide flood storage capacity. The 
River Wid is  located within the Anglian River Basin District and the Roding, Beam and 
Ingrebourne catchment and Mar Dyke lie within the Thames River Basin District. They 
contribute to the objectives of the Water Framework Directive, the Thames and Anglian 
River Basin Management Plan.   
169 8.36 According to the Brentwood Water Cycle Study (2018), watercourses in the study area are 
either of Poor or Moderate Status; therefore, new development proposals need to ensure 
construction does not result in deterioration and where necessa ry, provide protection, 
enhancement and buffering of watercourses. This includes the provision of ecological buffer 
strips and corridors, native tree planting and the new wetland areas to help manage flood 
risk and reduce diffuse pollution whilst connectin g people to nature. This could also include 
de-culverting, removal of redundant structures, alien species removal where appropriate.  
8.37 According to the TCPA’s guidance Planning for Green and Prosperous Places , as time 
goes by, GBI usually becomes increasing ly valuable, but only if it is well maintained. This 
guidance also emphasises on the importance of maintaining GBI. Therefore, when planning 
GBI, the following should be considered from the earliest stage:  
a. revenue funding: to pay for the care of the GBI in  perpetuity;  
b. capital funding: to pay for creating the GBI; and  
c. the design of the GBI: which will affect the cost of maintaining it as well as the cost of 
creating it.  
8.38 Proposals that provide appropriate GBI which is well integrated with the existing and new 
development and with the surrounding area will be supported. In progressing an allocation, 
strategic consideration should be given to additional mitigation measures, for example 
planning for the provision of ‘off -site’ compensatory habitats to address likely residual 
impacts upon Priority Habitats and Species, and long -term financial support to land 
managers of nearby green and blue infrastructure that may be subject to significant 
additional recreational pressure.  
8.39 The strategic allocation of Dunton Hil ls Garden Village is located between three living 
landscape areas; other strategic allocations in the south of the borough, such as the 
Enterprise Park and West Horndon Industrial Estate redevelopment are also likely to have 
cumulative impacts on the lands cape. However, they also present significant opportunities to 
establish a strategic framework that deliver a positive contribution to the local ecological 
network. The quantity, quality, accessibility and distribution of GBI across the area will be 
conside red in site policies in Chapter 9 and development masterplan frameworks.  
8.40 Development should seek to deliver green and blue infrastructure network in the borough. 
The strategic planning, implementation and management of GBI requires a co -ordinated 
approach from a multi -disciplinary, cross -organisational team of partners, for example, 
National Highways, Essex County Council, Natural England, Thames Chase Forest, Essex 
Wildlife Trust, the Council’s public health team, as well as voluntary groups.  
8.41 This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy BE0 5 Sustainable Drainage , Policy 
NE01 Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment, Policy NE03 Trees, Woodlands 
and Hedgerows , and Policy NE0 9 Flood Risk.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
170 POLICY NE0 3: TREES, WOODLANDS, HEDGEROWS  
1. Development proposals that would result in the deterioration or loss of 
irreplaceable ancient woodland and ancient and veteran trees will not be 
permitted other than in wholly exceptional circumstances and only if the 
proposals include a suitable compensation strategy . Applicants will need to 
demonstrate the efficacy of the strategy by reference to the value of the 
habitats that will be lost or harmed and provide an appropriate implementation 
and maintenance programme to underpin the strategy the performance of 
which w ill be subject of a condition and/or planning obligation, as appropriate.   
2. In all other cases, proposals should, so far as possible and practicable, seek to 
retain existing trees, woodlands and hedgerows where they make a positive 
contribution to the local  landscape and/or biodiversity or which have significant 
amenity value. Wherever possible and appropriate, landscaping schemes 
should take account of and incorporate these existing features in the scheme 
and where any loss is unavoidable, incorporate measu res to compensate for 
their loss.   
 
8.42 Advice is available to woodland owners from the Essex Farming and Wildlife Advisory 
Group, Essex County Council, Thames Chase Project Team or the Forestry Commission as 
to the most appropriate management of their sites.  Woodland management must comply 
with the UK Forestry Standard and follow practices laid down in the Forestry Commission’s 
Environmental Guidelines. In any new woodland planting scheme, the Council will seek the 
planting of tree and shrub species suited to  the sites and aims of the scheme. Where 
conservation is the primary objective, there will be a presumption in favour of native species. 
The Forestry Commission is the Statutory Authority with powers to provide grant aid and 
issue Felling Licences. The For estry Commission is also charged with the administration of 
the Environmental Impact Assessment (Forestry) Regulations (1999).  
8.43 Trees and hedgerows are protected in the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, the Tree 
Regulations 2012 and Hedgerow Regulations 1997. The Council understands that the 
contribution that trees, either as woodland or individual specimens and hedgerows, make to 
the landscape is significant. In particular , the range of benefits for wildlife and people they 
provide.  
8.44 Trees, woodlands, hed ges and hedgerows provide important habitats for a range of species, 
provide shelter, help reduce noise and atmospheric pollution and also store carbon dioxide, 
helping to mitigate against climate change. They add to the character and quality of the local 
environment, can have historic value (e.g. ancient woodlands) and can offer recreation 
opportunities supporting health and well -being.  
8.45 Trees,  woodlands, hedges and hedgerows , wherever appropriate, should be incorporate d 
within a landscape scheme. This can assist in integrating the scheme into the wider local 
environment by providing some mature, established landscape elements. When this cannot  
171 be achieved, or it is known that trees are being lost to disease, mitigation or replacement 
compensatory measures will be required to ensure no loss to the overall value to the 
environment. These should be secured by condition or through a S106 Agreement.  
8.46 Some specific trees or groups of trees are of particular  amenity  value , such that their 
removal would have a significant impact upon the local environment and its enjoyment by 
the public. Where they are potentially under threat, the Council will  seek to retain and protect 
them, either thr ough planning conditions or through  Tree Preservation Orders (TPO) . 
8.47 A hedge or hedgerows is generally found within a settlement and often has an amenity or 
ornamental role; a hedgerow is more commonly found in a rural setting , although some old 
hedgerows r emain within settlements and often provide field boundaries and may comprise 
a range of native species. They make an important contribution to the character of an area 
and may be historically and occasionally archaeological important. They also contribute 
significantly to biodiversity. Therefore, like trees, hedgerows should be conserved  for their 
amenity, biodiversity and historic value. Development that is likely to impact hedgerows must 
be subjected to an assessment against the criteria of the Hedgerow R egulations 1997.  
8.48 If a hedgerow is deemed to be important under the Hedgerow Regulations, development 
proposals must demonstrate that adverse impacts upon the Important Hedgerow will be 
avoided, and impacts that cannot be avoided are mitigated on -site. 
8.49 In considering development proposals, the Council will normally expect the retention and 
beneficial management of any existing hedgerow; where a hedgerow is to be removed, the 
Council will, where appropriate, require its replacement with native species, either  within or 
neighbouring sites, as part of its mitigation strategy, or demonstrate how it will contribute to 
biodiversity net -gain through other appropriate habitat creation.  
8.50 In granting planning permission for new development , where significant hedgerows a re to be 
retained, the Council will ensure that these hedgerows are given appropriate protection 
during the building works, through the use of planning conditions.  
POLICY NE04: THAMES CHASE COMMUNITY FOREST  
Development proposals which fall within the Thame s Chase Community Forest 
Arear  should not prejudice the implementation, aims and objectives of the Thames 
Chase Plan . 
 
8.51 The Thames Chase Community Forest covers 40 square miles of landscape in East London 
and South West Essex . It is one of 10 national comm unity forests across England 
established  in 1990 to actively regenerate the landscape, protecting, improving and 
expanding the woodland character of the Community Forest for the benefit of local people Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
172 and wildlife  Management is led by the Thames Chase Tru st62 in accordance with the 
Thames Chase Plan63. 
8.52 The Council supports the aims of the Thames Chase Plan, being:  
a. to conserve , improve and expand the woodland character of the Community Forest;  
b. to sustain the natural integrity of the Community Forest’s air, land and water including 
wildlife;  
c. to integrate climate change adaption and mitigation responses into the developing 
Community Forest;  
d. to use the Community Forest to improve local health and w ell-being, volunteering, 
learning and employment; and  
e. to enable effective partnership working from national to local level to maximise the 
impact of available resources.  
8.53 The Thames Chase Plan provides a green  infrastructure  framework, to support and guide 
applications in enhancing the local environment, through landscaping, conservation works 
and upgrading of footpaths or bridleways. Such benefits are welcome , provided uses are 
consistent with Green Belt  policy . 
8.54 In 2016, following an award from the Heritage  Lottery Fund, a wider partnership of 
organisations was set up  with a stronger emphasis on area -based project delivery that 
translates forest wide ambition into tangible, quantifiable initiatives on the ground. This Land 
of the Fanns Partnership includes a  number of national and local organisations, including 
Brentwood Borough Council, who are working towards the Landscape Conservation Action 
Plan (LCAP)64. Development proposals falling within the Thames Chase Community Forest 
area are strongly encouraged t o consider the Thames Chase Community Forest aims and 
objectives outlined in these plans when devising their landscape schemes and green 
infrastructure proposals.  
Open Space  Needs and Adopted Standards  
POLICY NE05: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES  
1. All open spaces, including the designated Urban Open Spaces, as identified 
will be protected and where necessary enhanced to ensure access to a 
 
62 The Thames Chase Trust https://www.thameschase.org.uk/about -thames -chase/the -thames -chase -trust.  
63 Thames Chase Plan 2014 https://www.thameschase.org.uk/uploads/TCP_Full.pdf   
64 Land of the Fanns Landscape Conservation Action Plan (LCAP) 2016 - https://www.landofthefanns.org/our -
partnership/about -the-scheme/   
173 network of high quality provision and opportunities for sport, play and 
recreation within the borough.  The loss of open spaces and any ancillary 
facilities, such as sports, play and recreation provision, will not be permitted 
unless it can be demonstrated that:  
a. an assessment has been undertaken which clearly shows the provision 
and the function it performs is surplus to requirements; or  
b. the loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by 
equivalent or better provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable, 
accessible location within the local catchment area; or  
c. the development is f or alternative sports and recreational provision, the 
benefits of which clearly outweigh the loss.  
2. New development is required to maximise opportunities to incorporate new 
publicly accessible, high quality and multi -functional open space and/or, where 
appropriate, enhance existing provision that will serve the new and existing 
community, through improved connections, biodiversity net -gain and high 
quality sport, play and recreational amenities.  
3. The amount and type of provision required will be determined ac cording to the 
Council’s identified needs, as set out in its Open Space and Play Pitch 
Strategy and adopted open space standards; with regard to children’s play 
space, the Council will seek proposals which meet the Fields in Trust minimum 
standards (see Fi gure 8.3). 
4. Where it can be clearly demonstrated that proposals are not able to 
incorporate new provision or enhance existing provision to serve the new 
community, then a commuted sum may be requested in line with Policy MG05 
Developer Contributions where s uch contributions will provide alternative or 
enhanced and conveniently accessible off -site open space provision.  
5. Proposals for the inclusion or enhancement of supporting and ancillary uses 
and facilities on open space, such as sport, play and other suppor ting 
recreational provision, should meet the following criteria:  
a. the proposed facilities help improve the quality of the open space and 
promote inclusive access to a wide range of users and recreational 
interests;  
b. are demonstrably ancillary to the use of o pen space and its primary 
function, e.g. play/sports fields;  
c. help to contribute to both the character and amenity of the area and are 
appropriate and proportionate to the function and nature of the open 
space;  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
174 d. do not have a detrimental impact on the environmental function of the 
open space.  
6. Maintenance plans should be submitted at planning application stage for all 
new facilities to ensure their long -term quality and management.  
 
8.55 Brentwood’s existing sport, leisure, public and private open spaces are  important valued 
assets serving communities and visitors.  
8.56 Access to good quality open space is essential for health and well -being. The ability to 
access local open space across the borough varies with a lack of provision in some areas. 
Provision within new development is therefore particularly important in areas where a 
deficiency has been identified or where new development would give rise to a deficiency.  
8.57 The Council’s Open Space, Play Pitch and Leisure Assessments provide an overview of the 
existing p rovision across the borough, as well as known deficiencies. All major development 
proposals should investigate and maximise opportunities to enhance open space , play, sport 
and recreation facilities where possible and appropriate, particularly in areas of deficiency in 
quantity and quality. New development can help to enhance provision even where it is not 
feasible to deliver new public open space on site. This could include improving access, 
through public realm enhancements, to existing nearby facilities or alternatively, 
contributions will be sought where appropriate.  
8.58 All proposals, where appropriate, will be required to comply with the Council’s identified 
needs and open space standards as set out in Figure 8.2 or any subsequent update, to 
inform the des ign of the proposals and planning application process . These take account of 
the recommendations in open space and sports facilities evidence, i.e. Brentwood Play Pitch 
Strategy (2018), Brentwood Open Space Strategy (2008 -2018) , the Leisure Strategy  and 
Play Strategy (2018). With regard s to children’s play space, the Council will seek proposals 
which meet the Fields in Trust minimum standards as set out in Figure 8.3. 
 
Outdoor Sport  3.15 ha per 1,000 population  
Children’s Playing Space  Between 0.13 – 0.17 ha per 1,000 
population  
Allotments and Community Gardens  0.18 per ha per 1,000 population  
Figure 8.2: Open Space Standards  
  
175 Local Area for Play  
(LAP)  Characteristics: The LAP is a small area of open space 
specifically designated and primarily laid out for very 
young children to play close to where they live. Aimed 
at children up to the age of 6.  
Walking distance:            100 m  
Minimum activity zone:   100 sqm  
Minimum buffer zone:      5 m  
Local Equipped Area for Play  
(LEAP)  Characteristics: The LEAP is an area of open space 
specifically designated and laid out with features 
including equipment for children who are beginning to 
go out and play independently close to where they live.  
Walking distance:            400 m  
Minimum activity zone:    400 sqm  
Minimum buffer zone:      20 m  
Neighbourhood Equipped 
Area for Play  
 (NEAP)  Characteristics: The NEAP is an area of open space 
specifically designated, laid out and equipped mainly 
for older children but also with play opportunities for 
younger children.  
Walking distance:            1,000 m  
Minimum activity zone:    1,000 sqm  
comprising an area for play equipment and structures 
and a hard surfaced area of at least 465 sqm – the 
minimum needed to play five -a-side football)  
Minimum buffer zone:      30 m  
Figure 8.3: Fields in Trust Children’s Play Space Standards  
POLICY NE06 : ALLOTMENTS AND COMMUNITY FOOD GROWING SPACE  
1. The provision of allotment space should, where possible and appropriate, be 
an integral part of the green and blue infrastructure provision in residential 
development.  
2. Provision of areas for personal and community gardening and food growing 
will be favourably considered.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
176 3. The change of use or developmen t of designated allotment sites will not be 
permitted unless it can be demonstrated that provision is no longer required or 
that an alternative provision can be provided.  
 
8.59 Community food growing not only helps to improve social integration and community 
cohesion but can also contribute to improved mental and physical health and well -being. It 
supports healthy living by enabling residents make more sustainable food choices, protects 
local ecosystems and fosters community spirit and enterprise. It also helps  reduce the 
carbon footprint of food production by minimising CO2 emissions from transporting food and 
is beneficial for air quality by helping to reduce pollution.  
8.60 The wider benefits of growing produce are identified in the Brentwood Open Space, Sport 
and Leisure Assessment (2016)  which highlights that providing opportunities for people to 
grow their own food contributes to sustainability, health and social inclusion.  
8.61 The Council therefore aims to safeguard its existing allotments, and encourage developm ent 
proposals to include spaces for residents and communities to grow their own food.   
8.62 There are currently 16 known allotment sites in Brentwood, as illustrated on the Policies 
map. Ten of these sites have statutory status and are therefore afforded addit ional legal 
protection provided by the Allotments Act 1925. Policy NE06 applies to all statutory and non -
statutory allotments equally.  
8.63 When allotments or community gardens are provided on site as part of a development, 
developers should also provide suffi cient information to address the long -term maintenance, 
in line with the requirements of Strategic Policy NE02: Green and Blue Infrastructure.  
8.64 Innovative solutions to small scale food growing space are encouraged, such as green 
roofs/walls, re -utilising ex isting under -used spaces and incorporating spaces for food 
growing in new schools.  
8.65 This policy should be read in conjunction with Strategic Policy NE02: Green and Blue 
Infrastructure.  
POLICY NE07 : PROTECTING LAND FOR GARDENS  
Proposals for development on sites that form part of a n existing garden  or group of 
gardens will only be permitted where:  
a. sufficient garden space and space around existing dwellings is retained, 
especially where these spaces and any trees are worthy of retention due  
177 to their contribution to the character of the area and their importance for 
biodiversity;  
b. the form, height and layout of the proposed development is appropriate to 
the surrounding pattern of development and the character of the area;  
c. the amenity and privacy o f neighbouring, existing and new residents are 
protected; and  
d. provision is made for adequate amenity space, vehicular access 
arrangements and parking spaces for the proposed and existing 
properties . 
 
8.66 The definition of Previously Developed Land within the NPPF excludes private residential 
gardens. The development of garden land will be resisted unless proposals fulfil the 
requirements this policy and other relevant policies within this Plan.  
8.67 Garden land (includes private back gardens and private amenity areas or private communal 
gardens) forms an important part of the network of green infrastructure and an integral part 
of the urban layout and assist in defining the character of the residential area. Garden land 
provide s a semi -natural habitat for  local wildlife and corridors for the movement of wildlife in 
the urban area. Collectively, they help to mitigate fluvial and surface water flooding in the 
built-up parts of Brentwood. Private gardens also form an important amenity resource for 
private dwe llings as well as form part of an area's development pattern, providing a setting 
for buildings. They are an important environmental resource and are a vital component of 
Brentwood’s character.  
8.68 If designed appropriately , some forms of redevelopment and in fill development, which make 
efficient use of land, will continue to be a valuable additional source of housing supply.  
Proposals will be considered on a case -by-case basis, taking into account the nature and 
scale of the proposed use, its context and the quality of the design and whether the 
remaining area of garden is sufficient to meet occupier needs. This will depend upon the 
size of the dwelling and the Council will take into account the relevant guidance in the Essex 
Design Guide in making its assessm ent as well as other relevant policies in this plan.  
8.69 In this regard , applicants should  also refer to Policy HP06 Standards for New Housing, 
Policy NE05  Open Space  and Recreation Provision as well as the Brentwood Town Centre 
Design Guide  SPD. 
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
178 Promoting a Clean and Safe 
Environment  
STRATEGIC POLICY NE08 : AIR QUALITY  
1. Development is required to meet  national  air quality standard s and identify 
opportunities to improve air quality or mitigate local exceedances and impacts 
to acceptable legal and safe levels. Development proposals must demonstrate 
that they will not:  
a. Compromise the achievement of compliance targets within Air Quality 
Management Areas (AQMAs);  
b. Create new exceedance areas; and 
c. Create unacceptable risk of high levels of exposure to poor a ir quality, 
particularly where development is near to, or promotes land uses to be 
used by those particularly vulnerable to poor air quality (such as children 
and older adults).  
2. Development proposals should be designed to minimise exposure to existing 
poor air quality and make appropriate provision s to improve local air quality 
conditions through design solutions and measures  to the outdoor and indoor 
environment . Particular attention should be given to the positioning, layout and 
design of proposals for ne w build developments and community infrastructure 
(indoor and outdoor) that are likely to be used by large volumes of people on a 
daily basis, especially by vulnerable groups. Community infrastructure should, 
where possible incorporate appropriate buffer z ones to prevent or minimise 
exposure to air pollution sources.  
3. An Air Quality Impact Assessment is required as part of any planning 
application for:  
a. major developments;  
b. employment led developments ; 
c. developments which will require substantial earthworks or demolition;  
d. developments which include community infrastructure including leisure, 
education and health facilities or open space (including child play space);   
179 e. new build developments in areas  along busy or congested road and rail 
lines where residents will be exposed to poor air quality ; 
f. developments which propose the use of Combined Heat and Power, 
biomass boilers or similar solutions that might impact air quality ; and  
g. new developments within AQMAs . 
4. Development proposals should have regard to their individual and cumulative 
impacts on air quality. Proposals that do not meet the requirements of (A) and 
(B) above will be resisted unless appropriate measures are implemented to 
ensure adverse impacts can  be mitigated to an acceptable level. Mitigation 
should be provided onsite unless it can be demonstrated that it is inappropriate 
and that off -site provision will deliver equivalent or wider benefits.   
Air Quality in Brentwood  
8.70 Transport generated emissions are the main source of poor air quality in the borough. Air 
quality relates to both particulate and gaseous pollution, including fumes, odours, dust and 
unsafe levels of Carbon Dioxide, Nitrogen Dioxide and other pollutants in the atmos phere 
which can impact environmental amenity for people and wildlife. This policy aims to address 
existing poor air quality and ensure new development does not contribute to the worsening 
of air quality across the borough, but instead contributes to improv ing air quality through 
design and other mitigation measures.  
8.71 The Council will ensure that all development plays its part in securing ‘clean growth’, in line 
with Government’s Clean Air Strategy (2019)65. As a minimum, development must not create 
further d eterioration of existing poor air quality or lead to new exceedances of legal air 
quality standards or compromise achievement of compliance in those areas currently in 
exceedance, as currently stipulated by the Air Quality Standards Regulations 201066. 
Development proposals should also reduce the population’s exposure to poor air quality, 
particularly for those groups who are most vulnerable to its impacts such as children and 
young people and older people.  
Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs)  
8.72 Exceedances  of legal air quality standards are currently as provided by the Air Quality 
Standards Regulations (2010). Brentwood currently has three declared Air Quality 
Management Areas (AQMA) were exceedances have been previously recorded:  
a. AQMA No. 2: M25/Brook Street  Roundabout;  
 
65 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/clean -air-strategy -2019   
66 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2010/1001/contents/made   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
180 b. AQMA No. 4: A12/ Warescot Road/Hurstwood Avenue/Ongar Road;  
c. AQMA No. 7: A128/A1023 Junction (Wilson’s Corner).  
8.73 AQMAs  can be found on the Council’s website. Ongoing monitoring will continue and the 
AQMA areas will be adjusted and reported to DE FRA accordingly. Monitoring data of air 
pollution in these AQMAs since 2015 has shown that the air quality standard for Nitrogen 
Dioxide has been met. However, as these three AQMAs remain potentially problematic, they 
remain in place for now. The designate d AQMAs are illustrated on the policies map and 
declared on the DEFRA website3; these will be subject to periodic review and updating. 
Development should have regard to the Council’s Air Quality Action Plan67. 
Air Quality Assessments  
8.74 An appropriate and pro portionate assessment of air quality must be included with any 
application that may adversely affect local air quality or be significantly affected by existing 
poor air quality levels. It is important that applicants consider the need for any assessment 
before any application is submitted.  
8.75 Air Quality Assessments (AQA) must follow best practice guidance and should include the 
following as a minimum:  
a. must address the impacts arising during construction and operation/occupation of the 
development;  
b. assessments should take into account the individual and wider cumulative impacts on 
the proposed development, consistent with national policy;  
c. where an AQA in dicates a potential negative impact on air quality, the AQA should 
identify implementable measures that will minimise or mitigate impacts from the 
development;  
d. an AQA with full dispersion modelling is required for all proposed Biomass and CHP 
boilers and t his must demonstrate that the impact on nearby receptors is minimal.  
8.76 Development  that involves significant demolition, construction or earthworks will be required 
to assess the risk of impacts according to the latest best practice guidance, such as the 
Institute of Air Quality Management’s (IAQM) ‘Air Quality Monitoring in the Vicinity of 
Demolition and Construction Sites’ (2018)68. Applicants should also refer to further guidance, 
such as the Considerate Contractor Advice Note69 on the Council webpages.  
 
67 Air Quality Action Plan (2008), or any update of this http://aqma.defra.gov.uk/action -
plans/BBC%20AQAP%202008.pdf   
68 https://iaqm.co.uk/guidance/   
69 https://document.brentwood.gov.uk/pdf/pdf_1185.pdf       
181 Mitigating Poor Air Quality  
8.77 Tackling poor air quality requires a multi -dimensional approach to help achieve the objective 
of improving air quality across Brentwood. Therefore, this policy should be read in 
conjunction with all ot her policies that together also address poor air quality impacts, 
including, but not limited to:  BE09: Sustainable Means of Travel And Walkable Streets, 
BE10: Sustainable Passenger Transport, BE11: Electric And Low Emission Vehicles, BE12: 
Mitigating The Transport Impacts Of Development; NE02 Green and Blue Infrastructure.  
8.78 While focus is often on outdoor air quality, it is important that design proposals demonstrate 
how ventilation  in buildings can be designed to prevent or reduce the health impacts of po or 
indoor air quality, whilst maintaining adequate energy and thermal performance as required 
by Strategic Policy BE01: Carbon Reduction and Renewable Energy. This is especially 
important for developments adjacent to key transport infrastructure where emis sions are 
higher. Applicants are advised to look at best practice guidance on how to achieve safe 
indoor air quality in new developments, such as NICE 2020 guidance ‘Indoor Air Quality at 
Home’70.   
8.79 Appropriate measures are often cross -cutting and involve different actions across the 
different aspects of the development’s design proposals. Such measures should be 
proportionate to the scale of development and should include: sustainable transport 
considerations, such as reducing vehicular traffic levels, enc ouraging sustainable movement 
patterns; sustainable building design to reduce emissions throughout the lifetime of the 
building, or reducing emissions from associated plant equipment; improving or greening the 
public realm.  
8.80 Developments comprising new or e nhanced community infrastructure, such as schools, 
should consider how they can include appropriate safe ‘Buffer Zones’, such as low traffic 
zones or traffic exclusion zones, to eliminate or reduce exposure. Implementation of these 
would require joint work ing between the Council, Essex County Council as the Lead Local 
Education Authority and Highways Authority, and relevant schools.  
STRATEGIC POLICY NE0 9: FLOOD RISK  
1. New development will be required to avoid areas of flood risk by  applying the 
Sequential and , where necessary, the Exception Tests in accordance with 
national policy and guidance.  
2. A site specific Flood Risk Assessment must assess all sources of flooding. It 
should demonstrate how flood risk will be managed over the development’s 
lifetime, taking climate change into account. A site specific FRA is required, in 
 
70 https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng149/chapter/Recommendations#prioritising -indoor -air-quality -in-local-
strategy -or-plans   
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
182 accordance with national policy guidance, for the following types of 
development :  
a. all new development greater than 1 ha in size in Flood Zone 1 ; 
b. all development within a Critical Drainage Ar ea; 
c. all new development (including minor development and change of use) in 
flood zones 2 and 3;  
d. new development or a change of use to a more vulnerable class which 
may be subject to other sources of flooding.  
3. Where proposals satisfy the Sequential and Exception Tests design proposals 
should ensure that:  
a. the most vulnerable land uses are located in areas within the site that are 
at lowest risk of flooding;  
b. development will be safe for its lifetime taking account of the vulnerability 
of its users,  
c. flood risk will not increase elsewhere;  
d. development would not constrain the natural function of the flood plain, 
either by impeding flow or reducing storage capacity;  
e. development is constructed so as to remain operational even at times of 
flood through resistant and resilient design ; 
f. appropriate mitigation measures are incorporated to address any residual 
flood risk safely, including safe access and egress for all likely users of the 
development;  
g. where necessary incorporate flood resistant and f lood resilient design 
measures such that, in the event of a flood, the development could be 
quickly brought back into use without significant refurbishment;  
h. incorporate sustainable drainage systems in line with Policy BE05 
Sustainable Drainage, unless ther e is clear evidence that this would be 
inappropriate;  
i. where possible, the development will reduce flood risk overall.  
j. safe access and escape routes are included where appropriate, as part of 
an agreed Emergency Response Plan, w here required.   
183 4. Where the sit e is additionally  located within a Critical Drainage Area (CDA) , 
development should minimise and mitigate surface water runoff in line with 
Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage.  
 
8.81 This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage , Strategic 
Policy NE02 Green and Blue Infrastructure and Policy BE02 Water Efficiency and 
Management . 
Flood Risk Data and Assessment  
8.82 In 2020 , Essex County Council produced  an updated  Surface Water Management Plans for 
the borough  identifying an area specific action plan for each CDA. This must be taken into 
account by development proposals falling within each CDA.  Applicants should also follow 
the guidance and recom mendations set out in Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA 
2018)1 which was undertaken to assess the risk of flooding in Brentwood to inform 
development of the Local Plan . 
8.83 In line with the NPPF and associated Government guidance, a sequential approach wil l be 
applied  when deciding on the location of new development to ensure that development is 
directed to those areas of the Borough, and locations within sites, that are at the lowest risk 
of flooding. The applicant must demonstrate the appropriateness of p roposed uses within 
the different respective flood zones having regard to the Sequential and Exception Tests. 
Development proposals should be informed by site specific Flood Risk Assessments 
submitted by applicants. Assessments are required to take into ac count the long -term impact 
of climate change. The latest standing advice on climate change allowances published by 
the EA should be referred and form the basis of any assessment.  
8.84 Flood zones 2 and 3, and Critical Drainage Areas (CDA) (as defined by the 20 18 modelling 
updates ) are illustrated on the Policies map, using the latest available data. Applicants 
should consult the Environment Agency (EA) and Essex County Council as the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (LLFA) to establish whether the data has since been  updated. All proposals 
will be assessed against the latest available information.  
Extent of Flood Risk in Brentwood  
8.85 Fluvial flood risk in Brentwood is not extensive and is largely limited to areas in very close 
proximity to local watercourses. Risk of flo oding from surface water presents a more 
extensive zone of risk than the fluvial flood zones. This is because the fluvial flood zones in 
Brentwood are relatively narrow owing to the ‘headwater’ nature of most of the 
watercourses. Incidences of fluvial (riv er) flooding are recorded along the eastern boundary 
of the River Wid from Stondon Hall Brook , and the River Roding to the north of the borough. 
Areas at risk of surface water flooding are mainly rural and  include low lying areas south of Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
184 the A127 west and  east of West Horndon.  The most likely mechanism for surface water 
runoff generation is when heavy rainfall exceeds the capacity of the local drainage network 
and of the ground to infiltrate water; therefore surface treatments in new development are 
equall y important in avoiding localised flooding. Therefore, Policy BE05 Sustainable 
Drainage must also be taken into account alongside flood risk. The feasibility of infiltration on 
site will need to be determined through a site -specific drainage assessment tha t forms part 
of the Drainage Strategy. Brentwood’s Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP 2015, 
updated 2020) and Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA 2018) provide additional 
information on other sources of flood risk and potential mitigation measures.  
Floo d Management and Mitigation  
8.86 Developers are encouraged to refer to the Environment Agency’s Flood Risk Standing 
Advice for planning applicants . Early pre -application engagement with Brentwood Borough 
Council, Essex County Council as the Lead Local Flood Authority, the Environment Agency  
and the relevant water utility company (i.e. Thames Water or Anglian) , is strongly  advised.  
8.87 It is important that development does not increase flood risk to people, properties and 
infrastructure. All proposals should proactively seek to minimise and mitigate risk wherever 
possible, especially in areas with identified risk from flooding. Applicant s will be expected to 
consider risk from all sources of flooding using appropriate up to date information. All 
development proposals should also take into consideration the impacts of climate change 
over the lifetime or the development.  
8.88 The SFRA recommends  that ‘Functional Floodplain’ status is applied to all of Flood Zone 3 
extent in the Borough (as described in Section 4.4), with the exception of the areas for which 
the EA hold detailed modelled data (Rivers Wid and Mardyke). All areas of Flood Zone 3 
should have the Flood Zone 3b planning restrictions applied, as per Table D.2 in Appendix D 
of the SFRA. The EA would object to any new development in functional floodplain (Flood 
Zone 3b). Development should be located in areas suitable to the vulnerability level of the 
proposed uses, in accordance with the exceptions test. For any proposed water -compatible 
uses within a functional floodplain, the applicant must demonstrate that development is 
designed and constructed to:  
a. remain operational and safe for users  in times of flood;  
b. result in no net loss of floodplain storage;  
c. not impede water flows and not increase flood risk elsewhere.  
8.89 Compatible  development will be assessed in accordance with national planning policy 
guidance for flood risk vulnerability and flood zone 'compatibility’ tables.  
8.90 Where the Sequential  and Exception Tests are satisfied, the Council expects that proposals 
fully investig ate opportunities to avoid, reduce, manage and mitigate flood risk through the 
site’s layout and design. Residual risk must be fully assessed and addressed by 
incorporating flood resistant design (e.g. constructed to prevent water from entering the 
buildin g and damaging its fabric) and resilient design measures (e.g. impact is minimised,  
185 ensuring the building’s structural integrity is maintained and that drying and cleaning can be 
facilitated).  
8.91 All development proposals in areas at risk of flooding will nee d to submit a  site specific  Flood 
Risk Assessment (FRA), commensurate with the scale of the flood risk and recognising all 
likely sources of flooding - surface water, ground water and watercourse flood risk. Sites 
within a Critical Drainage Area are also r equired to submit a Drainage Strategy in line with 
Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
POLICY NE 10: CONTAMINATED LAND AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES  
Contaminated Land  
1. Planning permission will only be granted for development on, or near to land 
which is suspected t o be contaminated, where the Council is satisfied that:  
a. any risks, including to human health and the environment, can be 
adequately addressed in order to make the development safe; and  ; 
b. there will be no adverse impact on the environment and quality of loc al 
groundwater or quality of surface water . 
2. Proposed development on or near known or potentially contaminated land will 
be required to submit a Phase 1 Preliminary Risk Assessment to identify  the 
level and type of risk and, where necessary:  
a. undertake a Pha se 2 Intrusive Site Investigation to provide a detailed 
assessment of contamination and risks to all receptors;  
b. prepare a Remediation Statement providing details of a remediation 
scheme appropriate to the individual site; and  
c. submit a Validation Report pr ior to the construction of the development.  
Hazardous Substances and Installations  
3. Development proposals involving the use, movement or storage of hazardous 
substances will only be permitted within designated employment areas as 
identified on the Policies Map and only if proposals can demonstrate that 
appropriate safeguards are in place to ensure there is no unacceptable risk to 
human health, safety and the environment.  
4. Development of a site in the vicinity of a hazardous installation, will only be 
permitted where it is demonstrated that development will not constitute an 
unacceptable risk to human health, safety and the environment. Depending on 
individual site circumsta nces proposals may be required to be accompanied by Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
186 a Preliminary Risk Assessment and Management Strategy that clearly 
identifies risks and sets out measures to appropriately manage and mitigate 
these.  
Contaminated Land  
8.92 The Essex Contaminated Land Consortium’s Land Affected by Contamination - Technical 
Guidance for Applicants and Developers (2014), provides detailed information on how to 
deal with land contamination.  In accordance with this guidance, where sites are known to be 
contaminated , or wher e contamination is subsequently discovered, the Council will require 
any planning application to be accompanied by a detailed report appraising the levels and 
extent of contamination together with measures that will remediate the contamination.  The 
guidanc e also provides guidance on how planning conditions may be used to secure 
suitable remediation when dealing with planning applications where contaminated land is 
identified.  
8.93 Where insufficient information is submitted with a planning application for a cont aminated, 
potentially contaminated or suspected contaminated site, the Council will take a 
precautionary approach when making a decision.  
Hazardous Substances and Installations  
8.94 The Planning (Hazardous Substances) Act 1990 aims to prevent major accidents an d limit 
the consequences of such accidents. In considering proposals for development which may 
involve hazardous substances , the Council will need to be completely satisfied that the 
proposal will not constitute a hazard to existing communities or the loca l environment. 
Similarly, existing consents will be an important consideration in the determination of 
sensitive uses such as housing. The Council will consult with the Health and Safety 
Executive and other expert bodies, where necessary  to seek technical advice on the 
potential risks  of a proposal, and follow the required regulatory procedures as appropriate . 
Development proposals to expand existing sites handling or processing hazardous 
substances will not be granted where this would harm public safety.  
8.95 Hazardous substances are defined by the Planning (Hazardous Substances) Regulations 
1992. The Council is required to ensure that land use policies maintain and secure 
appropriate distances between establishments where hazardous substances are present , 
and residential areas, areas of public use and areas of national sensitivity or interest.  
8.96 Similarly, w here development is proposed within the consultation zone of notifiable 
hazardous installations, the Council is required to consult the Health and Safety Exe cutive 
and other expert bodies on the suitability of that development in relation to the risks pose d 
by the existing establishment to the surrounding population.  Where such development could 
affect a sensitive natural area, Natural England must be consulte d. Other regulatory 
procedures may apply as appropriate.   
187 POLICY NE 11: FLOODLIGHTING AND ILLUMINATION  
1. Development proposals involving floodlighting or any other means of 
illumination (other than advertisements) will only be permitted where the 
scheme:  
a. is ap propriate for the intended use and has been appropriately designed 
toprevent light spillage ; 
b. is energy efficien t; 
c. provides the minimum level of light necessary to achieve its purpose;  
d. uses an appropriate light spectrum and specification that will not be 
harmful to nocturnal wildlife or human health;  
e. does not impact unacceptably on the night sky or give rise to any  
unacceptable  increase in sky glow; and  
f. ensures the appearance and design of the installation when unlit is 
sympathetic to the character and design of the development of which it 
forms part and will when lit have no unacceptable adverse effect on visual 
amenity, highway safety, landscape or the historic character  of the area . 
2. Applicants will need to submit a full lighting strategy, proportionate to their 
application, specifying details of external lighting, its power and type, the 
overall level and distribution of illumination and times of operation. Appropriate 
conditions will be imposed to restrict lighting levels and hours of use or require 
measures to be taken to minimise adverse effects  where reasonably 
necessary . 
 
8.97 External lighting can contribute to a healthy, safe environment, enhance the appearance of 
buildings and extend  hours of operation of some activities such as  sports ; insensitive or 
excessive illumination can, however, have a harmful impact on the local area and on the 
enjoyment of the night sky, particularly in open countryside. Excessive lighting can be 
detrimenta l to residential amenity, health and, in some circumstances, can be a statutory 
nuisance. Light pollution represents a wasteful use of energy, contrary to the aims of 
sustainable development.  
8.98 Whilst local residents acknowledge that street lighting for safe ty reasons is important 
(Brentwood Strategic Growth Options, 2015), they place a high value on being able to see 
the night sky and avoid unnecessary lighting (Brentwood Neighbourhood Consultation, 
2011). Proposals for lighting or floodlighting of buildings , sport, leisure or other facilities 
should take into account the effect of light and lighting columns on the character and 
amenity of the surrounding area.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022 
 
 
188 8.99 Applicants  should also consider the effect of lighting in terms of sky glow, glare and light 
trespa ss, effect on wildlife, and any potential  disturbance arising from the associated use. 
Proposals should be unobtrusive in terms of the light source and distribution of light, the 
aura created by the overall illumination and appearance of any structures upo n which lights 
are mounted.  
8.100  Where appropriate, the Council will control the location, form, timing and level of all external 
lighting and illumination.  
8.101  Applicants should refer to the Institute of Lighting Engineers’ guidance when considering the 
developmen t and installation of lighting schemes. The Council will require a lighting strategy 
to accompany all full planning applications  which include floodlighting or other forms of 
external illumination . 
8.102  Lighting installations on listed buildings that materially  affect their character, or illumination of 
some types of outdoor advertisements, will also require consent.   
189  
 
 
 
 
Site Allocations  
 
 
 
 
 
9.1 Site allocations listed in this chapter reflect  the spatial strategy and strategic objectives . The 
allocations  in this chapter contain specific, sometimes additional, requirements to those set 
out in Chapter 5 -8. All site allocations are depicted on the Policies Map of the Local Plan.    
9.2 Each policy follows a similar format, providing the basis for how development is expected to 
come forward and key considerations.  While these site policies detail specific requirements 
for each allocation site, these requirements will apply along with all other relevant policy 
requirements in this Local Plan unless the site-specific  requirements differ.  The following 
sub-headings are  included for each site:  
a. Amount and type of development:  Sets out an approximate number of new homes 
considered appropriate for a site according to certain characteristics, such as 
surrounding density and character, and the amount of land considered to be 
developable (i.e. not including areas that will not be developed within a site , like 
gardens or roads). The number of new homes on a site is indicative , and in each case , 
the Council will consider the need to maximise development according to policies 
within the Plan.  Where appropriate for some residential allocations the land 
requirements for education and early years and child care facilities are stated. In 
addition any land/floorspace requirements for employment and retail provision  are 
included . For emp loyment allocation policies, figures stated for hectares of 
employment land are more accurate and should be adhered to as a starting point.    
b. Development principles:  Sets out the wider principles of development on site that 
should be considered further thr ough the decision -making process.  
c. Infrastructure requirements:  Sets out the specific requirements for each site that are 
expected to be delivered alongside development.  These are not exhaustive,  and any 
planning application should look to consider wider i nfrastructure needs informed by 
09 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
190 evidence, such as the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan  (IDP) . In determining 
appropriate contributions for infrastructure r eference should also be made to Policy 
MG05 . 
9.3 Where reference is made to the type and size of new homes, the local character should also 
be considered.  
9.4 Affordable housing should be provided in line with Policy HP05 , as well as considerations for 
specialist housing, Policy HP04. 
9.5 The t rajectory is not fixed, it gives an indication to how development is expected to come 
forward within a phased approach and taking account of the ability to build in infrastructure. 
However, proposals should show whether development can be delivered sooner .  The 
Council is committed to delivering new homes swiftly, in line with the government’s aims.  
9.6 Where sites with more than  one landownership are allocated, policies set out the need for  
joint working. However, this does not preclude multiple planning applications being 
submitted, these applications should evidence consideration of other sites and working 
together on proposals . This is reflected in individual site allocation policies.  
9.7 This chapter is split according to strategic sites  and non-strategic  allocation  sites for both 
residential -led and employment development. Residential -led allocation sites will deliver 
predominant ly residential dwellings along with any necessary infrastructure. The Strategic 
Allocations also include other primary uses, such as employment and community 
infrastructure and are therefore referred to as Residential -Led, Mixed -use sites. In summary, 
the sites are:  
Strategic Residential -led and Mixed -Use Allocations:  
R01  Dunton Hills Garden Village Strategic Allocation  
R02  Land at West Horndon Industrial Estate , West Horndon   
R03  Land North of Shenfield , Shenfield   
R04  Ford Headquarters and Council Dep ot, Warley   
 
Residential -led Allocations:  
R06  Land at Nags Head Lane, Brentwood   
R07  Sow and Grow Nursery , Pilgrims Hatch   
R08  Land at Mascalls Lane , Warley   
R09  Land at Warley Hill , Warley   
R10  Brentwood Railway Station Car Park , Brentwood   
R11  Westbury Road Car Park , Brentwood    
191 R12  Land at Hunter House , Brentwood   
R13  Chatham Way Car Park , Brentwood   
R14  William Hunter Way Car Park , Brentwood   
R15  Wates Way Industrial Estate , Brentwood   
R16  Land off Doddinghurst Road, Pilgrims Hatch and Brentwood  
R19  Land at Priests Lane, Shenfield  
R21  Land South of Ingatestone , Ingatestone   
R22  Land Adjacent to the A12, Ingatestone   
R23  Brizes Corner Field , Kelvedon Hatch   
R24  Land off Stocks Lane , Kelvedon Hatch   
R25  Land North of Woollard  Way, Blackmore   
R26  Land North of Orchard Piece, Blackmore   
 
Strategic Employment Allocations:  
E11  Brentwood Enterprise Park   
 
Employment Allocations:  
E12  Childerditch Industrial Estate   
E10  Codham Hall Farm   
E13  Land at East Horndon Hall   
E08  Land Adjacent to A12 and Slip Road, Ingatestone   
Dunton Hills Garden Village  
Background  
9.8 The NPPF  (2021, Section 5 Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes) sets out how the plan -
making process should positively plan to identify appropriate land for homes. It goes further Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
192 to states that a significant step towards meeting the housing shortage  is through l arger scale 
development , such as new settlements or significant extensions to existing villages and 
towns .  
9.9 The Council’s strategy for growth has considered all potential brownfield sites and previously 
developed underutilised land within the main urban area , and this has formed the Central 
Brentwood Growth Corridor. However, with 89% of the borough falling within the  
Metropolitan Green Belt of London, it has meant that the Council has had to make some 
difficult decisions about the most sustainable areas where its housing needs could be 
delivered. This has meant the Council has undergone a review of potential locations to 
determine the considered balance betwee n minimising the impact on the Green Belt and 
ensuring chosen locations are sustainable – that is the most accessible and least harmful to 
key environmental designations. The assessment concluded, as detailed in the 
Sustainability Appraisal, that the south  Brentwood locations were deemed the most suitable 
locations; this has determined the South Brentwood Growth Corridor strategy.  
9.10 Dunton Hills was selected as a strategic allocation ( ref R01) to meet the majority of 
Brentwood’s housing need, within the Plan  period and beyond. Given its proximity to the 
A127, to West Horndon railway station , and to nearby employment areas, development at 
Dunton Hills provides a unique opportunity to deliver a sustainable new settlement. Its size 
means supporting infrastructur e can also be delivered, thereby relieving the impact on 
existing facilities that are at capacity. Providing a significant amount of development will help 
reduce pressure to alter the Green Belt boundaries again in the next Plan period.  
9.11 In January 2017 , Dunton Hills was announced as one of 14 proposed garden villages across 
England receiving funding to take plans forward and  to help timely delivery of the 
development.  The site at Dunton Hills offers a unique opportunity to deliver a new settlement 
that meets both  Garden Communi ty principles  as well as Brentwood’s growth strategy . 
9.12 The site is approximately 259.2 ha and is bounded by A128 (Tillbury Road / Brentwood 
Road) on t he west; the A127 (Southend Arterial Road) on its northern edge; the London, 
Tilbury & Southend C2C Railway on its southern edge; and the borough boundary on its 
eastern edge. The B148 (West Mayne) is the eastern road beyond the borough boundary 
separating  the site from the built -up area of Basildon.  
9.13 Its location is ideally placed to align with the principles of Garden Communities . It is 
connected enough to make it a sustainable location; at the same time physically contained 
and surrounded by countryside to not only align to Brentwood’s Borough of Villages 
character, but also continue to maintain characteristics of Green Belt openness.  
A Spatial Vision for Dunton Hills  
9.14 Dunton Hills Garden Village (DHGV) will be holistically planned, self -sustaining and 
characterful . The development will  align to the principles and qualities for Garden 
Communities as set out in two key publications: the TCPA Garden Villages Guidance by the 
TPCA (2017)71 which incorporates the ‘Garden City Principles’ , and the government ’s 
 
71 TCPA (2018)  Understanding Garden Villages : An Introductory Guide   
  
193 Prospectus on ‘Garden Communities ’ (MHCLG , 2018)72. While the principles listed in these 
two publications differ slightly, their intention is the same. Garden Communities are 
‘holistically planned new settlements that enhance the natural environment and offer high -
quality affordable housing and locally ac cessible work in beautiful,  healthy and sociable 
communities ’ (TCPA, 2017). M HCLG further states that there are clear expectations to 
ensure these new developments achieve and maintain the necessary quality so that they 
become ‘vibrant, mixed -use, communities where people can live, work and play for 
generations to come – communities which view themselves as the conservation areas of the 
future ’.  
9.15 The Garden Communit y principles should be seen  as an indivisible and interlocking 
framework for delivery . These principles can be organised into those which define the 
expected qualities of the development; those which r elate to the delivery process; and those 
necessary to ensure sustainable management of the garden village into the future. This 
division broadly aligns to the three overarching strategic objectives for Dunton Hills Garden 
Village.  
9.16 Dunton Hills should form a place where people will want to live, where they feel healthy and 
happy and  which  provide s opportunities to prosper and flourish. Dunton Hills must not be the 
type of dormitory ‘non -place’ that has  so often  become the norm for such developments in 
the re cent past.  
9.17 The policy framework is set out  in two parts interrelated polic ies: 
i. The Strategic Allocation  – describing the overarching site requirements and land use 
parameters;  
ii. Masterplanning, Delivery and Legacy – prescribing the physical components needed  
to deliver the necessary quality for a healthy, liveable and sustainable village , setting out 
the expectations for how the delivery of the scheme should be achieved to embed an 
ethos of co -design and participation, timely and good governance in delivery , and an 
embedded legacy management of the village assets.  
9.18 The Council  requires development proposals to demonstrate how they will deliver the 
ambitions set out in the vision statement and  the strategic objectives.   
DHGV Strategic Aims and Objectiv es 
9.19 The vision for Dunton Hills is summarised as three overarching aims, each supported by a 
number of sub -objectives that together provide the link between the vision and the 
development strategy  (illustrated in Figure 9.1). These form the fundamental deve lopment 
principles to help shape and inform  the development of a masterplan, and in turn , guide 
decision -making : 
9.20 Strategic Aim DH01: To create a distinctive and well -designed garden village  at Dunton 
Hills that responds to its spatial context and incorpora tes all the necessary components to 
achieve a healthy, liveable and self -sustaining  new community . Seven sub -objectives 
 
72 MHCLG (2018). Garden Communities Prospectus  
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
194 encapsulate the key spatial interrelated opportunities that should be  embedd ed into the 
masterplanning, design , and delivery of the garden village.  
i. DH01a: DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER & HARMONIC DESIGN . Development that 
delivers homes and neighbourhoods that have their own unique character, with 
architectural design and materials that are durable and human -scale in nature; 
where elements are spatially organised to create safe, positive experiences and 
interactions.  
ii. DH01b: LANDSCAPE -LED. Development that takes a natural landscape -led 
approach to urban design, to deliver a healthy, walkable and climatically adapted 
public realm  and multi -functional green and blue infrastructure , amongst the 
backdrop views of the Essex countryside.  
iii. DH01c: EMBE DDING HERIT AGE ASSETS . Development that takes every 
opportunity to embed the natural and built heritage assets of the site.  
iv. DH01d: SOCIAL PLACE . Development that creates active, vibrant village 
centre (s) with the necess ary community infrastructure, all connected and 
interspersed by nodes of social -cultural activity and recreational opportunities  
throughout the village  that foster social well -being and healthy communities.  
v. DH01e: SMART INFRASTRUCTURE . Development that del ivers smart, 
sustainable and resilient infrastructure to future -proof investment  and help 
manage resources (i.e. water, energy, waste) efficiently and sustainably . 
vi. DH01f: SUSTAINABLE TRAVEL . Development that encourages integrated  and 
sustainable travel sol utions across all modes of transport, including: mitigat ion of  
any road  infrastructure impacts ; delivery of a  well-networked, safe streetscape 
environment that encourages  by default , active modes of travel (walking and 
cycling) f or short distances and everyday conveniences ; smart infrastructure for 
clean vehicular travel options, across both private and shared/passenger 
transport modes.  
vii. DH01g: HOMES THAT PROVIDE DESIRABLE DESIGN, CHOICE AND ARE 
AFFORDABLE . Development that deliver s homes  that people wi ll be proud to live 
in, that are universal, adaptable and sustainable in design using quality , durable 
materials ; and homes which  are affordable and provide a range of choice s in 
terms of size and tenure , to encourage a mixed and balanced community to 
establish and flourish.  
9.21 Strategic Aim DH0 2: To create a place that promotes enterprise, innovation and learning as 
part of the delivery process, but also as an embedded culture for the future village.  
i. DH02a: HEALTHY & PRODUCTIVE WORKPLACES . Development that d elivers 
a variety of workplaces, including incubator/affordable spaces designed to be 
places conducive to health and productivity and flexible enough to respond to 
economic drivers and emergence of new sectors of employment and changing 
work patterns.   
195 ii. DH02b : ALL THROUGH LEARNING . Development that d eliver s an exemplar all 
through school with a design that fosters a learning environment for all types of 
learners and through life, from nursery through to adult learning opportunities.  
iii. DH02c: INNOVATION & ENTERPR ISE. Development that c reates a construction 
process that quick -starts a programme of innovation, learning and enterprise , and 
ensures that innovation drives the use of smart infrastructure .   
9.22 Strategic Aim DH0 3: To create a legacy of co -design, co -deliver y, and eventual , vibrant 
and cohesive community spirit and stewardship.  
i. DH03a: GOOD GOVERNANCE . Development that embeds the right governance 
structures and covenants to maintain an ongoing, proactive stewardship of 
communal and public interfacing spaces.  
ii. DH03b: PHASING PLAN . Development that implements  a rigorous development 
phasing plan to ensure the scheme  delivers the appropriate infrastructure at the 
right time  to enabl e an early sense of community and belonging to the garden 
village. 
Development Principles  
9.23 Underscoring these strategic aims are four underlying development principles that should be 
embedded into the different stages of the scheme, from design, through to construction 
methods and eventual legacy management:  
i. Design and Build with Nature . Development must take into account the site’s natural 
assets and make a positive use of the landscape’s natural systems to ensure the long -
term health, resilience and sustainability of the new settlement . Green Belt, landscape 
capacity a nd the environmental impacts  will be avoided and/or mitigated to  allow the 
development to blend naturally into its surroundings. This approach should not be 
limited to just green infrastructure considerations, but also reflected in the thinking 
around natu re-based solutions (such as for sustainable drainage), choice of building 
materials and design details (aesthetics and building function). The development 
approach should consider the learning and knowledge of ecosystem services, natural 
capital and benefi ts of GBI.  
ii. Smart and Sustainable . Development must achieve resilient and high performing 
infrastructure to ensure resource efficiencies and sustainable use. Design and 
construction choices must be forward looking, demonstrating how the development will 
be durable, long -lasting, optimised, self -sufficient and smart to support economic 
growth, productivity and well -being  for a thriving community to establish . Modern 
infrastructure should consider the latest knowledge and innovation of emerging 
technologies.  
iii. Adaptable . Development should be flexible to accommodate the likely progression over 
a 20-year build -out period. Design choices should be robust, resilient and adaptable , 
and take into account the latest knowledge and technology advancements in relation  to Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
196 changing working patterns , personal preferences  and life circumstances , economics and 
climate change.  
iv. Healthy . Development must strive towards creating an environment that is conducive to 
human health so that it encourages healthy behaviours and active li ving, as well as 
ensures it is delivering a liveable settlement that addresses the wider determinants of 
health. The principles of health are imperative and cross -cutting and should form the 
basis against which proposals are continuously evaluated and moni tored.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.1: Strategic Aims and Objectives for Dunton Hills Garden Village  DesignStrategic Aim 
DH01To create a distinctive and well -
designed garden village at Dunton 
Hills that responds to its spatial 
context and incorporates all the 
necessary components to achieve a 
healthy, liveable and self -sustaining 
new community. Seven sub -
objectives encapsulate the key 
spatial interrelated opportunities that 
should be embedded into the 
masterplanning, design, and delivery 
of the garden village.DH01a: Distinctive Character & Harmonic Design
DH01b: Landscape -Led
DH01c: Embedding Heritage Assets
DH01d: Social Place
DH01e: Smart Infrastructure
DH01f: Sustainable Travel
DH01g: Homes That Provide Desirable Design, 
Choice and Are AffordableFunctionStrategic Aim 
DH02To create a place that promotes 
enterprise, innovation and learning 
as part of the delivery process, but 
also as an embedded culture for the 
future village.DH02a: Healthy & Productive Workplaces
DH02b: All Through Learning
DH02c: Innovation & Enterprise ManagementStrategic Aim 
DH03To create a legacy of co -design, co -
delivery, and eventual, vibrant and 
cohesive community spirit and 
stewardship.DH03a: Good Governance
DH02b: Phasing Plan 
197 DHGV Polic ies 
POLICY R01 (I): DUNTON HILLS GARDEN V ILLAGE STRATEGIC ALLOCATION  
1. In line with Policy MG01 , land at Dunton Hills (east of the A128, south of the 
A127 and north of the C2C railway line , approximately 259.2 ha  in size ) is 
allocated for residential -led mixed -use development to deliver Dunton Hills 
Garden Village.  
2. The development  will deliver a mix of uses to comprise around  1,650 homes in 
the plan period  (as part of an overall indicative capacity of around  4,000 
homes , the remainder  to be delivered beyond 2033 ) together with necessary 
community, retail and employment  development and comprehensive 
infrastructure  to support a self -sustaining, thriving and healthy  garden village . 
3. The development proposals shall accord with all other relevant policies in this 
Plan (including the master planning and delivery requirements of R01(ii)).  
Housing Mix  
4. Development proposals shall deliver an appropriate variety of housing types 
and tenure s in accordance with the Borough’s identified needs and the specific 
needs of Dunton Hills Garden Village. They shall includ e the provision of : 
a. self-build and custom buil d plots in accordance with Policy HP01;  
b. specialist accommodation  including three care homes of around 80 beds 
each, or an appropriate mix of specialist accommodation to meet identified 
needs,  in accordance with Policy HP04;  
c. affordable  housing  in accordan ce with Policy HP05 ; and  
d. a minimum of 5 serviced Gypsy and Traveller pitches , the location of the 
pitches and the timing of their provision to be identified in the masterplan . 
Employment Development  
5. Development proposals shall deliver around 5.5 hectares of employment 
development distributed across the village that may include office, light 
industrial and research and development uses coming within use class E and 
other employment development that is complementary to, and compatible with, 
the resi dential development.  
Main Town Centre Uses  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
198 6. Development proposals shall deliver main town centre uses in the form of a 
district shopping centre and such additional local centres (in accordance with 
Policy PC04) as may be appropriate in order to optimise the  self-sufficiency of 
the village. These centres shall also include the community and health facilities 
and related infrastructure necessary to support the village’s residential and 
working community.  
Schools and Nurseries  
7. Development proposals shall make p rovision for:  
a. a site for one secondary school (Class F1) (around 7.9 hectares) with 
capacity to co -locate one primary school and one early years and 
childcare nursery facility;    
b. sites for an additional two primary schools with sufficient capacity to co -
locate early yea rs and childcare nursery facilities (around 2.1 hectares 
each);   
c. a site for a further primary school with capacity to co -locate early years 
and childcare nursery facilities (around 2.1 hectares) in the eventuality 
primary education provision is not co -located with the secondary school; 
and 
d. an additional  stand -alone early years and childcare nurseries (around 0.13 
hectares) ;  
Green and Blue Infrastructure  
8. Not less than 50% of the total allocated area shall comprise green and blue 
infrastructure which should,  so far as possible, be of a multi -functional nature . 
Mobility Hub  
9. Development proposals shall make provision for a mobility  hub that should 
relate well to the district centre .  
POLICY R01 (II): SPATIAL DESIGN OF DUNTON HILLS GARDEN VILLAGE  
Master Planning, Design and Layout  
1. All development proposals in relation to the site shall be in accordance with an 
approved masterplan. The masterplan shall relate to the whole of the  
199 allocated site and be produced in consultation with local communities and all 
relevant stakeholders and shall include a statement that sets out how 
community and stakeholder involvement has influenced the design and layout 
of the submitted scheme and its intended delivery. The masterplan shall be 
submitted to the Council for its app roval as part of the initial application for 
planning permission.  
2. The Masterplan shall:  
a. be locally led with the community and relevant stakeholders, in 
accordance with the Statement of Community Involvement;  
b. show the intended overall design and layout of t he development and the 
proposed distribution and location of uses across the allocated site which 
shall accord with, be based upon and promote, garden community 
principles;  
c. demonstrate how heritage assets and their settings will be sympathetically 
and appr opriately integrated into the development taking into account the 
requirements of para.3 (j) and (k) below;  
d. identify the proposed transport links, including access to the site and main 
internal highway links, and principal walking, cycling and bridle links  
(including links to the surrounding network);  
e. show all structural landscaping and the treatments to be provided 
(including boundary treatments and measures to ensure visual separation 
from Basildon);  
f. incorporate a green and blue infrastructure (GBI) plan which is informed 
by a comprehensive wildlife and habitat survey and heritage and 
landscape character assessments;  
g. show all intended links to the surrounding footpath and cycleway network 
and indicate potential footpath and cycleway links towards Basildon from 
the east of the allocated site;  
h. show how development will safeguard, maintain and, where possible, 
enhance key views in and across the allocated site;  
i. provide for convenient pedestrian and cycle links through the allocated 
site towards West Horndon Station;  
j. show how the development will incorporate the full range of sustainable 
transport measures, including dedicated bus services and the location and 
nature of a mobility hub;  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
200 k. identify the locations and forms of the district and local centres, including 
the community and healthcare facilities to be provided within them; and  
l. include a phasing and implementation plan which should secure the 
phasing of deve lopment across the whole of the allocated site to ensure 
that the development will be carried out in a manner that co -ordinates the 
implementation and timely delivery of such on and off -site infrastructure 
as shall be necessary to support each phase of the  development and to 
ensure that:  
i. its impacts are satisfactorily and appropriately mitigated;  
ii. there are adequate supporting facilities (including access to adequate 
green and blue infrastructure, leisure and sporting facilities, shops, 
health, community an d educational facilities) that will allow the early 
establishment of a self -sufficient and cohesive community; and  
iii. occupiers have an appropriate range of sustainable travel options at 
their disposal, including access to bus services and the cycle and 
pedes trian link to West Horndon Station.  
3. Development proposals should:  
a. ensure that detailed design and layout take into account the guidance 
contained in an adopted Garden Village Design Supplementary Planning 
Document;  
b. ensure that the distinct spatial, landsc ape and heritage qualities of the site 
and its surroundings are maintained or enhanced;  
c. ensure that the design of neighbourhoods is such that they are 
harmoniously integrated to form an overall Dunton Hills Garden Village 
identity and distinctiveness;  
d. combine to provide an appropriate range of densities across the site to 
ensure a compact and highly networked, walkable and fine -grained 
environment with a highly connected street -based layout that encourages 
walking and cycling;  
e. provide, or relate appropriat ely to, well -located multi -functional green 
infrastructure to promote safe, and attractive environments for leisure, 
informal and adventure play areas, recreational and sporting activity with 
appropriate levels of surveillance;  
f. promote coherent signposted internal footpath and cycleway routes that 
provide, where appropriate, links to the surrounding network with 
sympathetic transitions between the rural and urban environment;   
201 g. provide or contribute to a highly connected and biodiverse ecological 
network that  incorporates existing habitats of value and natural features 
and, wherever possible and appropriate, the enhancement of existing, or 
the creation of new, habitats; and  
h. provide an appropriate level of formal sports pitches and facilities to meet 
the evolv ing needs of the community;  
i. ensure the public right of way (PRoW)  network  is retained, maintained 
and enhanced;  
j. take into account the findings of the Council’s Heritage Impact 
Assessment for Dunton Hills Garden Village and the applicant’s own 
heritage imp act assessment and demonstrate what measures have been 
taken to sustain the significance of any affected designated and non -
designated heritage asset and its setting, whether on or off -site and, 
wherever possible and appropriate, include other measures to provide 
enhancements to their settings; and  
k. take into account the results of a programme of archaeological evaluation 
based upon a geophysical survey of the development area.  
Delivery  and Legacy  
4. The development shall be delivered in accordance with the phasing and 
implementation plan . 
5. A mobility hub shall be delivered prior to the first occupation of the 
development with provision for its enhancement and expansion during later 
phases to be secured through a planning obligation.  
6. Where directly related to Dunton Hills Garden Village applicants will be 
required to make necessary, appropriate and reasonable financial 
contributions via planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be necessary and 
reasonably required by Nati onal Highways and Essex County Council in 
accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will 
determine the level and timing of payments for these purposes) unless, in 
the case of the A127/128 junction, the applicant enters into a s.278 
Agreement for its timely construction, if more appropriate;  
b. necessary bus services to nearby school facilities prior to the delivery of 
on-site school facilities which services shall be secured before first 
residential occupation of the development;  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
202 c. phased i mprovements to West Horndon Station in accordance with policy 
BE08 to increase its capacity and utility in line with anticipated demand 
generated by each phase  of the development;  
d. off-setting improvements to the Hartswood Golf Course.  
7. Appropriate restricti ons on the occupation of the development will be imposed 
subject to the carrying out and completion of necessary highway works to 
secure safe and convenient access to the site, including any necessary 
improvements to the A128 corridor.  
8. Proposals shall incl ude a supporting statement which addresses the long -term 
governance and stewardship arrangements (including the management, 
maintenance and renewal) of the green and blue infrastructure, the public 
realm, community and other relevant public facilities. Pla nning obligations will 
be sought to secure the long term funding, maintenance and stewardship of 
the assets where necessary.  
9. Proposals shall include a supporting statement that includes initiatives to 
ensure that new jobs created are offered to local peopl e, as far as may be 
reasonably possible.  
 
9.24 The Council will adopt the Dunton Hills Garden Village Design Supplementary Planning 
Document to give guidance to subsequent applications. The sections that follow elaborate 
on the spatial vision and policy requirements  which should be incorporated into th e 
masterplan and any subsequent applications . This vision for Dunton Hills Garden Village 
was defined following two Design Review workshops with Design Council CABE  in 2016 , as 
well as a broad analysis of site constraints and opportunities.  
Distinctive Character & Harmonic Design  
DISTINCTIVENESS  
9.25 Strategic Objective DH01 (distinctive character & harmonic design) aligns to Garden 
Communit y principles which highlight qualities such as ‘clear local identity’, ‘well designed’, 
‘beautiful and imaginatively des igned homes with gardens’ , ‘clear identity’ . Dunton Hills 
Garden Village should achieve a distinctive recognisable character by respecting the 
traditions of village life while ensuring 21st century conveniences, technologies and design. 
To achieve this aim  requires a thorough understanding of the spatial context (landscape, 
heritage, habitat, constraints). The site’s masterplan should creatively respond to the site’s 
context. Achieving distinctiveness should be inspired by the historic evolution of Dunton 
Hills: the landscape character , heritage assets and cultural heritage references, such as 
local names, features, and their significance, in line with Strategic Objective DH01c 
(embedding heritage assets).   
203 9.26 Design must also be informed by local aspirations, b y inviting active participation of local 
community and stakeholders, as part of a coordinated and informed approach to 
masterplanning.  
9.27 Historic garden villages placed a huge emphasis on the use of high -quality, craftsmanship 
and often local materials. This  has resulted in homes and communities that have remained 
desirable and unique to their geographic context. How a place looks and feels tends to be 
the focus of objections to new communities establishing and therefore , it is important to get 
this right. Du nton Hills should  become a community which sees itself as a ‘conservation area 
of the future’, not a dormitory ‘non -place’ that has become the norm for such developments 
in the recent past.  
9.28 The development should incorporate the p rinciples of design harmon y (balance, symmetry, 
scale, proportions, etc .). Approaches such as  ‘building with nature’ and ‘healthy -by-design’ 
should also be the starting point and embedded in the process of design to achieve a 
healthy, liveable, resilient and a self -sustaining new s ettlement. TCPA guidance on Garden 
Communities provides extensive learning points to guide the future creation of garden 
communities.  
9.29 The design of the garden village  must also consider how the place will feel to walk through 
at night as well, given the pr obable openness of its surroundings; night -time lighting will 
need to be designed in a way that provides the necessary levels of illumination, but not be 
detrimental to nocturnal wildlife.  
DENSITY  
9.30 The layout of the development should achieve a fine -graine d, permeable and connected 
environment that makes the best, most efficient use of land. A new compact village 
vernacular should be defined that respects and maintains its feel as a village, but without the 
predominance of sprawling detached properties that  do not make the best sustainable use of 
land and can often leave a place feeling exposed , incoherent , and car dominant . 
Development proposals should consider a density hierarchy that increase s to medium 
density  towards the local village centres and around  public open spaces, to achieve a sense 
of enclosure and safety and natural surveillance overlooking exposed sites.  
Homes  
9.31 Strategic Objective DH01g (homes that provide desirable design, choice and are affordable) 
seeks to achieve homes people will be proud  to live in, that are universal, adaptable and 
sustainable in design using quality durable materials and that are affordable and provide a 
range of choice in terms of size and tenure.  This responds to the Garden Communit y 
principles which state the need to  provide ‘mixed -tenure homes’ , ‘housing types that are 
genuinely affordable’ , ‘great homes offering a range of high -quality distinctive homes’ . 
9.32 Delivering great, affordable homes will be key to making the village distinctive  and desirable . 
At least 1,650  homes are planned within the Plan period, with an indicative capacity of 
around 4,000 (with the remainder to be delivered after 2033 , subject to further feasibility and 
assessment of impact ). Homes, like the public realm, should be well de signed and provide a Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
204 range of choice (dwelling sizes, tenure) to encourage a balanced community from all stages 
of life to form.  
9.33 While houses should be designed to be distinctive, they must not be ‘over designed’, 
meaning that the traditional and much -loved elements of a house get distorted or become 
non-functional. At the same time development should avoid making Dunton Hills feel like 
dormitory non -place of sprawling, detached, cookie -cut houses that do not evoke any 
character or sense of pride, where tra ditional elements may have been included, but in a 
manner where the craftsmanship has neglected the detail to the extent that has rendered 
them undesirable, cheap -looking, slapdash and so often criticised of being ‘pastiche’ (but 
mean more likely a parody whereby the imitation falls short of the real thing).  
9.34 The timely delivery of new homes will also be key to the early establishment and success of 
the new village. Proposals should demonstrate innovative ways to accelerate the delivery 
without compromising  the quality, durability, longevity and overall sustainability of the built 
fabric.  
9.35 A substantial fraction of the housing delivered on site should be genuinely affordable, and 
development proposals should think creatively about solutions to make this happ en, learning 
from national and international case studies.  
9.36 In accordance  with the Golf Course Needs Assessment and the Golf Feasibility Assessment, 
the loss of entry level golf at Dunton Hills Garden Village should be mitigated by an 
appropriate financial contribution being secured through a planning obligation that would be 
used towards enhancements to the Borough Council’s Hartwood Golf Course.  
Landscape -Led 
URBAN LAYOUT / PUBLIC REALM  
9.37 Strategic Objective DH01b (landscape -led) responds to the Garden Commu nity principles 
that promote  ‘generous, accessible green space’ , ‘development that enhances the natural 
environment’, ‘comprehensive green infrastructure network’ and ‘deliver environmental gains 
and enhancements to natural capital. At Dunton Hills this wi ll be achieved through a 
landscape -led development with generous amount of green infrastructure for multi -functional 
uses. The  landscape setting of Dunton Hills provides a unique backdrop to ensure green 
infrastructure (as well as the harmonious horizon vi ews afforded by the topography of the 
site) is the starting point for the design response.  
9.38 A design and build with nature approach delivers multiple benefits  taking advantage of the 
wider ecosystem services and natural capital afforded by green infrastruc ture to achieve 
sustainable development : a). climate resilient infrastructure to counteract the impact of 
climate change  and help achieve resource efficiency ; b). multi -functional g reen spaces that 
are highly  connected,  accessible  and incorporate universal design measures  that encourage 
healthy recreation such as walking, cycling and horse riding , as well as  other outdoor leisure 
and learning pursuits ; c). a healthy public realm that creates a harmonious living 
environment.  The gre en infrastructure proposals should deliver varied recreational 
experiences to appeal to a varied range of users with different interests and age -related 
preferences .  
205 9.39 The public realm should focus on the importance of the street scene through attractive 
buildings, public art, street furniture, the use of materials, strong landscaping providing wide 
pavements and grass/planted verges, tree -lined avenues and where appropriate, 
incorporation of rain gardens and food production opportunities.  
9.40 A highly connected  network of streets should be designed, using existing field boundaries as 
a reference point to form an accessible, connected and fine -grained urban layout with 
neighbourhoods that are legible and easy to navigate, with a wide range of interlinked uses 
and generous green spaces, ensuring street blocks are contiguous and permeable to 
encourage walking and social interaction.  
9.41 The significance of the landscape features and key views such as London skyline and 
Langdon Hills and other s identified  must be retaine d and enhanced as part of the 
development. Grassy meridians down the middle of streets should be used as a traffic 
calming tactic, especially on the larger roads which spur off the main A roads, to create lane 
separation for different transport modes.  
BIODIVERSITY NET  GAIN AND ECOLOGICAL CONNECTIVITY  
9.42 The existing significant green infrastructure features such as the woodland, fenland and 
ponds should be retained and/or enhanced and connected to achieve a contiguous green 
corridor throughout the garden village, achieving biodiversity net -gain across the site.  
9.43 As well as establishing an integrated ecological network within the site, the development 
should demonstrate its ecological connectivity to the wider  ‘living landscape’ habitats and 
local wildlife dest inations beyond the development boundary, for example Eastlands Spring, 
Thorndon Country Park to Langdon Hills Country Park. The site’s existing habitats - such as 
the lakes and ponds - should inspire the basis for the design of parks and village greens as  
key destinations and nodes of social -cultural activity within the village, in line with DH01d 
(social place). Connecting these natural heritage assets gives structure to the site and 
naturally divides it into potentially varying character areas for develo pment.  
9.44 Proposals will need to retain and weave through priority habitats such as significant areas of 
existing woodland habitat ; and where relevant , reinstate degraded fenland and demonstrate 
the measures taken to protect mature trees ; and where appropriat e, enhance hedgerows, 
ponds and other environmental features of note, which contribute to the character and 
biodiversity. The river course and ponds should be retained to minimise impact on the 
wildlife they support as well as contributing to sustainable d rainage across the site.  
9.45 The creative interweaving of productive landscapes within the GBI network will be favourably 
considered. The agricultural heritage of the site also provides a distinctive cultural context to 
inspire green infrastructure with a foc us on food production and foraging as alternatives to 
grassed verges; while grass verges are well -loved in garden communities, alternatives or 
additional elements, such as sensory street verges through the use of, for example, culinary 
herbs or linear orch ards could also add another dimension to the much -loved and expected 
tree-lined and green verge -lined residential avenues. Allotments and open space should be 
provided in accordance with Policy NE05 and NE06 .  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
206 Embedding Heritage Assets  
DESIGNATED & NON -DESIGNATED HERITAGE ASSETS  
9.46 The site contains  and is surrounded by the following listed buildings, designated heritage 
assets and non -designated heritage assets as set out in the Heritage Impact Assessment:  
• Dunton Hills (Grade II listed building) on -site;  
• Dunton Hall (Grade II listed building) off-site;  
• Church of St Mary (Grade II listed building) off -site;  
• Church of All Saints (Grade II* listed building) off -site; 
• Nightingale Hall (non -designated) on -site; 
• Nightingales Lane (non -designated) on -site; 
• Windmill – site of (non -designated) on -site; 
• Cottages at entrance to golf course (non -designated) on -site.   
Development proposals will be considered by reference to the  requirements of Policy BE16 
and the specific requirements of R01(ii).  
9.47 Strategic Objective DH01c (embedding heritage assets) aims to ensure the surviving historic 
features, notably the listed buildings, the wider farmstead barns and buildings, moated sites , 
field boundaries, historic woodland and parish boundaries which preserve elements of a 
probable medieval or earlier landscape as well as later settlement patterns will be preserved 
and enhanced.  Successful places tend to also have a strong heritage ident ity. Heritage can 
provide a powerful connection between people and place. For this reason, heritage should 
be harnessed in a manner that will drive Dunton Hill’s distinctiveness, health and well -being 
and place attachment. Garden Communities Prospectus pla ces an emphasis on ensuring 
these ‘communities… view themselves as the conservation areas of the future’. The 
prospectus also emphasises that development ‘should include consideration for how the 
natural and historic environment of the local area is reflec ted and respected’ to build a 
‘strong local vision’.  
9.48 The farmstead shows that the farmhouse was the heart of the settlement, and that the 
existing large threshing barns to north and south of the main house were each part of larger 
courtyards and groupings  of farm buildings. It was clearly a substantial farmstead throughout 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and the impressive scale and construction of the 
original threshing barns indicates that this was a wealthy and substantial farmstead for at 
least 100 years earlier. The surviving buildings within the landscape represent the typical 
medieval settlement pattern for this area and most are designated Grade II listed buildings.  
9.49 The natural heritage of the landscape (including views) should be intercon nected with the 
heritage of the listed buildings as well as other non -designated heritage assets of interest. 
The layout, orientation and morphology of the residential streets must be designed to 
enhance and highlight the key views (e.g. street axes toward s the views, instead of buildings  
207 turning their backs onto them). As a minimum , the proposals should retain and incorporate 
this historic fabric.  
9.50 Cultural references from the past, such as field patterns, field names and building names 
should inform the ch aracter and place -making aspects of the village. For example, heritage 
names such as Dunton Ridge, East Horndon Hall, as well as current hill names, given to the 
site by the golf players, should all inspire how the design of the village develops and how it  
could inform future street naming , neighbourhood naming , landmark naming.  
9.51 While a preliminary desktop heritage assessment has highlighted these key heritage assets, 
proposals should be informed by a comprehensive Heritage Statement and Landscape 
Character  Study, which should assess both the designated and non -designated heritage 
assets of the site.  
9.52 Should any artefacts be found on site during construction, these should be recorded and 
safeguarded, with projects put in place to find a legacy home, includin g considerations as to 
how they can be incorporated as relics and public art in the village centre.  
Sustainable & Clean Travel  
ACTIVE TRAVEL  
9.53 Strategic Objective DH01f (sustainable travel) seeks to ensure the development mitigates 
any road impacts resultin g from the proposals and ensures development delivers 
sustainable travel options. The transport sector is innovating fast ; and provision should, as 
far as appropriate , be planned to future proof transport needs. This objective responds to 
Garden Communit y principles which highlights the need for ‘integrated, forward looking and 
accessible transport options’ which facilitate access to jobs, education and services, where 
‘walking, cycling and public transport [is] designed to be the most attractive forms of l ocal 
transport’. A Travel Plan should accompany an application to set out how sustainable travel 
will be achieved.  
9.54 Starting from a blank canvas provides an opportunity to make streets like they do in many 
European cities, where cycling is the norm, rather  than the exception. Principles of active 
design must guide the evolution of the village layout, street hierarchy and connectivity.  
9.55 Planning for active travel must also consider the topography of the site, which will make this 
type of travel challenging f or some . Innovative public transport schemes such as electric 
bikes should therefore be a considered option, providing appropriate locations for picking -up 
and dropping -off bikes.  
9.56 Masterplan proposals will need to demonstrate how they are adhering to the c reation of 
‘walkable neighbourhood’s through the design of a highly networked street hierarchy, 
providing safe, segregated lanes for different modes of travel such as cycling and walking 
that are equitable to all users, minimising conflict of different mod es and user abilities , 
thereby encouraging more to cycle and feel safe on the streets . These should integrate with 
‘quiet way’ off -street options through green routes where possible.  
9.57 The moto r vehicle should be subordinate in importance on the street netwo rk within the 
village. Equally, while a car -limited development should be the main driver, the development Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
208 should also make owning or using clean vehicle options possible, taking advantage of the 
latest and emerging technologies.  
9.58 The necessary electric ve hicle charging infrastructure should also be designed and delivered 
appropriately, adhering to principles of universal design and clutter free public realm. Vehicle 
sharing clubs should be encouraged to establish. These less polluting vehicle options shoul d 
be coupled by planning for clean air zones/car free, especially around the schools.  
9.59 Design should consider how to influence safe and active travel mode behaviours through 
design , i.e. streets narrow and ‘village’ in feel , dense network of streets, paths and parks 
ensures that it is faster and more enjoyable to walk and bike than to drive , less land to 
streets.  
9.60 Cul-de-sacs should be an exception; street width  is important to allow cycli ng and not allow 
the car to dominate, making them pedestrian friendly with opportunities for home zones to 
establish.  
Social Place  
VILLAGE CENTRE  
9.61 Strategic Objective DH01d (social place) seeks to ensure the development creates active, 
vibrant village centres with the necessary community infrastructure, all connected and 
interspersed by nodes of social -cultural activity and recreational opportunities  throughout the 
green infrastructure to foster social wellbeing and healthy communities. This aligns to the 
Garden Communit y principles which state that development should deliver ‘strong cultural, 
recreational and shopping facilities’  and where the ‘scale … supports the necessary 
infrastructure to allow the community to function self -sufficiently on a day -to-day basis’ . 
Additionally, it states that Garden Communities should be ‘healthy places’, ‘designed to 
provide the choices and changes for all to live a healthy life’.  
9.62 The long -term success of any place is fundamentally rooted in the community that 
establishes; and this invariably depends on designing places that are social, that incorporate 
spaces where opportunities for recreation, social interaction an d where individual and 
collective wellbeing pursuits can ensue. For Dunton Hills, the historic fabric of the farmstead 
already provides an ideal, cultural heritage backdrop for the primary village centre to 
establish itself with a village green and a mix o f civic and commercial spaces to create a 
vibrant village core.  
9.63 Knitting together the residential streets with the village centre(s) will be the green 
infrastructure, which will be interspersed with nodes of recreation/leisure activity and more 
local vill age hubs, making the whole village feel connected and walkable in line with DH01b 
(landscape -led). 
9.64 The village centre should be on the District Shopping  Centre  level in the retail hierarchy , 
comparable with Ingatestone village centre , to create a central h ub for new residents to 
come together and to provide day -to-day facilities including a supermarket, retail, healthcare, 
leisure and community amenities. The a mount of retail is to be confirmed through the 
masterplan process .  
209 SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE  
9.65 The timel y delivery of education, health and community facilities early in the development 
will also be key to enabling the success of the village in its early years. Community spaces 
should be flexible to adapt to the needs and cultural preferences of the communit y which 
settles.  
9.66 Opportunities to co -design these spaces with the surrounding communities and/or with early 
settlers should be harnessed.  
9.67 A health facility will need to be part of the community infrastructure, and this should be 
carefully planned to ensur e the integration encourages better , healthier behaviours. The 
facility should focus on wellbeing and prevention , and be an exemplar example of integrating 
diagnosis, treatment and proactive wellbeing onsite, set in a backdrop of nature, where 
prescribing healthy activity can be achieved  by the integration of services. Integrating the 
health facility in proximity to recreation and community facilities wi ll actively encourage 
‘sustainable healthcare’, embedding a design that encourages healthy living, eating, and 
activit ies and opportuniti es for social prescribing.  
9.68 Design principles for community and health facilities should incorporate : 
i. the principles set out by the Centre for Sustainable Health Care including: prevention , 
patient empowerment and self -care, lean systems , low carbon alterna tives;  
ii. principals of biophilic design which connect people with nature and use design elements 
which incorporate natural analogues (such as natural textures, patterns, colours and 
images) to create positive perceptual environments.  
Smart Infrastructure  
9.69 Strategic Objective DH01e (smart infrastructure) seeks to ensure development delivers 
smart, sustainable and resilient infrastructure to future -proof investment. This objective 
aligns to the Garden Communit y principles which calls for ‘future proofed’ places , designed 
to be resilient to allow for changing demographics, future growth and the impacts of climate 
change; as well as development that ‘uses zero -carbon and energy -positive technology to 
ensure climate resilience’. This is fundamental to a development  site that will take over two 
decades to complete.  
9.70 It is important that the infrastructure is creatively designed to take account of the anticipated 
opportunities presented by technological advances  (such as driverless cars and renewable 
energy measures) , therefore , ensuring some flexibility to adapt to future progression. 
Sustainable development can only be achieved through the use of cleaner, smarter, more 
energy efficient service infrastructure that save on running costs in the longer -term. Smart 
infras tructure should look at the best possible solutions to minimise resource waste and 
costs , and maximise efficiencies, value for money and digital convenience.   
9.71 Digital infrastructure will be fundamental , especially to account for the changing working 
patter ns and needs for home working.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
210 9.72 Future proofing investment can be achieved by taking advantage of land value capture 
which is made possible by green field development at these early stages  – a key Garden 
Communities principle . It is important to recognise t he fundamental role that GBI can play in 
delivering climate resilient smart infrastructure to help achieve resource efficiencies in water 
management, energy consumption as well as mitigation of air pollution.  
9.73 Opportunities to embed anticipated technologica l advances must be secured early in the 
design and build of the scheme. There are many examples of how smart infrastructure is 
being rolled out throughout the world; these should be taken into account in a scheme like 
this which will be 20 years into the f uture; opportunities such as driverless public transport , 
construction techniques that allow for accelerated delivery , building and construction 
materials that generate energy , smart grids that are more efficient at utilising energy , 
ambitious standards fo r environmental sustainability of housing , and undergrounding of 
refuse bins , etc.  should all be considerations in the planning and design of the scheme, 
subject to further masterplanning work.  
Enterprise, Innovation and Learning  
9.74 Strategic Objective DH02b (all through learning) will deliver exemplar education facilities that 
meet the needs of  all types of learners through life, from nursery to adult learning 
opportunities.   
9.75 Garden Communit y principles emphasise the need to integrate ‘a wide range of jobs w ithin 
easy commu ting distances of homes’. The success of enterprise depends on designing and 
building work places and learning spaces that are healthy -by-design , to inspire and promote 
creativity and productivity.  
9.76 Strategic Objective DH02c (innovation & l earning) aims to ensure the construction process 
quick -starts a programme of innovation, learning and enterprise; and Strategic Objective 
DH02a (healthy & productive work places) seeks to ensure the delivery of a variety of 
workplaces to ensure a self -sustaining garden village with good job opportunities.  
9.77 Dunton Hills is being developed amongst a backdrop of wider economic growth 
opportunities, including the Enterprise Park and East Horndon employment site. The 
proximity of these workplaces will make Dunton Hills Village a desirable place to live, to be 
near work.  
9.78 Equally however, the village centre(s) themselves should provide opportunities for localised 
employment, to ensure a thriving local economy ensues. The spaces should be designed to 
flexibly accommodate Class E and other employment development  and community spaces  
that are complementary to, and compatible with, the residential development , thinking 
particularly about the entrepreneurial potential of the area.  
9.79 The interior design should be informed by the latest research and guidance from key 
institutional bodies like British Council of Offices (BCO) and Chartered Institute of Building 
Services Engineering (CIBSE) on how design can create productive workplaces. The 
aspiration is to also create units that are suitable for small businesses as well as a ccount for 
the current trend in flexible working modes ; superfast broadband will be integral in all 
buildings to make this a success.   
211 9.80 This aim also requires a programme of complementary actions to be embedded alongside 
the planning process, such as working with the research and innovation sectors and local 
education establishments, to ensure knowledge transfer and learning are firmly embedded 
from conception, through to construction and implementation of the scheme.  
9.81 Delivery of , firstly, primary, and  eventually , secondary education provision is key to the long -
term success of the village. Its location and how it is designed is also fundamental to the 
overall performance of the school. The school should ideally be placed away from the main 
arterial roa ds that surround the site, and should be orientated towards the village centre, so 
that it becomes part of the social fabric of the place and creates opportunities for wider after -
school recreation and learning pursuits by the wider community.  
9.82 The school should be set within a garden itself, providing opportunities for outdoor learning 
and ‘forest school’ sessions in nature. It should also provide the on -site provision of playing 
fields for sports and physical education. The interior and functional design of the school 
should be informed by various case studies which have learned from successes and failures 
of make ing a good learning environment (e.g. schools for future programmes). Designing for 
sensory comfort and stimulation are fundamental components of  interior design and 
particular attention should be placed on issues of solar gains, ventilation, air quality and 
movement through school. Implementation of accredited standards, such as the WELL 
standard will be expected.  
9.83 The project team have already begun a programme working with local schools and 
universities. This is instilling a culture of co -design, which could eventually lead to a cultural 
of co -delivery within the community. Such initiatives can help foster a sense of community 
and achievement , and drive a sense of belonging to the place.  
9.84 The construction programme should create a programme of apprenticeships to inspire future 
residents to be part of the process and should, where appropriate, incorporate elements of 
traditional skills and craftsma nship. Additional learning programmes could be implemented 
such as involving local schools and education establishments to help monitor and record any 
wildlife and changes as part of the school curriculum, establishing learning opportunities 
from the outse t.  
Community Stewardship  
9.85 Strategic Objective DH03a (governance)  aims to ensure d evelopment embeds the right 
governance structures and covenants to maintain an ongoing  and proactive stewardship of 
communal and public interfacing spaces.  This responds to th e fundamental Garden 
Communities principle of ‘community ownership of land and long -term stewardship of 
assets’.  
9.86 A suitable management body will need to be established at an appropriate time to manage 
the assets of the DHGV over the long -term. The most sui table approach should emerge 
through the design and delivery process. Consideration should be given to h ow the legacy 
assets will be handed over for on -going legacy operations and maintenance . 
9.87 To achieve this aim requires the early thinking about the hando ver and legacy requirements 
of the development. The delivery process should firmly embed principles of co -creation and Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
212 participation. Embedding these requirements early will help the self -sufficiency of the site, 
providing the longer -term environment for a  more effective resource management approach 
as well as a spirit of active citizenship, participation and stewardship of the village assets.  
9.88 Development proposals should demonstrate how ongoing management is to be achieved in 
line with the key Garden Commu nities principle on legacy and stewardship arrangements. 
Active participation in the design and delivery will foster a sense of belonging and continued 
participation in the village life and stewardship of assets. The setup of such arrangements 
are to be fu nded by the development from the outset.  
9.89 A delivery and legacy management strategy should be developed, in collaboration with 
development management, local authority departments (highways, planning, property), the 
Parish Council, utility service providers , land trusts, to find the best model to achieve the 
desired outcome, without a long -term disproportionate and unsustainable financial burden 
on any one stakeholder group.  
9.90 Equally , thinking creatively about land registry solutions, such as creating covena nts to 
achieve key stewardship elements for the  maintenance of front of house green verges, or 
treatment of front gardens , for example, should be considered . 
9.91 The Legacy Management Strategy should include the elements of logistics, project 
management, gover nance arrangements, code of construction, amongst others , to give 
assurance around the deliverability of the scheme, within a timely manner.  
Strategic Residential -Led and Mixed -Use 
Allocations  
West Horndon Industrial Estate  
POLICY R02: LAND AT WEST HORNDON INDUSTRIAL ESTATE  
Land at West Horndon Industrial Estate is allocated for residential -led mixed use  
development.  
1. Amount and Type of Development  
Development should provide:   
213 a. around 580 new homes;  
b. around 60 bed  residential care home or an appropriate mix of specialist 
accommodation to meet identified needs, in accordance with policy HP04 ;  
c. 5% self-build and  custom build across the entire allocation area ; 
d. around 2ha of land for employment purposes  which may includ e light 
industrial, offices, research and development (within class E) or other sui 
generis employment uses which are compatible with the residential 
development ; 
e. retail, commercial and leisure floorspace sufficient to meet the needs of 
the new community . 
2. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. be accompanied by a comprehensive masterplan and phasing strategy to 
inform detailed proposals as they come forward;  
b. provide vehicular a ccess via Station Road and Childerditch Lane ; 
c. create a new village c entre,  connected by sustainable links  to West 
Horndon  station, and which comprises  retail and supporting community 
facilities;  
d. provide new and e nhance d links with West Horndon station  and the wider 
area; and 
e. provide well -connected internal road layouts whi ch allow for good 
accessibility;  
f. provide new multi -functional green infrastructure, including public open 
space  in accordance with Policies NE02 and NE05 ; 
g. provide for appropriate  landscaping  and buffers  along sensitive boundary 
adjoining the railway line ; and 
h. any future development should sustain and where possible enhance the 
significance of the Scheduled former parish church and churchyard of St 
Nicholas, the Grade II* listed Registered Park and Garden of Thorndon 
Hall, and the Thorndon Park Conservation Area and their settings.  
3. Infrastructure Requirements  
a. provision of improved bus service;  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
214 b. provision of health facilities ; and  
c. as the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should 
minimise and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 
Sustainable Drainage . 
4. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions 
via planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways (M25, J28 and J29) and Essex County 
Council (A127/B186) in accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the 
planning obligation will determine the level and timing of payments for 
these purposes);  
b. necessary bus services to secondar y school facilities prior to the delivery 
of secondary school at Dunton Hills Garden Village, which services shall 
be secured before first residential occupation of the development;  
c. phased improvements to West Horndon Station in accordance with policy 
BE08  to increase its capacity and utility in line with anticipated demand 
generated by each phase of the development.  
 
9.92 This site is situated on the western side of West Horndon adjoining the railway station in the 
centre  of the village. The site will provide for around 580 homes, anticipated to be delivered 
between  2026/27 and 2032/33 . This will deliver a high quality sustainable new development 
that maximises opportunities for travel by sustainable modes. It will provide a mix of size and 
type of homes includ ing affordable, self -build and custom build, appropriately accessible and 
adaptable housing, as well as other types of specialist housing in accordance with the 
Council’s policy requirements.  
9.93 The development will take its main vehicular access from Station  Road and will be expected 
to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and strategic road 
network.  
9.94 This development is in close proximity to the existing village and well located to existing 
facilities including the train stat ion, shop, public house and village hall.  
9.95 Opportunities for sustainable transport modes should be maximised to allow for alternative 
forms of transport to the private car (walking, cycling and public transport) are prioritised.  
9.96 The development is expected to promote the highest standards of design to ensure inclusive 
and high -quality buildings and spaces.   
215 9.97 Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Scheduled former parish church and churchyard of St Nicholas, th e Grade II* listed 
Registered Park and Garden of Thorndon Hall, and  Thorndon Park Conservation Area  and 
their settings.  
9.98 The development will be required to provide appropriate landscaping and buffers to preserve 
the amenity of adjoining residential properties. Buffers will also be required along sensitive 
boundaries adjoining the railway line.  
9.99 As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be requir ed to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Land North of Shenfield, Shenfield  
POLICY R03: LAND NORTH OF SHENFIELD  
Land north of Shenfield,  known as Officer’s Meadow and surrounding land is 
allocated for residential -led mixed -use development.  
1. Amount and Type of Development  
Development should provide:  
a. around 825 new homes;  
b. around 2.1 hectares  of land  for a co-located primary school and early 
years and childcare nursery ; 
c. around 60 bed residenti al care home or an appropriate mix of specialist 
accommodation to meet identified needs, in accordance with policy HP04 ; 
d. 5% self-build and  custom build across the entire allocation area;  and 
e. around 2ha of land for  employment purposes  which may include ligh t 
industrial, offices, research and development (within class E) or other sui 
generis employment uses which are compatible with the residential 
development . 
2. Development Principles  
Development should:  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
216 a. be accompanied by a comprehensive masterplan and phasing strategy to 
inform detailed proposals as they come forward;  
b. be of a design quality and layout that reflect s its key gateway location, 
particularly on land near to Junction 12, A12;  
c. provide vehicular a ccess via Chelmsford Road (A1023) and Alexander 
Lane;  
d. allow if possible for the diversion of Alexander Lane  to creat e a quiet lane 
for pedestrians and cyclists, with the provision for new and improved route 
through the development site linking to Chelmsfor d Road;  
e. enhance walking, cycling and public transport services with Shenfield 
station  and local services and facilities in the wider area , including 
Brentwood Town Centre ; 
f. provide well -connected internal road layouts which allow for good 
accessibility;  
g. provide new multi -functional  green infrastructure including public open 
space  in accordance with Policies NE02 and NE05 ; 
h. maintain and enhance Public Right s of Way within the site and to the 
wider area ;  
i. protect  and where appropriate enhance  the Local Wildlife  Site (Arnold’s 
Wood) . 
j. provide for appropriate  landscaping  and buffers  along sensitive 
boundaries adjoining the A12 and railway line . 
k. maintain the same amount of existing playing field provision on site or, 
where this cannot be achieved, provide replacement playing fields 
(including supporting ancillary facilities) of equivalent or better provision in 
terms of quantity and quality in a suitable location prior to commencement 
of development on the playing field. Any replacement playing field 
provis ion should not prejudice Shenfield High School or the community 
from meeting their playing pitch needs; and  
l. be designed to ensure a coherent functional relationship with the existing 
development, which should be well integrated into the layout of the overa ll 
masterplan.  
3. Infrastructure Requirements  
Proposals should   
217 a. provide p edestrian and cycle crossing points across Chelmsford Road 
(A1023)  where appropriate ; 
b. provide an improved bus service;   
c. as the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should 
minimise and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 
Sustainable Drainage . 
4.  Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quiet  way’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.100  This policy does not apply to the existing properties that existed prior to the adoption of the 
Plan.  
9.101  This site is situated to the north of Shenfield with the A12 adjoining th e northern boundary 
and railway line to the east. The site will provide for around 825 homes, anticipated to be 
delivered between 2023/24 and 2030/31. This will deliver a high quality sustainable new 
development that maximises opportunities for travel by s ustainable modes. It will provide a 
mix of size and type of homes including affordable, self -build and custom build, appropriately 
accessible and adaptable housing, as well as other types of specialist housing in 
accordance with the Council’s policy requir ements.  
9.102  As the allocation comprises a number of parcels which could be brought forwards at different 
times it is important that consideration is given to how the site will develop holistically. As 
individual parcels are brought forwards any masterplan will  need to appropriately consider 
and reflect what is being proposed elsewhere on the site. This is particularly important in 
ensuring that collective requirements for infrastructure provision are considered and 
delivered appropriately.  
9.103  Given the scale of de velopment, a wide range of new community services and facilities 
including a new co -located primary school and early years and childcare nursery, open 
space and play facilities are required. These services and facilities should be of an 
appropriate scale t o serve the new communities and located where they will be easily 
accessible by walking, cycling and public transport.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
218 9.104  The scale of development in this location will require a new primary school with co -located 
early years and childcare nursery located on 2.1ha of land. A comprehensive approach will 
be necessary to deliver this early on in the development.  
9.105  The development will take its main vehicular access from Chelmsford Road (A1023) and will 
be expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the pe rformance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.106  Opportunities for sustainable transport modes should be maximised to create 
neighbourhoods where alternative forms of transport to the private car (waking, cycling and 
public transport) are prioritised. Ne w and enhanced pedestrian and cycle connections will be 
expected to be provided within the site and to the wider area. As parts of the site are 
separated by Chelmsford Road (A1023) pedestrian and cycle crossings need to be provided 
where appropriate to all ow for safe connection between the two areas. Opportunities to 
improve and enhance pedestrian and cycle connectivity with Shenfield station, local services 
and shops should also be explored.  
9.107  The development will be required to provide appropriate habitat m itigation and creation, and 
appropriate buffers to the Local Wildlife Site (Arnold’s Wood).  The site falls within the 
Shenfield CDA and is at potential risk of flooding from surface water as show on the EAs 
Risk of Flooding From Surface Water Maps. Any dev elopment within this area should be 
directed away from areas of existing flooding and where possible should try to have a 
positive impact on existing areas of flood risk downstream of the development. Early 
Engagement with the LLFA in this area is critical  to ensure that existing and potential flood 
risk is properly managed.  
Ford Headquarter s and Council Depot, Warley  
POLICY R04: FORD HEADQUARTER S AND COUNCIL DEPOT  
The Ford Headquarters and Council Depot, Warley  is allocated for residential -led 
mixed use  development.  
1. Amount and Type of Development  
Development should provide:  
a. 133 new homes;  
b. around 60 bed residential care home or an appropriate mix of specialist 
accommodation to meet identified needs, in accordanc e with policy HP04 .  
c. 5% self-build and  custom build housing across the entire allocation area;  
and  
219 d. around 2ha of land  for employment purposes  which may include light 
industrial, offices, research  and development (within class E) or other sui 
generis employment uses which are compatible with the residential 
development . 
2. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. be accompanied by a comprehensive masterplan and phasing strategy to 
inform detailed prop osals as they come forward;  
b. provide vehicular access  via Eagle Way and The Drive;  
c. provide well -connected internal road layouts which allows  for good 
accessibility;  
d. integrate existing community facilities within new development ; 
e. provide for new multi -functi onal green infrastructure including public open 
space in accordance with Policies NE02 and NE05  
f. any future development should sustain and where possible enhance the 
significance of the Grade II listed Blenheim House and the Chapel of the 
Royal Anglian and  Essex Regiments and their settings ; 
g. protect and where appropriate enhance the  Local Wildlife Sites  (Barrack 
Wood/Donkey Lane Plantation) ; and  
h. provide an improved bus service.  
3. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should 
minimise and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 
Sustainable Drainage . 
4. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
220 b. ‘quiet way’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.108  This site is situated to the south of the Warley urban area. The site will provide for around 
133 homes, anticipated to be delivered between 2022/23 and 2024/25  . This will deliver a 
high quality sustainable new development that maximises opportunities for travel by 
sustainable modes. It will provide a mix of size and type of homes including affordable, self -
build and custom build, appropriately accessible and adaptable housing, as well as other 
types of specialist housing in accordance with the Council’s po licy requirements.  
9.109  The development will take its main vehicular access from Eagle Way and The Drive and will 
be expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.110  It is expected that existing comm unity facilities adjoining the site (e.g. Brentwood Imperial 
Youth Band) will be integrated into the development.  
9.111  Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Grade II listed Blenheim House and the Chapel of th e Royal Anglian and Essex Regiments 
and their settings. This development should be of high quality design. The historic context of 
the site including previous use by the Essex Regiment and current use by Ford Motor 
Company provides an opportunity to promot e local history.  
9.112  The development will be required to provide appropriate habitat mitigation and creation, and 
appropriate buffers to the Local Wildlife Site, Barrack Wood/Donkey Lane Plantation.  
9.113  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early  consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.   
221 Residential -Led Allocations  
Land off Nags Head Lane, Brentwood  
POLICY R06: LAND OFF NAGS HEAD LANE  
Land off Nags Head Lane, Brentwood  is allocated for around 125 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Nags Head Lane;  
b. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified within 
the Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence;  
c. provide public open space  in accordance with policies NE02 and NE05 ; 
and 
d. provide sensitive landscaping along the north and eastern boundaries 
adjoining existing commerc ial development and residential dwellings;  and 
e. any future development at R06 should sustain and where possible 
enhance the significance of The Grade II listed Nags Head public house 
and its setting.   
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drai nage Area , development should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes) ; Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
222 b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.114  This site is situated to the west of the Brentwood urban area bounded by the railway line and 
Nags Head Lane. Residential properties and retail units adjoin the site to the north and 
further residential properties adjoin the eastern boundary. The site will provide for around 
125 homes, anticipated to be delivered between  2022/23 and 2025/26 . It will provide a mix 
of size and type of homes including affordable in a ccordance with the Council’s policy 
requirements.  
9.115  The development will take its main vehicular access from Nags Head Lane and will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.116   Developmen t of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Grade II listed Nags Head public house  and its setting. This development should be of high 
quality design.  
9.117  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consulta tion with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Sow and Grow Nursery, Pilgrims Hatch  
POLICY R07: SOW AND GROW NURSERY  
Sow and Grow Nursery , Pilgrims Hatch is allocated for around 38 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Ongar Road;  
b. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified within 
the Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ;  
223 c. any future development should sustain and where possible enhance the 
significance of the Grade II listed Registered Park and Garden of South 
Weald Park and its setting ; and 
d. provide sensitive landscaping along the southwestern boundary adjoining 
the allotments.  
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area  development should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable  Drainage . 
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex C ounty Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.118  This site is situated to the south west of Pilgrims Hatch on off Ongar Road (A128). 
Residential properties are situated to the north and on the opposite side of Ongar Road 
(A128). Allotments and agricultural fields adjoin the site to the west. The site wil l provide for 
around 38 homes, anticipated to be delivered  in 2022/23 . It will provide a mix of size and 
type of homes including affordable in accordance with the Council’s policy requirements.  
9.119  The development will take its main vehicular access from Ongar  Road (A128) and will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.120  Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Grade II listed Registered Par k and Garden of South Weald Park and its setting. This 
development should be of high quality design and will be required to provide appropriate 
landscaping and buffers to protect the amenity of the adjoining allotments and setting of the 
Historic Park and Garden at South Weald Park.  
9.121  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the over all design of the scheme.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
224 Land at Mascalls Lane, Warley  
POLICY R08: LAND AT MASCALLS LANE  
Land at Mascalls Lane, Warley is allocated for around 9 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Mascalls Lane;  and 
b. provide appropriate landscaping along sensitive north, east and western 
boundaries adjoining existing residential dwellings.  
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in l ine with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
 
9.122  This site is situated to the south of Warley on land off Mascalls Lane. Existing residential 
properties adjoin the site on the north, east and western boundaries. The site will provide for 
around 9 homes, antici pated to be delivered in 2022/23 . 
9.123  The development will take its main vehicular access from Mascalls Lane and will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.124  As the site is located withi n a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.   
225 Land off Warley Hill, Warley  
POLICY R09: LAND OFF WARLEY HILL  
Land off Warley Hill, Warley is allocated for around 43 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Pastoral Way;  and 
b. any future development should sustain and where possible enhance the 
significance of the Grade II listed Warley Hospital, Tower at Warley 
Hospital and Lodge to Warley Hospital and their settings; and ; 
c. provide for sensitive landscaping throughout the site a nd consider the 
need for the retention of some existing trees on site where appropriate.  
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Dra inage  
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County  Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.125  This site is situated near the centre of Warley on land west of Warley Hill (B186) to the south 
of Warley on land off Mascalls Lane. Residential properties lie to the north east and north 
west of the site with established woodland adjoining the western bou ndary. The site will 
provide for around 43 homes, anticipated to be delivered between 2022/23 and 2023/24 . It 
will provide a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance with the 
Council’s policy requirements.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
226 9.126  The development will take its main vehicular access from Pastoral Way. Development will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.127  The site forms part of the former Warley Hospital estate with nearby Grade II Li sted 
Buildings situated to the north (Tower House and Lodge at Warley Hospital). Development 
of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the Grade II listed 
Warley Hospital, Tower at Warley Hospital and Lodge to Warley Hospita l and their settings. 
This development should be of high quality design.  
9.128  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigati on 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Brentwood Railway Station car park, Brentwood  
POLICY R10: BRENTWOOD RAILWAY STATION CAR PARK  
Brentwood Railway Station  car park  is allocated for around 200 new homes . 
1. Development Princi ples 
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via St . James Road ; 
b. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified within 
the Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ; 
c. provide public open space  as required by Policy NE05 ; and 
d. ensure that the level of  parking on site is sufficient to meet existing and 
future rail traveller needs . 
2. Drain age 
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financi al contributions via 
planning obligations towards:   
227 a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine th e 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.129  This site is situated in Brentwood on land west of Brentwood railway station. The site is 
bounded by the railway line to the south and there are residential dwellings situated to the 
north. The site will provide for around 200 homes, anticipated to be deli vered between 
2029/30 and 2032/33. It will provide a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in 
accordance with the Council’s policy requirements.  
9.130  The development will take its main vehicular access from St James Road and will be 
expected to ade quately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.131  With the site being centrally located opportunities to create improved connections and public 
realm enhancement, including the creation of public open space sho uld be maximised.  
9.132  Opportunities for sustainable transport modes should be maximised to allow for alternative 
forms of transport to the private car (walking, cycling and public transport) to be prioritised.  
9.133  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Westbury Road Car Park, Brentwood  
POLICY R11: WESTBURY ROAD CAR PARK  
Land off Westbury Road, Brentwood is allocated for  around 45 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Westbury  Road;  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
228 b. be designed to a high standard to meet the objectives of the Town Centre 
Design Plan as part of a key opportunity area ; 
c. provide good pedestrian and cycle connections  to routes identified within 
the Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ; 
d. any future development at R11 should sustain and where possible 
enhance the significance of the Brentwood Town Centre Conservation 
Area and the Grade II listed building at 120 High Street and their settings;  
e. be accompanied by a heritage assessment taking ac count of 
archaeological potential for the historic core of Brentwood ; and  
f.  the retention of public parking spaces to be reconfigured and integrated 
with the new development, provided that the number of spaces to be 
included is sufficient to meet overall to wn centre public parking needs in 
combination with other public parking provision within the town centre . 
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development should  minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastruc ture improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes co nnecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.134  This site is located within Brentwood Town Centre on land south of the High Street (A1023) 
and west of Kings Road. Residential properties adjoin the southern boundary and business 
uses lie to the east. The site will provide for around 45 homes, anticipated  to be delivered in 
2023/24 . It will provide a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance 
with the Council’s policy requirements.  
9.135  The development will take its main vehicular access from Westbury Road and will be 
expected to adequatel y mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.   
229 9.136  The site is situated in an important central location in within Brentwood Town Centre. 
Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, e nhance the 
Grade II listed building at 120 High Street, and the Brentwood Town Centre Conservation 
Area and their settings.  
9.137  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council ) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Land at Hunter House, Brentwood  
POLICY R12: LAND AT HUNTER HOUSE  
Land at Hunter House  is allocated for around 48 new homes . 
1. Developm ent Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Western Road;  
b. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified within 
the Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ;  
c. any future development at R12 should sustain and where possible 
enhance the significance of the Brentwood Town Centre Conservation 
Area and its setting; and  
d. be accompa nied by a heritage assessment taking account of 
archaeological potential for the historic core of Brentwood.  
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy  BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Hig hways and Essex County Council in accordance Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
230 with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.138  This site is located within Brentwood Town Centre on land adjacent to Western Road, south 
of William Hunter Way and the western end of the High Street (A1023). The site is adjoined 
by residential dwellings and commercial premises on all boundaries. The sit e will provide for 
around 48 homes, anticipated to be delivered between 2025/26 and 2026/27. It will provide 
a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance with the Council’s policy 
requirements.  
9.139  The development will take its main vehic ular access from Western Road and will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.140  Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Brentwood Tow n Centre Conservation Area and its setting. This development should be of 
high quality design.  
9.141  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determin e appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Chatham Way car park, Brentwood  
POLICY R13: CHATHAM WAY CAR PARK  
Chatham Way  car park , Brentwood  is allocated for around 31 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Chatham  Way;  
b. provide good pedestrian and cycle connections ;  
231 c. retain as much public car parking  as possible ; 
d. any future development should sustain and where possible enhance the 
Brentwood Town Centre C onservation Area and its setting ; 
e. be accompanied by a heritage assessment taking account of 
archaeological potential for the historic core of Brentwood ; and  
f. the retention of public parking spaces to be reconfigured and integrated 
with the new development, provided that the number of spaces to be 
included is sufficient to meet overall town centre public parking needs in 
combination with other public parking provision within the town centre . 
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obliga tions towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for t hese purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.142  This site is located within Brentwood Town Centre on land between Chatham Way and 
Crown Street at the western end of the High Street (A1023). The site i s adjoined by 
residential dwellings and commercial premises on all boundaries. The site will provide for 
around 31 homes, anticipated to be delivered in 2026/27 . It will provide a mix of size and 
type of homes including affordable in accordance with the Co uncil’s policy requirements.  
9.143  The development will take its main vehicular access from Chatham Way. It will be expected 
to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and strategic road 
network.  
9.144  Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Brentwood Town Centre Conservation Area  and its  setting. This development should be of 
high-quality  design.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
232 9.145  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local  
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
William Hunter Way car park, Brentwood  
POLICY R14: WILLIAM HUNTER WAY CAR PARK  
William Hunter Way  car park , Brentwood is allocated for residential -led mixed use 
development.  
1. Amount and Type of Development  
Development should provide:  
a. around 300 new homes of mixed size and type, including affordable 
housing;  and 
b. retail , commercial and leisure  floorspace sufficient to meet the needs of 
the new community . 
2. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via William Hunter Way;  
b. be designed to a high standard to meet the objectives of the Town Centre 
Design Plan as part of a key o pportunity area ; 
c. be the subject of a comprehensive masterplan to inform detailed proposals 
as they come forward, to include full consideration of the sensitive site 
edges;  
d. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified in the 
Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ; 
e. any future development should sustain and where possible enhance the 
Brentwood Town Centre Conservation Area and its setting  ; 
f. be accompanied by a heritage assessment takin g account of 
archaeological potential for the historic core of Brentwood ; and  
g. the retention of public parking spaces to be reconfigured and integrated 
with the new development, provided that the number of spaces to be  
233 included is sufficient to meet overall  town centre public parking needs in 
combination with other public parking provision within the town centre  . 
3. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
4. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by Nation al Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centr e. 
 
9.146  This site is located within Brentwood Town Centre on land to the north of the High Street 
(A1023) along William Hunter Way. The site is adjoined by residential dwellings on the north, 
east and western boundaries with commercial premises to the south. The site will provide for 
around 300 homes, anticipated to be delivered in 2026/27 . It will provide a mix of size and 
type of homes including affordable in accordance with the Council’s policy requirements. In 
addition, retail use is expected to be deliver ed on site due to its prominent town centre 
location.  
9.147  The development will take its main vehicular access from William Hunter Way. It will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.148   Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Brentwood Town Centre Conservation Area and its setting. This development should be of 
high quality design.  
9.149  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early  consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
234 Wates Way Industrial Estate, Brentwood  
POLICY R15: WATES WAY INDUSTRIAL ESTATE  
Wates Way Industrial Estate, Brentwood  is allocated for residential -led mixed use 
development . 
1. Amount and Type of Development  
Development should provide:  
a. around 46 new homes;  and 
b. retail, commercial and leisure floorspace sufficient to  meet the needs of 
the new community . 
2. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Ongar Road;  
b. provide public open space  as required by policy NE05 ; and 
c. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified in the 
Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence . 
d. consideration of historic context for the area . 
3. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage.   
4. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by Natio nal Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Cent re.  
235  
9.150  This site is located within Brentwood Town Centre on land off Ongar Road (A128). The site 
is adjoined by residential dwellings on the north eastern boundary with further residential 
and commercial units on the south east and south western boundaries.  The site will provide 
for around 46 homes, anticipated to be delivered between 2022/23 and  2023/24 . It will 
provide a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance with the 
Council’s policy requirements. In addition, retail/commercial u se is expected to be delivered 
on site.  
9.151  The development will take its main vehicular access from Ongar Road (A128). It will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.152  With the site bein g centrally located opportunities to create improved connections and public 
realm enhancement, including the creation of public open space should be maximised.  
9.153  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Land off Doddinghurst Road, Pilgrims Hatch  and Brentwood  
POLICY R16: LAND OFF DODDINGHURST ROAD  
Land off Doddinghurst Road , Pilgrims Hatch and Brentwood is allocated for around 
200 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Doddinghurst Road;  
b. provide public open space  as required by policy NE05 ; 
c. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified in the 
Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ; 
d. provide appropriate  landscaping  and buffers  along sensitive boundary 
adjoining the A12 ; and  
e. provide improved bus service.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
236 2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage .  
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obliga tion will determine the 
level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.154  This site comprises two parcels of land separated by the A12. The northern parcel is 
situated to the south of Pilgrims Hatch and the southern parcel is to the north of Brentwood. 
Both parcels adjoin existing residential dwellings on two boundaries. The site will provide for 
around 200 homes, anticipated to be delivered between  2022/23 and 2025/26 . It will provide 
a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance with the Council’s policy 
requirements.  
9.155  The development will take its main vehicular access from Doddinghurst Road . It will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely imp acts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.156  Opportunities to create improved connections should be maximised to create a development 
where alternative forms of transport to the private car (walking, cycling and public transport) 
are pr ioritised. New and enhanced pedestrian and cycle connections will be expected to be 
provided within the site and to the wider area.  
9.157  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
  
237 Land at Priests Lane, Shenfield  
POLICY R19: LAND AT PRIESTS LANE  
Land at Priests Lane , Shenfield  is allocated for around 75 new homes.  
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access points via Priests Lane;  
b. provide public open space  as required by policy NE05 or a financial 
contribution towards other open space improvements within the borough ; 
c. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified in the 
Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ; and 
d. provide l and for Endeavour School expansion ; and  
e. provide replacement playing field provision in the form of an appropriate 
financial contribution being made towards new or enhanced playing 
field projects within the Borough.  
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a  Critical Drainage Area , development should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage.  
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways and Essex County Council in accordance 
with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the 
level and timing of  payments for these purposes);  
b. ‘quietway’ cycle routes connecting transfer hubs to schools in Brentwood 
Town Centre.  
 
9.158  This site is located to the south of Shenfield on land off Priests Lane. The site adjoins the 
railway line on the south eastern boundary and residential dwellings on the north, east and Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
238 southern boundaries. The site will provide for around 75 homes, anticipated to be delivered 
between  2022/23 and 2023/24 . It will provide a mix of size and type of homes including 
affordable housing in accord ance with the Council’s policy requirements.  
9.159  The development will take its main vehicular access from Priests Lane. It will be expected to 
adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and strategic road 
network.  
9.160  Opportunities to c reate improved connections should be maximised to create a development 
where alternative forms of transport to the private car (walking, cycling and public transport) 
are prioritised. New and enhanced pedestrian and cycle connections will be expected to be  
provided within the site and to the wider area.  
9.161  The Endeavour School (a Special Educational Needs school) which adjoins the site to the 
south is seeking to expand to accommodate a 6th Form. Essex County Council welcomes 
this proposal and intends to commis sion some of the places for local children with an 
Education Health and Care Plan. The 6th form provision will enable local children to 
continue their education within their community and reduce travel time to specialist 
establishments elsewhere. The schoo l does not currently have the available land to expand. 
Land adjoining the school within the development site should be utilised to accommodate 
the expansion.  
9.162  The development of the site will result in the loss of land last used as Brentwood Ursuline 
Schoo l’s detached playing fields and was also used by local football clubs.  The Councils’ 
Playing Pitch Strategy identifies deficiencies in playing pitch provision and recommends that 
the loss of this site be mitigated through the development of replacement fa cilities elsewhere 
in the Borough. Development of this site will therefore be expected to mitigate the loss of the 
playing fields through an appropriate financial contribution being secured towards the 
delivery of off -site playing field  
9.163  As the site is loca ted within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Land South of Ingatestone  
POLICY R21: LAND SOUTH OF INGATESTONE  
Land south of Ingatestone, comprising former garden centre and A12 works sit e is 
allocated for around 161 new homes . 
1. Development Principles   
239 Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Roman Road;  
b. provide  public open space  as required by policy NE05 ; 
c. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified in the 
Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ; 
d. provide appropriate  landscaping  and buffers  along sensitive boundary 
adjoining the A12 and railway line; and  
e. be accompanied by a heritage assessment taking account of 
archaeological potential for the proximity to Roman Road.  
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should 
minimise and mitigate s urface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable 
Drainage.  
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards  off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may 
be reasonably required by National Highways and Essex County Council in 
accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine 
the level and timing of payments for these purposes) . 
 
9.164  This site is located to the south of Ingatestone and north of Mountnessing on land between 
the railway line and Roman Road. Residential properties adjoin the site on the northern 
boundary. The site will provide for around 161 homes, anticipated to be delivered between  
2022/23 and 2024/25 . It will provide a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in 
accordance with the Council’s policy requirements.  
9.165  The development will take its main vehicular access from Roman Road. It will  be expected 
to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and strategic road 
network.  
9.166  Opportunities to create improved connections should be maximised to create a development 
where alternative forms of transport to the private car (walking, cycling and public transport) 
are prioritised. New and enhanced pedestrian and cycle connections will be expected to be 
provided within the site and to the wider area.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
240 9.167  The site lies within close proximity to a Roman Road so there is potential  for archaeological 
remains to be present. A heritage assessment should be undertaken in accordance with 
Policy BE16 Conservation and Enhancement of Historic Environment . 
9.168  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Le ad Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) will be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Land adjacent to the A12, Ingatestone  
POLICY R22: LAND ADJACENT TO THE A12, INGATESTONE  
Land adjacent  to the  A12, Ingatestone is allocated for around 57 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Roman Road;  
b. provide public open space  as required by policy NE05 ;  
c. provide appropriate  landscaping  and buffers  along sensitive boundary 
adjoining the A12 ; and  
d. be accompanied by a heritage assessment taking account of 
archaeological potential for the proximity to Roman Road . 
2. Drainage  
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage. . 
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards  off-site hi ghway infrastructure improvements as may 
be reasonably required by National Highways and Essex County Council in 
accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine 
the level and timing of payments for these purposes) . 
 
9.169  This site is located to the south of Ingatestone on land between Roman Road and the A12. 
Residential properties adjoin the south east and south western boundaries. The site will  
241 provide for around 57 homes, anticipated to be delivered between 2022/23 and 2 023/24. It 
will provide a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance with the 
Council’s policy requirements.  
9.170  The development will take its main vehicular access from Roman Road. It will be expected 
to adequately mitigate its likely im pacts on the performance of the local and strategic road 
network.  
9.171  Opportunities to create improved connections should be maximised to create a development 
where alternative forms of transport to the private car (walking, cycling and public transport) 
are p rioritised. New and enhanced pedestrian and cycle connections will be expected to be 
provided within the site and to the wider area.  
9.172  The site lies within close proximity to a Roman Road so there is potential for archaeological 
remains to be present. A heri tage assessment should be undertaken in accordance with 
Policy BE16 Conservation and Enhancement of Historic Environment.  
9.173  As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area early consultation with the Lead Local 
Flood Authority (Essex County Council) w ill be required to determine appropriate mitigation 
which should be incorporated into the overall design of the scheme.  
Brizes Corner Field, Kelvedon Hatch  
POLICY R23: BRIZES CORNER FIELD  
Brizes Corner Field , Kelvedon Hatch is allocated for around 23 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Blackmore Road;  and 
b. provide public open space  as required by policy NE05 . 
2. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributio ns via 
planning obligations towards  off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may 
be reasonably required by National Highways and Essex County Council in 
accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine 
the level and tim ing of payments for these purposes);  
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
242 9.174  This site is located to the south west  of Kelvedon Hatch on land off Blackmore Road. 
Residential properties adjoin the site on the north east and north western boundaries. The 
site will provide for around 23 homes, anticipated to be delivered between 2022/23  and 
2023/24 . It will provide a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance 
with the Council’s policy requirements.  
9.175  The development will take its main vehicular access from Blackmore Road. It will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance o f the local and 
strategic road network.   
Land off Stocks Lane, Kelvedon Hatch  
POLICY R24: LAND OFF STOCKS LANE  
Land off Stocks Lane, Kelvedon Hatch is allocated for around 40 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Stocks Lane;  and 
b. provide open space  as required by policy NE05 . 
2. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards off -site highway infrastructure improvements as may 
be reasonably required by National Highways and Essex County Council in 
accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine 
the level and timing of payments for these purposes);  
 
9.176  This site is l ocated to the south east of Kelvedon Hatch on land off Stocks Lane. Residential 
properties adjoin the north east and north western boundaries. The site will provide for 
around 40 homes, anticipated to be delivered between 2022/23  and 2023/24 . It will provi de 
a mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance with the Council’s policy 
requirements.  
9.177  The development will take its main vehicular access from Blackmore Road. It will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the perf ormance of the local and 
strategic road network.   
243 Land north of Woollard Way, Blackmore  
POLICY R25: LAND NORTH OF WOOLLARD WAY  
Land north of Woollard Way , Blackmore is allocated for around 40 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Redrose Lane  or Nine Ashes Road ; 
b. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified in the 
Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ; 
c. provide public open space  as required by policy NE05 ; and 
d. be accompanied by a heritage assessment taking account of 
archaeological potential for the historic settlement of Blackmore.  
2. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations to wards off -site highway infrastructure improvements as may 
be reasonably required by National Highways and Essex County Council in 
accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine 
the level and timing of payments for these purp oses) . 
 
9.178  The site is located to the north of Blackmore on land off Redrose Lane and Woollard  Way. 
Residential properties adjoin the site on the southern boundary. The site will provide for 
around 40 homes anticipated to be delivered between 2022/23 and 2023/24. It will provide a 
mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance wit h the Council’s policy 
requirements.  
9.179  The development will consider an appropriate main vehicular access via Redrose Lane or 
Nine Ashes Road . It will be expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the 
performance of the local and strategic road ne twork.  
9.180  The site lies within close proximity to the historic settlement of Blackmore so there is 
potential for archaeological remains to be present. A heritage assessment should be 
undertaken in accordance with Policy BE16 Conservation and Enhancement of Hi storic 
Environment.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
244 Land north of Orchard Piece, Blackmore  
POLICY R26: LAND NORTH OF ORCHARD PIECE  
Land north of Orchard Piece, Blackmore  is allocated for around 30 new homes . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide vehicular access via Redrose Lane , Orchard Piece or Fingrith Hall 
Lane ; 
b. provide good pedestrian and cycle  connections  to routes identified in the 
Brentwood Cycle Action Plan or other relevant evidence ; 
c. provide public open space  as required in policy NE05 ; and 
d. be accompanied by a heritage assessment taking account of 
archaeological potential for the historic settlement of Blackmore.  
2. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations  towards off -site highway infrastructure improvements as may 
be reasonably required by National Highways and Essex County Council in 
accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning obligation will determine 
the level and timing of payments for these p urposes) . 
 
9.181  The site is located to the north of Blackmore on land off Redrose Lane  and Orchard Piece . 
Residential properties adjoin the site on the southern boundary. The site will provide for 
around 30 homes anticipated to be delivered between 2022/23  and 2023/24 . It will provide a 
mix of size and type of homes including affordable in accordance with the Council’s policy 
requirements.  
9.182  The development will consider an appropriate main vehicular access via Redrose Lane , 
Orchard Piece or Fingrith H all Lane . It will be expected to adequately mitigate its likely 
impacts on the performance of the local and strategic road network.  
9.183  The site lies within close proximity to the historic settlement of Blackmore so there is 
potential for archaeological remain s to be present. A heritage assessment should be 
undertaken in accordance with Policy BE16 Conservation and Enhancement of Historic 
Environment.   
245 Strategic Employment Allocations  
Brentwood Enterprise Park  
9.184  The site is located at a key strategic location at t he junction of the M25 and A127. Most of 
the site comprises the former M25 works site and associated uses and comprises previously 
developed land.  
POLICY E11: BRENTWOOD  ENTERPRISE PARK  
Land south east of M25 Junction 29 is allocated for around 25.85  ha of land for  
employment development (principally for offices, light industrial and research and 
development, B2 and B8 and other sui generis employment uses). Other ancillary 
supporting development within classes C1, E and F1 or other sui generis ancillary 
supporting development may be permitted as a means of supporting these 
principal employment uses . 
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. be accompanied by a high quality  landscaping scheme (including a 
scheme of maintenance) for the site as a whole with the objective also to  
provide improved visual amenity between the site and  adjoining Green 
Belt; 
b. be of a high quality in terms of its design and layout to reflect its status as 
a key gateway site ; 
c. protect and where possible enhance the  adjoining Local Wildlife Site  
(Hobbs Hole) ; 
d. preserve and where possible enhance the Public Right of Way through  the 
site. 
2. Infrastructure Requirements  
Proposals should provide:  
a. access  via M25 Junction 29 and /or Warley Street (B186) and associated 
slip roads;  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
246 b. well-connected internal road layouts which allows good accessibility for 
bus services ; 
c. new public transport  or Dema nd Responsive Travel  links with the 
surrounding area;  and 
d. good walking and cycling connections  within the site and to the  
surrounding area.  
3. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning  obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be reasonably 
required by National Highways (M25, J28 and J29) and Essex County 
Council (A127 and B186) in accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the 
planning obligation will determ ine the level and timing of payments for 
these purposes) unless, in the case of the Junction 29 mitigation and 
A127/B186 works, the applicant enters into a s.278 Agreement for its 
timely construction, if more appropriate;  
b. phased improvements to West Horndo n Station in accordance with policy 
BE08 to increase its capacity and utility in line with anticipated demand 
generated by each of phase the development.  
 
9.185  The site is located on land to the south of the A127 and east of the M25. Warley Street runs 
along the eastern boundary. Existing residential properties are situated to the east. The site 
will provide for at least 25.85 ha of land for employment use (princ ipally use classes B1, B2, 
B8 and any associated employment generating sui generis uses). This employment 
allocation will make a considerable contribution towards the overall employment needs for 
the Borough.  It is envisaged that due to the location of the  site next to one of the Borough’s 
key gateway, development on site should create a positive impression through high quality 
design and layout.  
9.186  The development will be required to provide appropriate habitat mitigation, creation, and 
appropriate buffers to  the Local Wildlife Site (Hobbs Hole).  
9.187  The development has a number of potential access points including via the M25 Junction 29 
and Warley Street (B186). It will be expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the 
performance of the local and str ategic road network.  
9.188  Opportunities for sustainable transport modes should be maximised to create a development 
where alternative forms of transport to the private car (waking, cycling and public transport) 
are prioritised.   
247 Employment Allocations  
Childerdit ch Industrial Estate  
POLICY E 12: CHILDERDITCH INDUSTRIAL ESTATE  
Land at Childerditch Industrial Estate is allocated for around 20.54 ha of land for 
employment development which may comprise offices, light industrial, research 
and development (within Class  E), B2, B8 or sui generis employment uses. Other 
ancillary supporting development may be permitted as a means of supporting 
these principal employment uses .  
1. Development Principles  
Proposals for development (including the redevelopment of existing developed 
areas) should:  
a. include appropriate landscaping treatment to improve visual amenity on 
site, and safeguard and where possible and appropriate, enhance the 
visual amenity of the adjoining green belt;  
b. provide access  to the site  via the eastbound A12 7; 
c. make provision for improved walking and cycling links  within the site and 
to the surrounding area ; 
d. provide new p ublic transport or Demand Responsive Travel links with the 
surrounding area ; and 
e. any future development should sustain and where possible enh ance the 
significance of the Grade II* listed Registered Park and Garden of 
Thorndon Hall, and the Thorndon Park Conservation Area and their 
settings.  
2. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. off-site highway infrastructure improvements as may be necessary and 
reasonably required by National Highways (M25, J28 and J29) and Essex 
County Council (A127 and B186) in accordance with policies MG05 and Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
248 BE08 (the plann ing obligation will determine the level and timing of 
payments for these purposes);  
b. phased improvements to West Horndon Station in accordance with policy 
BE08 to increase its capacity and utility in line with anticipated demand 
generated by each of phase the development.  
 
9.189  The site is located on land to the north of the A127 on land off Childerditch Hall Drive. A 
number of  residential dwellings lie to the west of the site. The site will provide for 20. 54 ha of 
land for employment use (principally use classes B1, B2, B8 and any associated 
employment generating sui generis uses).  
9.190  The development will take its main vehicular a ccess from the eastbound carriageway of the 
A127. It will be expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the 
local and strategic road network.  
9.191  Opportunities for sustainable transport modes should be maximised to create a develo pment 
where alternative forms of transport to the private car (waking, cycling and public transport) 
are prioritised.  
9.192  Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Grade II* listed Registered Park and Garden of T horndon Hall, and the Thorndon Park 
Conservation Area and their settings. This development should be of high quality design.  
9.193  The proposed development area is at potential risk of flooding from surface water as shown 
on the Environment Agency Risk of Floodi ng from Surface Water Maps. Any development 
within this area should be directed away from areas of existing flooding and, where possible, 
should try to have a positive impact on existing areas of flood risk downstream of the 
development. It should however be ensured that any development within this area complies 
with flood risk mitigation measures outlined in the Essex SuDS guide.  
Codham Hall Farm  
POLICY E 10: CODHAM HALL FARM  
Land at Codham Hall Farm,  north east  of M25 Junction 29 is allocated for around 
9.6 ha of land for employment  development which may comprise offices, light 
industrial, research and development (within Class E), B2, B8 or sui generis  
249 employment uses. Other ancillary supporting development may  be permitted as a 
means of supporting these principal employment uses.  
1. Development Principles  
Proposals for development (including the redevelopment of existing developed 
areas) should:  
a. provide access via M25 Junction 29  and Warley Street (B186) ; 
b. protect and where possible enhance the  adjoining Local Wildlife Site  
(Codham Hall Wood) ; 
c. preserve and where possible enhance the  Public Right of Way through  the 
site;  
d. provide good walking and cycling connections  within the site and to the 
surrounding area; and  
e. be accompanied by an appropriate landscaping treatment scheme for the 
site as a whole to improve visual amenity on site, and safeguard and 
where possible and appropriate, enhance the visual amenity of the 
adjoining green belt.  
2. Infrastructure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:  
a. necessary off -site highway infrastructure improvements as may be 
reasonably required by National Highways (M25, J28 and J29) and Esse x 
County Council (A127 and B186) in accordance with policies MG05 and 
BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the level and timing of 
payments for these purposes) unless, in the case of the A127/B186 works, 
the applicant enters into a s.278 Agreement for its timely construction, if 
more appropriate;  
b. phased improvements to West Horndon Station in accordance with policy 
BE08 to increase its capacity and utility in line with anticipated demand 
generated by each of phase the development.  
 
9.194  The site is located on land to the north of the A127 and east of the M25. The site will provide 
for 9.6ha of employment land (principally use classes B1, B2, B8 and any associated 
employment generating sui generis uses).  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
250 9.195  The development will take its main vehicular ac cess via the existing arrangement directly 
onto Junction 29 of the M25. It will be expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on 
the performance of the local and strategic road network.  
9.196  The development will be required to provide appropriate habita t mitigation, creation, and 
appropriate buffers to the Local Wildlife Site (Codham Hall Wood).  
9.197  Opportunities for sustainable transport modes should be maximised to create a development 
where alternative forms of transport to the private car (waking, cyclin g and public transport) 
are prioritised.  
9.198  The proposed development area is at potential risk of flooding from surface water as shown 
on the Environment Agency Risk of Flooding from Surface Water Maps. Any development 
within this area should be directed away  from areas of existing flooding and, where possible, 
should try to have a positive impact on existing areas of flood risk downstream of the 
development. It should however be ensured that any development within this area complies 
with flood risk mitigation  measures outlined in the Essex SuDS guide.  
East Horndon Hall  
POLICY E 13: EAST HORNDON HALL  
Land at East Horndon Hall is allocated for around 5.5 ha of land for employment 
development which may comprise offices, light industrial, research and 
development ( within Class E), B2, B8 or sui generis employment uses. Other 
ancillary supporting development may be permitted as a means of supporting 
these principal employment uses.   
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide access via Old Tilbury Road;  
b. provide good walking and cycling connections within the site and the 
surrounding area; and 
c. any future development should sustain and where possible enhance the 
significance of East Horndon Hall and All Saints Church and their settings.  
2. Infrastructure Contr ibutions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards:   
251 a. necessary off -site highway infrastructure improvements as may be 
reasonably required by National Highways (M25, J28 and J29) and Essex 
County Council (A127 and B186) in accordance with policies MG05 and 
BE08 (the planning obligation will determine the level and timing of 
payments for these purposes);  
b. phased improvements to West Horndon Station in accordance with policy 
BE08 to incre ase its capacity and utility in line with anticipated demand 
generated by each of phase the development.  
 
9.199  The site is located on land to the east of West Horndon, south of the A127 and west of 
Tilbury Road (A128). Some residential properties are situated to the east and south of the 
site. The site will provide for 5.5ha of employment land (principally use classes B1, B2, B8 
and any associated employment generating sui generis uses).  
9.200  Opportunities to create sustainable links with the strategic housing alloc ation of Dunton Hills 
Garden Village and West Horndon station should be maximised.  
9.201  The development will take its main vehicular access from the Old Tilbury Road. It will be 
expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance of the local and 
strategic road network.  
9.202  Opportunities for sustainable transport modes should be maximised to create a development 
where alternative forms of transport to the private car (waking, cycling and public transport) 
are prioritised.  
9.203   Development of this site will need to sustain and, where opportunities arise, enhance the 
Grade II listed East Horndon Hall and All Saints Church and their settings. This development 
should be of high quality design.  
9.204  The proposed development area is at potential risk of flooding f rom surface water as shown 
on the Environment Agency surface water flooding maps. Any development within this area 
should be directed away from areas of existing flooding and, where possible, should have a 
positive impact on existing areas of flood risk do wnstream of the development. It should be 
ensured that any development within this area complies with flood risk mitigation measures 
outlined in the Essex SuDS guide.   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
252 Land adjacent to A12 and Slip Road, Ingatestone  
POLICY E0 8: LAND ADJACENT TO A12 AND SLIP ROAD , INGATESTONE  
Land adjacent to A12 and slip road, Ingatestone is allocated for  around 2.06 ha of 
land for employment  development which may comprise offices, light industrial, and 
research and development (within Class E), B2, B8 or sui generis employment 
uses. Other ancillary supporting development may be permitted as a means of 
supporting these principal employment uses.  
1. Development Principles  
Proposals should:  
a. provide access via Roman Road (B1002) with highway improvements ; 
b. provide goo d walking and cycling connections within the site and the 
surrounding area . 
2. Drainage   
As the site is located within a Critical Drainage Area , development  should minimise 
and mitigate surface water runoff in line with Policy BE05 Sustainable Drainage . 
3. Infra structure Contributions  
Applicants will also be required to make necessary financial contributions via 
planning obligations towards off -site highway infrastructure improvements as may 
be reasonably required by National Highways (M25, J28 and J29) and Essex  
County Council in accordance with policies MG05 and BE08 (the planning 
obligation will determine the level and timing of payments for these purposes).  
 
9.205  The site is located on land to the south west  of Ingatestone between the A12 and 
southbound off slip from the A12. Some residential properties are situated to the east and 
south of the site. The site will provide for 2.06ha of employment land (principally use classes 
B1, B2, B8 and any associated emp loyment generating sui generis uses).  
9.206  The primary purpose of the allocation is to deliver jobs for the area and so consideration will 
be given to other uses that enable job opportunities, taking account of market needs.  
9.207  The development should achieve safe and suitable access(es) for all highway users, 
including pedestrians and cyclists. This will need to be undertaken in consultation with Essex 
County Council as the Highway Authority, and National Highways who control the  A12 and  
253 its slip roads . It will be expected to adequately mitigate its likely impacts on the performance 
of the local and strategic road network.  
9.208  Opportunities for sustainable transport modes should be maximised to create a development 
where alternative f orms of transport to the private car (waking, cycling and public transport) 
are prioritised.  
9.209  The site falls within the Mountnessing CDA. Any development within this area should where 
possible try to have a positive impact on existing areas of flood risk do wnstream of the 
development. Early engagement with the LLFA in this area is critical to ensure that existing 
and potential flood risk is properly managed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
254   
 
255  
 
 
 
 
 
Local Development Plan Housing Trajectory  
 
        Plan Period  
  New 
Homes  HELAA 
Ref. Policy 
Ref Year 1  
2016/17  Year 2  
2017/18  Year 3  
2018/19  Year 4  
2019/20  Year 5  
2020/21  Year 6  
2021/22  Year 7  
2022/23  Year 8  
2023/24  Year 9  
2024/25  Year 10  
2025/26  Year 11  
2026/27  Year 12  
2027/28  Year 13  
2028/29  Year 14  
2029/30  Year 15  
2030/31  Year 16  
2031/32  Year 17  
2032/33  
Completions (2016/17 - 
2020/21)  977     150 213 246 200 168                         
                                          
Extant permissions (as 
at 1st April 2021) and 
minus non -
implementation 
discount (10% of 
permission supply)  1036                155 261 230 210 180               
                                          
Windfall  434                         62 62 62 62 62 62 62 
                                          
Local Plan Allocations  
Brownfield Land within Brentwood Urban Area / Settlement Boundary  
Ford Headquarters and 
Council Depot, Warley - 
northern and southern 
site 133 081 / 
117A / 
117B  R04            25 50 58                 
Brentwood Railway 
Station Car Park  200 002 R10                           100 100     
Westbury Road Car 
Park, Westbury Road, 
Brentwood  45 039 R11             45                   
Land at Hunter House, 
Western Road, 
Brentwood  48 041 R12                   24 24             
Appendix 1 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
256         Plan Period  
  New 
Homes  HELAA 
Ref. Policy 
Ref Year 1  
2016/17  Year 2  
2017/18  Year 3  
2018/19  Year 4  
2019/20  Year 5  
2020/21  Year 6  
2021/22  Year 7  
2022/23  Year 8  
2023/24  Year 9  
2024/25  Year 10  
2025/26  Year 11  
2026/27  Year 12  
2027/28  Year 13  
2028/29  Year 14  
2029/30  Year 15  
2030/31  Year 16  
2031/32  Year 17  
2032/33  
Chatham Way / Crown 
Street Car Park 
Brentwood  31 040 R13             
 
        31             
William Hunter Way  300 102 R14                  300            
Wates Way Industrial 
Estate, Ongar Road, 
Brentwood  46 003 R15             23 23                   
Brownfield Land within 
Brentwood Urban Area 
/ Settlement Boundary 
Total  803                48 118 58 24 355      100 100     
Greenfield Land within Brentwood Urban Area / Settlement Boundary  
Land at Priests Lane, 
Brentwood  75 044 / 
178 R19            30  45                   
Greenfield Land within 
Brentwood Urban Area 
/ Settlement Boundary 
Total  75                30 45                   
Brownfield Land within settlement boundary – Other Locations  
West Horndon Industrial 
Estates  580 020 / 
021 /152  R02                 80 75 95 100 100 65 65 
Brownfield Land within 
settlement boundary – 
Other Locations  580                     80 75 95 100 100 65 65 
Green Belt Land – Edge of Brentwood Urban Area  
Land north of Shenfield  825 034 / 
158 / 
235 / 
087 / 
263 / 
276 R03             50 100 125 125 125 125 100 75     
Land East of Nags Head 
Lane, Brentwood  125 032 R06            25 25 50 25               
Sow and Grow Nursery, 
Ongar Road, Pilgrims 
Hatch  38 010 R07            38                      
 
257         Plan Period  
  New 
Homes  HELAA 
Ref. Policy 
Ref Year 1  
2016/17  Year 2  
2017/18  Year 3  
2018/19  Year 4  
2019/20  Year 5  
2020/21  Year 6  
2021/22  Year 7  
2022/23  Year 8  
2023/24  Year 9  
2024/25  Year 10  
2025/26  Year 11  
2026/27  Year 12  
2027/28  Year 13  
2028/29  Year 14  
2029/30  Year 15  
2030/31  Year 16  
2031/32  Year 17  
2032/33  
Land Adjacent to 
Carmel, Mascalls Lane, 
Warley  9 027 R08             9                     
Land west of Warley Hill, 
Pastoral Way, Warley  43 083 R09             20 23                   
Land off Doddinghurst 
Road, either side of A12  200 023A / 
23B R16             50 50 50 50               
Green Belt Land – 
Edge of Brentwood 
Urban Area Total  1,240                 142 148 200 200 125 125 125 100 75    
Green Belt Land – Edge of Ingatestone  
Land south of 
Ingatestone, Ingatestone  161 128 / 
106 R21             50 60 51                 
Land Adjacent to 
Ingatestone By -pass  57 079A  R22            17 40                   
Green Belt Land – 
Edge of Ingatestone 
Total  218                67 100 51                 
Green Belt Land – Larger Villages  
Brizes Corner Field, 
Blackmore Road, 
Kelvedon Hatch  23 194 R23            12  11                   
Land off Stocks Lane, 
Kelvedon Hatch  40 075B  R24            20 20                    
Land north of Woollard 
Way, Blackmore  40 077 R25            20  20                   
Land south of Redrose 
Lane, north of Orchard 
Piece, Blackmore  30 076 R26             10 20                   
Green Belt Land – 
Larger Villages Total  133                62 71                   
Strategic Allocation – Dunton Hills Garden Village  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
258         Plan Period  
  New 
Homes  HELAA 
Ref. Policy 
Ref Year 1  
2016/17  Year 2  
2017/18  Year 3  
2018/19  Year 4  
2019/20  Year 5  
2020/21  Year 6  
2021/22  Year 7  
2022/23  Year 8  
2023/24  Year 9  
2024/25  Year 10  
2025/26  Year 11  
2026/27  Year 12  
2027/28  Year 13  
2028/29  Year 14  
2029/30  Year 15  
2030/31  Year 16  
2031/32  Year 17  
2032/33  
Dunton Hills Garden 
Village  1,650  200 R01                  150 250 250 250 250 250 250 
Strategic Allocation – 
Dunton Hills Garden 
Village Total  1,650                       150 250 250 250 250 250 250 
Allocation Total  4,699                  349 482 309 224 710 450 470 550 525 315 315 
                                          
Total Housing 
Provision  7,146      150 213 246 200 168 155 610 712 519 404 772 512 532 612 587 377 377 
                                          
Housing requirement 
by year  7,752    300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 400 400 400 400 400 400 984 984 984 
Performance against 
requirement within 
individual year     -150 -87 -54 -100 -132 -145 310 412 119 4 372 112 132 212 -397 -607 -607 
Housing provision 
cumulative total     150 363 609 809 977 1,132  1,742  2,454  2,973  3,377  4,149  4,661  5,193  5,805  6,392  6,769  7,146  
Housing requirement 
cumulative total     300 600 900 1,200  1,500  1,800  2,100  2,400  2,800  3,200  3,600  4,000  4,400  4,800  5,784  6,768  7,752  
Cumulative total 
deficit/suplus     -150 -237 -291 -391 -523 -668 -358 54 173 177 549 661 793 1005  608 1 -606 
 
5 year supply calculations                   
Five year supply calculation at adoption (2021/22)  
Includes 20% buffer from Housing Delivery Test and 
accounts for deficit (446) from start of plan period to year 
before adoption (2016/17 to 2020/21) which has been 
annualised over the remainder of the plan period (12 
years) (2021/22 to 2032/33) (Liverpool approach)       Total supply 2021/22 to 2025/26  2,400         
     Local Plan annual housing requirement 
(2021/22 to 2025/26)  1,700         
     Deficit (2016/17 to 2020/21) ÷ 12 years x 5 
years  -218        
     Housing Delivery Test 20% buffer (Local Plan 
annual requirement + deficit)  384        
     Total five year requirement (with undersupply 
+ 20% buffer)  2,302         
     Annual five year requirement (Total 
requirement ÷ 5 years (rounded)  460        
     Five year supply (years) = Total supply ÷ 
Annual five year requirement  5.21        
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
259  
 
 
 
 
Strategic and non -strategic 
policies and their relationship 
to the Strategic Objectives  
 
Strategic 
Objective  Strategic Policies  Non-Strategic Policies  
SO1: 
Managing 
Growth 
Sustainably  Delivering Sustainable Patterns of 
Growth  
Strategic Policy MG01: Spatial 
Strategy  
Strategic Policy MG02: Green Belt  
 Cross -cutting Development Management  
Policy MG03: Settlement Hierarchy  
Policy MG04: Health Impact Assessments 
(HIAs)  
Policy MG05: Developer Contributions  
Policy MG06: Local Plan Review  
SO2: Deliver 
a Healthy and 
Resilient Built 
Environment:  Sustainable Design of Buildings and 
Infrastructure  
Strategic Policy BE01 Carbon 
Reduction, and Renewable Energy  
Communications Infrastructure  
Strategic P olicy BE06: 
Communications Infrastructure  
Transport Infrastructure  
Strategic Policy BE08: Strategic 
Transport Infrastructure  
Strategic Policy BE09: Sustainable 
Means of Travel and Walkable 
Streets  
Design & Place -making (Buildings 
and Public Realm)  
Strategic Policy BE14: Creating 
Successful Places  Sustainable Design of Buildings and 
Infrastructure  
Policy BE02: Water Efficiency and Management  
Policy BE03: Establishing Low Carbon and 
Renewable Energy Infrastructure Network  
Policy BE04: Managing Heat Risk  
Policy BE05: Sustainable Drainage  
Communications Infrastructure  
Policy BE07: Connecting New Developmen ts to 
Digital Infrastructure  
Transport Infrastructure  
Policy BE10: Sustainable Passenger Transport  
Policy BE11: Electric and Low Emission Vehicle  
Policy BE12: Mitigating the Transport Impacts of 
Development  
Policy BE13: Parking Standards  
Design & Place -making (Buildings and Public 
Realm)  
Appendix 2   
260 Strategic 
Objective  Strategic Policies  Non-Strategic Policies  
Heritage  
Strategic Policy BE16: Conservation 
and Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  
 
 
Variety and Quality of Homes  
Strategic Policy HP01: Housing Mix  Policy BE15: Planning for Inclusive Communities  
Heritage  
Policy BE17: Archaeological Remains  
Variety and Quality of Homes  
Policy HP02: Protecting the Existing Housing 
Stock  
Policy HP05: Affordable Housing  
Policy HP 03: Residential Density  
Policy HP04: Specialist Accommodation  
Policy HP06: Standards for New Housing  
Gypsy and Traveller Provision  
Policy HP07: Regularising Suitable Existing 
Traveller Sites  
Policy HP08: Safeguarding Permitted Sites  
POLICY HP09: Sub -Divis ion of Pitches or Plots  
POLICY HP10: Proposals for Gypsies, 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople on 
Windfall sites  
SO3: Deliver 
Sustainable 
Communities 
with Diverse 
Economic & 
Social -
cultural 
Opportunities 
for All  Economy and Jobs  
Strategic Policy PC01: Safeguarding 
Employment Land  
Retail  
Strategic Policy PC03: Retail and 
Commercial Leisure Growth  
Strategic Policy PC04: Retail 
Hierarchy of Designated Centres  
Community Infrastructure  
Strategic Policy PC10: Protecting 
and Enhancing Community Facilitie s  Economy and Jobs  
Policy PC02: Supporting the Rural Economy  
Retail  
Policy PC05: Brentwood Town Centre  
Policy PC06: Mixed Use Development in 
Designated Centres  
Policy PC07: Primary Shopping Areas  
Policy PC08: Non -centre Uses  
Policy PC09: Night -Time Economy   
Community Infrastructure  
Policy PC11: Education Facilities  
SO4: Deliver 
Beautiful, 
Biodiverse, 
Clean and a 
Functional 
Natural 
Environment  Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity  
Strategic Policy NE01: Protecting 
and Enhancing the Natural 
Environment  
Strategic Policy NE02 : Green and 
Blue Infrastructure  
Clean and Safe Environment  
Strategic Policy NE08: Air Quality  
Strategic Policy NE09: Flood Risk  Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity  
Policy NE03: Trees, Woodlands, Hedgerows  
Policy N E04: Thames Chase Community Forest  
Policy NE05: Open Space and Recreation 
Provision  
Policy NE06: Allotments and Community Food 
Growing Space  
Policy NE07: Protecting Land  for Gardens  
Clean and Safe Environment  
Policy NE10: Contaminated Land and 
Hazardous Su bstances  
Policy NE11: Floodlighting and Illumination  
 
  
261  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring Framework  
 
 
 
This section Deals with how the Council will monitor the Local Plan’s success in meeting the challenges and opportunities set  out in the planning 
policies to ensure effective delivery of the Plan.  
This will be done through the monitoring of the indicators  set out in the tables below on an annual basis which will be published through the 
Authorities Monitoring Report (AMR). The AMR will be used to report the performance of the Local Plan as well as recommending  any actions 
required to ensure the delivery of  the Plan.  
 
Appendix 3  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
262 Table 1: Monitoring Framework. Broad parameters for monitoring  policy implementation .  
Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Chapter 4: Managing Growth  
MG01  Spatial 
Strategy  7,752 new homes over the 
Plan period as a running total  
 Planning 
permissions  
 Achieve 7,752 new 
residential dwellings (net) 
over the Plan period 2016 -
2033.  
Target to also include the 
number of housing 
expected to be developed 
on an annual basis from the 
Housing Tra jectory.  80% or less of the running 
total of the Housing 
Trajectory is achieved over 
a three -year period.  Review the housing trajectory and 
assess reasons why 
developments are not coming 
forward as expected.  
If the five -year housing supply is 
not being ach ieved, then consider 
whether the policy requirements 
need to be reviewed as part of a 
full or focused review and, if 
necessary, consider undertaking 
a call for sites to include 
additional sites to help improve 
delivery of new homes.  
13 new gypsy and traveller 
pitches to be delivered over 
the plan period  
 13 new pitches to be 
delivered at the following 
sites (as identified in 
HP07): 
Oaktree Farm (7 pitches)  
Hunters Green (1 pitch)  
DHGV (5 pitches)  Failure to meet 13 new 
pitches over the Local Plan 
period.  Refresh the HELAA and/or 
SHLAA to identify new gypsy and 
traveller pitches to meet the 
borough’s needs.  
 
Consider whether the policy 
requirements need to be reviewed 
as part of a full or focused review.  
46.64 ha of employment land 
over the Plan period  A minimum of 33.76 ha (or 
2.81 ha per year) (net) of 
employment land provision 
over the remaining Plan 
period 2021 -2033  
  80% or less over a five 
year period of the minimum 
employment land need 
(2.81 ha per year)  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
 
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.   
263 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
(Based on the identified 
needs range of 33.76 - 
45.96 ha)   
Consider whether the policy 
requirements need to be reviewed 
as part of a full or focused review.  
1,604 sqm (net) of 
comparison retail floorspace  
 
4,438 sqm (net) of 
convenience floorspace  1,604 sqm (or 
approximately 94sqm per 
year) (net) of comparison 
retail floorspace over the 
Plan period  
 
4,438 sqm (or 
approximately 261 sqm per 
year) (net) of convenience 
floorspace over the Plan 
period  80% or less over a three 
year period of the average 
annual net comparison 
retail floorspace  
 
80% of less o ver a three 
year period of the average 
annual net convenience 
floorspace  Assess the reasons why net 
comparison retail floorspace 
and/or net convenience 
floorspace is not being achieved.  
 
Consider a refresh of the Retail 
Needs Assessment.  
 
Consider whether the policy 
requirements need to be reviewed 
as part of a full or focused review.  
MG05  Developers 
Contribution  Strategic Transport 
Infrastructure requirements 
as identified in the individual 
site allocation policies and 
the most up to date IDP Part 
B. 
 Planning 
permission  Appropriate level of funding 
collected based on the 
requirements set out in the 
most up to date IDP Part B 
for providing the required 
strategic transport 
infrastructure.  Failure to deliver a project 
that then results in a delay 
to the delivery of 
development sites allocated 
in the plan  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
Chapter 5: Resilient Built Enviro nment  
BE08  Strategic 
Transport 
Infrastructure  Strategic Transport 
Infrastructure requirements 
as identified in the individual 
site allocation policies and 
the most up to date IDP Part 
B. 
 Planning 
permission  Appropriate level of funding 
collected based on the 
requirements set out in the 
most up to date IDP Part B 
for providing the required 
strategic transport 
infrastructure.  Failure to deliver a project 
that then results in a delay 
to the delivery of 
development sites allocated 
in the plan  Work wit h lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
264 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
BE09  Sustainable  
Means  of 
Travel  and 
Walkable  
Streets  Develops provide an 
appropriate level of 
sustainable transport 
infrastructure as required by 
the policy  Planning 
permission  Developments provide 
access to appropriate 
sustainable travel 
infrastructure including:  
• Walking;  
• Cycling; and  
• Access to public 
transport  
No net loss of existing 
pedestrian and cycle paths  
 
Where appropriate access 
to car pools, car sharing, 
community buses and cycle 
schemes  Developments do not 
provide appropriate walking 
and cycle paths and access 
to public transport.  
A loss to the existing 
pedestrian and cycle p aths 
as a result of development.  Assess why pedestrian and/or 
cycle paths are not included 
within developments or why there 
is a net loss of pedestrian / cycle 
paths. Consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
BE11  Electric and 
Low-
Emission 
Vehicles  Provide sufficient occupier 
and visitor access to electric 
vehicle changing points  Planning 
Permission  All development include 
electric charging points 
wherever possible  80% of all new 
developments do not 
provide access to electric 
vehicle charging points in 
line with the most up to 
date Government guidance 
and/or Council strategy, 
whichever is greater.  Assess why electric vehicle 
charging points are not being 
included in developments. 
Consider whether the policy 
should be reviewed to set 
minimum standards for electric 
vehicle charging points to ensure 
uptake.  
BE13  Parking 
Standards  Provide the required amount 
of parking as determined by 
the most up to date Essex 
Parking Standards  Planning 
Permission  All developments adhere to 
the Essex Parking 
Standards as required by 
the most up to date parking 
standards Design and 
Good Practice document.  Not all developments 
provide the minimum level 
of parking spaces as 
required by the most up to 
date Essex Parking 
Standards guidance  Assess why not all developments 
meet the most up to date Essex 
Parking Standards Design and 
Good Practice requirements. 
Consider if a further review of the 
policy is required.   
265 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
No net loss of parking 
spaces for the Brentwood 
Town Centre development 
sites:  
R11: 97  
R12: 48  
R13: 122  
R14: 371  
 
Total current parking spaces 
totaling: 638  Planning 
Permission  No net loss of Town Centre 
car parking places.  R10, R11, R12, R13, and 
R14 total parking places 
are less than 80% of the 
original available parking 
spaces.  Assess why  there was a net loss 
of parking within Brentwood Town 
Centre. Consider if a further 
review of the policy is required.  
BE16  Conservation 
and 
Enhancemen
t of Historic 
Environment  National Heritage Risk 
Register  Planning 
permission  Sites R01, R02, R06, R22, 
E12, and E13 to provide a 
Heritage Statements as 
required by the site specific 
policy requirements.  
 
Reduction in the number of 
heritage assets on the 
Historic England’s ‘At Risk’ 
register. Reduction in the 
number of heritage assets 
considered to be ‘ at risk’ on 
the local list of heritage 
assets once established.  Heritage Statements are 
not provided for all 
development sites required 
to do so as stated within 
the individual site policies.  
 
Identification of a heritage 
asset newly listed on the ‘at 
risk’ register. Periodic 
increase in the number of 
heritage assets on the ‘at 
risk’ register in the borough. 
Identification of a locally 
listed heritage asset that 
could be at risk through 
periodic review.  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measure s to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
the policy is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
266 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Chapter 6: Housing Provision  
HP01  Housing Mix  Proposals of 10 or more to 
meet M4(2) or M4(3) Building 
Regulations  
 
Developments of 60 or more 
to meet 5% M4(3) Building 
Regulation  
 
 Planning 
permission  All developments of 10 or 
more dwellings meet the 
minimum requirement of 
M4(2) Building Regulation 
standards  
 
 5% of M4(3) Building 
Regulation standards for 
80% of developments of 60 
or more are not met.  
 Assess reasons why M4(3) 
Building Regulations are not 
being met. If this requirement is 
not being met due to viability 
reassess viability. Consider 
whet her the policy requirements 
need to be reviewed as part of a 
full or focused review.  
 
 
Developments of 100 or 
more to provide 5% Self and 
Custom Build  All developments of 100 or 
more provide 5% Self and 
Custom Build homes.  5% Self and Custom Build 
dwelling are not met for 
80% of development of 100 
or more are not met  Assess reasons why 5% Self and 
Custom Build requirement is not 
being met. Consider whether the 
policy requirements need to be 
reviewed as part of a full or 
focused review.  
HP04  Special ist 
Accommodat
ion Appropriate level of 
Specialist Accommodation is 
provided as indicated in the 
Council’s ‘Specialist 
Accommodation Report’  Planning 
Permission  Appropriate level and type 
of Specialist 
Accommodation is provided 
as indicated in the 
Council’s most up to date 
Specialist Accommodation 
Report and other relevant 
evidence base.  80% of the required 
Specialist Accommodation 
is provided over the plan 
period.  Assess why the Specialist 
Accommodation requirements are 
not being met. If there are viability 
concerns, update the Viability 
Assessment and review the policy 
requirements.  
HP05  Affordable 
Housing  All developments of 10 or 
more to provide 35% 
affordable housing  Planning 
Permission  All developments of 10 or 
more to provide 35% 
affordable housing as 
required by the policy  80% of all developments of 
10 or more dwellings to 
provide 35% affordable 
housing  Assess why the affordable 
housing requirements are not 
being met. If concerns around 
viability, update the Viability 
Assessment and review the policy 
requirements.   
267 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Tenure split to be 86% 
Affordable / Social Rent and 
14% of other forms of 
affordable housing.  Appropriate tenure split as 
required by the policy.  80% of all developments 10 
or more to provide 86% 
affordable / social rent and 
14% of other forms of 
affordable housing  Assess why the tenure split is not 
being achieved. If concerns 
around viability, update the 
viability assessment. If the needs 
of the borough have changed, 
then consider updating the 
housing evidence  and updating 
the policy to reflect the new 
housing tenure split.  
HP08  Safeguarding 
Permitted 
Sites  Gypsy and Traveller  pitches 
listed in criteria B of the 
policy are granted permanent 
planning permission  Planning 
Permission  All Gypsy and Traveller 
sites and associated 
pitches are granted 
planning permission over 
the plan period.  80% or less of the Gypsy 
and Traveller site s 
identified in the policy are 
granted planning 
permission  Consider undertaking a Gypsy 
and Traveller Accommodation 
Needs Assessment to determine 
if the needs within the borough 
have changed. Consider 
reviewing the policy.  
HP10  Proposals for 
Gypsies, 
Travellers, 
ad Travelling 
Showpeople 
on Windfall 
Sites  New Gypsy and Traveller 
sites come forward during 
the plan period on windfall 
site. Planning 
Permission  All gypsy and traveller 
windfall sites come forward 
in line with the policy 
requirements. Those that 
are granted permission on 
greenbelt sites have clearly 
demonstrated very special 
circumstances.  Gypsy and Traveller sites 
are granted permission on 
appeal.  Assess the justifications for gypsy 
and traveller sites being granted 
on ap peal. Consider updating the 
Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Needs 
Assessment and reviewing 
policies HP0 7: Provision for 
Gypsy and Traveller through to 
HP10: Proposals for Gypsies, 
Travellers, ad Travelling 
Showpeople on Windfall Sites. 
Amend these polici es where 
needed.  
Chapter 7: Prosperous Communities  
PC03  Retail and 
Commercial 
Growth  Retail floorspace 
requirements met in line with 
policy MG01.  
 Planning 
Permission  Appropriate level of retail 
floorspace provided as 
indicated within policy 
MG01 and site policies 
R01, R02, R 14, and R15  80% or less of the policy 
required retail floorspace is 
achieved in accordance 
with the site specific 
policies.  Assess the reasons why retail 
floorspace is not being achieved.  
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
268 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Retail floorspace to be 
provided as part of the 
following mix -use 
developments  
 
Dunton Hills Gadren  Village 
(R01  
Land at West Horndon 
Industrial Estate (R02)  
William Hunter Way Car Park 
(R14)  
Wates Way Industrial Estate 
(R15)  Consider a refresh of the Retail 
Needs Assessment.  
 
Consider whethe r the policy 
requirements need to be reviewed 
as part of a full or focused review.  
PC10  Protecting 
and 
Enhancing 
Community 
Facilities  Maintaining the existing level 
of Community Facilities.  Planning 
Permission  No net loss of existing 
community facilities, 
include those registered as 
Assets of Community Value 
(ACV).  The loss of a community 
facility to an alternative use.  Assess why the community facility 
was loss (i.e. there was no longer 
a need for the facility). Consider 
updating the Council’s Built 
Facilities Strategy. Consider 
reviewing the policy.  
Chapter 8: Natural Environment  
NE01  Protecting 
and 
Enhancing 
the Natural 
Environment  Biodiversity net gains  
 Planning 
permission  Achieve biodiversity net 
gains  New developments are 
unable to achieve 
biodiversity net gains.  Assess why biodiversity net gains 
are not able to be achieved on 
site(s). Consider a review of how 
the policy has been applied, and 
whether the policy should be 
reviewed.  
Sites within the RAMS Zone 
of Influence make 
appropriate contribution 
toward mitigation.  Sites within the RAMS 
Zone of Influence make 
appropriate contribution 
towards mitigation as 
required by the policy and New developments not 
making appropriate 
contributions towards 
mitigations as required by 
the RAMS Strategy  Assess reasons why RAMS 
contributions were not made as 
required by the RAMS Strategy 
and the policy. Consider if  
269 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
the most up to date 
evidence.  changes to the policy wording are 
required.  
No impacts on SSSI’s or 
Sites  of Local Importance  No impacts from 
developments, either 
individually or in 
combination, on SSSI’s or 
Sites of Local Importance  Unacceptable 
environmental impacts on 
SSSI’s and/or Sites of 
Local Importance as a 
result of an individual 
development or a 
combination of 
developments.  Assess reasons why 
unacceptable environmental 
impacts on SSSI’s and/or Sites of 
Local Importance have occurred. 
Consider reviewing the policy 
wording.  
NE02  Green and 
Blue 
Infrastructure  Maximise opportunities for 
improving Green and Blue 
Infrastructure (GBI)  Planning 
Permission  Existing Green and Blue 
Infrastructure are protected 
and enhanced where 
possible  Adverse impact to green 
and blue infrastructure as a 
result of development.  
Lack of appropriate 
specification and 
maintenance plans for the 
proposed green and blue 
Infrastructure through the 
life of the development.  
 Assess the reasons why 
appropriate protect and/or 
enhancement to Green and Blue 
Infrastructure was not achieved. 
Consider r eviewing the policy 
wording.  
Development adjacent to 
water course or water body, 
do not have any adverse on 
the function or quality of the 
Blue Infrastructure.  No adverse impacts on 
water quality as a result of 
those developments 
located near water courses 
and/or water bodies.  Adverse impact on water 
courses and/or water 
bodies as a result of 
development.  Assess reasons why adverse 
impacts to water courses and 
water bodies. Consider reviewing 
the policy wording.  
NE08  Air Quality  Developments do not create 
an unacceptable risk to Air 
Quality.  
All development types listed 
within the policy, criteria C 
are required to submit an Air Planning 
Permission  All developments required 
by the policy submit an Air 
Quality Assessment which 
clearly demonstrates no 
risk to air quality.  Planning permission is 
granted to developments 
where:  
• An Air Quality 
Assessment has Assess reason why planning 
permission was granted to a 
development which did not meet 
the requirements of the policy. 
Consider whether a review of the 
policy wording is required.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
270 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Quality Assessment as part 
of the planning application 
process.  not submitted; 
and/or  
• An unacceptable 
impact on air 
quality is identify  
 
Chapter 9: Site Allocations  
R01 Dunton Hills 
Garden 
Village  Housing:  
• Delivery of 1,650 
new homes, 
providing 35% 
affordable housing  
• 5% self and Custom 
build homes  
• Delivery of three 
care homes of 
around 80 bed 
spaces each  
• Minimum of 5 new 
Gypsy and Traveller 
pitches  Planning 
Permission  • 1,950 new 
dwell ings 
• 577 affordable 
housing  
• Approximately 82 
self and custom 
build homes  
• Three, 80 -bed care 
homes  
• Five gypsy and 
traveller pitches  • Deliver the full 
identified housing 
of 1,650 new 
dwelling over the 
plan period  
• Deliver the full 35% 
affordable housing 
requirement 
(approximately 
577) 
• Deliver 5% Self and 
Custom Build 
homes 
(approximately 82 
dwellings)  
• Three, 80 bed care 
homes  
• 5 Gypsy and 
Traveller pitches to 
be provided within 
the first five years 
of development 
coming forward  Assess why the housing 
requi rements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs.   
271 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Employment:  
5.5 ha of employment land of 
E use class  A minimum of 5.5 ha 
employment land provision 
over the remaining Plan 
period 2021 -2033  
 Less than 90% of 
employment land is 
provided as identified within 
the policy.  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
 
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.  
Infrastructure:  
Delivery of at least one 
secondary school with 
sufficient capacity to co -
locate early years and 
childcare nursery facilities  At least one secondary 
school and co -located early 
years and childcare nursery 
facilities  Secondary school and early 
years and childcare nursery 
not provided  Assess why the Secondary 
school, early years, and/or 
childcare facil ities have not been 
provided.  
 
Consider whether a review of the 
viability assessment is needed.  
 
Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
Environment and Heritage:  
• Minimum of 50% of 
the site is green and 
blue infrastructure  
• National Heritage 
Risk Register  • 50% of the site is 
green and blue 
infrastructure  
• Heritage Statement 
included with 
application  • A minimum of 50% 
of the site is not 
green and blue 
infrastructure as 
required by the 
policy  
• Heritage Statement 
not included in 
application  • Assess why 50% of the 
site was not green and 
blue infrastructure as 
required by the policy.  
• Consider how the Council 
can contribute to 
measures to im prove the 
condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider 
whether policy BE16 
Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
272 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Environment  is 
contributing to the neglect 
of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider 
whether the policy should 
be reviewed.  
R02 Land at West 
Horndon 
Industrial 
Estate  Housing:  
• Deliver 580 new 
dwelling  
• 35% affordable 
housing  
• 5% Self and Custom 
Build homes  
• 60-bed residential 
care home or 
appropriate specialist 
accommodation  Planning 
Permission  • Provide the full 580 
new dwelling  
• Provide 35% 
affordable housing 
(approximately 203 
dwellings)  
• Provide 5% Self 
and Custom Build 
homes 
(approximately 29 
new dwellings)  
• One 60 -bed care 
home or other 
appropriate 
specialist 
accommodation to 
meet the needs of 
the borough  • Less than 90% of 
the full identified 
housing 
requirement is met  
• Less than 90% of 
the affordable 
housing 
requirement is met  
• Less than 90% of 
the Self and 
Custom Build 
requirement is met  
• 60-bed care home 
or other appropriate 
specialist 
accommodation is 
not met.  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for si te 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs.  
Employment:  
Around 2 ha of employment 
land with an appropriate mix 
of retail, commercial, and 
leisure floorspace  A minimum of 2 ha 
employment land provision 
over the remaining Plan 
period 2021 -2033  
 Less than 90% of 
employment needs are 
provided  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
 
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify addition al employment 
sites to meet job growth.   
273 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
  Environment and Heritage:  
Preparation of a Heritage 
Statement   Heritage Statement 
including in application  No Heritage Statement 
included in application  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16 Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R03 Land North 
of Shenfield  Housing:  
• Provide 825 new 
homes  
• 35% affordable 
housing  
• 5% self and custom 
builds  
• 60 bed residential 
care home  Planning 
Permission  • 825 new dwelling  
• 288 affordable 
dwellings  
• 41 self and custom 
build dwellings  
• 60 bed residential 
care home  • Less than 825 new 
dwelling are 
provided  
• 90% of less of the 
affordable housing 
is provided  
• Less than 90% self 
and custom build 
homes are 
provided  
• Care home or 
appropriate mix of 
specialist 
accommodation to 
be meets not 
provided.  Asses s why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing n eeds.  
Employment:  
2ha of employment land  2ha of employment land  Less than 90% of the 
required employment land 
is provided  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
 
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
274 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
 
Infrastructure:  
• Provide vehicle 
access off 
Chelmsford Road 
and Alexander Lane  
• Provide multi -
function green 
infrastructure, 
including maintaining 
the provision of the 
existing playing field 
on site.  
• 2.1 ha of land for 
primary school and 
early years and 
childcare nursey.  • Vehicle access off 
Chelmsford Road 
and Alexander 
Lane  
• Existing Green and 
Blue Infrastructure 
are protected and 
enhanced where 
possible. No loss of 
the existing playing 
field currently on 
site 
• Provide primary 
school, early years 
and childcare 
nursey  • A minimum of two 
vehicle access 
points into the site 
are provided 
agreed with ECC  
• Adverse impact to 
green and blue 
infrastructure as a 
result of 
development. Lack 
of appropriate 
specification an d 
maintenance plans 
for the proposed 
green and blue 
Infrastructure 
through the life of 
the development.  
• Required 
educational 
facilities not 
provided.  
 • Work with lead 
organisations and 
developers to unblock 
delivery of infrastructure 
projects. If necessary 
review alternative ways of 
meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 
• Assess the reasons why 
appropriate protect and/or 
enhancement to Green 
and Blue Infrastructure 
was not achieved. 
Consider reviewing the 
policy wording for policy 
BE16 Green and Blue 
Infrastructu re. 
 
• Assess the reasons why 
the policy required 
educational facilities were 
not provided.  
R04 Ford 
Headquarter
s and 
Council 
Depot  Housing:  
• Provide 133 new 
homes  
• 35% affordable 
housing  
• 5% Self and Custom 
Build  Planning 
Permission  • 133 new dwelling  
• 46 affordable 
dwellings  
• 6 self and custom 
build dwellings  
• 60-bed residential 
care home or other • Less than 133 new 
dwelling are 
provided  
• 90% of less of the 
affordable housing 
is provided  
• Less than 90% self 
and custom build Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability c oncerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to  
275 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
• 60-bed residential 
care home or 
appropriate mix of 
specialist 
accommodation  appropriate 
specialist 
accommodation  homes are 
provided  
• Care home or other 
appropriate 
specialist 
accommodation is 
not provided.  ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs.  
Employment:  
2ha of employment land  2ha of employment land  Less than 90% of the 
employment land is 
provided  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
 
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.  
 
Infrastructure:  
• Provide Vehicle 
access off Eagle 
Way and The Drive  
• Provide multi -
functional green 
infrastructure  
• Provide appropriate 
financial contribution 
towards 
infrastructure 
improvements as set 
out in the Council’s 
IDP • Vehicle access off 
Eagle Way and 
The Drive  
• multi -functional 
green infrastructure  
• Appropriate 
financial 
contribution 
towards other 
infrastructure 
improvements  • A minimum of two 
vehicle access 
points into the site 
are provided 
agreed with ECC  
• Adverse impact to 
green and blue 
infrastructure as a 
result of 
development. Lac k 
of appropriate 
specification and 
maintenance plans 
for the proposed 
green and blue 
Infrastructure 
through the life of 
the development.  
 • Work with lead 
organisations and 
developers to unblock 
delivery of infrastructure 
projects. If necessary 
review altern ative ways of 
meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 
• Assess the reasons why 
appropriate protect and/or 
enhancement to Green 
and Blue Infrastructure 
was not achieved. 
Consider reviewing the 
policy wording for policy 
NE02: Green and Blue 
Infrastructure  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
276 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Heritage:  
Grade II listed Blenheim 
House and the Chapel of 
Royal Anglian and Essex 
Regiments  No negative impact on the 
Grade II listed Blenheim 
House and the Chapel of 
Royal Anglian and Essex 
Regiments  Negative impacts occur on 
the listed building within the 
area as a direct result of 
development.  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16 Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R06 Land off 
Nags Head 
Lane  Housing:  
• 125 new dwelling  
• 35% affordable 
housing  
• 5% Self and Custom 
Build  Planning 
Permission  • 125 new dwellings  
• 43 affordable 
dwellings  
• 6 Self and Custom 
Build dwellings  • Less than 125 new 
dwelling are 
provided  
• 90% of less of the 
affordable housing 
is provided  
• Less than 90% self 
and custom build 
homes are 
provided  
 Assess why the housing 
requirements are n ot being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs.  
Infrastructure:  
Provision for public open 
space  Provide multi -functional 
green infrastructure  
 Adverse impact to green 
and blue infrastructure as a 
result of development. Lack 
of appropriate specification 
and maintenance plans for 
the proposed green and 
blue Infrastructure through 
the life of the development.  
 Assess the reasons why 
appropriate protect and/or 
enhancement to Green and Blue 
Infrastructure was not achieved. 
Consider reviewing the policy 
wording for policy NE02 Green 
and Blue Infrastructu re  
277 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Environment and Heritage:  
 
National Risk Register  Heritage Statement 
submitted with application  No Heritage Statement is 
submitted with the 
application  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R07 Sow and 
Grow 
Nursery  Housing:  
• 38 new homes  
• 35% affordable 
housing  Planning 
Permission  • 38 new dwellings  
• 13 affordable 
dwellings  • Less than 38 new 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable housing  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs.  
Infrastructure:  
Appropriate developers 
contribution as set out in the 
Council’s IDP towards 
highway infrastructure  Appropriate developers 
contribution as set out in 
the Council’s IDP towards 
highway infrastructure  Insufficient developers 
contribution made as 
required by policy  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 
Environment and Heritage:  
National Risk Register  No adverse impacts of 
Grade II listed Park and 
Garden of South Weald 
Park Adverse impacts on the 
Grade II listed Park and 
Garden of South Weald as 
a result of the development.  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether  
policy BE16: Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
278 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R08 Land at 
Mascalls 
Lane  Housing:  
9 new dwellings  Planning 
Permission  9 new dwellings  Less than 9 new dwelling  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
 
Infrastructure:  
Appropriate financial 
contribution as determined 
by the Council’s IDP  Appropriate financial 
contribution  No financial contribution  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 
R09 Land of 
Warley Hill  Housing:  
• 43 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable 
housing  Planning 
Permission  • 43 new dwellings  
• 15 affordable 
dwelling  • Less than 43 new 
dwellings  
• Less than 90% 
affordable housing  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are  viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs.  
Environment and Heritage:  
National Risk Register  No negative impacts of the 
Grade II listed Warley 
Hospital, Tower at Warley 
Hospital and Lodge to 
Warley Hospital  Adverse impacts on the 
Grade II listed buildings as 
a result of the development.  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16: Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets,  
279 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
and if  so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R10 Brentwood 
Railway 
Station  Housing:  
• 200 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable 
housing  
• 5% Self and Custom 
Build dwellings  Planning 
Permission  • 200 new dwellings  
• 70 affordable 
dwelling  
• 10 self and custom 
build dwellings  • Less than 200 new 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable housing  
• 90% or less self 
and custom builds  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call f or site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs.  
Infrastructure:  
• Adequate parking for 
future rail traveler 
needs  
• Developers 
contribution as 
required by the 
Council’s IDP  • Adequate parking 
for future rail 
traveller needs  
• Appropriate 
developers 
contribution  • Insufficient parking 
provided  
• Insufficient 
developers 
contribution made 
as required by 
policy  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastruc ture projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 
R11 Westbury 
Road Car 
Park Housing:  
• 45 new dwelling  
• 35% affordable 
housing  Planning 
Permission  • 45 new dwellings  
• 15 affordable 
dwellings  • Less than 45 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable housing  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure  the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
280 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Infrastructure:  
• Developers 
contribution to 
Highway 
improvements as 
required by the IDP  
• No net loss of Town 
Centre parking – 638 
parking spots  • Sufficient 
developers 
contribution  
• 638 car parking 
places for the Town 
Centre allocate 
sites  • Insufficient 
developers 
contribution  
• Loss of Town 
Centre parking as a 
result of 
development  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 
Environment and Heritage:  
National Risk Register  Heritage Statement  No Heritage Statement  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16 Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R12 Land at 
Hunter 
House  Housing:  
• 48 new dwelling  
• 35% affordable 
dwellings  Planning 
Permission  • 48 new dwellings  
• 16 affordable 
dwellings  • Less than 48 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable housing  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viab ility Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
• Developers 
contribution to 
Highway • Sufficient 
developers 
contribution  
• 638 car parking 
places for the Town • Insufficient 
developers 
contribution  
• Loss of Town 
Centre parking as a Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways  
281 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
improvements as 
required by the IDP  
• No net loss of Town 
Centre parking – 638 
parking spots  Centre allocate 
sites result of 
development  of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 
Environment and Heritage:  
National Risk Register  Heritage Statement  No Heritage Statement  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16 Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R13 Chatham 
Way Car 
Park Housing:  
• 31 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable 
housing  Planning 
Permission  • 31 new dwellings  
• 10 affordable 
housing  • Less than 31 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable housing  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
• Developers 
contribution to 
Highway 
improvements as 
required by the IDP  
• No net loss of Town 
Centre parking – 638 
parking spots  • Sufficient 
developers 
contribution  
• 638 car parking 
places for the Town 
Centre allocate 
sites • Insufficient 
developers 
contribution  
• Loss of Town 
Centre parking as a 
result of 
development  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs . 
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
282 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Environment and Heritage:  
National Risk Register  Heritage Statement  No Heritage Statement  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16: Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R14 William 
Hunter Way 
Car Park  Housing:  
• 300 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable 
housing  
• 5% Self and Custom 
Build dwelling  Planning 
Permission  • 300 new dwellings  
• 105 affordable 
housing  
• 15 self and custom 
build  • Less than 300 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable housing  
• 90% or less self 
and custom build  Assess why the housing 
requirements are  not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
• Developers 
contribution to 
Highway 
improvements as 
required by the IDP  
• No net loss of Town 
Centre parking – 638 
parking spots  • Sufficient 
developers 
contribution  
• 638 car parking 
places for the Town 
Centre allocate 
sites • Insufficient 
developers 
contribution  
• Loss of Town 
Centre parking as a 
result of 
development  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs . 
 
Environment and Heritage:  
National Risk Register  Heritage Statement  No Heritage Statement  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16: Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic  
283 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if  so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R15 Wates Way 
Industrial 
Estate  Housing:  
• 46 new dwellings  Planning 
Permission  • 46 new dwellings  • Less than 80 
dwellings  
 Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
  Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements as 
required by the IDP  Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
R16 Land off 
Doddinghurst 
Road  Housing:  
• 200 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable  Planning 
Permission  • 200 new dwellings  
• 70 affordable  • Less than 200 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable housing  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements as 
required by the IDP  Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
284 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
R19 Land at 
Priests Lane  Housing:  
• 75 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable  Planning 
Permission  • 75 new dwellings  
• 26 affordable  
 • Less than 75 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be und ertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
  Infrastructure:  
• Replacement playing 
field 
• Developers 
contribution to 
Highway 
improvements as 
required by the IDP  • Replacement 
playing field  
• Sufficient 
developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 
R21 Land South 
of 
Ingatestone  Housing:  
• 161 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable  Planning 
Permission  • 161 new dwellings  
• 56 affordable 
dwellings  • Less than 161 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable  
 Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs   
285 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements as 
required by the IDP  
 Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
Environment and Heritage:  
National Rik Register  Heritage Statement 
submitted with application  No Heritage Statement 
submitted with application  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16 Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R22 Land 
adjacent to 
the A12, 
Ingatestone  Housing:  
• 57 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable 
dwellings   • 57 new dwellings  
• 20 affordable  • Less than 57 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements as 
required by the IDP  
  Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
286 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Environment and Heritage:  
National Rik Register   Heritage Statement 
submitted with application  No Heritage Statement 
submitted with application  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16 Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
R23 Brizes 
Corner Field  Housing:  
• 23 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable  Planning 
Permission  • 23 new dwellings  
• 8 affordable  • Less than 23 new 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements as 
required by the IDP Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
R24 Land off 
Stocks Lane  Housing:  
• 40 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable  Planning 
Permission  • 40 new dwellings  
• 14 affordable  • Less than 40 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update th e Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to  
287 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements as 
required by the IDP  
 Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
R25 Land North 
of Wollard 
Way Housing:  
• 40 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable  Planning 
Permission  • 40 new dwellings  
• 14 affordable  • Less than 40 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to 
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements as 
required by the IDP  Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
R26 Land North 
of Ochard 
Piece  Housing:  
• 30 new dwellings  
• 35% affordable  Planning 
Permission  • 30 new dwellings  
• 10 affordable  • Less than 30 
dwellings  
• 90% or less 
affordable  Assess why the housing 
requirements are not being met. If 
there are viability concerns, 
update the Viability Assessment.  
Consider whether a call for site 
should be undertaken and 
additional sites allocated to Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
288 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
ensure the borough can meet its 
identified housing needs  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements as 
required by the IDP  Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
E11 Brentwood 
Enterprise 
Park Employment:  
25.85 ha of employment  Planning 
Permission  25.85 employment – B2, 
B8, and sui generis  90% or less employment  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements and 
early years child care as 
required by the IDP Sufficient developers 
contribution  Insufficient developers 
contribution  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
E12 Childerditch 
Industrial 
Estate  Employment:  
20.64 ha of employment land  Planning  
Permission  24.64 employment – Class 
E, B2, B8, and sui generis  90% or less employment  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements and Sufficient developers 
contribution  Insufficient developers 
contribution  Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways  
289 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
early years child care as 
required by the IDP  of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
Environment and Heritage:  
National Risk Register  Heritage Statement 
submitted with application  No Heritage Statement is 
submitted with application  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16: Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
E10 Codham Hall 
Farm  Employment:  
9.6 ha of employment  Planning 
Permission  9.6 ha employment – Class 
E, B2, B8 or sui generis 
uses  90% or less employment  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements and 
early years child care as 
required by the IDP  Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
E13 East Hordon 
Hall Employment:  
9.6 ha employment  Planning 
Permission  9.6 ha employment – Class 
E, B2, B8, or sui generis  90% or less employment  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March  2022  
 
 
290 Plan 
Policy  Policy 
Name  Indicator  Delivery 
Mechanism  Target  Trigger for action  Action  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements and 
early years child care as 
required by the IDP  Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
Environment and Heritage:  
National Risk Register  Heritage Statement 
submitted with application  No Heritage Statement 
submitted with application  Consider how the Council can 
contribute to measures to improve 
the condition of the ‘at risk’ 
heritage assets. Consider whether 
policy BE16: Conservation and 
Enhancement of Historic 
Environment  is contributing to the 
neglect of the heritage assets, 
and if so, consider whether the 
policy should be reviewed.  
E08 Land 
Adjacent to 
A12 and S lip 
Road, 
Ingatestone  Employment:  
2.06 ha employment  Planning 
Permission  2.06 ha employment – 
Class E, B2, B8, or sui 
generis  90% or less employment  Assess the reasons why 
employment land provision is not 
being achieved.  
Consider a refresh the HELAA to 
identify additional employment 
sites to meet job growth.  
Infrastructure:  
Developers contribution to 
Highway improvements and 
early years child care as 
required by the IDP  Sufficient developers 
contribution  
 Insufficient developers 
contribution  
 Work with lead organisations and 
developers to unblock delivery of 
infrastructure projects. If 
necessary review alternative ways 
of meeting the infrastructure 
needs.  
 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
291  
 
 
 
 
Schedule of plans and 
policies which will be 
superseded by the new Plan  
 
In accordance with Regulation 8 (5) of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) 
Regulations 2012, the following Development Plan Documents and Policies will be superseded by 
the Local Plan:  
Table 1: Schedule of Superseded Documents  
Superseded Development Plan Document  Date Adopted  
Brentwood Replacement Local Plan 2005  August 2005  
 
Table 2: Schedule of Superseded Policies  
Superseded Replacement Local Plan 2005  Policies  
CP1 General Development Criteria  
CP2 New Development and Sustainable Development Choices  
CP3 Transport Assessments  
CP4 The Provision of Infrastructure and Community Facilities  
H3 Community Uses in Residential Development  
H4 Mixed Use Development  
H5 Changes of Use of Upper Floors  
H6 Small Unit Accommodation  
H7 Single Storey Dwellings  
H8 Conversions  
H9 Affordable Housing on Larger Sites  
H10 Affordable Rural Housing  
Appendix 4  
292 Superseded Replacement Local Plan 2005  Policies  
H11 Supported Accommodation  
H12 Residential Homes  
H14 Housing Density  
H15 Hutton Mount  
H16 Lifetime Homes  
H17 Dormer Windows  
E1 Areas Allocated for General Employment  
E2 Areas Allocated for Office Purposes  
E4 Sites for Additional Employment Land  
E5 Land Adjacent to Council Depot, Warley  
E6 Childerditch Industrial Park, Warley  
E8 Employment Development Criteria  
S1 New Major Retail Developments  
S3 Petrol Filling Retail Developments  
S4 Non -Retail Uses within Local Sho pping Cantres and Parades  
T1 Travel Plans  
T2 New Development and Highway Considerations  
T3 Traffic Management  
T5 Parking - General  
T6 Public Car Parking Strategy  
T7 Off Street Public Car Parking  
T8 On -Street Parking  
T9 Commuter Car Parking  
T10 Access for Persons with Disabilities  
T11 Bus Services  
T12 Rail Services  
T13 Taxis  
T14 Cycling  
T15 Pedestrian Facilities  
GB1 New Development  
GB2 Development Criteria  
GB3 Settlements Excluded from the Green Belt  
GB4 Established Areas of Development  
GB5 Extensions to Dwellings  
GB6 Replacement Dwellings  
GB7 Garages, Swimming Pools/Enclosures and Outbuildings  
GB8 Extensions to Gardens  
GB9 Havering Grove  
GB10 Subdivision of Dwellings  
GB11 Temporary Siting of Mobile Homes  
GB12 Permanent Dwellings for Agricultural Dwellings  
GB13 Removal of Agricultural Occupancy Conditions  
GB14 Agricultural Buildings  
GB15 Re-Use and Adaptation of Rural Buildings for Small -Scale Employment, Tourism, 
Leisure, and Community Uses  
GB16 Residential Conversions  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
293 Superseded Replacement Local Plan 2005  Policies  
GB17 Conversion or Change of Use of Listed Buildings  
GB18 Existing Inappropriate Development Sites  
GB19 Farm Shops and Retailing  
GB22 Outdoor Facilities  
GB23 Ancillary Buildings  
GB25 Riding Schools and Livery Stables  
GB26 Oth er Stables  
GB27 Access to Countryside  
LT1 Strategic Public Open Spaces  
LT2 Development of Existing Urban Open Spaces  
LT3 Areas Deficient in Open Space  
LT4 Provision of Open Space in New Development  
LT5 Displacement of Open Land Uses  
LT6 The Brentwood Centre  
LT8 Use of Redundant Institutional, Recreational and Community Buildings  
LT9 Highwood Hospital Site  
LT10 Changes of Use or New Buildings for Institutional Purposes  
LT11 Retention of Existing Local Community Facilities  
LT15 Hotel Accommodation in the Urban Area  
LT16 Bed & Breakfast and Self -catering Accommodation  
LT19 Accessibility to Premises to which the Public are Admitted and to Employment 
Generating Developments  
C3 County Wildlife Sites, Local Nature Reserves and Other Habi tats and Natural Features of 
Local Value  
C4 Management of Woodlands  
C5 Retention and Provision of Landscaping and Natural Features in Development  
C6 Tree Preservation Orders and Works to Preserved Trees  
C7 Development Affecting Preserved Trees, Ancient  Woodland and Trees in Conservation 
Areas  
C8 Special Landscape Areas  
C9 Ancient Landscapes and Historic Parks and Gardens  
C10 Protected Lanes  
C11 Thames Chase Community Forest  
C12 Landscape lmprovements  
C14 Development Affecting Conservation Areas  
C15 Listed Buildings – Demolitions, Alterations or Extensions  
C16 Development within the Vicinity of a Listed Building  
C17 Change of use of a Listed Building  
C18 Ancient Monuments  
C19 Secured by Design  
C20 Shop Fronts  
C21 Illuminated Advertisements  
C22 Signs within Conservation Areas or on Listed Buildings  
C23 Externally Illuminated Hanging Signs  
C24 Non-Illuminated Advertisements  
C25 Floodlighting and Other Forms of Illumination   
294 Superseded Replacement Local Plan 2005  Policies  
IR2 Telecommunications  
IR3 Protecting the Best and Most Versatile Agricultural Land  
IR4 Recycling Facilities  
IR5 Energy and Water Conservation and the Use of Renewable Sources of Energy in New 
Development  
IR6 Renewable Energy Schemes  
PC1 Land Contaminated by " Hazardous Substances  
PC4 Noise  
PC5 Traffic Noise  
PC6 Transport Pollution  
PC7 Areas of Poor Air Quality  
TC1 Vacant and Redevelopment Sites within Residentially Allocated Areas  
TC2 Residential Replacement  
TC3 Mixed Use Development  
TC4 Use of Upper Floors  
TC5 Type of Accommodation  
TC6 Small Scale Shops  
TC7 Non -Retail uses  
TC8 Professional/Financial Services  
TC9 The Telephone Exchange  
TC10 Site of the William Hunter Way Car Park  
TC11 Traffic in the High Street  
TC12 Landscaping in the Town Centre  
TC13 Pedestrian Areas  
TC14 Advertisements and Shop Fronts  
TC15 Shop Fronts Facing William Hunter Way  
TC16 Non -Illuminated Advertisements Fronting William Hunter Way  
TC19 Medical/Health Uses  
APP1 Ex tracts from the adopted Essex Design Guide for Residential and Mixed Use Areas  
APP2 Vehicle Parking Standards  
APP3 Advertisements and Shop Front Guidance: Additional Advice to Applicants  
APP4  Access for Disabled Persons  
APP5  Miscellaneous Residential Design Guidance  
  
295  
 
 
 
Glossary  
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATION S 
ACV Assets of Community Value  
AMR  Authority Monitoring Report  
AQMAs  Air Quality Management Areas  
ASELA  Association of South Essex Local Authorities  
BRE Building Research Establishment  
BREEAM  Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method  
CDA  Critical Drainage Area  
CHP  Combined Heat and Power  
CIL Community Infrastructure Levy  
DEFRA  Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs  
DH District Heating and cooling systems  
DM Development Management  
DPD  Development Plan Document  
EA Environment Agency  
ECC  Essex County Council  
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment  
ELR Employment Land Review  
EqIA  Equalities Impact Assessment  
FTTP  Fibre to the Premises (broadband)  
GBI Green and blue infrastructure  
GPDO  General Permitted Development Order  
GTAA  Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment  
HCA  Homes and Community Agency  
HELAA  Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment  
HRA  Habitat Regulation Assessment  
IDP Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
JSP (South Essex) Joint Strategic Plan  
Appendix 5 Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
296 LAA Local Area Agreement  
LCA Landscape Character Assessment  
LCAP  Landscape Conservation Action Plan  
NPPF  National Planning Policy Framework  
OAHN  Objective Assessment of Housing Need  
ONS  Office of National Statistics  
PPG  Planning practice guidance  
PPTS  Planning Policy for Traveller Sites  
RAMS  Recreational disturbance Avoidance Mitigation Strategy  
SA/SEA  Sustainability Appraisal/Strategic Environmental Assessment  
SCI Statement of Community Involvement  
SFRA  Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  
SHLAA  Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  
SHMA  Strategic Housing Market Assessment  
SoCG  Statement of Common Ground  
SPD Supplementary Planning Document  
SSSI  Site of Special Scientific Interest  
SuDS Sustainable Drainage Systems  
SWMP  Surface Water Management Plan  
Note: This abbreviation is sometimes used for Site Waste Management Plans.  
GLOSSARY  
Affordable housing  Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing which is provided to specific 
eligible households whose housing needs are not met by the market housing on offer 
(including housing that provides a subsidised route to home owners hip and/or is for essential 
local workers). Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices.  
Air Quality Management 
Areas  (AQMAs)  Areas designated by local authorities because they are not likely to achieve national air 
quality objectives by the relevant deadlines.  
Ancient woodland  An area that has been wooded continuously since at least 1600 AD. It includes ancient 
semi -natural woodland and plantations on ancient woodland sites (PAWS).  
Archaeological interest  There wil l be archaeological interest in a heritage asset if it holds, or potentially holds, 
evidence of past human activity worthy of expert investigation at some point.  
Biophilic design  Biophilic Design responds to the well documented knowledge that humans have an innate 
connection to nature and natural processes. It offers an approach to creating buildings and 
spaces that respond to our human needs – thereby making design ‘human -scale’.  
Incorporating biophilic design principles to the design of places and buildi ngs not only means 
integrating nature (green infrastructure) into design proposals, but also incorporating natural 
analogues into the design of the built elements; these can include using elements that use 
references to, representations of, or mimic aspect s of nature such as natural materials, 
colours, textures, natural geometries (fractals and curves), organic forms and patterns.  
Brownfield sites  Land which is or has been previously developed as opposed to greenfield land which has 
never been developed. See ‘previously developed land’.  
Climate change 
adaptation  Adjustments made to natural or human systems in response to the actual or anticipated 
impacts of climate change, to mitigate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities.  
Climate change 
mitigation  Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate system, primarily through 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  
Community forest  An area identified through the England Community Forest Programme to revitalise 
countryside and green spa ce in and around major conurbations.  
Community 
Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  A mechanism by which charging authorities can set a standard charge on specified 
development in their area to pay for the new infrastructure required to support growth.  
Community Ri ght to 
Build Order  An Order made by the local planning authority (under the Town and Country Planning Act 
1990) that grants planning permission for a site -specific development proposal or classes of 
development.  
Conservation  The process of maintaining and  managing change to a heritage asset in a way that sustains 
and, where appropriate, enhances its significance.   
297 Conservation Area  An area of special architectural or historic interest, the character or appearance of which it is 
desirable to preserve or enh ance, designated under Section 69 of the Planning (Listed 
Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.  
Critical Drainage Areas 
(CDA)  A discrete geographical area (usually a hydrological catchment) where multiple or interlinked 
sources of flood risk cause flooding during a severe rainfall event thereby affecting people, 
property or local infrastructure. The CDA comprises the upstream con tributing catchment, 
the influencing drainage catchments, surface water catchments and, where appropriate, a 
downstream area if this can have influence on CDA.  
Curtilage  The area, usually enclosed, encompassing the grounds and buildings immediately 
surrou nding a home that is used in the daily activities of domestic life.  
Decentralised energy  Local renewable and local low -carbon energy sources that generate energy close to where it 
will be used, rather than at a large plant elsewhere and be sent through th e national grid. 
This local generation reduces transmission losses and lowers carbon emissions. Examples 
are combined heat and power (CHP) plants and district heating (DH) schemes.  
Deliverable  To be considered deliverable, sites for housing should be avai lable now, offer a suitable 
location for development now, and be achievable with a realistic prospect that housing will 
be delivered on the site within five years. Sites that are not major development, and sites 
with detailed planning permission, should be  considered deliverable until permission expires, 
unless there is clear evidence that homes will not be delivered within five years (e.g. they 
are no longer viable, there is no longer a demand for the type of units or sites have long term 
phasing plans). S ites with outline planning permission, permission in principle, allocated in 
the development plan or identified on a brownfield register should only be considered 
deliverable where there is clear evidence that this housing will be completed on site within 
five years.  
Design and build with 
nature  Sometimes also referred to as ‘nature -based solutions’ it calls on design and building 
approaches to account for natural systems and ecosystem services, and to harness these 
natural processes to create smart and su stainable infrastructure to manage resources and 
climate impacts (such as sustainable urban drainage, passive heating and cooling, energy 
efficiency and waste management, etc). The approach is gaining traction with a number of 
guides starting to emerge73 
Design code  A set of illustrated design requirements that provide specific, detailed parameters for the 
physical development of a site or area. The graphic and written components of the code 
should build upon a design vision, such as a masterplan or other design and development 
framework for a site or area.  
Designated heritage 
asset  A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed Building, Protected Wreck Site, 
Registered Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or Conservation Area designated under 
the relevant legislation.  
Developable  To be considered developable, sites should be in a suitable location for housing 
development with a reasonable prospect that they will be available and could be viably 
developed at the point envisaged.  
Duty to Co -operate This is a legal duty that requires Local Planning Authorities and other prescribed public 
bodies to ‘engage constructively, actively and on an ongoing basis’ to develop strategic 
policies. It is a statutory test and a key issue when assessing the soun dness of Local Plans.  
Employment land review  Assesses the likely demand for, and supply of, land for employment uses including land 
currently in use for employment purposes; land currently allocated for employment 
purposes; and land with the potential to be suitable for employment purposes.  
Environmental impact 
assessment  A procedure to be followed for certain types of project to ensure that decisions are made in 
full knowledge of any likely significant effects on the environment.  
Five-year housing land 
supply  The new Local Plan must ensure that enough homes are provided and identify enough land 
to maintain a steady supply of housing over the plan period. This is commonly called 
maintaining a five -year housing land supply.  
Green and blue 
infrastructure  Green and Blue Infrastructure (GBI) can be summarised as a network of multi -functional 
green space, both new and existing, both rural and urban, which supports the natural and 
ecological processes and is integral to the health and quality of life of sustai nable 
communities. Green and Blue Infrastructure also encompasses river systems and coastal 
environments (these are sometimes also refer to as Blue Infrastructure). The Local Plan 
uses Green -Blue Infrastructure (GBI) and Green Infrastructure (GI) interchan geably).  
 
73 Building with Nature (2017).  Available at:  https://www.buildingwithnature.org.uk/   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
298 Component elements of Green and Blue Infrastructure include natural and semi -natural 
green spaces such as parks, private gardens, agricultural fields, hedges, trees, woodland, 
green roofs, green walls, rivers and ponds. The term covers all land co ntaining these 
features, regardless of its ownership, condition or size.  
Green and Blue Infrastructure in the widest sense will be accepted in line with key 
institutional definitions including Natural England74, Landscape Institute, Green Infrastructure 
Partnership75, Ecosystems Knowledge Network76 
Green Belt  A national planning policy designation given to land. Green Belts were designated to stop 
the uncontrolled growth of large cities and towns. The Green Belt can include both greenfield 
and brownfield ( previously developed) sites in areas with both good and poor landscape 
value.  
Green Belt assessment  An assessment of the Green Belt to determine the strategic role of the Green Belt in the 
District, whether the Green Belt fulfils its purpose as set out in  the National Planning Policy 
Framework.  
Greenfield sites  Land that has not been previously developed or undeveloped pieces of land. Greenfield 
sites are typically outside existing built -up areas, but areas such as open spaces and 
residential gardens are considered greenfield regardless of where they are located.  
Gypsy and Tra veller 
Pitch / Plot  Area of land on a site/development generally home to one household. Can be varying sizes 
and have varying caravan numbers. Pitches refer to Gypsy and Traveller si tes and Plots to 
Travelling Showpeople yards.  
Gypsy and Traveller 
Site An area of land on which Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  are 
accommodated in caravans/chalets/vehicles. Can contain one or multiple pitches/plots.  
Habitat Regulations 
Assessment (HRA)  The Habitat Regulation Assessment forms part of the Local Plan evidence base. The Habitat 
Regulation Assessment is a statutory requirement under the Conservation (Natural Habitats) 
(Amendment) (England and Wales) Habitat Regulations Assessment Regulations 2006. An 
HRA is required for a plan or project which, either alone or in combination with other plans or 
projects is likely to have a significant effect on the integrity of a European site (one that 
forms part of the Natura 2000 (N2K) network), plus Ramsar sites (collectively ‘international 
sites’).  
Harmonic design  Refers to composition of design elements such as balance, pattern , repetition, proportion, 
scale, rhythm, right amount of variety and detail, unity, etc, that come together to create a 
space that affords healthy functional qualities; different combinations will create spaces that 
are calming, versus spaces that afford s ocial interaction and activity, without being 
overpowering and jarring.  
Healthy -by-design  Healthy by Design promotes the ethos of incorporating healthier design considerations into 
masterplanning and place -making decisions. It is a process which ensures t hat all elements 
known to promote health and wellbeing are given due consideration when designing places 
and buildings to avoid adverse health impacts. There are numerous guides on how to 
delivery healthy environments, including a selection promoted by Pub lic Health England77. 
Heritage Asset  A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a degree of 
significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its heritage interest. 
Heritage assets include designated heri tage assets and assets identified by the local 
planning authority (including local listing).  
Housing and Economic 
Land Availability 
Assessment (HELAA)  The HELAA is a technical study which is used to assist in the monitoring of whether there is 
an adequat e supply of deliverable housing land. It informs planning process in terms of 
identifying land that is suitable, available and achievable for housing and economic 
development uses over the Plan period. It identifies sites and broad locations with potential  
for development, assesses their development potential and assesses their suitability for 
development and the likelihood of that development coming forward.  
Infrastructure  Infrastructure means any structure, building, system facility and/or provision required by an 
area for its social and/or economic function and/or well -being . 
 
74 Natural England (2014)  Green Infrastructure Guidance. Available at:  
http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/35033   
75 Green Infrastructure Partnership  Resource Library https://www.tcpa.org.uk/pages/category/green -infrastructure -
partnership   
76 Ecosystems Knowledge Network Resources. https://ecosystemsknowled ge.net/resources/tools -guidelines/green -
infrastructure   
77 Guidance on Healthy Places https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/phe -healthy -places    
299 Any structure, building, system facility and/or provision required by an area for its social 
and/or economic function and/or wellbeing including (but not exclusively):  footways, 
cycleways and highways; public transport; drainage, SuDs and flood protection; waste 
recycling facilities; education and childcare; healthcare; sports, leisure and recreation 
facilities; community and social facilities; cultural facilities, incl uding public art; emergency 
services; green infrastructure; open space; affordable housing; live/work units and lifetime 
homes; broadband and facilities for specific sections of the community such as youth or the 
elderly.  
Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan (IDP ) This document forms part of the evidence base for the Local Plan. It assesses the 
infrastructure capacity and needs of Brentwood, and provides an overview of the way 
infrastructure is planned and the agencies involved in its delivery. It also looks at co sts and 
likely funding mechanisms for infrastructure, and forms the basis for assessing contributions 
that would be sought to meet the needs of new development.  
Landscape Character 
Assessment  An assessment which describes the main types of landscape in an  area and gives advice 
about the management and planning of the landscape.  
Listed Building  A building is listed, on the National Heritage List for England, when it is of special 
architectural or historic interest considered to be of national importance.  
Living landscapes  Key areas of landscape identified by Essex Wildlife Trust, which form ecological networks 
that allow wildlife to move through them and increase their resilience to threats such as 
climate change, floods drought, sea -level rise and develop ment pressure. These areas are 
promoted for nature conservation, wildlife habitats, public enjoyment and adaptation to 
climate change.  
Main town centre use  Retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, 
entertainment a nd more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, 
drive -through restaurants, bars and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, 
indoor bowling centres and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism developm ent 
(including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  
Major development  For housing, development where 10 or more homes will be provided, or the site has an area 
of 0.5 hectares or more. For non-residential development it means additional floorspace of 
1,000m2 or more, or a site of 1 hectare or more, or as otherwise provided in the Town and 
Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015.  
Market housing  Private rented  and housing for sale where prices are set in the open market.  
Mineral Consultation 
Area  A geographical area based on a Mineral Safeguarding Area, where the district or borough 
council should consult the Mineral Planning Authority for any proposals for non -minerals 
development.  
Minerals Safeguarding 
Area  An area of land overlying or in the immediate vicinity of a mineral  
resource that is defined on a map and is recognised through policy as an area that needs 
consideration if a non -mineral development is submitted for determination.   
Multi -functional green 
space  Multi -functional refers to the ecosystem services that Green Infrastructure provides to tackle 
impacts of climate change, flood risk, water management, heat risk, food supply, providing 
efficient and renewable energy and creating comfortable, attractive places in which to live.  
National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF)  A document that sets out the Government’s planning policies for England and how these are 
expected to be applied.  
Natural play area  Natural play areas are outdoor spaces designated for adventure play that are made of 
natural materials and incorporate natural components such as plants, logs, water, sand, 
mud, boulders, hills and trees. Natural Play does no t just mean leaving a few logs on the 
ground, but is a combination of integrating quality structured play equipment in a natural 
context as well as interweaving nature and natural elements to create spaces where children 
can use their imagination to play t hereby giving a wide range of play and learning 
experiences. Refer to guides by the National Trust, Woodland Trust as well as Play England.  
Neighbourhood plans  A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a particular 
neighbourhood area (made under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004).  
Non-designated 
heritage asset  Buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes identified as having a degree of 
significance meriting consideration in planning decisions but which are not  statutorily 
recognised (i.e. they are not listed, not within a Conservation Area and not part of a 
Scheduled Monument).  
Older people  People over or approaching retirement age, including the active, newly -retired through to the 
very frail elderly; and who se housing needs can encompass accessible, adaptable general 
needs housing through to the full range of retirement and specialised housing for those with 
support or care needs.  Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
300 Open space  All open space of public value, including not just land, but also a reas of water (such as 
rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) which offer important opportunities for sport and 
recreation and can act as a visual amenity.  
Permitted development 
rights  Permission to carry out certain limited forms of development without the need to make an 
application to a local planning authority, as granted under the terms of the Town and 
Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order.  
Planning condition  A condition imposed on a grant of planning permission (in accordan ce with the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990) or a condition included in a Local Development Order or 
Neighbourhood Development Order.  
Planning obligation  A legal agreement entered into under section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 
1990 to miti gate the impacts of a development proposal.  
Planning Practice 
Guidance (PPG)  Guidance on best practice for implementing the Government’s planning policies set out in 
the National Planning Policy Framework.  
Policies map  A Ordnance Survey based map showing where policies and designations within the Local 
Plan apply.  
Previously developed 
land Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of the 
developed land (although it should not be assu med that the whole of the curtilage should be 
developed) and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. This excludes: land that is or 
was last occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been developed for 
minerals extraction or waste disposal by landfill, where provision for restoration has been 
made through development management procedures; land in built -up areas such as 
residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments; and land that was previously 
developed but where th e remains of the permanent structure or fixed surface structure have 
blended into the landscape.  
Protected lane  Lanes identified as being of special historic or landscape value in the countryside.  
Quietway cycle routes  Continuous , high-quality and well -signed cycle routes using mainly less -trafficked or traffic -
free routes, such as side  streets, parks and waterways.  
Ramsar sites  Wetlands of international importance, originally designated under the 1971 Ramsar 
Convention.  
Register ed Parks and 
Gardens  Sites included in the Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest compiled 
and maintained by English Heritage, which make a significant contribution to the diversity of 
the local and/or national landscape and/or which ar e or particular historical importance.  
Renewable and low 
carbon energy  Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as generating electricity. Renewable energy 
covers those energy flows that occur naturally and repeatedly in the environment – from the 
wind, the fall of water, the movement of the oceans, from the sun and also from biomass and 
deep geothermal heat. Low carbon technologies are those that can help reduce emissions 
(compared to conventional use of fossil fuels).  
Self-build and custom -
build housing  Housing built by an individual, a group of individuals, or persons working with or for them, to 
be occupied by that individual. Such housing can be either market or affordable housing. A 
legal definition, for the purpose of applying the Self -build and Custom Housebuilding Act 
2015 (as amended), is contained in section 1(A1) and (A2) of that Act.  
Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest (SSSI)  Land notified under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 as an ecosystem of flora and/or 
fauna considered by Natural England to be of significant national value and interest to merit 
its conservation and management.  
Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA)  This provides an overview of flood risk from all sources within a defined area and provides 
general guidance on flood risk and issues associated with flooding for the area being 
studied.  
Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment 
(SHLAA)  A technical study which identifies sites with development potential for housing and assesses 
their developab ility, deliverability and capacity.  
Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment 
(SHMA)  A technical study prepared for the Council which assesses the overall state of the housing 
market and advises on future housing policies used to inform the Council’s Housing 
Strategy.  
Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (Su DS This is a  natural  approach to managing drainage by slowing down and reducing the quantity 
of surface water run -off from a developed area to manage downstream flood risk and 
reducing the risk of the runoff causing pollution.  
Sui generis  Planning uses falling outside the st andard use classes, which can include betting offices, 
theatres, hostels, scrap yards, petrol stations, nightclubs, launderettes, casinos.   
301 Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD)  Documents which add further detail to the policies in the development plan. Th ey can be 
used to provide further guidance for development on specific sites, or on particular issues, 
such as design. Supplementary planning documents are capable of being a material 
consideration in planning decisions but are not part of the development plan.  
Surface Water 
Management Plan 
(SWMP)  Plan produced by the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) that outlines the preferred surface 
water management strategy in a given location. These plans focus on areas of highest 
surface water flood risk and consider flooding from sewers, drains, groundwater and runoff 
from land, small water courses and ditches that occurs as a result of heavy rainfall.  
Note: This abbreviation is sometimes used for Site Waste Management Plans.  
Sustainable Transport 
Modes  Any efficient, safe and accessible means of transport w ith overall low impact on the 
environment, including walking and cycling, low and ultra -low emission vehicles, car sharing 
and public transport.   
Universal design  Universal Design is the design of buildings, products or environments to be aesthetic and 
usable to the greatest extent possible by everyone and therefore accessible to all people, 
regardless of age, disability or other factors. Detailed guidance can be found on the website 
for Centre for Excellence in Universal Design (CEUD), by the National Dis ability Authority 
(NDA) Ireland78. 
Use Class  The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) puts uses of land 
and buildings into various categories known as 'Use Classes' e.g. A1 Shops, B1 Business 
and D1 Non -Residential institutions.  Planning permission is generally required to change 
from one use class to another, although there are some exceptions.  
Wider determinants of 
health  Wider Determinants of Health draws attention to the broad range of individual, social, 
economic and environmental factors which influence our health79. An understanding of the 
wider determinants of health ensures we take a holistic approach to planning and  designing 
places. It acknowledges that healthy, cohesive communities are the result of not just places 
with accessible health care and green spaces, but also where the social, cultural and 
economic wellbeing factors are also in place to allow individuals to achieve their full 
potential, thereby bringing about the total wellbeing of their community. Therefore, it is 
important to ensure access to facilities like jobs and community spaces is fundamental to 
place -making. For more details, view Government guida nce80. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 Centre for Excellence in Universal Design ( CEUD ) by the National Disability Authority ( NDA ) 
http://universaldesign.ie/   
79 Public Health England (201 7). Chapter 6: Social Determinants of Health 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/health -profile -for-england/chapter -6-socia l-determinants -of-health   
80 Wider Determinants of Health - https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/wider -determinants -of-health -may-2018 -
update   Brentwood Local  Plan  |  March 2022  
 
 
302  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published  in 2022 by Brentwood Borough Council  
Planning Policy Team, Town Hall, Ingrave Road, Brentwood, Essex CM15 8AY  
 
www.brentwood.gov.uk  
email: planning.policy@brentwood.gov.uk  
telephone: 01277 312 500  
