City Plan Part 1 
Foreword 
1
 It is my pleasure to introduce the City Plan Part One as adopted by Brighton & 
Hove City Council on 24th March 2016.
The City Plan Part 1 strategy reflects the importance the Council places on 
protecting and enhancing the city’s unique built and natural environment whilst 
ensuring needed homes and jobs are provided together with the right 
infrastructure and community facilities to support the city’s residents, businesses 
and visitors.
The policies in the City Plan will help to make sure that there are better links for 
our communities and neighbourhoods to employment and skills opportunities and 
adequate housing provision whilst also meeting the demands of businesses and 
visitors. The Plan seeks to create genuinely sustainable communities through 
encouraging mixed use developments, high-quality and well-designed places; 
and developments that enable people to make better choices about their need for 
travel. The City Plan will also help to ensure that new development is supported 
by necessary infrastructure that protects and promotes communities, the city’s 
economy and the environment.
The City Plan Part One will provide the overarching strategy for emerging 
Neighbourhood Plans and will be supported in due course by the City Plan Part 
Two which will contain the remaining site allocations and development 
management policies. 
This Plan replaces a number of policies in the adopted Brighton & Hove Local 
Plan (2005), and this is set out in Annex 4 of the Plan.
I would like to express my thanks on behalf of Brighton & Hove City Council to all 
those who contributed to the preparation of this plan through its many stages and 
I look forward to its implementation.
Councillor Gill Mitchell
Deputy Leader Brighton & Hove City Council
Chair of the Environment, Transport & Sustainability CommitteeContents  
S
ection One: Introduction page no.  
I
ntroduction and Overview   5 
A profile of Brighton & Hove – context and challenges  10 
S
ection  Two: The Strategy  
V
ision and O bjective  17 
The Strategy  25 
SS1 - Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  28 
S
ection  Three: Development and Special Area policies  
DA
1 – Brighton Centre and Churchill Square Area  34 
DA2 – Brighton Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock Area 39 
DA3 – Lewes Road Area  48 
DA4 – New England Quarter and London Road Area  57 
DA5 – Eastern Road and Edward Street Area   66 
DA6 – Hove Station Area   74 
DA7 – Toad’ s Hole Valley   81 
DA8 – Shoreham Harbour   89 
SA1 – The Seafront   96 
SA2 – Central Brighton   104 
SA3 – Valley Gardens  110 
SA4 – Urban Fringe  114 
SA5 – The Setting of the South Downs  National Park  118 
SA6 – Sustainable Neighbourhoods  122 
S
ection Four – City Wide Policies  
A
 Strong and Prosperous City  
CP1 Housing Delivery  131 
CP2 Sustainable Economic Development  138 
CP3 Employment Land  143 
CP4 Retail Provision  150 
CP5 Culture and Tourism   154 
CP6 Visitor  Accommodation  158 
CP7 Infrastructure and Developer Contributions  162 
A Su
stainable City  
CP8 Sustainable Buildings   166 
CP9 Sustainable Transport  171 
CP10  Biodiversity   181 
CP11 Flood Risk   184 
A
n Attractive City  
CP12 Urban Design   188 
CP13 Public Streets and Spaces  192 
2 CP14 Housing Density  194 
CP15 Heritage  197 
CP16 Open Space   199 
CP17 Sports Provision 205 
H
ealthy and Balanced Communities  
CP18 Healthy City  211 
CP19 Housing Mix  214 
CP20 Affordable Housing  219 
CP21 Student Housing and Housing in Multiple Occupation  223 
CP22 Traveller Accommodation  228 
A
ppendix 1 Glossary of terms  231 
Appendix 2 Key Diagram   240 
A
nnexes (published separately)  
Annex 1: Implementation and Monitoring  
Annex 2: Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
Annex 3: Housing Implementation Str ategy  
Annex 4: List of Local Plan Policies to be Replaced by the City Plan  Part 1  
Li
st of Tables  
T
able 1 – One Planet Principles of Sustainability  26 
Table 2 – Summ ary of Development Proposals  32 
Table 3 – Housing Delivery, Supply Breakdown 2010- 2030  136 
Table 4 – City Plan Employment Floorspace  145 
Table 5 – Estimated Retail Need   152 
Table 6 – Definition of Development Size 170 
List of Figures  
Figure 1 Relationship of City Plan to other Strategies  6 
Figure 2 – Housing Trajectory 2010 – 2030 135 
List of Key Illustrations  
DA1 – Brighton Centre and Churchill Square Area  34 
DA2 – Brighton Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock Area  39 
DA3 – Lewes Road Area  48 
DA4 – New England Quarter and London Road Area  57 
DA5 – Eastern Road and Edward Street Area   66 
DA6 – Hove Station Area   74 
DA7 – Toad’ s Hole Valley   81 
DA8 – Shoreham Harbour   89 
SA1 – The Seafront   96 
SA2 – Central Brighton   104 
SA3 – Valley Gardens  110 
SA4 – Urban Fringe  114 
SA5 – The South Downs   118 
SA6 – Sustainable Neighbourhoods  122 
3
  
                    
Section 1 
 Introduction  
   
 4 Introduction & Overview  
 
What is the City Plan?  1.1 The purpose of the City Plan  is to provide the overall strategic and spatial 
vision for the future of Brighton & Hove through to 2030. It will help shape the 
future of the city and plays an important role in ensuring that other citywide plans and strategies achieve their objectives. The City Plan Part One is a Development Plan Document (DPD)
1.  
 1.2 The City Plan Part 1 sets out how the council will respond to local 
priorities; how it will meet the social, economic and environmental challenges that face the city; and how it will work with partners to reduce inequalities. It identifies the broad locations, scale and type of development and supporting infrastructure that will take place in the city. The City Plan also responds to, and provides for, the needs of a growing population and a growing local economy and reflects the role and importance of the city in the sub region and the south east.  
 1.3 The City Plan Part 1:  
• Sets out a vision and objectives for the development and growth of Brighton & Hove up to 2030; identifies broad locations for development and allocates strategic sites and employment sites;  
• Sets clear policies that guide decisions on planning applications;  
• Indicates how the plan will be implemented and shows how progress will be monitored;  
• Sets out the infrastructure requirements for the city up to 2030 and how these will be addresse d. 
 
Other Development Plan Documents  
 1.4 The policies in all the other  Development Plan D ocuments for Brighton & 
Hove have to be in line with the City Plan Part 1, so it is the most important Development Plan Document :  
• The City Plan P art 2 will contain site allocations and the remaining 
development management policies.  
• A Joint Area Action Plan (JAAP) is being developed with Adur District 
Council and West Sussex County Council that will set out a 
comprehensive, deliverable plan for the future revitalisation of Shoreham Harbour.  
• Supplementary Planning Documents will provide guidance on specific areas or topics.  
• Waste and Minerals Local Plan - the Council, working in partnership 
with East Sussex County Council and the South Downs National Park 
1 Development Plan Documents (DPDs) are key statutory documents which set out the vision, 
strategy and policies for the area. They are subject to Sustainability Appraisal and to a formal 
examinati on in public.  
 5                                         Authority, i s preparing a Waste and Minerals Local Plan2 that will 
provide planning policies to guide the management of waste and 
production of minerals in the plan area until 2026 . 
• The South Downs National Park was formally designated in 31 March 2010 and the National Park Authority brought into effect in April 2011. This is now the planning authority for the administrative area of Brighton & Hove that falls within the National Park. This area will no longer be covered by Brighton & Hove City Plan Part 1 policies but will 
be covered by the Local Plan for the National Park.  
 Relationship to other Strategies  
 1.5 The City Plan Part 1 has been informed by the aims of the city’s 
Sustainable Community Strategy, other citywide plans and strategies and national planning policy and feedback from consultation. Figure 1 shows the relationship to these documents.  Policies in the City Plan are in conformity with the National Planning Policy Framework and apply it at the local level.   
  Figure 1 Relationship of the City Plan to other Strategies  
 
 
   
2 The East Sussex South Downs and Brighton & Hove Waste & Minerals Plan was adopted 
19 February 2013 and work has commenced on a waste and minerals sites plan.  
 6                                          
Links to neighbouring areas  
 1.6 Brighton & Hove provides jobs, entertainment, shops and leisure, health 
and education facilities for people living in neighbouring areas. The city is a regionally significant retail and visitor destination and a transport hub. 
Brighton & Hove’s Travel to Work Area (TTWA), stretches north through Burgess Hill and towards Haywards Heath and Crawley, east to Newhaven and Lewes and west as far as Shoreham and to a lesser extent Worthing. In 2001, census data shows that the city had a relatively self -contained labour 
market with 75% of the workforce living within the City’s boundaries in 2001. The major commuting flows into the City were from Lewes District (representing 7% of the City’s workforce), Adur (5%),  Mid Sussex (3%) and 
Worthing (3%). In 2001, 7% of the City’s resident working population commuted to London for work.  
 1.7 Brighton and Hove forms part of a Sussex Coast housing market which 
includes Lewes District as well as Coastal West Sussex. A key f eature of the 
housing market dynamic in Brighton & Hove particularly is movement of households from London to Brighton with movement of over 4000 people per annum, many of whom continue to commute to the capital supported by the strength of the rail links.  This reflects the City’s strategic accessibility.  
 1.8 Brighton & Hove is also a member of the Coast to Capital Local Enterprise 
Partnership (LEP) which sees international trade activity as the core economic 
driver that determines the functional economic  area, which is reliant on 
Gatwick Airport. Recognised as one of the south east’s key growth areas, the Gatwick diamond is linked to Brighton and Hove, as well as the West Sussex coast. The inclusion of Croydon in the LEP establishes a link to the London economy, and an opportunity for increased business growth and the potential 
for collaboration between Coast to Capital and those in London
.  
 1.9 The council is working with South Downs National Park Authority, Adur 
District Council, Mid Sussex District Cou ncil, Lewes District Council and other 
local partners to achieve designation and then implementation of the city and surrounding area as a Biosphere Reserve, seeking to bring people and nature together across an are a of chalk downland which extends from th e River Adur 
in the west to the River Ouse in the east, the chalk ‘scarp’ to the north and the marine environment to the south and focussed on nature conservation, 
environmental knowledge and economic and social development which is culturally and ecologically sustainable.  The ‘Core Area’ includes the 
internationally recognised Castle Hill and Lewes Downs.  
 1.10 The NPPF requires  councils to work together to address strategic 
priorities across boundaries and development requirements which cannot be wholly met within their own areas
3. The preparation of the City Plan has had 
regard to this  duty to cooperate requirement and a Duty to Cooperate 
3 Paragraph 179 of the NPPF 2012  
 7                                         Statement4 has been prepared alongside the City Plan setting out the 
strategic planning and duty to cooperate issues and the approach undertaken 
to address them. The council will continue to engage constructively, actively 
and on an ongoing basis with neighbouring authorities and public bodies  with 
regard to strategic planning matters.  
 Annexes  1.11 The City Plan Part 1 is accompanied by 4 annexes:  
 Annex 1 - Implementation and Monitoring – sets out the key monitoring 
indicators and targets and identifies how the City Plan will be implemented. This is p ublished separately as Annex 1 to the City Plan part 1. The A uthority  
Monitoring Report (AMR) is the key evaluation tool to monitor performance and will be revised to take into account new policies contained within this plan.  
 Annex 2- Infrastructure Delivery Plan - details the physical, social and 
environmental infrastructure that will be required to implement the proposals set out in the City Plan. This is p ublished separately as Annex 2 to the City 
Plan part 1.  
 Annex 3 - Housing Implementation Strategy  – describes the approach to 
managing the delivery of housing over the plan period and sets out how a five year supply of housing will be maintained to meet the planned housing target. This is p ublished separately as Annex 3 to the City Plan part 1.  
 Annex 4 - Local Plan Policies to be R eplaced by the City Plan  Part 1  – 
lists the 2005 Brighton & Hove Local Plan policies that have been replaced by 
the adopted City Plan Part 1 and those that are saved. . This is p ublished 
separately as Annex 4 to the City Plan part 1 . 
 Supporting Documents  
 1.12 The City Plan part 1 is also accom panied by a number of supporting 
documents:  
 Sustainability Appraisal – which looks at and assesses the social, economic 
and environmental impacts of the City Plan part 1. Published as a separate document.  
 Supporting Evidence Document - identifies and summarises the key 
findings from all the background studies and strategies that have informed the preparation of the City Plan. Published as a separate document.  
 Consultation Statement – provides full information on how organisations and 
groups have been consulted throughout the preparation process of the City Plan part 1. Published as a separate document.  
4 Brighton & Hove City Plan Part 1 Duty to Cooperate Compliance Statement  June 2013  
 8                                         Appropriate Assessment - an assessment under the provisions of the 
Habitats Regulations to ensure the City Plan itself does not lead to any 
adverse effect on any European or international wildlife site. Published as a separate document.
5. 
Health & Equalities Impact Assessment - assesses the potential health and 
equalities outcomes of the City Plan. Published as a separate document . 
 Development Plan Documents  Being Revised  
 Policies  Map 
The adoption of the City Plan part 1 will lead to changes to the Local Plan proposals  map (2005) through new allocations, changes to boundaries and 
deleted allocations.  
 
A Glossary of terms is included at Appendix 1 . 
 
    
 
     
 
      
 
   
5 The Brighton & Hove City Council administrative area includes the Castle Hill Special Area 
of Conservation, and a number of other European or Ramsar wildlife sites are located in the 
wider area, The City Plan has been assessed under the provisions of the Habitats regulations to ensure that it will not have an adverse effect on any European or Ramsar wildlife site and this assessment has been recorded. The City Plan does not support any project proposal 
where it cannot be demonstrated that the development would not have an adverse effect on 
the integrity of any European or Ramsar site. Any subsequent plan following this City Plan will similarly adhere to the requirements of the Habitat Regulations.
 
 9                                         A profile of Brighton & Hove – context and challenges  
 
1.13 Brighton & Hove is a tightly constrained, compact city situated between 
the South Downs National Park and the sea with a population of  271,9526 . 
With a limited legacy of derelict or vacant sites these ‘natural boundaries’ 
define and limit the outward expansion of the city7. The built up area is 
roughly half of the city’s geographical area (8,267 ha).  
 1.14 Brighton & Hove is an attractive city of distinct urban and suburban 
neighbour hoods generally of low to medium rise, with some taller buildings in 
the city centre. Within the centre of the city, residential densities of between 60-200 dwellings per hectare are commonplace. Despite the recent downturn 
in the housing market, relatively high house prices
8, particularly for smaller 
properties, have put home ownership beyond the reach of many households.  
 1.15 The natural environment within and surrounding the city is of remarkable 
quality. One sixth of the city’s area is covered by a nature conservation designation and the city is home to a great variety of common and rare animal and plant species. The extensive chalk downlands, much of which fall within the South Downs National Park boundaries, are essential to the health of the city, in  terms of its water supply (aquifer), biodiversity, and opportunities for 
leisure and recreation. The city’s network of parks and open spaces plays an essential role for the city as a whole hosting community and cultural events as well as being places of relaxation and recreation for both residents and visitors to the city. There has been significant progress in sports -related 
regeneration and investment in sports facilities in schools and colleges.  
 1.16 Brighton & Hove is a regional cultural ‘city by the sea’ famous for its 
vibrant, cosmopolitan lifestyle with a strong commitment to the arts and thriving creative industries and digital media sector which attracts tourism and new businesses. The city’s cultural heritage encompasses the internationally renow ned and iconic Royal Pavilion and its Estate, regionally recognised 
museum collections, historic parks and gardens but also established cultural activities such as the Brighton Festival, exhibitions and community based arts and cultural events. The city is  known internationally for its extensive Regency 
and Victorian architecture and has around 3,400 listed buildings. The city is also a major European business conference and tourist destination which attracts around 8million visitors per year and in 2009, visitors to the city were thought to have spent £732m. The 11km of seafront is the ‘shopfront’ of the city acting as a focus for entertainment, recreation and leisure activities. Substantial public and private investment has transformed the seafront between the two Piers. Phased renewal of the coastal defences between the 
Marina and the city boundary at Saltdean has been undertaken over the past 
6 At 2010 based on 2011 Census data, Housing Requirement Study Update, 2012  GL Hearn. 
7 Over the period 2004/5 – 2009/10, 100% of residential development and 100% of new 
employment floorspace were on brownfield land.  
8 House prices tripled in the ten year period 1997 – 2007, Brighton & Hove Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment  2008. In 2011 Housing prices were 36 per cent above the national 
average, State of the City 2011.  
 
 10                                         15 years, and is part of an ongoing programme of coastal defence 
maintenance in response to erosion and climate change.  
 1.17 The city is a regional centre for shopping and employment within the 
south east and a sub- regional centre for health services. The economy has 
performed strongly over the past decade, with, until the recession, falls in unemployment
9 and rises in average earnings10. In 2008, the local economy 
was estimated to be worth £4.2 billion11. With the onset of global recession in 
autumn 2008 it is ever more important that the city builds upon its resilience and protects and provides for good quality jobs in the city. The city has a strong service sector economy, with public services, education, health and financial and business services being rich sources of local employment. Brighton & Hove is home to the biggest creative industries and digital media cluster in the south east outside London, currently providing over 10% of 
employment in the economy. The city is known as a profitable place for business with a strong entrepreneurial culture and a large proportion of residents working in higher grade professional occupations and the population as a whole is well -educated compared with the South East and national 
averages.  
 1.18 The city has a well -defined network of shopping centres, including 
Brighton Regional Centre and contains a significantly greater number  of 
shops than other cities of similar size, with a strong reputation for specialist and independent traders. The two growing universities within the city host around 34,000 students
12 and with high graduate/ post -graduate retention 
they make a substantial contribution to the economic, social and cultural life of 
the city. A study in 201013 concluded that the Universities inject more than 
£1bn into the UK economy and most (£976m) is spent in the city and South East. The Universities support 12,000 jobs (the majority of them in city) and provide 4,231 full time equivalent (FTE) jobs.  
 1.19 However, set against this success, the city is a net exporter of 
commuters; around 25,000 workers travel in to Brighton & Hove and around 28,000 people who live in the city t ravel outside Brighton & Hove for work
14. 
This has implications for sustainable travel and also for the ability of local people to find local employment. There is also evidence that the city is developing a ‘dual economy’, with a high proportion of highly skilled jobs in knowledge- based occupations, supported by a growing number of lower paid 
workers in lower skilled, support services including care work and many of the 
9 Falls from 7.5% in February 2000 to 5.8 % in June 2008 but an increase to 7.6% in June 
2011, ONS . 
10 Average full- time pay increasing from £410.50 per week in 2002 to £480.00 per week in 
2008and continue to increase, in December 2010 £522.60 (The State of the City Report 
2011).  
11 Sustainable Community Strategy, update 2009.  
12 2008/09, estimated to be closer to 40,000 in 2011, State of the City report 2011  
13 'The economic impact of Brighton's universities' Ursula Kelly and Professor Iain McNicoll 
2010  
14 Brighton & Hove Strategic Housing Market Assessment 20 08, Census 2001 Special 
Workplace Statistics.  
 11                                         hospitality and retail trades. There is a limited legacy of manufacturing 
industry in the  city and, as a consequence, very few brownfield sites available 
for redevelopment.  
 1.20 The city is also a regional transport hub, with the A23/M23 linking it to  
London/M25 and the A27 providing major east -west links. Car ownership in 
the city is the lowest in the South East region and one of lowest nationally and bus patronage and cycling and pedestrian movements in and out of the city centre have continued to increase since 2000. The city’s rail network includes 8 stations over three lines, linking east, west and north with Brighton Station having the highest daily passenger volume of all stations along the south coast between Kent and Hampshire. Shoreham Harbour on the western side of the city is a regionally significant port and offers a significant opportunity for future regeneration and growth. The city is served well by air links with two airports; Shoreham and Gatwick, within easy reach. Ferry services operate to Dieppe from nearby Newhaven.  
 1.21 The city has a relatively young population, with population growth over 
the last 20 years concentrated in the 15- 44 age groups . Looking ahead over 
the next 20 years, the city’s population will continue to be focussed on households aged in their 20s, 30s, and 40s
15. This reflects the nature of 
Brighton as a destination for young people, and the presence of two 
universities and the many English Language schools , international business 
schools and University pathfinder colleges  within the centre of the city. A high 
proportion of young working age adults provides  the city with many 
advantages in terms of its potential labour pool. However, this population profile also has implications for a range of issues such as a sense of local community, potential for crime and disorder, the need for sustainable employment opportunities and the need to provide for a mix of housing units and tenures.  
 1.22 Brighton & Hove is a diverse city of neighbourhoods and communities. 
The proportion of our population who are from Black and minority ethnic backgrounds is increasing. In the 2001 census, 12 per cent of our residents were recorded as not being from White British backgrounds; in 2011 the 
proportion had increased to 19.5  per cent. It’s estimated that at least 14 per 
cent (35,000) of Brighton & Hove’s adult residents are lesbian, gay, bisexual or trans. Whilst the trans population is thought to be small, trans people face particularly acute issues.  Nine per cent of adult residents (15,600) are thought 
to have a physical disability of some kind. Two per cent (5,033) are estimated to have a learning disability. 19 per cent of adults (28,000 people) aged 15- 64 
are estimated to have a common mental disorder such as anxiety or depression
16.   
    
15 Housing Requirements Study update, October 2011, GL Hearn.  
16 State of the City  2011  
 12                                         Challenges  
 
1.23 In setting out the vision for the city to 2030, there are a number of key 
issues that the City Plan Part 1 needs to address. These include:  
 
• A growing population. The city’s population could be expected to grow 
by 10.2% to 299,777  by 2030. This represents growth in the population 
of around 27 ,759 people by  2030 if current trends c ontinue17.  
• With the onset of a global recession in autumn 2008, the city must 
protect and provide for good quality jobs.  
• Although the city has a relatively young population, population growth 
over the next 20 years is likely to be strongest in those people aged 60 
and over (growth of 30%)18.  
• With an ageing population the city needs to ensure that the older population age well, through promoting physical and mental health and promoting age- friendly living environments and housing.  
• The need to prioritise the provision of extra care housing to meet the needs of older and disabled people in the community.  
• The working age population is projected to increase by 12,  650 over 
the next 10 years.  If these projections prove accurate, the city may need to find work for  an additional 6,000 residents by 2014 just to keep 
the employment rate at the current level of 71.1%.  
• Access to suitable and affordable housing
19 remains difficult for many 
households. Affordability of housing has serious implications for the recruitment and retention of staff and has also resulted in a high number of concealed households
20. 
• The city also has a lack of affordable business premises and workspace.  
• The city’s unemployment rate remains higher than the South East 
average
21. Despite the very high proportion of the city’s adult residents 
who have higher level qualifications, GCSE attainment within the city’s 
schools, whilst improving, is well below the national average.22 
• A number of the city’s areas have been identified as facing high levels of disad vantage. 12 per cent of the city’s local areas
23 are in the ten 
per cent most deprived in England. Two of the city’s 164 local areas are in the most deprived one per cent of areas in England; one in East Brighton & one in Queen’s Park.  
17 this is an ‘unconstrained’ estimate of population growth.  Brighton & Hove City Council 
Housing Requirements Study  2012 Update ,  
18 Housing Requirements Study Update, October 2012  
19 The 2005 Housing Needs Survey identified a net annual affordable housing shortfall of 
1,200.  
20 Adults living within another household because they cannot afford to enter the housing 
market (e.g. young adults living with parents).  
21 Unemployment at September 2010 was 6.8% compared to the regional rate of 5.5%, State 
of the City Report 2011.  
22 In 2010, 49% of pupils at local authority schools gained 5 or more GCSEs at A* -C; the 
national average was 55%.  
23 According to the 2010 Indices of Deprivation.  
 13                                         • Over the three years from 2007 to 2009 the percentage of children and 
young people in families living in poverty in Brighton and Hove has remained around 22% of all children. This is in line with the national average but significantly above the regional South East average
24. 
• There are marked differences in physical and mental health and life 
expectancy between the most deprived and most affluent neighbourhoods in the city. Reducing the gap between deprived neighbourhoods and the rest of the city is a priority.  
• Whilst community s afety is improving in the city, many people still fear 
being victims of crime.  
• There is a national trend towards increased car use. Accompanied by the anticipated future development in the city this will lead to worsening congestion and air quality by 2030 without a number of positive 
measures to mitigate this.  
• Transport is the main cause of poor air and noise quality in certain 
parts of the city. In 20 13 a new Air Quality Management Area was 
designated that is a quarter of the size of the previous one
25. 
• There is a  significant pressure for school places in the city at both 
primary and secondary level due to increased numbers of children entering the education system annually since 2000.  
• The city’s two universities are growing and the impacts of further growt h and expansion  including appropriate student accommodation 
provision will need to be addressed.  
• The city faces competition from home and abroad as a tourist destination in both the leisure and business tourism market.  
• With the recent rapid expansion of the hotel sector, there is a need to 
ensure that the supply of visitor accommodation in the city is more 
appropriately balanced.  
• Brighton & Hove’s ecological footprint has recently been calculated as 5.14 global hectares (gha) per person. This eco footprint is not sustainable and the city needs to shift towards a more resource efficient future. The Sustainable Community Strategy sets a challenging target reduction to 2.5 gha per person by 2020; and to 1.25 gha per person by 2050.  
• There is an urgent need to move to a low carbon economy and city. The Climate Change Act sets out the government’s target to reduce carbon emissions to 80% of the 1990 levels by 2050, The Sustainable Community Strategy sets a challenging target to reduce the city’s carbon emissions by  42% by 2020 and by 80% by 2050 from the 2005 
baseline of 5.7 tonnes per person.  
• Investment in and delivery of  energy efficiency improvements and 
energy infrastructure will be required to support target reductions in 
carbon emissions.  
• There is a need to secure the sustainable management of water resources and meet the objectives of the Water Framework Directive. 
24 Brighton & Hove Child Poverty Commissioning Strategy 2012- 2015  
25 The council declared a new air quality management area on 30 August 2013. The Air 
Quality Action Plan will be updated in 2014.  
 14                                         The city is within a ‘highly water stressed’ region with above regional 
average per capita water consumption  
• There is a need to improve groundwater  status. The city’s groundwater 
system provides 100 per cent of the city’s water supply and its current overall quality or status is “poor”.  
• Planning will need to anticipate sea level rises of 6mm a year in the 
South East and ensure that the city is resilient to the predicted impacts 
of climate change such as warmer, wetter winters, hotter, drier summers, sea level rise and more frequent extreme weather events.  
• Available evidence suggests a continuing loss of species and habitats.  
• Over 40 per cent of Brighton & Hove including the ancient woodland
26 
at Stanmer Park is included within the boundary of the South Downs National Park.  
• As the density of the city increases, demand and use of parks and open space has escalated. In the more central areas of the city, access to open space is limited. Despite good progress made in recent years, sports and recreation facilities are as yet inadequate for a city of its size and regional importance.  
• The city contains an exceptional historic and architectural quality that 
needs to be appropriately conserved and enhanced.  
• Continued investment is required in cultural provision for the city, 
maintaining and developing the quality, richness and uniqueness of content.  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
26 An area which has had continuous woodland cover since at least 1600 AD.  
 15                                          
 
 
  
 
  
 
Section  2 
 
The Strategy  
 
   
 16 Section 2 – The Strategy  
 
Vision and Objectives  
 The vision for Brighton & Hove in 2030  
 2.1 The vision sets out what kind of city Brighton & Hove should strive to be 
by 2030. In order to achieve this vision and address the issues identified in Section 1, the City Pla n sets out a number of strategic objectives. The aim is to 
achieve these objectives through the spatial strategy, the policies set out in the City Plan and through the direct actions of the city council and its partners.  
Working closely with all sections and areas of the local community the aim is to achieve the following:  
 A Strong and Prosperous City  
 2.2 By 2030, Brighton & Hove will have a sustainable,  resilient  low carbon 
economy with sufficient jobs at all levels. Local residents will have the skills to enable them to progress through the labour market and earn incomes to help them live successfully within the city. New housing  of different types, including 
affordable housing,  will be provided in suitable locations to match a range of 
requirements and lifetime needs.    
• Brighton & Hove will play a full role in the economic growth and development of the south east region  through a coordinated 
partnership approach with neighbouring authorities and the L ocal 
Enterprise Partnership.   
• The economic performance of the city will continue to improve and the city’s long -term unemployment rate will have fallen with an increase in 
employment rates.  
• Sustainable economic growth will be achieved by ensuring a range of 
suitable employment sites and premises; supporting  the city’s key and 
growing employment sectors with a well trained and suitably skilled 
local workforce and by securing training and support for local entrepreneurs and start -up businesses.  
• Key growth sectors will be supported including the creative, digital and information technology  and environmental technology sectors.   
• Make appropriate provision for leisure, retail, cultural, tourism, health and education needs and support the appropriate growth of the city’s two universities given their significant contribution to the local economy.  
• Significant new development will be directed to areas of the city with 
good sustainable transport links and to those areas in need of 
regeneration and renewal.  
• New housing, including affordable housing,  will be delivered to help 
meet housing demand and need. This will help achieve more sustainable communities with a range of housing types and tenures, including family homes and homes to match lifetime needs  as well as 
 17 extra care housing to meet the needs of older and disabled people in 
the community . 
• To be England’s favourite ‘Creative City’ through an expanded base and support for the arts and creative industries across the city, drawing on the local workforce, and a thriving creative and cultural quarter in the city centre.  
• To be one of Europe’s best meeting destinations ; the city’s tourism 
industry will have grown significantly but sustainably into a year -round 
profitable business.  
• To be a world class cultural and heritage offer with a strong connection to the character of  Brighton & Hove providing the best for residents and 
tourists.  
 
 
Strategic Objectives:  
 SO1 Ensure that all major new development in the city supports the 
regeneration of the city, is located in sustainable locations, provides for the demands that it generates and is supported by the appropriate physical, social and environmental infrastructure.  
 SO2 Support the continued improvement of the economic performance 
of the city by identifying and safeguarding an appropriate range of sites and premises to meet demands of high growth and key employment sectors and ensuring there is a well trained and suitably skilled local workforce.  
 SO3 Develop Brighton & Hove as a major centre on the South Coast for 
sustainable business growth and innovati on, creative indus tries, retail  
provision, tourism and transport.  
 SO4 Address the housing needs of Brighton & Hove by working with 
partners to provide housing that meets the needs of all communities in the city, achieves a mix of housing types, sizes and tenures that is affordable, accessible, designed to a high standard and adaptable to 
future change.  
 
SO5 Maintain and strengthen the role of Brighton city centre, improve its 
attractiveness and recognise and protect its unique cultural, tourism and retail mix and look to d
iversify the evening economy and leisure function.  
 SO6 Through joint working with Adur District Council, West Sussex 
County Council and the Shoreham Port Authority,  maximise the potential 
of Shoreham Harbour for the benefit of existing and future residen ts, 
businesses, Port -users and visitors through a long term regeneration 
strategy.  
 
   
 18 A Sustainable City  
 
2.3 By 2030 the city will have made significant progress towards becoming 
a resource- efficient, One Planet, Zero Carbon City27 and a city that is 
adapting well to climate change.  This will be achieved by:  
 
• Working towards a reduction in the city’s carbon emissions by 42% by 
2020 and a reduction of 80% by 2050 from the 2005 baseline of 5.7 tonnes per person.  
• Maximising  opportunities to support major renewable and decentralised 
energy infrastructure  
• Reducing  the e cological footprint of the city  and working towards a 
target reduction of 2.5 global hectares (gha) per person by 2020 and 
1.25 gha per person by 2050.  
• Raising the standard of sustainable design and construction of homes 
and buildings in the city to ensure that all new and existing development s contribute to radical reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions and resource use , maximise  the potential for sustainable 
construction methods and minimise demolition and construction waste.  
• Delivering major developments in the city, to act as exemplars of 
modern design quality and sustainable building practice
28. 
• Pioneering the drive towards a low carbon economy with a thriving 
environmental technology sector to support the development of renewable and low -carbon energy, recycling initiatives and reduced 
resource consumption.  
• Achiev ing the objectives of UN Biosphere Reserve status through 
working towards making Brighton & Hove a high quality natural environment where a balanced relationship exists between people and 
nature.  
• A reduction in car use of 10- 20%, less air borne pollution, less traffic 
noise and far lower carbon emissions.  
• Low carbon transport - achieving a flexible transport network 
incorporating transport interchanges and more sustainable transport corridors that can accommodate peaks of demand; a rapid/express transit system to move people more efficiently to and between major leisure, retail, tourism employment and residential developments; measures to enable people to move more easily, safely and effectively around the city on foot, by bicycle and on public transport.  
• An integrated package of long term and short term measures to achieve significant change and improvement in local air quality.   
     
27 Work towards a city that achieves zero carbon emissions . 
28 For example One Brighton is one of the country’s first environmentally and socially 
sustainable ‘One Planet Living’ communities.  
 19                                          
 
Strategic Objectives:  
 
SO7 Contribute to a reduction in the ecological footprint of Brighton & 
Hove and champion the efficient use of natural resources and environmental sustainability.   SO8 Ensure design and construction excellence in new and existing 
buildings in Brighton & Hove which responds positively to the challenges posed by local impacts of climate change, resource- efficiency, and  
delivers biodiversity and environmental objectives and improvements to accessible natural green space.  
 
SO9 Make  full and efficient use of previously developed land in recognition 
of the environmental and physical constraints to development posed by the sea and the South Downs.  
 SO10  To support the implementation of the objectives of the Biosphere 
Reserve Management Strategy
29, such as the creation of green links 
between open spaces and the surrounding downland, changes in the design and management of spaces to create a functioning Green Infrastructure Network. To conserve and enhance the priority areas for biodivers ity and to ensure that everyone has good access to and 
opportunities to be engaged with natural open space. Nature conservation opportunities in open spaces and in new development should be maximised to contribute to Local  Biodiversity Action Plan
30 objecti ves.  
 SO11  Provide an integrated, safe and sustainable transport system to 
improve air quality, reduce congestion, reduce noise and promote active travel.  
  
         
29 Biosphere Reserves are areas nominated by national government and designated under 
UNESCO’s Man and Biosphere (MAB) programme. They can encompass urban areas, 
forming sites of excellence to explore and demonstrate innovative approaches to 
conservation and sustainable development. They aim to reconcile the conservation of nature 
with socio -economic development. A Management Strategy sets out actions to conserve and 
enhance the natural environment under the global Biosphere accreditation.   
30 A plan prepared by the city council and nature conservation organisations to reverse the 
decline in the variety of species of animals and plants. The Local Biodiversity Action Plan is part of the Biosphere project and will be included in the submission to UNESCO.  
 20                                          
An Attractive City  
  2.4 The council wants to ensure that the city is and remains a rew arding, 
safe and healthier place for residents, businesses and visitors alike with a higher quality built environment and a protected and enhanced natural environment. By 2030:  
 
• Aim t o have raised the standards of sustainable design and 
architectural quality to ensure that new development respects and 
positively enhances the distinctive townscapes of the city’s different neighbourhoods. There will be a high quality public realm which will accommodate the needs of all people and create public places and spac es which are well used and where people feel safe and at ease 
with reduced opportunity for crime and reduced fear of crime.  
• C ontinue to bring new life to the city’s built and cultural heritage, in 
recognition of the city’s status as a premier historic resort of national significance and international renown, and the contribution such historic areas and culture make to the city’s regeneration.  
• Ensure t he city’s open spaces will be well maintained and more 
accessible to everyone; the Valley Gardens in particular will be a more attractive, accessible and usable environment.  
• A wide range of leisure opportunities will be provided where they are most needed including at Black Rock and King Alfred and these along with the  new community stadium will form a focal point for the city’s 
sporting aspirations.  
• The downland countryside will be conserved and its links to urban 
green spaces strengthened via a green network across the city where 
biodiversity is enhanced and equality of access to natural open space is achieved.  
• To have taken a key role in promoting the city as a gateway to the South Downs National Park.  
• The regeneration of the seafront will have continued, with significantly improved seawater quality and ensured that the location and design of development reduces and adapts to the risk of flooding and coastal erosion.  
             
 21  
 
Strategic Objectives:  
 SO12  Ensure design excellence which responds positively to the 
distinctive character of the city’s different neighbourhoods and creates an attractive and acces sible well- connected network of streets, spaces and 
buildings.  
 SO13  Enhance and maintain the distinctive image, character and vibrant, 
varied heritage and culture of the city to benefit residents and visitors. Support the role of the arts, creative industries and sustainable tourism sector in creating a range of high quality infrastructure support facilities, spaces, events and experiences  
 SO14  Conserve and enhance the South Downs National Park, including 
the promotion of an enhanced downland landscape which delivers Local Biodiversity Action Plan objectives; more sustainable farming practices and improved public access. Enhance and promote physical and sustainable transport links between the city and the Downs.  
 SO15  Promote new opportunities for sport and recreation. Protect and 
enhance the quality and quantity of parks and green spaces in the city, formal and informal, improving their interconnectivity, enhancing their individual character, landscape and biodiversity to ensure that they are valued by the whole community and well used throughout the year.  
 SO16  Preserve and enhance the city’s recognised cultural heritage and 
bring vacant buildings of national or local architectural or historic interest back into appropriate uses. Ensure new developments  contribute 
positively to their historic surroundings.  
 SO17  Enhance the seafront as a year round place for sustainable tourism, 
leisure, recreation and culture whilst protecting and enhancing the quality of the coastal and marine environment.  
 SO18  Main tain and enhance the distinct character and physical 
environment of the city’s established network of shopping centres to ensure they remain vibrant, attractive and accessible.  
 
 
 
 22 Healthy and Balanced Communities  
 
2.5 Everyone has a right to a decent ho me, a good education, a job that 
pays for a decent standard of living, good healthcare and to feel safe in their community. No one should be disadvantaged from birth due to the neighbourhood or family circumstances they are born into. To tackle inequality in the city by 2030 we aim:  
 
• To have helped to create more sustainable communities - by ensuring 
a mix of accessible and affordable new housing types and tenures in 
suitable locations, including family homes, which offer a good range of community facilitie s and with good access to jobs, key services and 
infrastructure thereby reducing the need to travel, and so build strong communities that get involved in influencing decisions.  
• To be a ‘Healthy City’ through promoting the active participation of 
residents of all age groups in sports , physical and cultural activity, 
healthier living conditions and a citywide network of walk -in polyclinics, 
health centres, children’s centres and specialist services providing 
equality of access to healthcare facilities across the city.  
• To continue to tackle the issues of homelessness and overcrowded households and to have made substantial progress in meeting housing needs and demand. In conjunction with partners the city’s housing stock will be brought up to a decent standard.  
• To have narrowed the gap between the deprived neighbourhoods and the rest of the city through improvements to infrastructure and support services, by widening access to learning and employment opportunities and by supporting and encouraging community engagement in regeneration and local decisions.  
• Provide additional primary and secondary school places in response to 
growing demand and future increases in population through expansion 
of successful schools and by providing new schools . The role of the 
higher and further education establishments in the city will continue to 
grow and strengthen.  
 
 23  
 
Strategic Objectives:  
 
SO19  Contribute towards the delivery of more sustainable communities and 
the reduction of inequalities between neighbourhoods in Brighton & H ove.  
 SO20  Contribute towards reducing inequalities experienced by different 
groups within the city and recognise the special needs of younger people, older people, disabled people, lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans people and black and minority ethnic people, gypsies and travellers, refugees and asylum seekers and people of different religions and belief in the provision and improvement of accessible and appropriate community facilities, healthcare, education, housing, safety and employment.  
 SO21 . Provid e additional primary and secondary school places in response to 
growing demand and future increases in population by working with partners, including not for profit organisations, to build new schools and by expanding successful schools (where possible, with the consent of the school). Assist in 
the long term planning of higher and further education establishments, and ensure that they play a full part in the city’s economic, social and environmental development.  
 SO22  Across the city apply the principles of healthy urban planning and work 
with partners to achieve an equality of access to community services (health and learning), to opportunities and facilities for sport and recreation and lifelong learning. Ensure pollution is minimised and actively seek improvements in water, land and air quality and reduce noise pollution.  
  SO23  Ensure that Brighton & Hove is a city where all people feel safe in 
public places and within their neighbourhoods through working with partners to create a safer environment, reduce crime and reduce the fear of crime.  
 
                 
 24 A Spatial Strategy for Brighton & Hove  
 
2.6 Brighton & Hove is a coastal city providing a sub- regional focus for jobs 
and services to the surrounding areas. The local authorities along the Sussex coast face similar issues around physical and environmental constraints to accommodating growth and ensuring a balanced approach to housing and employment provision.  
  
2.7 Recognising the need to plan positively to meet the needs of a growing 
city, the City Plan seeks to achieve a balanced and sustainable approach to 
accommodating growth over the plan period.  
  Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development  
 2.8 As a council we need to ensure that the city can grow and regenerate in a 
sustainable manner.  Creating a more sustainable city is at the heart of the 
vision and strategy for the City Plan. A widely accepted definition of sustainable development is “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”
31.  The Government has set out a Strategy32 with five overall principles 
of sustainable development: living within environmental limits; ensuring a strong, healthy and just society; achieving a sustainable economy; using sound sci ence responsibly; and promoting good governance. The council is 
committed to using the One Planet
33 approach and guiding principles to move 
towards a more sustainable city and the policies in the City Plan will help deliver against the local targets under the One Planet Living principles  as 
shown in Table 1.  
                
31 ‘Our Common Future’ 1987 (the Bruntland Report)  
32 UK Sustainable Development Strategy Securing the Future 2005 
33 The One Planet approach is a framework that helps address all major aspects of 
environmental, social and economic sustainability and is based on ten principles or areas of 
focus developed by sustainable development charity BioRegional with WWF to help people 
and organisations live and work within a fair share of the planet’ s resources.  
 
 25                                         Table 1 Delivering One Planet Principles of Sustainability  
Principle  Description  Relevant City Plan policies and 
other plan documents  
Zero Carbon  Making buildings more 
energy efficient and 
delivering all energy with 
renewable technologies  Spatial Strategy; Development Areas 
1 -8  
SA1 Seafront  
CP1 Housing Delivery  
CP2 Sustainable Economic 
Development  
CP3 Employment Land  
CP7 Infrastructure and developer 
contributions  
CP8 Sustainable Buildings  
CP9 Sustainable Transport  
Zero Waste  Reducing waste arisings, 
reusing where possible, and 
ultimately sending zero 
waste to landfill  Spatial Strategy; Development Areas 
1-8, SA1  
CP8 Sustainable Building CP15 Heritage  
Waste and Minerals Plan 
SPD3 C onstruction and Demolition 
Waste guidance  
Sustainable 
Transport  Encouraging low carbon 
modes of transport to 
reduce emissions, reducing 
the need to travel  Spatial Strategy  
Development Areas 1 -8 
Special Areas 1-6 
CP4 Retail Provision  
CP7 Infrastructure and developer 
contributions  
CP9 Sustainable Transport  
Sustainable 
Materials  Using sustainable products 
that have a low embodied energy   Spatial Strategy; Development Areas 
1-8, SA1  
SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods  
CP5 Culture and Tourism  
CP7 Infrastructure and developer contributions  
CP8 Sustainable Building CP15 Heritage  
Waste and Minerals Plan 
Local and 
Sustainable Food Choosing low impact, local, 
seasonal and organic diets and reducing food waste  Spatial Strategy; Development Areas 
1-8, SA1  
SA4 Urban F ringe  
SA5 South Downs  
SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods  
CP4 Retail Provision  
CP8 Sustainable Building CP16 Open Space  
CP18 Healthy City  
Food Growing Planning Advice Note  
Sustainable 
Water  Using water more efficiently 
in buildings and in the 
products we buy; tackling Spatial Strategy; Development Areas 
1-8, SA1  
SA1 The Seafront  
2 6 local flooding and water 
course pollution  SA4 Urban Fringe  
SA5 South Downs  
CP8 Sustainable Building 
CP11 Flood Risk  
Land use and 
Wildlife  Protecting and expanding 
old habitats and creating 
new space for wildlife  Spatial Strategy, Development Areas 
1- 8 
SA1 The Seafront  
SA3 Valley Gardens  
SA4 Urban Fringe  
SA5 South Downs  
SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods  
CP8 Sustainable Building 
CP10 Biodiversity  
CP13 Public Street and Spaces  
CP14 Housing  Density  
CP16 Open Space  
Culture and 
Community  Reviving local identity and 
wisdom; support for, and 
participation in, the arts   Spatial Strategy,Development Areas 
1-8 
SA1 Seafront  
SA2 Central Brighton  
SA3 Valley Gardens  
SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods  
CP5 Culture and Tourism  
CP7 Infrastructure and Developer 
Contributions  
CP12 Urban Design  
CP13 Public Streets and Spaces  
CP15 Heritage  
Equity and 
Local 
Economy  Inclusive, empowering 
workplaces with equitable pay; support for local 
communities and fair trade Spatial Strategy; Development Areas 
1-8 
SA6 Sustainable Communities  
CP2 Sustainable Economic 
Development  
CP3 Employment Land  
CP4 Retail Provision  
CP7 Infrastructure and Developer 
Contributions  
Health and 
Happiness  Encouraging active, 
sociable, meaningful lives to promote good health and 
well being  Development Areas 1 -8 
SA1 The Seafront  
SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods  
CP1 Housing Delivery  
CP8 Sustainable Building CP12 Urban Design  
CP13 Public Streets and Places  
CP16 Open Space  
CP17Sports Provision  
CP18 Healt hy City  
CP19 Housing Mix  
CP20 Affordable Housing 
CP22 Traveller  Accommodation  
2
7 2.9 The government has placed the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development at the heart of its approach to planning, and this is articulated in 
the National Planning Policy Framework, published in March 2012.  The 
council is required by the government to include the following policy in the City Plan Part 1:  
 SS1 Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  
 When considering development proposals the Council will t ake a 
positive approach that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework.  It 
will always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions which mean that proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the economic, social and environmental conditions in the area.  
 Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Local Plan (and, where relevant, with polic ies in neighbourhood plans) will be 
approved without delay, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant policies are out of date at the time of making the decision then the Council will grant permission unl ess material considerations 
indicate otherwise – taking into account whether:
 
 
• Any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly 
and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against 
the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as a 
whole; or  
 
• Specific policies in that Framework indicate that development 
should be restricted34.  
 2.10 This policy aims to ensure that decisions are taken in line with the presumption in favour of sustainable development as set out in the Nat ional 
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF).  The policies and proposals in the City Plan Part 1 reflect the presumption in favour of sustainable development set out in paragraphs 11 to 16 of the NPPF, and the inclusion of this policy avoids any doubt about whether the City Plan Part 1 complies with the presumption.  
 Strategy for the future of Brighton & Hove  
 2.11 Brighton & Hove is a tightly constrained, compact city situated between 
the South Downs National Park and the sea. With a limited legacy of derelict or vacant sites these ‘natural boundaries’ define and limit the outward expansion of the city. The spatial strategy needs to achieve a balance 
34 For example, those policies relating to land within a National Park, sites protected under 
the Birds and Habitats Directives and/or as Sites of Special Scientific Interest; designated 
heritage assets; and locations at risk of flooding or coastal erosion.  
 28                                         between accommodating the city’s development needs, particularly for jobs 
and homes, with the continuing need to protect and enhance the city’s high quality environments and the nationally designated landscape that surrounds the city.  
 2.12 The assessed housing requirements (demand and need for new homes) 
for the city over the plan period are much higher than the ci ty can realistically 
accommodate. The plan sets a minimum housing target of 13,200  new homes 
to be achieved by 2030 and this reflects the capacity and availability of land/sites in the city; the need to provide for a mix of homes to support the growth and maintenance of sustainable communities; the need to provide land for other essential uses (such as employment, retail, health and education facilities and other community and leisure facilities) and the need to respect the historic, built and natural environment of the city.   2.13 The City is expected to continue to function as an economic growth hub for the wider sub- region and the council with its partners share an ambition to 
improve the City’s employment rate. Recent studies have consistently identified the shortage of employment premises and employment land supply 
as threats to business and employment growth in the city. The Employment Land Study Review 2012 forecasts  employment land requirement of 112,240 
sq m of office space (B1a and B1b) and 43,430 sq m industrial floorspace (B1c, B2 and B8) over the plan period to 2030. The spatial strategy therefore seeks to ensure that employment sites across the city are safeguarded and upgraded and through the regeneration of key sites new employment floorspace created. Without the industrial heritage of other cities, the supply of 
employment land and premises is limited in the city. In order to achieve the local housing target opportunities some employment sites have been identified to bring forward a mix of housing and employment floorspace. However further releases will harm the ability of the city to create new jobs for the growing population.  Opportunities will be sought in City Plan Part 2 to 
address the potential shortfall in employment land supply alongside a coordinated approach to bringing forward development sites across the city region in order create new employment space.  
 2.14 Retail needs to 2030 have been estimated at 58,313 sq m of comparison 
floorspace and 2,967 sq m of convenience retail. New ret ail development will 
be directed to the city’s existing retail centres in particular the Brighton centre to consolidate and enhance its role as a regional shopping centre.  2.15 To ensure the successful regeneration of the city, other development 
needs generated by a growing population; schools, community facilities’, sport and recreation and cultural provision also need to be accommodated. As the population density of the city increases, the demand for and use of parks and open spaces increases. The council will optimise the use of previously developed land whilst ensuring sufficient green infrastructure is delivered alongside new development. The council is committed to working with partners to achieve the objectives of a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve for the city and its hinterland as an international ‘centre of excellence’ to integrate the needs of people and nature.   
 29  
2.16 There is a need to tackle the causes and effects of climate change 
through lower carbon lifestyles; limiting our use of increasingly scar ce 
resources; reducing our dependency on fossil fuels especially in light of energy security and supply concerns; and making sure that the city  is resilient 
to climate change. We will need to adopt environmentally friendly practices such as making buildings more energy efficient, increas ing the use of 
renewable energy delivering significant changes in energy infrastructure, reduc ing car use and grow ing more local food. We will also need to ensure 
that the natural environment is maintained and enhanced to maximise opportunities for mitigation. This will enable us to contribute to meeting the local and national carbon reduction targets.  
 2.17 Part of what makes Brighton & Hove an attractive place to live is the 
quality of the historic built environment and public realm. Respecting the urban context of development is essential. The City Plan seeks to optimise the use of previously developed land across the city and opportunities for higher density or taller buildings . New development s will be guided by urban 
characterisation studies and the emerging Urban Design Framework.  
 2.18 The City Plan is accompanied by an Infrastructure Delivery Plan which 
sets out the infrastructure requirements for the city over the plan period but no critical issues have been identified that would restrict the council ’s ability to 
achieve the level of growth the Plan provides for.  
 The Spatial Distribution of Development  
 2.19 Spatially the majority of new housing, employment and retail 
development will be located on brownfield (previously developed) sites within 
the city’s built up area and directed to eight specific development areas (DA1 – 8). These are areas of the city which either already benefit from close 
proximity to good sustainable transport links or are areas where accessibility can be improved; are areas which offer significant capacity for new development and are areas where new development and/or regeneration will secure substantial benefits for the city. This approach ensures that opportunities for development of brownfi eld sites are maximised, transport 
impacts will be minimised and that the city’s countryside and the South Downs National Park will continue to be protected.   2.20 Much of the land within the city’s defined urban fringe forms part of the 
city’s green infr astructure; either in terms of the city’s open space framework 
(e.g. parks, recreation grounds, sports pitches and playing fields, allotments, cemeteries, natural/semi -natural space) or part of the city’s biodiversity 
resource such as local nature reserves, sites of conservation importance or Nature Improvement Areas. However , in light of the significant scale of the 
city’s housing need, objectively assessed as 30,120 new homes  to 2030
35; 
the requirement of the government’s National Planning Policy Framework  to 
plan positively to meet housing needs in full and; the need to adequately 
35 Objectively Assessed Need for Housing: Brighton & Hove, June 2015, GL Hearn Limited  
 30                                         address the  social dimension of sustainable development the potential for 
housing from the urban fringe has had to be reassessed36. The strategy for 
accommodating growth in the city continues to maximise development 
opportunities from brownfield sites but  also includes the urban fringe as broad 
source of potential for housing development . 
 
2.21 The eight development areas are:  
• DA1 - Brighton Centre and Churchill Square Area  
• DA2 - Brighton Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock Area  
• DA3 - Lewes Road Area 
• DA4 - New England Quarter and London Road Area  
• DA5 - Eastern Road and Edward Street Area  
• DA6 - Hove Station Area  
• DA7 - Toad ’s Hole Valley  
• DA8 - Shoreham Harbour  
 2.22 The Development Areas are proposed to accommodate a significant 
amount of development because they contain the potential capacity and opportunities for change, they can deliver development of a citywide or regional importance and/or because they are in need of regeneration . 
Proposals for each of the Development Areas are set against a guiding ‘area 
strategy’ which sets the framework for future development and change within each identified area. Local priorities (such as transport improvements, community safety, open space or public realm improvements) are identified together with broad strategic amounts of additional development required and any associated key infrastructure requirements. Strategic allocations are proposed within Development Area proposals; these are sites whos e 
regeneration/redevelopment are considered critical to the overall delivery of 
housing and employment growth over the plan period.  
 2.23 The City Plan also encourages development to come forward across the 
rest of the city on suitable brownfield site opportunities  (through, for example 
conversions, redevelopment and changes of use) in accessible locations and by promoting the efficient use and development of land/sites across the city 
including higher densities in appropriate locations. Such development wi ll help 
to secure the growth of , or maintain, sustainable neighbourhoods and 
communities and can also help to protect valuable open spaces.  
 2.24 Additional areas of the city are identified as special policy areas requiring 
effective partnership working and a comprehensive and coordinated policy approach to managing future development and change. These areas are:  
 
SA1 - The Seafront  
SA2 - Central Brighton  
SA3 - Valley Gardens  
SA4 - Urban Fringe 
SA5 - The Setting of the South Downs National Park  
36 Urban Fringe Assessment Study June 2014  
 31                                         SA6 - Susta inable Neighbourhoods  
 
Table 2 sets out the amount of development distributed across the city.  
 Table 2 Summary of Development proposals  
 
 New Homes  New Employment 
Floorspace (sq m)  New Retail 
floorspace  
(sq m)  
DA1 Brighton 
Centre and Churchill Square  20  Minimum 
20,000 comparison 
goods  
DA2 Brighton 
Marina  1940  2,000  5,000  
DA3 Lewes Road  875 15,600   
DA4 New England 
Quarter and London 
Road  1130  20,000   
DA5 Eastern Road 
and Edward Street  515 18,200 – 23,200   
DA6 Hove Station  525 1,000   
DA7 Toad’s H ole 
Valley  700 25,000   
DA8 Shoreham 
Harbour  300 7,500   
Rest of the City : 
a) Within the built up area  
b) Within the 
urban fringe   
4130  
 1060   
11,25737  
Small site 
development38 2015    
Total  13210  100,500 to 105,500  25,000  
 2.25 City wide policies (CP1 - CP22) set out the council’s approach to strategic 
policy issues such as the scale and type of housing to be achieved, securing sustainable economic development, the provision of open space, sports and recreation facilities, achieving more sustainable buildings, a healthy city and an improved public realm. The city wide policies are arranged under thematic headings: a strong and prosperous city, a sustainable city, an attractive city and healthy and balanced communities. 
 
 
37 Includes extant planning permissions not included within Development Area floorspace 
figures and potential of 6,500 sq m of employment floorspace at Patcham Court Farm (see 
CP3)  
38 Development from small identified sites estimated to be 765 units pr e-plan adoption and 
small windfall development across the plan period is 1,250 units  
 32                                          
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Section  Three 
Development an d Special Area policies  
                         
 33 DA1 Brighton Centre and Churchill Square Area  
 
 
Context  
 3.1 The area around the Brighton Centre is in the heart of the cultural, retail 
and commercial core of the city and contains the key drivers of the l ocal 
tourism, leisure and shopping economy. The development area encompasses the Churchill Square Shopping Centre and Western Road to the north; both of 
which form part of the Regional Shopping Centre, the Brighton Centre to the south and West Street to th e east. The Brighton Centre, compared with other 
modern conference centres, is now thought to be outdated in terms of its design, specification and appearance. The long term aspiration of the council is to secure the redevelopment of the Brighton Centre as  a successful, high 
profile and sustainable conference centre. West Street contains a concentration of bars and large nightclubs and is part of an area of the city experiencing high incidences of violent crime. The priority here is to improve community and public safety including improvements to West Street to ensure 
a balanced range of complementary evening and night -time economy uses.  
Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against the 
principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
 
 34 DA1 Brighton Centre and Churchill Square Area  
 
The strategy is to secure a new state of the art conference centre in a landmark new building to benefit  the city and the region and to sustain 
the tourism and service economy for the next 30 years, positioning Brighton & Hove as one of Europe’s leading conference and meeting destinations. The redevelopment of the Brighton Centre will form part of a comprehensive scheme including the extension of the Churchill  
Square Shopping Centre and new leisure facilities.  
 A. The local priorities to achieve the strategy are:  
 
1. The council will work in partnership with landowners to plan for a replacement facility for t he existing Brighton Centre with a new 
state of the art convention facility incorporating the highest standard of environmental design;  
 
2. Ensure that the redevelopment benefits the surrounding area through high quality building design ; significant improv ements to 
townscape  and heritage assets damaged by the 1970s 
redevelopment of the area ; legibility, permeability, public realm 
and biodiversity improvements (in accordance with the adopted Brighton Centre SPD and Nature Conservation and Development SPD);  
 
3. Support the extension of the Churchill Square shopping centre to provide a minimum 20,000 sq m net of new retail comparison 
goods
39 floorspace and A2/A3 use floorspace;  
 
4. Improve community and public safety in the area, by ensuring replaced/ new leisur e and cultural facilities promote a balanced 
and diversified range of complementary evening and night -time 
economy uses and address, where appropriate, community safety concerns, in particular along West Street and the lower seafront promenade (see SA2 Cen tral Brighton).  
 
5. To ensure high quality public and sustainable transport facilities serve new development , in particular the need to 
improve the bus interchange facilities at Churchill Square ; 
 
6. Improve pedestrian and cycle access through  and around the 
area, particularly along Queens Road to Brighton Station, and 
reduce the severance between the northern side of the A259 and the seafront to accord with the Public Space Public Life Study;  
 
7. Ensure improvements to local air quality in the Western Roa d, 
Churchill Square and North Street transport corridor and along 
39 Non- food items in shops  
 35                                         Queens Road / West Street40 through the implementation of the 
council’s Air Quality Action Plan . Ensure new development 
proposals take into account impact on local air quality and that 
improv ements and/or mitigation are sought wherever possible.  
 
8. Ensure that redevelopment proposals complement the priorities for the seafront in this area as set out in SA1 The Seafront.  
 9. Development within this area will be encouraged to consider 
low and z ero carbon decentralised energy and in particular heat 
networks and to either connect where a suitable system is in place (or would be at the time of construction) or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network  
 B: The Strategic Allocation for the Brighton Centre and Churchill Square  
Development Area is:  
 
1. New Brighton Centre and expansion of Churchill Square.  
 
Redevelopment of the Brighton Centre to provide a new 25,000 sqm conference centre, and expansion of Churchill Square 
shopping centre to provide a minimum of 20,000sqm  net new 
comparison goods A1 floorspace (and A2 and A3 use classes). New hotel and leisure facilities including a cinema will also be permitted. Proposals will be assessed against the local priorities set out above, citywide policies, informed by the adopted Brighton Centre SPD and the following criteria:  
 
a) Securing improved legibility, permeability and connectivity within the area through high quality building design, townscape and public realm (see  CP12 and CP13).  
 
b) Proposals for new retail floorspace should promote strong linkages with the primary shopping frontages along Western Road. Edge of centre proposals will be determined in accordance with policy CP4
41. 
 
c) Appropriate transport infrastructure improvements will be required that provide and promote public and sustainable transport to support the redevelopment including the need for integrated links to rapid/express bus -
based services on the A259 (see CP9 Sustainable Transport).  
 
d) The developer should enter into a training place   agreement to secure training for local people.  
40 See also SA2 Central Brighton part 7  
41Policy CP4 requires a retail impact assessment for all major edge and out of centre retail 
developments  over 1,000 sqm net as a locally set threshold.  
 36                                         Supporting Text  
 
3.2 The Brighton Centre re- development will deliver a sustainable city centre 
regeneration scheme, over a 30 year timeframe, with an economic impact  of 
some £2 billion for the local economy. The main objectives for the council are:  
 
• To deliver a world class state of the art convention centre  
• To continue to deliver significant positive impact to the local economy  
• To protect and enhance Brighton’s position as a leading conference  
destination  
• To increase the target market and to re- establish Brighton & Hove’s 
position in the international association conference market.  
• More detailed planning guidance is contained within The Brighton Centre SPD (adopted January 2005).  
 3.3 A further priority will be to ensure that redevelopment of the Brighton 
Centre delivers new retail floorspace as an extension of Churchill Square to enhance and consolidate Brighton’s role as a primary Regional Shopping Centre within the South East
41. There is considerable potential to enhance the 
pedestrian environment, unit configuration, appearance and national multiple 
retailer representation within this primary retail area. In order to enable 
existing retailers to trade up, and to attract major new retailers to the centre, it is necessary to identify new opportunities for creating additional retail space, in addition to the ongoing redevelopment and modernisation of current stock.  
 3.4 It will be necessary to facilitate fundamental townscape improvement 
opportunities in the area and improve the built form to create a new bold iconic landmark building and explore opportunities for a tall building.  
 3.5 Proposals should promote strong linkages with the primary shopping 
frontages, along Wes tern Road in particular and connectivity through to the 
seafront to address the problem of pedestrian severance. Improvements should include an enhanced bus interchange and pedestrian environment around Churchill Square, a new gateway link through from Churchill Square Shopping Centre to the seafront, and improved junctions at West Street and 
Kings Road and at the Clock Tower (Western Road, North Street and Queens 
Road) . On completion of the redevelopment the primary retail frontage of the 
regional centre will be extended to include any new retail elements of the scheme.
42 
 3.6 Current  air quality assessments
43 indicate that the Western Road, 
Churchill Square and North Street transport corridor and Queens Road exceed the Government’s Air Quality Objective for Nitrogen Dioxide and the 
41 Agreement has been reached with the Council and owners of Churchill Square (Standard 
Life Investments) to explore with a selected architect the opportunities for extending the 
shopping centre, and providing a brand new conference centre for the city.  
42 As advised in the Brighton & Hove City Council Retail Study Update 2011  
43 The 2011 Detailed Air Quality Assessment  and subsequent updates  
 37                                         area is included within the declared Air Quality Management Area  (AQMA)44. 
Improvements to local air quality in these corridors are a priority for the area.   
The movement of freight within the city centre can be a contributor to air borne 
pollution . The potential to reduce, retime, reroute and/or revise the mode of 
transport will be assessed in order to look at measures to reduce the number 
of freight trips into the city centre AQMA . Measures will be developed that 
encourage lower emi ssion urban freight distribution (see policy CP9 
Sustainable Transport).  New development proposals should take account of 
their impact on local air quality, be consistent with the council’s Air Quality 
Action Plan and minimise increased exposure to existing poor air quality within the AQMA. Improvements and/ or mitigation will be sought wherever possible.  
 3.7 West Street contains a concentration of bars and large nightclubs and 
central Brighton and particularly the West Street area, continues to experience higher incidences of violent crime
45. A priority will therefore be to 
improve community and public safety including West Street improvements to ensure a balanced range of complementary evening and night -time economy 
uses and initiatives to reduce public place violence in partnership with the 
NHS and Police.  
 3.8 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified particular potential for 
District Heating networks in and around this area within a long list of priority areas. Development within the long -list of p riority areas will be encouraged to 
consider  low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular  heat 
networks and required to either connect where a suitable system is in place, or would be at the time of construction, or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network . 
                  
44 2013  Air Quality Management Area  
45 Brunswick & Regency Neighbourhood Action Plan 2007- 2010  
 
 38                                         DA2 Brighton Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock Area 
 
 
 
Context  
3.9 Brighton Marina is situated at the base of the cliffs to the east of the city 
centre. It was created in the 1970’s and now functions as an independent component of the city’s urban area. The Marina contains a mix of housing, shopping, commercial, leisure and recreational buildings together with yacht moorings and a working harbour which creates a unique marine character.  
 3.10 Recreation and leisure uses have expanded over the years, as have the 
number of residential developments. However, different construction phases within the Marina have occurred without the benefit of a planned approach. Consequently, the Marina has become characterised by piecemeal development and areas of poor public realm.  
 3.11 The development area covered by this policy extends beyond the Marina 
encompassing other key sites in the vicinity, including the former Gas Works site to the north and the Black Rock site to the west of the Marina. These sites 
have been incorporated within the development area because they are likely to be affected by any future development of the Marina and vice versa, particularly in terms of traffic generation and impact  on nearby junctions.  
 3.12 The long term aspiration of the council is to address the deficiencies of 
the Marina and the wider area to facilitate the creation of a mixed use area of 
the city. This will be achieved through the generation of a sustainable hi gh 
quality marina environment which creates easier and more attractive access for residents and visitors, extends the promenade environment up to and around the Marina and creates stronger pedestrian and visual links with the sea from the Marina.  
 39 DA2 Brigh ton Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock Area 
 
The strategy for the development area is to facilitate the creation of Brighton Marina and the wider area as a sustainable mixed use area of 
the city, through the generation of a high quality marina environment by  
supporting proposals which:  
• Secure a high quality of building design that takes account of the 
cliff height issues in and around the Marina , townscape and 
public realm while recognising the potential for higher density mixed development in accordance with  the aims of the Spatial 
Strategy to optimise development on brownfield sites;  
• Improve connectivity and legibility between the Marina, Black 
Rock and the former Gas Works site  
• Enhance the transport infrastructure at the Marina, promote more 
sustainable for ms of transport and maximise opportunities to 
reduce car ownership;  
• Encourage opportunities for the sustainable production of heat 
and power for the district ;  
• Protect and enhance the ecological environment at the Marina, including improving linkages to gr een spaces and the existing 
Green Network;  
• Secure a more balanced mix of retail, including support for independent retailers,  and non retail uses such as  leisure, tourism  
and commercial uses ; 
• Deliver a substantial amount of additional residential units including affordable housing, over the plan period; and  
• Deliver the amounts of development as set out in part B below  
 A. The local priorities to achieve this strategy are:  
 1. The council will work in partnership with the different landowning interests to en sure that the regeneration of the Marina is comprehensive 
and conforms with an updated master plan (Supplementary Planning Document) for the Marina, to avoid further piecemeal development in the future.  
 2. Encouraging the development of housing, retail and employment 
floorspace and community facilities to increase opportunities for and to 
meet the needs of local communities.  
 3. Protecting and enhancing areas of marine character and the role for marine -related leisure, recreation and employment opportuniti es. 
 4. Securing improved legibility, permeability and connectivity  for 
pedestrians within  and to the Marina and the surrounding areas through 
high quality building design, townscape and public realm (see CP12 and CP13).  
 5. Enhancing the transport infrastructure at the Marina and promoting more sustainable forms of transport including enhanced bus services; 
 40 promoting smarter travel choices for people; minimising freight 
movements; improving pedestrian and cycle access; securing improved emergency vehicle a ccess (see CP9); and provision of, and support for, 
emerging and advanced technologies.  
6
. Balancing uses with an emphasis towards boating, surfing, leisure
and recreation and the enhancement of the retail offer through encouraging the provision of mixed retail activity and services to support any additional expansion in population (see CP4).  
7
. Ensuring an appropriate mix of housing reflecting housing needs46
w
ithin the city and which is accompanied by open space provision (see 
CP19 and CP16) . 
8. M
aximising opportunities to ensure the efficient, effective and
sustainable use of previously developed land so that any increase in residential density will positively enhance the Marina environment and help deliver other local priorities (see CP14)  
9. E
nhanci ng the social infrastructure to support any expansion in the
residential population through the provision of, or contributions towards, community, education and health services or facilities (see  
CP7).  
1
0. Conserving and enhancing the biodiversity and geodiversity of the
area through the implementation of an ecological master plan which ensures wildlife habitats are integrated throughout and ensures that protected sites  (RIGs
47, SSSI and SNCI)  are protected in accordance 
with Biosphere principles and having regard to proximity to the National Park Boundary (see CP10).  
1
1. Ensuring development proposals accord with the relevant Shoreline
Management Plan and incorporate a site specific Flood Risk  
Assessment in line with the requirements and recommendations for the 
area set out in the Brighton & Hove Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and guidance contained within the National Planning Policy Framework  
(see CP11), to protect development from all types of flood risk.  
1
2. Maximising opportunities to support the city’s sustainability
objectives through large -scale zero and low -carbon energy 
technologies , subject to delivery and viability considerations,  to serve 
the Marina and wider city, particularly those that take advantage of the Marina’s coastal location (see CP8).  
13.D
evelopment within this area will be encouraged to consider low and
zero carbon decentralised energy and heat networks in particular  and to 
either connect where a suitable system is in place (or would be at the 
46 B&H Housing Requirements Study June 2011 or subsequent updates.  
47 Regionally important geological sites.  
41 time of construction) or design s ystems so that they are compatible with 
future connection to a network.  
 
B. Provision will be made for the following amounts of additional development to be provided by 2030:  
 1,938 residential units (including the 853 residential units already 
granted planning permission for the outer harbour , 1000 
residential units allocated for the inner harbour and 85 residential units allocated for the Gas Works site);  5,000 sq m  (net) retail (A1- A5) floorspace;  
 2,000 sq m employment (B1a, B1c) floorspace;  
 10,500 sq m of leisure and recreation floor space ; 
 A community building within the Marina;  
 A health facility within or in the vicinity of the Marina to be agreed with the relevant NHS organisation
48; 
 
A primary school or increase in the number of school places within or in the vicinity of the Marina.  
 C. The Strategic Allocation in the Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock  
Development Area is:   1. Brighton Marina Inner Harbour  
 
Provision is made for a mixed use development comprising a minimum of 1,000 additional residential units  (excluding the outer harbour 
scheme) , 5,000 sq m of net additional retail development (A1 -A5), 3,500 
sq m of additional leisure and recreation use, community facilities 
(including health facility and community centre). Proposals will be assessed against the Development Plan policies and the following criteria:  
 a) Design – development should be of a high quality with excellent use 
of durable materials to reflect the unique location and surroundings of the Marina;  
48Brighton and Hove GPs have worked together to establish a  clinical commissioning group  
which covers the city, from Saltdean in the east to Portslade in the west. The clinical 
commissioning group became a statutory organisation in April 2013 when the PCT ceased to 
exist.  Some PCT functions have passed to clinical commissioning groups, some to the new 
NHS Commissioning Board,  and the responsibility for public health has transferred to local 
authorities.  
 
 42                                         b) Townscape and public realm  – development should improve the 
legibility and quality of the townscape and public realm and should 
demonstrate good connectivity between buildings and spaces within the 
Marina and wider area;  
 c) Housing mix – development should provide for a mix of dwelling type, 
tenure and size to cater for a range of housing requirements and to improve housing choice;  
 d) Flood risk - development should demonstrate that the most 
vulnerable land uses will be located in areas of lowest flood risk in accordance with Brig hton & Hove’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment ; 
 e) Sewerage capacity – the development must connect to the sewerage 
system off- site at the nearest point of adequate capacity ;  
 f) The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure 
training for local people.  
 2. Gas Works site  
 The Gas Works site has been identified for approximately 2 ,000 sq m of 
business floor space  to the north of the site , a minimum of 85 residential 
units and some ancillary retail development. The key criteria against which proposals will be assessed are:  
 
a) Employment provision - development should provide an 
appropriate mix of employment floor space of varying sizes that cater for business uses ranging from office to light industrial, including small starter units or ma naged units (Use Classes B1);  
 
b) Housing mix – development should provide for a mix of dwelling 
type, tenure and size to cater for a range of housing requirements and to improve housing choice;  
 
c) Design – development proposals should demonstrate high quality 
design  which positively contribute to the varying character of existing residential and commercial properties in the vicinity to create a cohesive and attractive urban environment;  
 
d) Connectivity – development proposals should enhance existing 
links between the Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock and contribute to the creation of safe links and coherent integration between the Gas Works site and the surrounding neighbourhood;  
 
e) Land contamination – development proposals should undertake 
and submit to the Local Planning Authority evidence to support uses where possible land contamination and remediation may prohibit the delivery of the above uses and amounts ;  
 
 43 f) The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure 
training for local people.  
 
3. Black Rock site  
 The Black Rock site has been allocated for 7,000 sq m of  leisure and 
recreation use, in addition to ancillary retail and café uses associated 
with the primary leisure use. Proposals will be assessed against the citywide policies and the fo llowing specific criteria:  
 
a) Provision of a high quality leisure and recreation facility that caters for the needs of the city,  complements Brighton Marina , 
enhances the seafront leisure function, draws tourism to the city and attracts visitors and residen ts to the seafront;  
 
b) Proposals for development will need to fully demonstrate how this would enable conservation of the historic environment including the setting of nearby listed buildings and the Kemp Town Conservation Area, and complements allocated de signations and 
uses at both the adjacent Inner Harbour and Gas Works sites  (see 
CP15) ; 
 
c) Creation of links between Black Rock and the Marina, including the provision of a pedestrian and cycle link from the west allowing 
the continuation of the seafront , which is part of the National 
Cycle Network, to promot e stronger  linkages through to the Inner 
Harbour area of the Marina, contributing towards the creation of coherent and safe public access between the seafront, Marina and the Gas Works site and;  
 
d) Protect a nd enhance the vegetated shingle area which is a rare 
and important habitat for local and migrating species and provide opportunities for appreciating the special quality of the Site of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCI) designated Black Rock beach ; 
 
e) The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure training for local people.  
 
Proposals for uses in addition to the recreation and leisure use will only be considered where it can be demonstrated that these uses support the delivery of a leisure and recreation facility and complement  
development at the Marina. Supporting or enabling uses should perpetuate informal leisure uses associated with the seafront, conserve the historic environment and enhance linkages between Black Rock, the Marina and the Gas Works site.      
 44 Supporting text  
 
3.13 A holistic approach to the regeneration of the development area will be 
achieved through the preparation and adoption of a Supplementary Planning  
Document (SPD) for the Brighton Marina and wider area. The S PD will 
replace the existing Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPGBH20, 2003) and Planning Advice Note (PAN04, 2008) for Brighton Marina.    3.14 The SPD will be supported by a Public Realm Strategy for the Marina, 
providing comprehensive design guidance for developers and will form part of the citywide Urban Design Framework (CP12). It will contribute to improving the visual appearance of the area, focussing particularly on shop fronts and pedestrian routes and connections to key attractions both within and  in the 
vicinity of the Marina. The strategy will also include guidance on how to improve the biodiversity of the area and access to areas of ecological importance e.g. the SSSI cliffs and SNCI beaches, which will make a significant contribution to improving the quality of life within the development area.  Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against 
the principles  and local targets under the One Planet Living  approach, which 
is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
 3.15 Fundamental to the strategy for the development area is the provision of 
mixed use development at a density that helps achieve a vibrant and sustainable place. However, proposed developments should ensure the preservation and/or enhancement of the setting of all listed buildings and 
conservation areas nearby, as well as the wider historic landscape and city skyline including views to and from the South Downs National Park. Applications for higher density development will be assessed in terms of their 
ability to meet the design and density considerations set out in CP12 and CP14. It is essential that any new development provides an attractive pedestrian environment, active retail and leisure frontages as well as easy access t o the harbour, boardwalk, shoreline and other recreational areas 
within the Marina.  
 3.16 In recognition of the current impact of the economic downturn on the 
deliverability of major schemes, it is important to allow for reasonable flexibility, in the shor t term to promote successful regeneration and enable 
viable schemes to be delivered. Proposals which bring forward development amounts different to that proposed in the policy will need to be fully and robustly justified through clear commercial and financ ial viability assessments 
and demonstrable benefits for early delivery. Consideration will be given to the whether allowing a different scale or mix of development will secure particularly strong planning benefits and whether the proposed amount of development is appropriate in light of ongoing monitoring of housing and employment delivery. Enabling development for either the Black Rock or the 
Gas Works site should be used to support and deliver their respective leisure and recreation, and employment uses .  
 3.17 The majority of existing retail activity takes place in the Merchant’s Quay 
and at the Asda superstore. Whilst Brighton Marina contains a range of bars, 
 45 restaurants and factory outlet stores related to its wider recreation and leisure 
role, it curre ntly lacks the full range of shops and services, such as banks and 
post offices,  to support the proposed expansion in residential population. The 
strategy for the development area is to enhance the choice and perfor mance 
of retail activity in the  Marina through the encouragement of mixed retail 
activity and improvements to the public realm. R etail development  should 
accord with CP4 Retail Provision. A detailed policy regarding the appropriate type and mix of A1 and non A1 uses in the Marina will be set out in Part 2 of the City Plan.  
 3.18 The Gas Works site is allocated for 2,000 sq m of employment use at the northern part of the site. It is recognised that the current configuration of the site and land contamination issues will potentially influence the t ype and 
position of employment uses on this strategic allocation. Vehicular access to the north of the site is more appropriate for industrial and employment type uses. The adjacent Bell Tower Industrial estate to the west will be an attractive factor in locating compl ementary uses.  
 3.19 Improvements to the transport infrastructure, in particular to the cycle, 
pedestrian and bus routes will be implemented and funded through planning obligations. These improvements will be closely linked to other priorities for the area, especially those relating to enhancement of the public realm and ecology. There is currently relatively good bus access to the Marina but there is scope to further improve bus services as well as the infrastructure i.e. 
through the provision of a high quality bus interchange within the Marina, in 
response to the additional demands resulting from the implementation of major development schemes. There are plans for the provision of rapid/express bus -based services along the seafront to contribute to improved 
public transport provi sion to the Marina (see CP9 Sustainable Transport) . 
Work will be undertaken with transport operators to secure improvements through both the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
49 if introduced  or 
planning obligations.  
 3.20 The identified amount of development will largely be met by the strategic 
allocations set out in part C of the policy. The Inner Harbour is located immediately south of the cliffs and is central to the regeneration of the western part of the Marina, acting as a catalyst to transforming its appearance and dysfunctional linkages. The Black Rock site to the west of the Marina has been identified for development of a recreation and leisure facility that will 
redress the lack of modern, prestigious, good quality recreation facilities in this part of the city (see also CP17). The Gas Works site to the north of the Marina is remote and cut off by the A259 from the rest of the development area. Consequently, there are potential opportunities to establish a choi ce of 
stronger and clearer routes between the Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock sites and from the city centre to enable ease of movement and a more 
pleasant environment for pedestrians and cyclists.    
49 CIL Regulations came into force in April 2010. Money raised from CIL can be used to fund 
a range of infrastructure needed as a result of development.  
 46                                         3.21 Any residential development proposals coming forward within the 
development area will need to demonstrate that they have the necessary 
physical and social infrastructure to support the expansion in the residential population through the provision of, or contributions towards, community, education and health services or facilities. Provision of facilities within the development should be of sufficient size to accommodate the end users.  Physical infrastructure, such as the provision of sufficient sewerage and water capacity to serve the new development, co uld be provided through the 
Community Infrastructure Levy charging schedule, if introduced.  
 3.22 The council’s 2008 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)  and SFRA 
update (2012)  has identified Brighton Marina and Black Rock as falling within 
an area of higher probability of flooding (Flood Risk Zone 3a). A Sequential Test has been carried out to demonstrate the appropriateness of development in this area and this is available as a background paper to the City Plan. Any development proposal will need to demonstrate that the most vulnerable land uses will be located in areas of lowest flood risk. Detailed guidance and specifications for addressing flood risk in this area is set out in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2008) section 7.2.9, and in the SFRA (2012) Appendix B.  
 3.23 The majority of the site is at risk of surface water flooding during a 1 in 
200 year event and the northwest corner of the Marina is also at risk of surface water flooding during the 1 in 30 year event. The SFRA 2012 sets out spec ifications in relation to reducing the consequence of flooding and to 
maintain existing flow paths. The SFRA 2012 found that the Standard of Protection (SOP) provided by the existing inner harbour walls will reduce over time, when assessed against extreme sea levels that may result as a consequence of climate change. Defences should therefore be maintained to ensure the SOP is sufficient for the lifetime of the development.  
 3.24 The natural environment is an important part of the Marina. The cliffs 
directl y behind it are nationally important for their geological interest and are 
included within Brighton to Newhaven Cliffs Site of Special Scientific Interest, which also includes the cliff top and foreshore immediately to the east  where 
the boundary of the So uth Downs National Park adjoins the Marina. Open 
water within the Marina supports an unusual marine fauna and is designated a Site of Nature Conservation Importance. Two areas of vegetated shingle (an internationally threatened habitat) occur at Black Rock  beach and along the 
Volks Railway and the whole area is noted as an important area for migrating birds.  
 3.25 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified particular potential for 
District Heating networks in and around this area within a long list of  priority 
areas. Development within the long -list of priority areas will be encouraged to 
consider low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular  heat 
networks and required to either connect where a suitable system is in place, or would be at the time of construction, or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network.  
 
 47 DA3 – Lewes Road Area 
 
 
 
Context  
 3.26 The Lewes Road is the largest development area identified in the City 
Plan. It extends the length of Lewes Road from The Level in the south (open 
space) northwards to the Universities and the South Downs National Park at the city’s boundary. Lewes Road is one of the main routes into the city and is identified as a sustainable transport corridor. The southern section of the development area is dominated by The Level, the Lewes Road District Shopping Centre and the Cemeteries to the east. The middle section is mixed in character including taller buildings and the Preston Barracks site. To the north are residential  areas, open space at Wild Park and Stanmer Park, the 
two main University campuses and the Community Stadium. The area as a whole has a mixed and often poor quality townscape and public realm, dominated by the dual carriageway. There are two residential renewal areas on the eastern side of Lewes Road at Moulsecoomb and Bevendean.  
 3.27 The main thrust of the strategy for the Lewes Road Development Area is 
to promote and enhance the role of the area for higher education in Brighton & Hove. In addition there are a number of significant development sites within 
 48 the area, including three strategic allocations (the Preston Barracks site, 
Woollards Field South and the Falmer Released Land). The area will benefit 
from an improved public realm and townscape along with greening of the route.  
 DA3 Lewes Road  
 The strategy for the development area is to further develop and enhance the role of Lewes Road as the city’s academic corridor
50 by supporting 
proposals which:  
• improve further and higher education provision in the Lewes Road area;  
• facilitate improved sustainable transport infrastructure that 
provides choice, including travel by bus, walking and cycling;  
• secure improvements to the townscape and public realm;  
• deliver inter -connected green infrastructure and biodiversi ty 
improvements, contributing to Biosphere objectives (see policy 
CP10);  
• improve air quality in the Lewes Road area; and  
• deliver the amounts of development set out in part B below.  
 A. The local priorities to achieve this strategy are:  
 
1. The council will  work in partnership with the Universities to support 
the sustainable redevelopment and expansion of the University campuses avoiding adverse impact upon the setting of the South 
Downs National Park ; deliver appropriate accommodation for students; 
and deve lop closer links between the Universities and local 
communities through sharing facilities and developing local opportunities for training and learning.  
 2. Promoting and investing in improved bus, cycling and pedestrian routes along Lewes Road from The Le vel to the Universities in 
partnership with public transport operators in order to achieve a modal shift and thereby help reduce the impact of traffic , in particular on air 
and noise quality.   
 
3. Encouraging the development of housing, employment floorspa ce 
and community facilities to increase employment opportunities for and 
to meet o ther needs of local communities.  
 
4. Securing improvements to the public realm and townscape, including greening the route, through the adoption of comprehensive design guidance that will inform future planning decisions and 
50 Academic Corridor:  Concentration of three major higher and further education institutions 
(the Universities of Brighton and Sussex and City College) along the A27/A270 axis in  
the Brig hton area, which together provide enhanced facilities for high- technology and 
knowledge- based businesses.  
 49                                         investment in the area and encourage more efficient use of underused 
sites (see CP12 Urban Design).  
 
5. Supporting and enhancing the district shopping centre by securing improved pedestrian links along and across the Lewes Road together 
with environmental and physical enhancements including high quality accessible shopfronts.  
 
6. Securing improvements in community safety, landscaping, open space, interconnected green infrastructure and biodiversity.  
 
7. To ensure improvements to local air quality through implementation of the council’s Air Quality Action Plan. Ensure new development 
proposals take into account impact on local air quality and that improvements and/ or mitigation are sought wherever possible.  
 8. Development within this area will be encouraged to consider  low and 
zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular  heat networks and 
to either connect where a suitable system is in place (or would be at the time of construction) or design systems s o that they are compatible 
with future connection to a network.  
 
9. The city council will w ork with  East Sussex County Council, the 
Highways Agency, neighbouring authorities and developers to identify measures to improve the performance of the Falmer Interchange trunk road junction.  
 B. Provision will be made for the following amounts of additional development to be provided by 2030. Provision will be made through strategic site allocations (below) and through allocations made in the City Plan Part 2 for:  
 
880 residential units;  
15,600 sq m employment floorspace including an Innovation Centre;  
Business School and additional academic floorspace (16,000 sqm);  
Student Accommodation (1300 rooms); and  
Community building at Bevendean.  
C. Strategic Allocations in  the Lewes Road Development Area are:  
 
1. Preston Barracks and Brighton University (Mithras House and Watts/Cockcroft Site)  
 The city council will work with the University of Brighton and other partners to provide a mixed use employment -led development 
comprising a new business school, 10,600sqm B1 employment 
floorspace, including an Innovation Centre; 750 rooms of student accommodation; 300 residential units and other ancillary supporting uses. Proposals will be assessed against the priorities for DA3 Lewes 
 50 Road, citywide policies, guidance in the adopted Planning Brief for the 
site and the following criteria:  
 a) Proposals will be required to have a high standard of public realm, including a central square, and effective links across the Lewes Road and to Moulsecoomb Station in order to improve the quality and permeability of the area.  
 b) Residential development should provide for a mix of dwelling type, tenure and size to cater for a range of housing requirements and to improve housing choices.  
 c) The development should contribute towards Biodiversity Action Plan objectives, green infrastructure and wider landscaping enhancements through creative landscaping solutions . 
 d) Sustainable transport infrastructure will be required to support the scheme and to ensure that there is no adverse air quality impact . 
 e) The development must connect to the water distribution and sewerage system off -site at the nearest point of adequate capacity.  
 f) The development must ensure that groundwater sources are protected, to the satisfaction of the Environment Agency.  
 g) The developer will be required to enter into a training place 
agreement to secure training for local people.  
 2. Woollards Field South  Provision of 5,000 sqm of B1 business  space or alternative employment 
generating development that helps to meet the city’s infrastructure needs on land to the south of the new archive centre, known as The 
Keep.  Proposals will be assessed against the priorities for DA3 Lewes Road, citywide policies and the following criteria : 
 a) The development will be required to achieve a high standard of design.  
 b) Sustainable transport infrastructure will be required to support the scheme and to ensure that there is no adverse air quality impact.  
 c) As a greenfield site, the development will be expected to be zero 
carbon
51 and, through creative landscaping solutions (including 
features such as green walls), should contribute towards Biodiversity Action Plan objectives, green infrastructure and wider landscaping enhancements.  
51 This will be subject to viability considerations and potential mitigation measures, as set out 
in policy CP8.  
 51                                         d) Development should ensure that there will be no adverse impacts on 
the setting of the South Downs National Park or any locally or nationally designated landscape, historic or ecological sites.  
 e) Development will be required to contribute towards reducing the heat island effect and reduce surface water run -off and flood risk, with run-
off being controlled to maintain greenfield run- off rates.  
 f) The developer will be required to enter into a training place agreement to secure training for local people.  
 g) The development must ensure that groundwater sources are protected to the satisfaction of the Environment Agency.  
 3. Falmer Released Land, Former Falmer High School  
 Redevelopment for some or all of a range of uses including housing, purpose built student accommodation, offices (B1) and/or educational 
use. Redevelopment should include  a car park related to the American 
Express Community Stadium and the provision, on or off site, of permanent accommodation for the Bridge Community Education Centre  
and for Brighton Aldridge Community Academy’s Pupil Referral Unit .  
Proposals will be assessed against the priorities for DA3 Lewes Road, citywide policies and the following criteria:  
 a) The development will be required to achieve a high standard of design.  
 b) Sustainable transport infrastructure will be required to support the scheme and to ensure that there is no adverse air quality impact.  
 c) Development should ensure that there will be no adverse impacts on the setting of the South Downs National Park or any locally or nationally designated landscape, historic or ecological sites.  
 d) The development should contribute towards Biodiversity Action Plan objectives, green infrastructure and wider landscaping enhancements through creative landscaping solutions . 
 e) The developer will be required to enter into a training place agreement to secure training for local people.  
 f) The development must ensure that groundwater sources are protected to the satisfaction of the Environment Agency.  
 Supporting Text  
 3.28 The strategy recognises the contribution made by the city’s two 
universities, based on the Lewes Road, to the economic, social and cultural 
 52 life of Brighton & Hove and the wider region52. The Universities offer popular 
and respected courses and have plans for overall growth and for 
improvements to their campus facilities to meet student demand and rising expectations. This will require improvement and expansion of their campuses and the need for appropriate new student accommodation on and near the campuses. The Council is keen to work with the universities to secure these objectives, which align closely with council strategies, particularly on student housing.  
 3.29 The Council will work with the universities and other education providers , 
in conjunction with Policy CP21 on student housing, to address the need for 
dedicated purpose built student accommodation in the local area where there is increasing pressure to accommodate students within the existing housing stock. The council will seek to control the location of new small Houses in Multiple Occupation (C4 use class and mixed C3/C4 uses ) within the Lewes 
Road corridor in order to avoid problems of overconcentration and to maintain healthy and inclusive communities.  
 3.30 In terms of providing benefits for and working with local communities, the 
Universities recognise that they have a role in forging closer links with local people by expanding learning opportunities and sharing education, community and sports facilities. There are also opportunities to encourage technology and innovation transfer from the  Universities to existing businesses and to 
support new opportunities for suitable new business accommodation that further develop links. The universities also contribute positively to the community through student volunteering and other outreach work.  Table 1 on 
page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against the principles and 
local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
 3.31 Improving the sustainable transport corridor and access to the South 
Downs National Park via the Lewes Road, in particular the cycle and pedestrian routes , will be implemented and funded through the Local 
Transport Plan
53 and developer contributions. These improvements will be 
closely  linked to the other priorities for the area, in particular better air and 
noise quality54 and improving the public realm and community safety , and will 
52 The universities have a combined annual revenue expenditure of approximately £350 
million. They directly employ 5000 staff and support several thousand jobs in the wider area, 
predominantly in the city. The universities contribute to employment through initiatives such as the Sussex Innovation Centre at the University of Sussex which provides support for start -
up businesses and the ProfitNet programme at the University of Brighton that has worked with 
over 1000 local small and medium sized businesses. Work with local community groups is 
sustained by the University of Brighton Community University Partnership Project (CUPP).  
53 LTP3, the city’s current Local Transport Plan, was adopted in 2011 and sets out a fifteen 
year strategy for transport proposals and improvements. It is prepared in order  to bid for 
Government funding for all forms of transport.  
54 The Noise Action Plan for the Brighton Agglomeration was produced by Defra in 2010. This 
identifies priority areas for action. The Defra mapping predicts that households most affected by traffic noise are those closest to major roads: London Road, Lewes Road & the seafront.  
Lewes Road from the University of Brighton to the Level is included in the 2013 Air Quality 
 53                                         be co- ordinated across boundaries with adjoining local authorities . There is 
currently relatively good bus and train access to the area, but there is scope 
to improve access to bus and rail services in response to the additional demands resulting from the implementation of major development schemes  
and to facilitate public transport access to the South Downs  National Park . 
Work will be undertaken with Lewes District Council and bus and train operators to identify and secure improvements.  New development proposals 
should take account of their impact on local air quality, be consistent with the council’s Air Qu ality Action Plan and minimise increased exposure to existing 
poor air quality within the AQMA. Improvements and/or mitigation will be sought wherever possible.  
 3.32 A holistic approach to improving the public realm and townscape will be 
achieved through the preparation and adoption of comprehensive design 
guidance for the area that will form part of the citywide Urban Design Framework (see policy CP12) and will be subject to community engagement. It will cover matters such as improving biodiversity and greening the corridor.   
This will make a significant contribution to improving quality of life within the area. It will also contribute to improving the appearance of the built environment, such as shopfronts, and to enhancing pedestrian routes and connecti ons through the district centre.  Development at the northern end of 
Lewes Road must take proper account of potential impact upon the setting of the nearby South Downs National Park.    
 3.33 Lewes Road District centre was identified in the 201 1 Retail Study  
Update
55 as a potentially vulnerable shopping centre. Additionally the LR2 
Regeneration Strategy  56 identified a number of opportunities to improve the 
local shopping environment. The comprehensive design guide will help to achieve this by influencing futur e development proposals and future Local 
Transport Plan proposals.  Melbourne Street Industrial Area is located to the east of the Lewes Road District Centre and is in need of investment.  It has been identified in policy CP3 for employment led (residential and employment) mixed use development.  
 
Management Area as it exceeds the government’s Air Quality Objective for annual Nitr ogen 
Dioxides.  
55 The Brighton & Hove Retail Study Update 2011 provides an update to the earlier 2006 
study, which identified current and future capacity for retail floorspace in Brighton & Hove. 
The studies assess the existing network of larger and smaller centres in the city and in the function and effectiveness of the current retail hierarchy. Whilst surrounded by a dense area of housing and containing a good range of everyday services, such as a post office, bank and 
pharmacy, there is a poor range and quality of comparison goods retailers in Lewes Road. 
Vacancy rates are high, pedestrian flows are low and the environment and pedestrian movements hampered by traffic congestion. The 2011 update recommended traffic management and improved pedestrian linkages in order to provide an upgraded shopping environment for the local catchment population.  
56 The LR2 Regeneration Strategy (London Road and Lewes Road Regeneration Strategy 
2007) identifies options and opportunities for the regeneration of the London Road  and Lewes 
Road area. The emphasis is on measures to improve the quality of urban design, streetscape and enhance the gateways to the city and to seek development opportunities in the area.  
 54                                                                                                                  3.34 There are a number of local priorities for the area that will be delivered 
through city council and other strategies supported by appropriate developer 
contributions. These extend to benefits for disadvantaged neighbourhoods 
adjacent to the Lewes Road. One is to address lower incomes and unemployment in adjoining neighbourhoods by securing training and job opportunities for local people in major development schemes. There is also an identified need for investment in public open spaces in the area including Saunders Park and William Clarke Park as well as under -used open spaces in 
Moulsecoomb and Bevendean and to connect otherwise isolated green spaces via the development of green networks.  
 3.35 Lewes Road south of the Vogue Gyratory is identified as a community 
safety priority area
57. Public realm and park improvements will help to address 
this priority. In terms of community facilities, the need for a dedicated community building is identified in Bevendean (Audit of Community Level Infrastructure 2004
58) and for youth facilities.  
 3.36 Preston Barracks is a large mixed use site which has significant potential 
for high quality employment, training and academic floorspace and for a significant number of residential units and purpose built student accommodation, integrated with creative urban greening. It is a strategic allocation due to its potential to help meet targets for housing and employment floorspace in the city. Future development on the site will be employment -led and there is scope for it to provide an element of affordable 
managed workspace for local small businesses and education floorspace linked to the University. The council is signed up in principle to a shared vision for a wider development opportunity for Preston Barracks and the nearby University of Brighton sites. A planning brief for Preston Barracks and University of Brighton , adopted in September 2011, provides detailed 
guidance on the site.   
 3.37 Planning permission was granted in 2011 for an archive centre with 
related conference, education and research facilities on the Woollards Field site to the south of Falmer Station. The remainder of the site to the south is allocated for 5,000 square metres of  business  (B1) floorspace or other 
employment generating uses in connection with meeting the city’s infrastructure needs . The site is earmarked in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
(Annex 2) as providing important infrastructure to meet the city’s requirement for ambulance/paramedic rapid response points. This development will help 
provide local training and employment opportunities and could help to strengthen the Universities’ positive role within the local economy.   Land at 
the southern end of the former Falmer High School site is no longer required for educational purposes.  The site has potential for redevelopment for a range of uses, including student accommodation, residential, offices and 
57 The Community Safety, Crime and Drugs Audit 2004 identifies the Lewes Road as a 
community safety priority area and proposed measures for improving safety.  
58 The Audit of Community Level Infrastructure 2004 was commissioned by the Local 
Strategic Partnership to identify the level of community infrastructure in the 15 Ne ighbourhood 
Renewal areas across Brighton & Hove.  
 
 55                                         educational use. These uses could work in conjunction with car parking use 
for the nearby American Express Community Stadium. Permanent accommodation for the Bridge Community Education Centre and for Brighton Aldridge Community Academy’s Pupil Referral Unit should also be provided, either on the Falmer Released Land or in an acceptable alternative location.  
 3.38 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified particular potential for 
District Heating networks in and around this area within a long list of priority areas. Development within the long -list of priority areas will be encouraged to 
consider low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular  heat 
networks and required to either connect where a suitable system is in place, or would be at the time of construction, or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network . 
 
 56 DA4 – New England Quarter and London Road  
 
 
 
Context  
 3.39 The regeneration of the New England Quarter has been acting as a 
catalyst for the redevelopment of the surrounding area east of Brighton Station. Built to support the One Planet Living principles , One Brighton has 
been designed to help its residents reduce their ecological footprint and is an exemplar of Sustainable Living . Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this policy 
will help to deliver against the principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  Opportunities for further development within this 
area arise from it being in close proximity to the retail and commercial core of the city and the area is well placed to capitalise on excellent transportation links provided by Brighton Station, London Road and Preston Road Stations. To the south, Trafalgar Street provides a link to the vibrant North Laine shopping and conservation area. There is real potenti al to invigorate this part 
of the city and create a high quality public realm which improves the arrival experience of those coming to the city by train.  
  
 57 3.40 London Road Town Centre serves as a community hub and key 
shopping centre for the surrounding residential areas and contains  the city’s 
only permanent Open Market . However  its performance as a ‘town centre’ has 
been in decline and there is a great need for regeneration and improvement. 
A particular aim of the policy is to achieve greater integration and accessibility 
between the London Road Shopping centre and the Brighton Station/New England Quarter area.  
 3.41 London Road itself is the main entrance and exit route from the city and 
is designated a sustainable transport corridor  and forms part of the National 
Cycle Network (Route 20) linking the city centre to the South Downs . It has 
the potential to become a strong and attractive gateway to the city. It is lined by mature trees and punctuated by large open green spaces (Withdean Park, Surrenden Field and Preston Park)  as well as smaller green spaces such as 
Providence Place Gardens
59. The area west of Preston Road is currently 
characterised by high rise office blocks opposite Preston Park’s western boundary along with a hotel and new GP practice and pharmacy. This is a secondary office location and provides the potential for high quality mixed use (employment/residential) future redevelopment.  
 DA4 – New England Quarter and London Road Area  
 The strategy for this development area is to revitalise the L ondon Road 
shopping area, create a major new business quarter for Brighton & Hove consisting of high quality business accommodation connecting London Road with the New England Quarter, and to maintain and enhance a green gateway to the city to the west of Preston Road.  
 A. The local priorities to achieve the strategy are:  
 1. Planning for a new business quarter for the city in the New England Quarter and London Road area to accommodate 20,000 sq m of additional new office floorspace post 2016.  
 2. Managing,  enhancing and consolidating the existing retail provision 
within the defined prime frontage of London Road Town Centre, recognising the importance of retaining key retail sites to act as ‘anchors’ for the centre as well as recognising the role of small independent/local traders.  
 3. Working with landowners and traders to secure the redevelopment/refurbishment of key retail sites along London Road.  
 
59 Brighton & Hove C ity Council is working to transform the area around Ann Street and 
Providence Place Gardens into a lively, safe and successful public space.  
 58                                         4. Working with education providers and funding partners to support 
improvements in vocational training and further education within the area as an extension to the Academic Corridor
60. 
 5 Working with Southern Rail , Network Rail and partners to enhance the 
environment and maximise use of space around Brighton Rail Station 
(Brighton Station Gateway) recognising it s important role as a gateway 
to the city, a public space , a major transport interchange  and the need to 
improve links to and from the station.  6. Ensure improvements to local air  and noise  quality through the 
implementation of the council’s Air Quality A ction Plan, through 
improvements to bus, pedestrian and cycle routes  to achieve a modal 
shift and help reduce the impact of traffic and through the implementation of the council’s Air Quality Action Plan. Ensure new development proposals take into account impact on local air quality and that improvements and/ or mitigation are sought wherever possible.  
 7. Strengthening links between the New England Quarter, London Road shopping centre and the North Laine shopping area with high quality streetscapes  and pu blic spaces and a greater choice of routes and ease 
of movement through the area with an improved pedestrian and cyclist environment.  
 8. Maintaining and strengthening the significant creative digital and 
information technology cluster in the area through the delivery of ultrafast broadband and ensuring that workshops, office space, studios, storage and other premises remain affordable, appropriate and available for use.  
 9. Enhancing the social infrastructure to support any expansion in the residential population through the provision of, or contributions towards community, education and health services or facilities;  
 10. Ensuring redevelopment opportunities extend and strengthen green infrastructure including the connection between the existing open space  
and greenway network of The Level, Brighton Station Greenway and Preston Park and secure enhancements to open space and biodiversity 
in the area.  
 11. Development within this area will be expected to incorporate 
infrastructure to support low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular heat networks subject to viability.  
 
60Academic Corridor: Concentration of three major higher and further education institutions 
(the Universities of Brighton and Sussex and City College) along the A27/A270 axis in the 
Brighton area, which together provide enhanced facilities for high- technology and knowledge-
based businesses.  
 59                                         A Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) has been prepared by the 
council to assist the delivery of development and guide developers on the form and content of development and the provision of infrastructure in the London Road Central area.  
 B. Provision will be made by 2030 for the following minimum amounts of development  through strategic allocations (below) and through 
allocations in the City Plan Part 2:  1,130 residential uni ts; 
20,000sq m B1a B1b floorspace ; and 
 300 bed space student housing (see CP21 Student Accommodation)   
 C. The Strategic Allocations in the New England Quarter and London Road Area are:  
 1. Provision is made for 20,000 sq m net additional B1a, B1 b floors pace 
and 165 residential units through the implementation of extant commitments for B1 floorspace and the mixed use development of the following sites
61: 
a) Vantage Point, Elder Place (including Circus Parade) - no net loss 
of B1a floorspace ; 
b) Trade Warehousing (Longley Industrial Estate) 4 -6 New England 
Street - 3,000 sq m ;  
c) Richardson's Scrapyard and Brewers Paint Merchant Site, New England Street - 3,000 sq m ; 
d) Cheapside (south between Blackman Street and Whitecross Street) - 2,000 sq m ; 
e) Blackman Street Site ( land adjacent to Britannia House) - 2,000 sq 
m. 
 Proposals will be assessed against the citywide policies, the London Road Central SPD and the following specific criteria:  
i. Each site would be expected to deliver the minimum office/ research and development (B1a, B1b) floorspace indicated above 
through a range of offices and flexible workspaces including larger floorplate office stock and affordable business floorspace suitable for small business and the creative, digital and 
information technology industries ; 
ii. An appropriate mix of uses including residential (C3) and ground floor ancillary retail (A1) and restaurants and cafes (A3)  will be 
permitted;  
iii. Development will be expected to be of a high quality of design and incorporate active uses at ground floor level, contribute to an improved public realm and improved connectivity to the wider development area for pedestrians and cyclists;  
61 These si tes fall within the Elder Place Development Zone or the Pelham Street 
Development Zone as identified in the London Road Central SPD 10 2009  
 60                                         iv. Development will be expected to contribute to green infrastructure 
improvements to increase green space connectivity and enhance biodiversity ; 
v. The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure training for local people.  
 The following sites
62 within the DA4 area with extant planning 
permission for B1a office uses will not be granted planning permission for alternative uses:  
f) Block J Brighton Station Site  
g) Block K Brighton Station Site  
h) GB Liners site, Blackman Street  
 2. New England House, New England Road  
 Safeguard and strengthen New England House as the city’s creative digital  and information technology  hub through:  
 
a) the council working in partnership to deliver its upgrade and refurbishment;  
 b) the council as landowner ensuring the workspace remains competi tively priced, appropriate and available to use;  
 c) Supporting proposals which provide a range of  appropriate 
workspaces to support the creative digital  and information 
technology  sector;  
 
d) Where it is necessary to make a refurbishment and upgrade of the 
building financially viable, appropriate enabling development around the building will be considered, providing it does not affect the operation and long term vision for the building.   
 3. 125- 163 Preston Road  
Provision is made for mixed use (office and residential) developments retaining as a minimum across the development sites 14,000 sq m of offic e floorspace and 45 0 residential units. Proposals will be assessed 
against the citywide policies and the following specific criteria:  
 
a) A high quality design which respects and enhances the local historic environment, the residential character of the area and the parkland setting;  
 
62 The station sites are identified in the Masterplan for the regeneration of the New England 
Quarter and GB Liners site within the Pelham Street Development Zone as identified in the 
London Road Central SPD 10 2009  
 
 61                                         b) A development which contributes positively to the creation of a 
coherent cluster of tall buildings with a consistent building line and a strong street frontage;  
 
c) A minimum office floorspace should be retained on each deve lopment site:  
 
125-135 Preston Road (Telecom House) - 3,000 sq m  
137-147 Preston Road - 3,000 sq m  
149 -151, 153, 157- 159, 161 -163 Preston Road - 2,000 sq m each  
d) Development should provide for a mix of dwelling type, tenure and size to cater for a range of housing requirements and to 
improve housing choice (see CP19);  
 e) The development must connect to the water distribution and sewerage system off -site at the nearest point of adequate 
capacity ; 
 
f) The developer will enter into a training place agreeme nt to 
secure training for local people.  
  
Supporting text  
3.42 The London Road Corridor has the potential to become a strong and 
attractive gateway to the city (London Road and Lewes Road Regeneration Strategy 2007
63) and there are opportunities for regeneration in distinct areas 
(including the area east of Brighton Station, the London Road Shopping Centre and west of Preston Road) which would strengthen and enhance the overall character and diversity of the city.  
 3.43 With the success of the Brighton Station redevelopment, the area east of 
Brighton Station, is the preferred location for new office development needed in the city (see Employment Land Study Review  2012). This well established 
mixed use area is particularly well placed in terms of transport links, its close proximity to Brighton Station and the retail and commercial core of the city; and it already benefits from having an established office and creative industries cluster.
 The council, through the Station Gateway Project, is 
seeking to enhance the environment around Brighton Station, recognising the importance of Brighton Station in this area as a transport interchange, public space and important gateway into the city. These environmental improvements will also link with improvements planned for the station and outstanding developments planned to the north of the station.  3.44 A number of sites have been identified as offering particular 
redevelopment potential to bring forward the net additional office floorspace proposed in this area to meet the city’s forecast need. Permitting a mix of uses to come forward on these sites alongside new office floorspace provision 
63 LR2 Study, London Road/Lewes Road Regeneration Strategy, 2007  
 62                                         recognises the positive impact mixed use development will have on the 
regeneration of the wider area as well as ensuring a more vibrant streetscape. The council recognises the need to take into account the sensitivity of financial viability appraisals to changing market circumstances with regard to the mix of uses proposed. However the priority for these sites is that an appropriate amount of new office floorspace is delivered. Therefore a minimum office floorspace requirement has been set out for each site informed by the Strategic Viability Assessments 2012. Appropriate other uses include residential and ancillary retail and café and restaurant uses at ground floor to create a more active building frontage. Developments will need to be carefully designed and managed to ensure that residential and other occupiers of the sites will have an appropriate level of amenity. Monitoring of planni ng commitments in this area shows the potential to deliver c.10, 000 sq 
m of office floorspace through extant planning permissions. These commitments are considered capable of being implemented and will contribute significantly to the proposed net additional employment floorspace to be delivered within this Development Area.    3.45 The opportunity to bring forward employment floorspace offering a range 
of office space and type, on the edge of the city centre and close to the main train station, offers loca l businesses the opportunity to grow and would build 
upon the success of the New England Quarter to create a mixed use area of the city (LR2 Study). The greater numbers of people living and working in the area will help to revitalise the shops and the market in London Road and will reduce the need for people to travel outside of the city for work. The role and 
importance of cultural and creative industries and organisations in the regeneration of the area is recognised.  
 3.46 Within this area, City College is a key provider of vocational training in 
the city, meeting the rapidly expanding demand for a broad range of workers to support Brighton and Hove’s economy with campuses at Pelham Street and at Preston Road. As an extension to the academic corridor (see  DA3) the 
council will work with education providers and funding partners and support proposals for the modernisation and expansion of facilities at the City College Pelham Street campus including the provision of student accommodation (see CP21 Student Accommodation and Homes in Multiple Occupation).  
 3.47 The creative industries sector has been identified as a growing and 
dynamic sector in the city with a shortage of affordable and appropriate workspace
64. The Creative Industries Workspace Study 2008 highlighted the 
importance of the existing creative industries cluster in the city centre and New England House as a unique and successful example. Currently 60% of New England House is let as workshops and office units to a mix of 
64 Creative Industries Workspace Study 2008. The study indicated that affordable rents in t he 
creative industries are generally at the lower end of the market range and in Brighton & Hove 
are in the region of £7.50 a square foot. However it should be noted that this average figure is 
higher than those generally considered affordable by some creative businesses and 
organisations.   
  
 63                                         businesses, many of which fal l within the creative industries and, more 
particularly, the digital media industries, but also include others like food, retail 
and wholesale, construction and direct marketing. The building is largely divided into workshops and office units. Many businesses have formed into ‘clusters’ to promote joint working, synergy and bulk purchasing.  In October 
2010 the council agreed to work in partnership to pursue an option for the refurbishment of the building to provide affordable and flexible managed space.  
 3.48 The policy seeks to safeguard and strengthen the existing cluster 
presence through the strategic allocation of New England House. T his policy 
supports proposals that provide a range of much needed workspaces appropriate for the creative, digital and information technology (CDIT)  sector 
including start -up spaces, second phase move on space and networking 
facilities. The council will work with providers to ensure the provision of 
appropriate information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure, i n 
particular ultrafast broadband infrastructure, within this area to support the 
creative industries and digital media sector (CP2 Sustainable Economic Development) .  
 3.49 To the west of Preston Road is an area characterised by medium and 
high rise office  blocks opposite Preston Park’s western boundary and tall 
residential blocks midway along the route. In recognition of this area as a secondary office location twinned with the priority to direct new office development into primary locations (New England Quarter and Edward Street) together with the need to secure future investment in the Preston Road office sites and meet local housing targets for the city these sites are identified for high quality mixed use development and have been identified as a strategic site allocation for this development area. Retaining a minimum office floorspace as indicated in Part C will ensure that the area continues to provide valuable employment floorspace as part of the mix of uses. Southern Water has assessed the water distribution and sewerage system in the vicinity of the strategic allocation for Preston Road sites and has indicated that the existing capacity is insufficient to accommodate the anticipated development. The 
development will therefore need to provide the local infrastructure required to connect to the water distribution and sewerage system at the nearest point of adequate capacity. Redevelopment should enhance the setting of the adjoining Preston Village conservation area, the setting of the Viaduct and the setting of Preston Park as a registered park of special historic interest, as well 
as respecting the amenity of the neighbouring residential area. Regard should be had to the Supplementary Planning Guidance note 15 on Tall Buildings.  
 
3.50 The Brighton and H ove Retail Study Update (September 2011) indicates 
that London Road is not exploiting its full potential as a town centre shopping area. The priority for the shopping area is to enhance and consolidate the existing retail provision within London Road shopping centre and improve the physical environment. This will lead to an improved shopping experience which will be helped by effective management of the town centre. The council will look to enhance the retail provision, particularly for comparison (non- food) 
goods which are currently under represented by encouraging the re -use of 
vacant key retail units to new retail tenants. The £18m regeneration of the 
 64 Open Market will provide 44 new permanent market stalls  offering an 
alternative retail provision for the city and small business opportunities , 
creative workshops, a large central square and 87 affordable homes and 
should provide a catalyst for the regeneration of London Road.  
 3.51 Environmental improvements should include a better pedestrian 
environment, better local air and noise quality, improved interconnected green infrastructure which maximises opportunities to integrate urban biodiversity and improved streetscape together with the need to create better walking and cycling links between London Road, the  area east of Brighton Station, the 
Level, Valley Gardens and the Seafront. .  
 3.52 London Road, either side of Preston Circus , has been designated as part 
of the 2013  declared Air Quality Management Area due to exceeding the 
government’s Air Quality Objec tive for Nitrogen Dioxide . The council’s  new Air 
Quality Action Plan will set out measures to ensure improvement to air quality. 
New development proposals should take into account impact on local air quality, be consistent with the council’s Air Quality Action Plan and minimise increased exposure to existing poor air quality within the AQMA. Improvements and/or mitigation will be sought wherever possible. The 
massing of residential developments adjacent to particular roads in the area should be carefully designed so as not to increase the number of people exposed to poor air quality.  Opportunities to improve streetscapes and the 
connection between the existing green spaces and greenways will help improve air quality, the ecology of this green network and better links between the open spaces.  The Council's Local Transport Plan recognises the link 
between traffic levels on main roads such as London Road and the highest levels of transport noise in the city
65. Part of the Local Transport Plan vision 
and objective  is to control and mitigate carbon emissions, air quality and noise 
effects of the city's transport systems , and this is reflected in CP9 Sustainable 
Transport .  
 3.53 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified viability for District 
Heating networks in and around this area within a short list of priority areas. Development within the short list of priority areas will be expected to incorporate infrastructure to support low and zero carbon decentralised 
energy and in particular  heat networks subject to viability . 
 
65 The Noise Action Plan for the Brighton Agglomeration was produced by Defra in 2010. This 
identifies priority areas for action. The Defra mapping predicts that households most affected 
by traffic noise are those closest to major roads: London Road, Lewes Road & the seafront.  
 65                                         DA5– Eastern Road and Edward Street Area  
 
 
 
Context  
3.54 Eastern Road/Edward Street is the main east -west corridor running from 
Pavilion Gardens towards Kemp Town and is identified as a sustainable transport corridor. It is close to St James ’ Street which is a vibrant district 
shopping centre. The development area extends from the junction with Pavilion Gardens in the west, northwards to include the Circus Street site and eastwards to the Royal Sussex County Hospital. The area is mixed in character in terms of the scale of buildings, uses and building types with the 
central area dominated by modern residential tower blocks. The corridor lies within and adjacent to five conservation areas with a number of Listed Buildings nearby. The main issue s for the area are poor quality public realm 
and townscape and the area is dominated by a dual carriageway. The corridor lies adjacent to a number of lower income residential areas and has a high proportion of older and disabled residents.  
 3.55 The main purpose of the development area designation is to make 
Eastern Road and Edward Street more attractive for all residents as well as visitors, workers and employers. It is to secure a better public realm, encourage more cycling and walking and greater use of buses. The development area is underpinned by  four strategic development sites the Edward Street Quarter (including the American Express Site), Circus Street site, Freshfield Road Business Park and the Royal Sussex County Hospital.  
 66 DA5 Eastern Road and Edward Street  
 
The strategy for the development area is to secure significant improvements to the public realm and townscape making the area more attractive, accessible and safer for residents, employees and visitors and to deliver the amounts of development  as set out in part B below.  
 A. The local priorities to achieve the strategy are:  
 
1. Improving the public realm and townscape through the adoption of comprehensive design guidance that will inform future investment in the area and planning decisions (see  CP12 Urban Design).  
 2. Promoting and investing in safe and sustainable transport improvements in the area including the public realm to encourage walking, and to transfer road carriageway to sustainable transport measures (buses, bicycles and pedestrians).  
 3. Ensuring that infrastructure is in place to enable the introduction of rapid bus -based services (see CP9 Sustainable Transport).  
 4. Improving air quality.  
 5. Development should incorporate the findings of the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2012 and any subsequent revisions.  
 6. Undertaking measures to improve community safety, invest in open spaces, provide additional school places within existing schools, improve youth facilities and create employment opportunities for local communities . 
 7. Maki ng more efficient use of under -used sites that will be identified 
through the strategic allocations below and Part 2 of the City Plan.  
 8 Development will need to provide connection to off -site water 
distribution and sewerage systems at the nearest point of adequate capacity.  
 9. Enhancing urban biodiversity through investment in green infrastructure including substantially increasing tree planting and soft landscaping to ameliorate the existing poor public realm (see CP10 Biodiversity).  
 10. Development w ithin this area will be expected to incorporate 
infrastructure to support low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular  heat networks subject to viability.  
 11. Support improvement to higher education teaching and library space in the Eastern Road and Edward Street Area.  
 
 67 B. The minimum amounts of development to be secured by 2030 
through strategic allocations (below) and through allocations in the City Plan Part 2 are:  
 
515 residential units;  
18,200 - 23,200sqm employment floorspace;  
74,000 sqm hospital floorspace;  
400-bed student accommodation; 
3,800sqm University education floorspace;  
Dance Studio (D1) ; 
a multi -practice GP’s surgery for Kemptown;  
a community building for Queens Park and Craven Vale ; 
ancillary supporting uses . 
 
C. Strategic allocations in Eastern Road/Edward Street Development Area are:  
 
1. Royal Sussex County Hospital  
 Comprehensive redevelopment and enlargement of the hospital to provide 74,000sqm additional hospital ( C2 use) floorspace, including 
the floorspace granted planning permission in 2012, which  will be 
considered in the context of citywide policies and the following criteria:  
 
a) Sustainable  transport infrastructure improvements will be required  including bus, walking and cycling improvements, and a comprehensive transport strategy will be required, including a 
feasibility study (see below) to support the enlargement of the hospital taking into account its wider sub regional role;  
 
b) There will be a comprehensive and integrated approach to the  
redevelopment of the  site that will be of a high standard of design 
and which will be sympathetic to the surrounding historic built environment; and 
 
c) The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure training for local people.  
 2. Edward Street Quarter  
 Employment -led redevelopment of the Edward Street  Quarter ( including 
former Amex House and the Job Centre) comprising demolition of the former Amex House and replacement with 15,000- 20,000  sq m of high 
quality B1a office floorspace , a minimum of 65 residenti al units  and 
 68 ancillary shops (A1) and cafes and restaurants (A3) . The proposal will be 
considered in the context of citywide policies and the following criteria:  
 
a) A comprehensive approach to the redevelopment of the Edward  
Street Quarter will be required including the need to address 
relationship with existing buildings, massing, and the  layout of 
the site and provide for a high quality of design;  b) The proposal will contribute towards improving the existing  
townscape and public realm, including public  art, in the 
surrounding area including improvements to Dorset Gardens; 
 c)  Sustainable transport infrastructure improvements that provide and promote public and sustainable transport will be required to support the scheme;  
 
d) The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure training for local people ; and 
 e) A Planning Brief will be prepared for the site.  An attractive and 
safer environment contributes toward improved mental health, well-being and community cohesion
66. 
 
3. Circus Street  Site 
 Mixed use redevelopment of the former Fruit and Vegetable Market and Kingswood Street Car Park comprising 400 -bed student 
accommodation, a minimum of 160 residential units, a minimum of 3200sqm office space, a Dance Studio and 3,800sqm of University  
floorspace and ancillary supporting uses. The proposal will be considered in the context of the citywide policies and the following criteria:  
 
a) The new development will be of a high standard of design that is sympathetic to the surrounding historic townscape and adjacent residential properties ; 
 b) A minimum of 750sqm of the proposed 3 200sqm office space will 
be provided in the form of B1 affordable managed workspace ; 
 c) Sustainable transport infrastructure improvements that provide and promote public and sustainable transport will be required to support the scheme;  
 d) The scheme will deliver wider community benefits including new/improved play space and public realm including improved 
66 Improvements to the quality of the built environment, connectivity between neighbourhoods, 
access to employment and green space play a vital role in contributing to improved mental 
health, well -being and perceptions of community cohesion and safety.  
 69                                         links to the surrounding area and St James Street and a training 
place agreemen t to secure training for local people ; and 
 e) Ancillary supporting uses will be limited to small scale retail and café/restaurant uses linked to the development.  
 4. Freshfield Road Business Park and Gala Bingo Hall  
 Mixed use redevelopment of the Freshfield  Road Business Park and 
Gala Bingo Hall sites comprising improve ment to the provision of 
employment floorspace including B1 office/light industrial floorspace 
and B8 warehousing and provision of a minimum of 110  residential 
units.  The proposal s will be co nsidered against citywide policies and 
the following criteria:  
 
a) Provide modern employment space and residential development . 
Re-provision or retention of a community or leisure facility as part 
of the Gala Bingo Hall site scheme appropriate to the needs of  the 
local community . 
 b) Redevelopment across both parts of the site will be of a high 
standard of design, that is sympathetic to the surrounding historic built environment and will make efficient use of the site in terms of height of buildings and layout and re -introduce development 
along the frontage of Eastern Road.  
 c) The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure training for local people.  
 
 Supporting Text  
 3.56 This development area has been designated on the basis that it is a 
susta inable transport corridor with the scope and opportunity for extensive 
townscape and public realm improvement. It lies within a tall buildings area and there are two large potential development sites.  
 3.57 The main priority in helping to deliver the strategy will be through the 
adoption of a comprehensive design guide. This will be linked to an Urban Design Framework for the city (see policy CP12)  that will take account of the 
need to protect and enhance the conservation areas (East Cliff, College, Queens Park, Carlton Hill and Valley Gardens). The guide will be subject to 
community and stakeholder consultation and address the concerns of local communities. The priority areas for improvement are Eastern Road and Edward Street (between Pavilion Gardens and Sutherland Road) and the Essex Street/Hereford Street Area. Issues to be addressed include creating a high quality , pedestrian friendly  public realm, creat ing active frontages and 
boundaries, promoting public art and design, improving permeability through 
spaces and around buildings, improving  Essex and Hereford Street Estate, 
greening the area and improving biodiversity. The design guide will be 
 70 implemented through future development schemes, developer contributions 
and city council strategies particularly for Housing and Transport.  An attractive and safer environment contributes toward improved mental health, well-being and community cohesion
67. Funding has been secured to improve 
sustainable transport infrastructure on Edward Street (see policy CP9).    
 3.58 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified viability for District 
Heating networks in and around this area within a short list of priority areas. Development within the short list of priority areas will be expected to incorporate infrastructure to support low and zero carbon decentralised 
energy and in particular  heat networks subject to viability.  
 
3.59 A feasibility study will be carried out to consider the re- routing and 
reduction  of through- traffic (with the exception of residents' vehicles, public 
transport including  taxis, ambulances other hospital transport and vehicles 
directly accessing the  hospital) along Eastern road in the immediate vicinity of 
the hospital with the aim of  reducing congestion, improving air quality and 
ensuring adequate e mergency  access to the hospital. If approved, the 
scheme should be implemented prior to completion of the 3Ts development at the Royal Sussex County hospital. A bus -based rapid transport system is 
intended to extend along Edward Street and Eastern Road as part of an east -
west link. The timing of implementation (after 2016) will be the subject of future bids for funding . Sustainable
 transport initiatives and improvements to 
the public realm68 are a priority for the area.  
 3.60 Community infrastructure priori ties for Eastern Road and Edward Street 
are based upon citywide strategies including Sustainable Community Strategy
69, Audit of Community Level Infrastructure70, Parks and Green 
Spaces Strategy71 and Infrastructure Capacity Study72. Priorities extend 
beyond the area including to nearby disadvantaged residential areas to contribute towards the reduction of inequalities. Priorities for strategies and developer contributions include:  
• Open space improvements – Tarner, Dorset Gardens;  
• Schools – additional primary school spaces required by 2026;  
67 Improvements to the quality of the built environment, connectivity between neighbourhoods, 
access to employment and green space play a vital role in contributing to improved mental 
health, well -being  and perceptions of community cohesion and safety.  
68 The Eastern Road Edward Street transport corridor is within the 2013 Air Quality 
Management Area.  Air Quality is a priority in the vicinity of the Royal Sussex County Hospital.  
69 Sustainable Community Strategy was refreshed and adopted by the 2020 Local Strategic 
Partnership in 2006. It sets out a long term plan to improve the economic, social and 
environmental well -being of the city and is based upon 8 priority themes.  
70 Audit of Community Level Infrastructure 2003 – the Audit was commissioned by the Local 
Strategic Partnership to identify levels of community infrastructure in the 15 neighbourhood 
Renewal Areas. It identified the need for a dedicated community building in Queens Park/Craven Vale.  
71 Parks and Green Spaces Strategy 2006 sets out the council’s plans for improving city’s 
parks.  
72 The Infrastructure Capacity Study assesses the city’s future needs for physical and 
community infrastructure to 2026.  
 71                                         • Youth facilities – improvements needed in Tarner and Queens 
Park/Craven Vale areas;  
• Community Safety – Edward Street is identified as a environment 
improvement zone;  
• Community Building – Queens Park and Craven Vale is a priority area;  
• Employment Opportunities – apprenticeship opportunities for local 
people to be secured via legal agreements attached to major new 
development  
• Multi -practice GPs Surgery – Kemptown – a priority of the Primary 
Care Trust  
• Biodiversity improvements  
Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against the 
local targets under the One Planet principles, a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits. Expansion and provision of additional teaching and library space for the universities, particularly the University of Brighton, at Circus Street and within the wider development area will be supported as an alternative use where other policy requirements are met (see paragraph 4.40 of CP3 Employment Land) .   
 3.61 The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) 2012 shows that some 
sites within the Development Area such as around Circus Street and the 
Stevenson Road area are at risk of surface water flooding. Development 
proposals within these areas will need to demonstrate that they have been sequentially planned and the buildings built within surface water flood risk considered.  Southern Water has identified the need for water and wastewater infrastructure to serve new development  and that new developments will need 
to connect to water and sewerage systems off site. This will determined when 
development comes forward and where appropriate, developer contributions will be sought towards meeting these priorities.   
 3.62 As part of the wider strategy for the sub- regio n, the Royal Sussex County  
Hospital has been identified as a centre for expansion of hospital healthcare provision in ‘teaching, trauma and tertiary’ sectors. As a result the Universities NHS Health Trust has planning permission to redevelop the site to provide an additional 60,000sqm. Particular care has been taken in relation  to the sensitivity of the surrounding historic environment, managing servicing and transport access to the site sustainably and ensuring there are benefits for the wider area.  
 3.63 Alongside the New England Quarter and London Road development 
area, Edward Street Quarter will be the focus for new office development in 
the city that will contribute to strengthening the city’s economy. The northern part of the site has been redeveloped by American Express to provide a new 
headquarters building. The remaining part of the site should be redeveloped as part of a comprehensive approach to the area. Redevelopment should be for office -led mixed use including some residential development and s hould 
include consideration of all buildings on the site, opportunities for improvements to townscape and the public realm within the site including the extension of Mighell Street and improving public space between.  
 
 72 3.64 The Circus Street site provides the opportunity for an integrated modern 
mixed use development that will provide modern offices and workspace 
alongside student accommodation, a new University Library and a number of new residential units. As part of the scheme South East Dance will be provided with a studio. As part of the scheme some benefits will be provided 
to the wider area in terms of a better public realm and play spaces and training opportunities.  
 3.65 The final strategic allocation for the area, Freshfield Road Business Park 
and t he Gala Bingo Hall and car park, has been identified as a development 
opportunity . The Freshfield Road Business Park element of t he site is well 
occup ied and only likely to come forward in the longer term (post 2024).  The 
buildings within the Business Park are currently largely in storage and trade counter uses.  Due to the accessible location of the site, which is on a sustainable transport corridor, and its topography (it is at a lower level than the surrounding area) it is considered there are major opportunities to use the site more effectively however it is recognised these units serve a useful function for the city.  It is expected that the majority of residential development will be delivered on the Gala Bingo Hall and Car Park site, which can be delivered earlier in the plan period,  with a leisure or community use retained 
or re-provided as part of the redevelopment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 73 DA6 Hove Station Area  
 
 
 
Context  
3.66 The area around Hove Railway Station contains key local and regional 
transport connections. Both the railway and Old Shoreham Road are important east -west corridors. The presence of Old Shoreham Road and the 
railway line have however resulted in north- south severance, a dominance of 
road traffic in some parts, and a lack of high q uality infrastructure for 
pedestrians and cyclists trying to travel within or through the area. Addressing these issues will be key to securing improvements within the area.  
 3.67 This development area is largely industrial in nature with residential on 
the periphery.  It includes two Industrial Areas, a trading estate and retail park 
with a range of out -of centre bulky goods retail stores.  It is near to Hove 
Town Centre, several residential areas, Hove Park and the seafront. There is a significant amount of employment floorspace within the area which should continue to be protected in order to help meet the employment needs of the 
city’s increasing population. A number of sites have large areas of surface car parking and single- storey developments and have scope to be used more 
efficiently.  
 
 74 3.68 There is a poor public realm and poor quality streetscape in several 
areas due to a lack of defined street frontages particularly around the large 
retail sites.  Within the area there is a lack of green infrastruct ure, including a 
shortage of all types of open space when compared to the city as a whole. Redevelopment of sites within the area could therefore help to increase the capacity of under -utilised sites and also to address townscape and public 
safety improvements. In particular the area includes part of the Portland Road and Clarendon Road Neighbourhood Renewal Area
73, which has been 
identified as a community safety hotspot.  Table 1 on page 26 sets out how 
this policy will help to deliver against the principles  and local targets under the 
One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
 DA6 Hove Station Area  
 The strategy for the development area is to secure the long term regeneration opportunities around the Hove Station area and enable its development as an attractive and sustainable mixed -use area  focussed 
on employment
74. The aim is to secure the creation of a high quality 
employment environment that will attract investment and new employment opportunities for the city and promote the efficient use of land through, predominantly employment and residential, mixed use 
developments.  
 A. The local priorities to achieve the strategy are:  
 1. The preparation of guidance to promote and coordinate employment  
focussed mixed -use regeneration of under -used land and buildings  that 
offers flexible employment space and high quality design of an acceptable height, mass and scale that takes into account impacts on factors such as townscape, strategic views and infras tructure (see CP12 
Urban Design) ; 
 2. Ensure that development takes account of and i mprov es the public 
realm and townscape particularly in the Conway Street area and the 
industrial/retail frontages along Sackville Road, Old Shoreham Road and Goldstone Lane ; 
 3. Ensure that development takes account of and contributes to the  
appropriate provision of  public open space and essential community 
services and provides environmental , biodiversity , pedestrian and 
public safety improvements particularly around the Conway Street area.   
 
73 A previous Government initiative aimed at bridging the gap between the most deprived 
neighbourhoods and the rest of England by tackling five key themes of: poor job prospects; 
high levels of crime; educational underachievement; poor health; and problems with housing 
and the physical environment.  
74 References to employment mean land and buildings that fall within B1, B2 or B8 Use 
Classes (eg office, research and development, industrial, storage or distribution).   
 75                                         4. Enhancing the sustainable transport interchange at Hove Station by 
improving the walking and cycling network in the wider area, improving permeability within the area , encouraging accessibility improvements 
over the railway at the station, strengthening north- south connections 
across the railway and beyond the area and east -west connections 
along Old Shoreham Road;  
 5. Continuing to encourage more efficient use of under -used sites whilst 
retain ing/replacing  employment floorspace
75, protect ing employment 
sites in accordance with CP3 Employment Land and undertaking 
measures to create employment opportunities for local communities;  6. Maintaining and strengthening the creative industries business cluster in the area by seeking to ensure a range of appropriate  
workshops, office space, studios, storage and other premises remain affordable
76 and available for use  by this business sector ; 
 7. Ensuring development  connects to the water distribution and 
sewerage system off -site at the nearest po int of adequate capacity .  
Development must address surface water flooding risks and incorporate appropriate surface water drainage measures (see CP11 Flood Risk );   
 8. Protecting groundwater sources from pollution to the satisfaction of the Environment A gency ; 
 9. Creative use of development to integrate new green infrastructure 
including green space, accessible green roofs, green walls and other features which support Biosphere objectives;  10. Development within this area will be encouraged to consider low and 
zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular  heat networks and to 
either connect where a suitable system is in place (or would be at the time of construction) or design systems so that they are compatible with 
future connection to a network . 
 
B. Provision will be made by 2030 for the following minimum amounts of development within this Development Area:  
 
• 525 residential units;  
75 Current employment floorspace within : Conway Street Industrial Area is detailed as 
18,700m2 (200,000 sq ft) in the Employment Land Study 2006; Newtown Road Industrial Area 
is detailed as 16,000 m2 (171,000 sq ft) in the Employment Land Study 2006; Sackville 
Trading Estate is indicated to be 5,080m2 B uses and 5,080m2 restricted A1 retail wit hin the 
planning report for BH2009/00761  
76 Creative Industries Workspace Study 2008. The study indicated that affordable rents in the 
creative industries are generally at the lower end of the market range and in Brighton & Hove 
are in the region of £7.50 a square foot. However it should be noted that this average figure is 
higher than those generally considered affordable by some creative businesses and 
organisations.  
 76                                         • Within Conway Street Industrial Area - retention/replacement of 
12,000sqm77; employment floorspace  
• Outside the Conway  Street Industrial Area - retention/replacement 
of existing with an additional 1,000sqm78 employment floorspace  
 
C.  The Strategic Allocation in the Hove Station Area is:  
 1. Conway Street Industrial Area 
 Comprehensive mixed use redevelopment  to deliver more  effective use 
of the under -used land and buildings, requiring the 
retention /replacement of 12,000sqm employment floorspace with a shift 
into high quality flexible office/business (B1) floorspace, the provision of 200 residential units and enhancements to the streetscape.  This will 
be considered in the context of Development Plan policies and the following criteria:   
a. Proposals relating to individual buildings and/or sites within this area will need to demonstrate they will not prejudice the objectives of this allocation , seek to minimise the loss of employment 
floorspace  and facilitate the delivery of the allocated  employment 
floorspace and residential units;  
b. All proposals, including changes in existing employment generating uses , will be expected to contr ibute to the provi sion of  a 
range of office and flexible workspaces including larger floor plate offices and affordable business floorspace suitable for small business and the digital media/creative industries;    
c. Measures to improve safe pedestrian and cyclist access through the site to Hove Station and across the railway will be expected;  
d. Proposals within this area will be expected to pay particular attention to facilitating social inclusion, social integration and crime reduction measures ; 
e. The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure 
training for local people.  
 
Supporting Text  
 3.69 The Hove Station area has a number of special characteristics. It is a 
sustainable transport hub with local and regional connections and there are stron g links to Hove Town Centre, the seafront and proximity to Hove Park. 
Improving the north- south links could unlock further potential within the Hove 
Station area and the council recognises the longer term role that this area could provide in terms of new, high quality employment opportunities for the city. 
77 Current employment floorspace within Conway Street Industrial Area is detailed as 
18,700m2 (200,000 sq ft) in the Employment Land Study 2006.   The policy therefore accepts a 
reduction from 18,700sqm to 12,000sqm employment floorspace where it shifts into 
employment uses with higher job densities . 
78 Due to the potential loss of employment space within the Conway Street Industrial Area a 
net gain in employment floorspace overall within DA6 area may not be achieved.  
 77                                         3.70 Growth that is based on utilising the sustainable transport connections, in 
particular Hove Railway Station, is a priority in order to facilitate development 
within the area. Part of the Hove Station Area lies within the 2013  declared Air 
Quality Management Area. D evelopment proposals should pay particular 
regard to air quality, especially adjacent  to the junction  of Sackville Road and 
Old Shoreham Road. New development proposals should take into account 
impact on local air quality , be consistent with the council’s Air Quality Action 
Plan and minimise increased exposure to existing poor air quality within the AQMA. Improvements and/or mitigation will be sought wherever possible. Also several of the junctions in the area are at or near capacity so any additional traffic is likely to add to delays.  
 3.71 Therefore in order to support development in the area there needs to be 
a choice of alternative forms of transport to the private car and high emission vehicles for some journeys. This should include improved access to the railway station (especially from north of the railway line) and measures to encourage cycling and walking in order to facilitate and ease movements around and within the area, with appr opriate provision for disabled people 
dependent on private car use. Such measures could be integrated with green infrastructure improvements. Future development will also need to address the surface water flooding risks indicated in the Strategic Flood Ris k 
Assessment (SFRA) 2012 and any subsequent revisions.  
 3.72 The area makes an important contribution to employment land provision 
in the city. Important uses in the area currently include creative industry businesses and workshops (Use Class B1), general  industrial (B2) and 
warehousing (B8). Many of t he units continue to be well -used, being relatively 
modern and still fit for their current purpose with few vacant units  especially 
south of Newtown Road
79. It is therefore a priority to continue to protect an d 
enhance the existing employment floorspace provision in the area in order to help maintain and strengthen the local economy. As part of future development proposals applicants should demonstrate that the needs of existing occupiers are being suitably addressed, for example, within the scheme or off -site and through phasing of development to allow for any 
relocation to avoid unwanted closure in business  and to minimise local job 
losses. This policy also helps to secure replacement jobs in employment use 
for those lost via redevelopment of the other employment generating uses 
such as the retail warehouses and the sui generis uses ( e.g. bus 
garage/depot ). Over the lifespan of this plan employment floorspace loss 
within the Conway Street Industrial Area will b e partially offset by mixed use 
employment with residential redevelopment in other parts of the Development Area. This will ensure a critical mass of employment space is created 
enhancing the attractiveness of the area to business and employment industries .   
 3.73 There is significant potential for the area in terms of higher density  and 
higher value job opportunities  which are needed within the city.  The area 
therefore provides opportunities to deliver growth in relation to employment, 
79 Brighton & Hove Employment Land Study Review 2012  
 78                                         although these are likely to be in the latter part of the plan period. Mixed use 
redevelopment will facilitate regeneration and create a more vibrant area. T his 
must not be at the expense of employment floorspace or, in respect of the 
Conway Street Industrial Area, net gains  in jobs via a change from industrial 
and similar type uses to office/higher density employment uses . It is 
anticipated that the majority of the capacity would be for additional office uses (B1) but also for the intensification (more efficient and effectiv e use) of 
existing warehouse and distribution uses (B8) particularly within the Newtown Road Industrial Area in accordance with CP3 Employment Land.  
 3.74 It is intended that the area will become increasingly important for 
accommodating creative industries  during the plan period, particularly for 
businesses that either cannot afford to locate in the creative industry clusters in the city centre (see Policy SA2) or for those that cannot afford to remain in more central locations (see DA4). The Hove Station area offers the advantage of a slightly out -of centre location, an existing small cluster of creative 
industries, proximity to potential employees, and good sustainable transport links.   Whilst overall high quality design is expected, it is accepted that in  
order for premises to be affordable to this sector respective units may need to be of a lower specification / functional in nature. The location and proportion of flexible employment space suitable for this business sector should therefore be considered at an early stage so that a cluster and critical mass is formed to aid attractiveness to this sector and to take account of potential impacts on streetscape.  
 3.75 The policy recognises high quality, new residential development could be 
accommodated on some sites through employment  focussed mixed use 
development where it does not prejudice existing or future employment floorspace provision in the area.  It relaxes the past protection for employment 
within the Conway Street and Newtown Road Industrial Areas.  It does this by 
seeking an employment / residential mix within these Industrial Areas (excluding south of Newtown Road) in recognition that they have capacity to 
accommodate more development, are well located and the proposed shift into office use mixed w ith residential will help act as a catalyst for redevelopment.  
This policy approach is necessary to help address the city’s needs in respect of employment and housing.     
 3.76 New development in the area must have regard to the community’s need for scho ol and public health provision. Proposals to appropriately 
accommodate such facilities will be supported.  It is also recognised opportunities for sport and gym/health and fitness facilities may arise within the Conway Street Industrial Area from future residents, office workers and commuters  and to meet on- site outdoor sports requirements generated by 
redevelopment in the area (see CP17 Sports Provision). Public realm and townscape improvements will be required and will help to attract high quality office development. There is currently poor public realm and streetscape 
within the development area due to a lack of defined street frontages on under -utilised sites and around the large retail sites which have large areas of 
surface car parking. Development will need to be carefully designed and managed to ensure residential and the other occupiers in the area have an 
 79 appropriate level of amenity, including improved access to green 
infrastructure . 
 3.77 Priorities for developer contributions in the area are ther efore 
environmental enhancements, improvements in open space, sustainable 
transport  and general public realm . Traffic calming measures and, in some 
areas, public safety improvements (as identified in the Portland Road and Clarendon Neighbourhood Action Plan
80) will also be required. If public health 
and school facilities are not delivered on site, contributions for the commensurate provision off -site will be necessary. Creating more active and 
accessible street frontages, a more attractive public realm and i mproved 
access to green infrastructure is interlinked with the priority to improve the environment for pedestrians. Redevelopment opportunities could therefore both help to increase the development capacity of under -utilised sites and 
also to address townscape, green infrastructure and public safety improvements. It will also be important for redevelopment opportunities to 
assist with the delivery of appropriate measures to improve wheelchair , 
pushchair and bicycle access over the railway at the station. Detailed design 
will be considered through preparation of guidance for the area.  
 3.78 The out -of-centre bulky retail goods units at Goldstone Retail Park and 
Sackville Road Trading Estate do not represent a designated retail centre therefore any proposals for new retail floorspace would be considered against the impact tests set out in national guidance and local policy. This is to ensure that the viability and vitality of Hove Town Centre and other existing retail centres is protected, and to recognise the defined hierarchy of centres as set out in policy CP 4.   
 3.79 The coal yard site close to the railway line is currently allocated for waste 
management uses. It will continue to be safeguarded to meet the future waste management needs of the city in accordance with the Waste Local Plan and emerging Waste and Minerals Development Framework. Any proposal for waste uses on the site should explore the opportunities for the development of district heating/combined heat and power technologies.   
 3.80 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified particular potential for 
District Heating networks in and around this area within a long list of priority areas. Development within the long -list of priority areas will be encouraged to 
consider low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular heat 
networks and required to either connect where a suitable system is in place, or would be at the time of construction, or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network . 
     
80 An action plan funded through the Neighbourhood Renewal scheme.  
 80                                         DA7 Toad’s Hole Valley 
 
 
 
Context  
 
3.81 Development of Toad’ s Hole Valley  and Court Farm represents a major 
opportunity to create a model for mixed use sustainable development that will 
provide family and affordable housing, modern office space and a new school to meet the future needs of the city. There is also an opportunity to conserve 
and enhance the Site of Nature Conservation Importance on the south-western boundary of the site, to provide new public open space and to improve links to the South Downs National Park. All new development will be expected to meet high standards of sustainability and design.    
 3.82 The site, including Court Farm,  is 47 hectares and is privately owned 
land. It is located on the northern fringe of Brighton and Hove bounded by the A27 bypass to the north, the south -eastern side is bounded by King George 
VI Avenue, the major route from Devil’s Dyke round- about into Hove, with the 
Goldstone Valley/Hove Park residential area to the south and Hangleton and Knoll to the west . The site is not accessible to the public with the exception of 
the Site of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCI) on the western 
embankment , which is statutory open access land.    
      
 81 DA7 – Toad’s Hole Valley  
 
The strategy for the development of Toad’ s Hole Valley and C ourt Farm 
is to secure a modern, high quality and sustainable mixed use 
development to help meet the future needs of the city , improve 
accessibility and provide new community facilities to share with adjacent neighbourhoods.  
 A. The local priorities to achieve this strategy are:  
 1. That the site is used efficiently and effectively to assist in meet ing the 
development  and infrastructure  requirements of the city .  
2. The development will aim to be an exemplary standard in terms of 
environmental, social and e conomic sustainability, achiev ing a One 
Planet approach and promot ing the city’s UNESCO Biosphere 
objectives.  
3. Ensure that development respects the setting of the South Downs 
National Park and  seeks to  enhance links to the National Park  for local 
residen ts and tourists . 
4. The development will provide the opportunity to benefit residents in 
term s of the mix of uses , an improved provision of  community facilities, 
road safety improvements, training and job opportunities for local people and the provision of  green infrastructure including public open 
space  and natural green space . 
5. To improve sustainable transport links to the area.  
6. To incorporate appropriate landscaping and planting to maximise opportunities to increase biodiversity across the site.  
7. Conserve and enhance the designated Site of Nature Conservation 
Importance . 
8. Protect sensitive groundwater source protection zones from pollution and ensure no increase in surface water run -off and flood risk.  
9. Provide the necessary infrastructure for  the development including 
water distribution and sewerage.   
 B. The following key elements will be provided by 2030:  
 
• A minimum of 7 00 residential units  
• B1 employment s pace  – site area 3.5 – 4.5ha  
• Site reserved for a new secondary s chool – site area 5ha  
• Public open space with children’s play  space and informal sports facilities  – 2 ha 
• Provision of ancillary supporting uses – shops and cafes  and 
multi -use community building  
• Food growing space  – 0.5 ha 
• Green infrastructure integrated through the site to de liver 
Biosphere objectives and contribute to Biodiversity Action Plan targets  
•  
C. The strategic allocation for Toad’s Hole Valley is:  
 82  
1. Toad’s Hole Valley  east of the SNCI and south of the A27 embankment  
 Provision will be made for a high standard sustai nable, mixed -use 
development across the site comprising a minimum of 7 00 residential 
units, B1 employment  space, a new secondary school, a  multi -use 
community facility  and ancillary supporting uses.   
  The proposals will be assessed against the citywide p olicies and the 
following criteria : 
 a) New development will be expected to make the best use of the site 
and residential densities should fall within a range of 50  - 75 
dwellings per hectare.  
b) There will be a minimum of 50 per cent 3+ bedroom family sized 
dwellings provided as part of the residential scheme.  
c) The office element of the scheme will be high tech, modern office space that will provide a range of unit sizes to attract new businesses to the city and support growing business.  
d) Due regard will be given to the impact of development on the purposes and setting of the South Downs National Park
81.  
e) Environmental sustainability will be central to the design and layout of the scheme which will be expected to meet the requirements of policy CP8.  
f)  Development within this area will aim to incorporate infrastructure to 
support low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular heat networks subject to viability  and deliverability . 
g) The scheme will make provision for 5ha of land to accommodate a new secondary school to be developed by the city council  or its 
nominee . 
h) Development will make contributions towards improved pedestrian and cycle links to the South Downs National Park .  
i) The provision of a new multi -use community facility to include a 
community meet ing place, a doctor’s surgery and a resource 
promoting links to the National Park .  
j) Development proposals will address the issues of highways safety on King George VI Avenue, noise and other traffic impacts from the A27 and provide improve d links to adjacent residential areas.  
k) Improve ments  to public transport access and a good quality public 
realm that encourages healthy lifestyles (walking and cycling  with 
connections to existing cycle infrastructure ). 
l) Development will need to provide local infrastructure to the water and sewer system at the nearest point of adequate capacity.  
m) Provision of children’s play facilities, public open space (2 ha.) , 
contributions towards  improved links to existing parks and food-
growing space (0.5 ha.) and opportunities.  
81 National Par ks have two purposes under Section 62 of the Environment Act 1995:  
• Conserve and enhance their natural beauty and cultural heritage; and  
• promote public understanding and enjoyment of their special qualities.  
 83                                         n) Develope r contributions will be sought to secure the sustainable
conservation and enhancement of the adjacent Site of Nature
Conservation Importance.
o)The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure
training for local people.
p)The s ite will be the  subject of detailed guidance provided in a future
planning brief  prepared in consultation with the
landowners/developer and relevant stakeholders.
q)Work in partnership with the Highways Agency and developer toimprove the operational performance of the trunk road network andlinks to local roads that will be set out in a future planning brief for
the area.
S
upporting Text  
3.
83 Brighton & Hove is a tightly constrained urban area. With the sea to the 
south and the recently designated South Downs National Park boundaries drawn tightly to the city’s edges there are few opportunities for the city to physically expand. The development needs of the city are such that making effective use of a scarce land supply is essential. This is particularly so given the need to balance development requirements with the city’s need for open 
space and the need to safeguard the city’s highly valued natural and historic environments.   
3.
84 Identifying land at Toad’s Hole Valley for development represents an 
opportunity to secure new housing, employment, education, open space and community facilities for the city. It is also an opportunity to achieve high standards of development, improve accessibility to this part of the city and secure new community facilities, green infrastruc ture and open space for 
residents of the new development and for adjacent neighbourhoods. As a result, development at Toad’s Hole Valley should aim to be an exemplar of sustainable development and demonstrate that the city’s UNESCO Biosphere Reserve objectives can be successfully integrated throughout the development scheme  subject to viability and deliverability .   
3.
85 In terms of design, care will be taken to ensure that future development 
will not adversely affect views to and from the South Downs National Park . A 
future planning brief for the area will provide guidance for the future development of the site.  
H
igh standards of sustainable development  
3.
86 Environmental sustainability will be central to the design and layout of 
development at Toad’s Hole Valley which will be expected to meet the 
requirements set out in CP8 Sustainable Buildings. When it can be demonstrated that sustainable building standards cannot be met on site, mitigation measures will be sought in accordance with the national zero 
carbon policy unless exemptions apply and City Plan policy CP8 Sustainable 
Building s and CP7 Infrastructure and Developer Contributions through 
Allowable Solutions or an agreed local offset mechanism.  Development will 
84 be expected to address the principles of a One  Planet approach82 and 
incorporate measures to help mitigate or adapt to climate change, reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, address fuel poverty and security and reduce the city’s ecological footprint  subject to viability and deliverability. Measures to 
help achieve the delivery of these objectives include:  
 
• facilitating low ecological footprint lifestyles and practices , both on site 
and in the surrounding area;  
• rationalising site layout, street and building orientation to maximise 
passive design;  
• maximising the potential to generate energy renewably on the site;  
• delivering a decentralised energy network;  
• offering options to extend energy infrastructure to the surrounding built 
environment ;  
• surface water run- off being controlled to maintain Greenfield run- off 
rates ; and 
• tree-planting to help reduce the impact of urban heat island effect  
 
3.87 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified particular potential for networks for District Heating in and around this area as part of a long list of priorit y areas based upon straightforward installation opportunities and cost 
effectiveness.  Development within the area will be expected to incorporate infrastructure to support low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular  heat networks subject to viability  and deliverability .  
 
Housing  
 3.88 The city’s housing requirements are such that it is important for the council to identify all suitable opportunities to secure new housing for the city’s growing population ( see Policy CP1).  The scale of housing requirements 
forecast for the city coupled with the constrained nature of the city’s urban land supply supports the planned release of this land at Toad’s Hole Valley.   3.89 The strategic allocation at Toad’s Hole Valley will secure a significant amou nt of new housing provision of which a significant amount will be family -
sized accommodation and affordable housing. Most of the city’s urban sites are relatively small in terms of site area and more suited to flatted forms of development. The evidence bas e
83 indicates that over the course of the plan 
period, an estimated 53 per cent of overall housing need and demand is likely to be for larger (3 and 4 bedroom) properties and in terms of house types demand/need is likely to be greater for houses (68 per cent) than for flats (32 per cent)
84. In reality, the likelihood of delivering this mix of housing in the city 
is restricted by the types of sites likely to be brought forward for development. Planned development at Toad’s Hole Valley allows for a better housi ng mix to 
82 See table 1, page 26 
83 Implications of Demographic Change on Demand for Homes in Brighton & Hove, GL Hearn, 
March 2012.  
84 See Figure 11 and 12, Implications of Demographic Change on Demand for Homes in 
Brighton & Hove, March 2012.  
 85                                         be integrated within the overall development. For this reason the policy 
requires at least 50 per cent of the new housing to be family -sized. The 
specified density range should also enable the provision of a mix of housing types and sizes to achieve a choice in the range of housing at this location and ensure effective use of the site whilst recognis ing this is an area of lower 
densities compared to the other seven development areas.  
 Employment Floorspace  
 3.90 The allocation of 3.5 – 4.5 ha site area for employment use with the aim 
of accommodating 25,000 sq m B1 employment  floorspace at Toad’ s Hole 
Valley  that will support a key growth sector in the economy  - the knowledge 
based economy. This will be done by providing the opportunity for high quality, sustainable and flexible business space offering move- on space for 
successful companies that need to expand and incubation space linked to the universities. The Employment Land Study Review 2012 indicated that in light 
of the identified needs for industrial floorspace over the plan period there was the potential for some of the B1a, B1b, employment floorspace to be 
substituted by B1c light industrial floorspace subject to appropriate masterplanning . Parking provided in connection with a future offic e use may 
be considered for informal weekend Park + Ride where the criteria set out in the supporting text of policy CP9 Sustainable Transport can be met.  It is 
considered that the most appropriate location for the employment area is in close proximity to the trunk road network in terms of accessibility and amenity.  
 Secondary School  and Infrastructure  
 3.91 There is a strategic need for additional secondary school places in the city. Since 2005 the council has expanded a number of primary schools to 
provi de an additional 11.5 forms of entry (345 more places) per year. These 
additional places will need to be provided in secondary schools by 2018. To go towards meeting this requirement it is proposed that 5 ha is reserved for a 6 form -entry secondary school as part  of the mixed use development. Playing 
fields provided with the school should be made available for dual use with the local community when not being used by the school.  
 3.92 Southern Water has identified the need for water and wastewater 
infrastruc ture to serve new development  and new development will need to 
connect to water and sewerage systems off site. This will determined when 
development comes forward and where appropriate, developer contributions will be sought towards meeting these prioritie s.  
 Phasing of Development  
 3.93 It is important that supporting, ancillary and community uses (including 
the school, ancillary shops and the  multi -use community facility) are provided 
at the appropriate time so as not to place an unacceptable burden on existing 
facilities. Therefore careful consideration should be given to the phasing of development on the site.  Additionally the new employment floorspace represent s an important element of this mixed use scheme. The land should 
 86 be retained for employment purposes and development should be delivered to 
a phasing programme to be agreed. A minimum of a first phase of the 
employment land should be completed prior to completion of the housing element of the scheme to stimulate the market. This will ensure the s ite will 
contribute to the overall supply of office floorspace in the city  (see CP3) .     
 Transport  
 3.94 The key issue for any comprehensive redevelopment of Toad’s Hole Valley is to ensure there are improved sustainable transport links to the area.  Work will be undertaken with sustainable transport providers to ensure that 
links are improved. In terms of promoting cycling and walking, improved links to adjacent neighbourhoods  and to designated national cycle routes  will be 
sought as part of a redevelopment scheme.  
 3.95 The site is bounded by King George VI Avenue which is a main route into Hove from the A27 Bypass.  The redevelopment of Toad’s Hole Valley represents an opportunity to improve safety  on this steep and curving road.  
Redevelopment proposals should give consideration to slowing traffic, realigning the road, providing off -street parking in accordance with parking  
standards and improving the local environment. More details will be provided in the future planning brief.  
 3.96 The development is  likely to have an effect on the operation of the Devils 
Dyke Junction with the A27. Work will be undertaken with the Highways Agency and developer , taking into account sustainable measures to reduce 
vehicular traffic , and  mitigation measures will be identified to ensure the safe 
movement of traffic  on the A27. Options will be developed as part of the future 
planning brief . 
 3.97 Improved walking and cycling links to the South Downs National Park will 
be expected to be provided as part of the redevelopment scheme. This may involve improving existing links.  
 Public Open Space   
 3.98 Toad’s Hole Valley is privately owned and not accessible to local 
residents.  As part of a redevelopment , 2 hectares of public open space 
should be provided. This should include a children’s playspace as well as a landscaped space and consideration should be given to ensuring long term maintenance.   
 3.99 As part of the scheme 0.5 hectares should be set aside for food growing 
by local residents within and in neighbourhoods near t o, the site.   
 Local Shops, Community facilities  
 3.100 In addition  to the land reserved for a new school, provision should be 
made for a multi -purpose community facility that may include a doctor’s 
surgery, a community meeting place and National Park 
 87 Interpretation/education facility. Further facilities required as part of a 
balanced and sustainable community will be for local shops and services.  
 Site of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCI)  
 3.101 The western bank of Toad’s Hole Valley is an identified SNCI and lies 
outside the strategic allocation for the area. As part of the proposed development measures will be expected to be undertaken to improve the 
quality and biodiversity of the SNCI and to improve walkways through the area and to the National Par k. 
                                        
 88 DA8 – Shoreham Harbour  
 
 
 
 
Context  
3.102 Shoreham Harbour and the A259 coast road provide an important 
“gateway” into Brighton & Hove from the west. The harbour itself extends for 
approximately three miles west of Hove along the Kingsway / A259 coast road. The Harbour contains the entirety of the long established, commercial trust Port of Shoreham operated by the Shoreham Port Authority (SPA), an important local employer. Part of the harbour falls within the Brighton & Hove 
City Council area and a larger part is located within the neighbouring Council area of Adur District in West Sussex. A Shoreham Harbour regeneration area has been broadly defined which takes in the southern parts of the coastal communities of W est Hove and South Portslade in Brighton & Hove; and 
Fishersgate, Southwick, Kingston- by-Sea and the eastern edge of Shoreham -
by-Sea town centre in Adur District.  
 3.103 In order to maximise the opportunities offered by this diverse waterfront 
location a Joint Area Action Plan (JAAP) is being developed with Adur District Council and West Sussex County Council that will set out a comprehensive, deliverable plan for the future revitalisation of the area. Working closely with the Shoreham Port Authority there is an opportunity to bring back into use vacant and underused sites for new employment and housing developments as well as raising the quality of the local environment and increasing recreational opportunities and waterfront access. The development plans f or 
the harbour are driven by an underperforming coastal economy, worsening pockets of deprivation, the need for port modernisation and the increasing challenge of finding strategic growth sites given the physical constraints of the sub-region.  
 89 3.104 The aims of the plans for Shoreham Harbour over the next 15- 20 years 
are: 
 
• To maximise the potential of Shoreham Harbour for the benefit of 
existing and future residents, businesses, Port -users and visitors 
through a long term regeneration strategy.  
• To deliver a series of appropriately located, high quality, sustainable, 
mixed -use developments including new housing, employment space, 
leisure opportunities, improved public realm and associated supporting 
infrastructure including flood defences and measures to encourage the use of sustainable transport.  
• The consolidation and enhancement of the operations of Shoreham 
Port recognising the vital role it will continue to play in the local economy.  
• Developments will be encouraged that are consistent with the Vision 
and S trategic Objectives for the area that will be set out in the 
Shoreham Harbour JAAP.  
• This broad location policy identifies the areas within Shoreham Harbour 
that will be subject to changes of land use including new areas of housing and employment that will  be further detailed in the JAAP.  
• To maximise opportunities to support the City’s sustainability objectives 
through large- scale zero and low -carbon energy technologies to serve 
the harbour and wider city, particularly those that take advantage of the harbo ur’s coastal location. In particular the City Council will encourage 
any opportunities that arise to incorporate waste heat or other heat sources into the heat networks for the city.   
DA8 – Shoreham Harbour  
 The City Council will work with Adur District C ouncil, West Sussex 
County Council, Shoreham Port Authority and other key partners to support the long term regeneration of Shoreham Harbour and immediately surrounding areas. A Joint Area Action Plan (JAAP) is currently being prepared that will contain de tailed policies for the 
harbour area  to address a range of issues, including the provision of 
infrastructure.  
 A. Development Capacity  
 Shoreham Harbour is identified as a broad location for future development. Development Capacity assessment has indicated the potential to accommodate the following levels of development which will be further tested and explored through the JAAP process:  
 300 new residential units within Brighton & Hove (which are included as 
part of the City's long term overall housing tar get) 
 7500 sq m net additional employment floorspace  
 90 B. The local priorities to achieve the strategy  
 
The priorities for the Character Areas that fall within the Brighton & Hove part of the harbour are as follows.
85 
 
i) South Quayside:  
 Area Priorities:  
 
a) To support Shoreham Port Authority in improving operational 
efficiencies, developing new trade and exploring opportunities for 
sustainable energy generation, in line with the adopted Port 
Masterplan.  
b) To accommodate the relocation of existing port operators f rom 
elsewhere within the Port.  
c) To identify and where appropriate, accommodate the future 
capacity requirements of  the existing Waste Water Treatment 
Plant.  
d) To improve Wharf Road and Basin Road South as a popular recreational route for walking and cycling providing access to the 
beaches.  
e) With the exception of the existing Power Station,  and the Waste 
Water Treatment Plant , uses not requiring a port location will not 
be permitted in this area.  
ii) Aldrington Basin:  
 
Area Priorities:  
 
a) To designate Aldrington B asin as a Strategic Employment/Mixed-
Use Area to accommodate a vibrant mix of new and improved port 
operational facilities as well as compatible non -port employment 
uses,  including A and B use classes.  
b) To maximise intensification and redevelopment opportunities of 
existing lower grade, vacant and under -used spaces.  
c) To accommodate appropriately located mixed -use residential 
development . 
85 An area vision and development p roposals will be defined for each of  the 7 c haracter a reas 
covering the Harbour within the Joint Area Action Plan. Note that Character Areas 1, and 4 
fall across the boundary with Adur District Council while areas 5 , 6, 7 fall entirely within Adur 
District.  
 91                                         d) To secure improvements to legibility, permeability and 
connectivity through high quality building design, townscape and 
public realm, whilst respecting and enhancing the character and 
environment of surrounding areas.  
e) To ensure that all development takes in to account the findings and recommendations of the  current Flood Risk Assessments.  
f) To ensure that new development proposals take into account 
impact on local air quality and noise and that improvements and/or mitigation are sought wherever possible
86 
 
iii) North Quayside / South Portslade  
 
Area Priorities:  
 
a) To develop North Quayside as a new and improved Port 
operat ional area accommodating new and relocated port uses 
with limited land reclamation and a new access road (within the Port boundary) in line with the Port Masterplan.  
b) To designate the South Portslade Industrial Area as a Strategic Employment/Mixed -use Area,  including some appropriately 
located residential  development . 
c) To secure improvements to legibility, permeability and connectivity through high quality building design, townscape and public realm, whilst respecting and enhancing the character and 
environme nt of surrounding areas.  
d) To improve connections and townscape around key linkages including the Boundary Road/Station Road (B2194) district 
retailing centre, Church Road ( A293) and along the A259.  
e) To ensure that all development takes into account the findings 
and recommendations of the  current Flood Risk Assessment . 
f)  To ensure that new development proposals take into account 
impact on local air quality and noise and that improvements and/or mitigation are sought wherever possible . 
 
 
86 Part of this character area lies  within the 2013 Air Quality Management Area.  
 92                                         iv)  Portslade and Sout hwick Beaches 
 
Area Priorities:  
a) Improvements to the quality, access, appearance and 
maintenance of the Public Right of Way corridor, beach promenade , public areas and beach environment . 
Supporting Text  
 
3.105 The regeneration of Shoreham Harbour has been an objective of the 
three local authorities: Brighton & Hove City Council (BHCC), Adur District Council (ADC) and West Sussex County Council (WSCC) for a number of years. In 2006 a re- appraisal of a previous regeneration project (known as 
“Shoreham Maritime”) by the South East England Development Agency (SEEDA) and the Shoreham Port Authority concluded that a comprehensive mixed -use scheme covering a wider area than just the Port itself and 
providing up to 10,000 homes and 8,000 jobs could be viable.  
 3.106 The aspirations for the Shoreham Harbour area were subsequently 
identified in the Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS) for the South East (May 2009). The South East Plan
87 indicate d that  the Sussex Coast w as a priority 
area for regeneration and specifically identifie d Shoreham Harbour as a 
Growth Point. An interim figure of 10,000 dwellings was identified subject to detailed studies.  
 3.107 Since this time land capacity and viability studies along with other 
technical studies concluded that the development capacity at the harbour was significantly less than 10,000 dwellings. This was mainly due to significant land reclamation from the sea (that would have enabled additional development space to be accommodated) not being financially viable under foreseeable market  conditions. There were concerns about the impact on the 
environment and character of the local area as well as loss of employment land that would be required to accommodate that level of housing. The technical evidence underpinning the reduction in the pr oposed scale of 
development will be  outlined in further detail within the JAAP.  
 3.108 In October 2010 the Shoreham Port Authority adopted a Port 
Masterplan setting out the Port’s plans for future growth. The Masterplan has been subject to public consultation and was endorsed by the three local authorities. The activities of the Port represent a key economic advantage for the area, with direct and indirect economic benefits arising from its planned development. The delivery of the Port Masterplan is vital t o the success of the 
wider regeneration of the area as the latter relies on the consolidation of port uses into the eastern part of the port.  The local authorities will continue to 
87 The Regional Strategy for the South East (Part Revocation) Order 2013 came into force on 
25 March 2013. Therefore, the South East Plan no longer forms part of the Development Plan 
for the Plan area.  
 93                                         work closely with the Port and with businesses based at the Port to ensure 
their future needs and aspirations are addressed through the JAAP process.  
 3.109 The successful delivery of the JAAP proposals will be dependent upon 
the ability of the local authorities to work closely with the existing site owners and business throughout the Harbour area. As well as addressing the needs of existing businesses, a central aim of the JAAP is to facilitate the reconfiguration of underused and vacant industrial and employment sites to provide new employment generating uses such as office space, restaurants, cafes, leisure, entertainment and tourism related uses.  
 3.110 The Port is important regionally for the landing, processing and 
handling of minerals and as such mineral wharf facilities are safeguarded 
under "Policy WMP15 - Safeguarding railheads and wharves" of the East 
Sussex, South Downs and Brighton & Hove Waste and Minerals Plan (adopted February 2013). As a result development proposals affecting minerals wharves are required to demonstrate that there is no net loss of capacity for handling minerals within the Port .  A similar policy may  be 
included within the emerging West Sussex Minerals Local Plan. The two mineral planning authorities  (Brighton & Hove and West Sussex)  are currently 
preparing guidance in liaison with the Port Authority  to set out clearly what the 
implications of the policy are and what is required of applicants as part of the planning process.  The mechanism for safeguarding minerals handling 
capacity within the Port is to be considered in detail in the JAAP.  
 3.111 The Shoreham Harbour Regeneration Partnership (comprising Adur 
District Council, Brighton & Hove City Council and West Sussex County Council) are in the process of  prepar ing an Investment Strategy which will 
provide a work programme for deliver ing regeneration and will underpin the 
emerging JAAP.  The infrastructure requirements for the H arbour area will be 
set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plans (IDP) that underpins  the City  Plan 
and the Adur Local Plan.  
 3.112 The Partnership will work closely with Southern Water to ensure that 
the Waste Water Treatment infrastructure is fit for purpose. An assessment of the capacity of the existing Waste Water Treatment works (located in Adur District) at Shoreham Harbour has been undertaken concluding that the existing plant has sufficient capacity to accommodate the levels of 
development being proposed through the City Plan, Adur Local Plan and the Shoreham Harbour JAAP. However, proposed changes to environmental regulation requirements may have implications for future land take and an alternative site may need to be identified. The possible need for site expansion in the vicinity of Shoreham Harbour will be explored through the emerging JAAP in close liaison with Southern Water and Shoreham Port Authority.  3.113 The Br ighton & Hove Energy Study has identified particular potential for 
District Heating networks in and around Shoreham Harbour within a long list of priority areas. Development within the long -list of priority areas will be 
encouraged to consider  low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in 
 94 particular  heat networks and required to either connect where a suitable 
system is in place, or would be at the time of construction, or design systems 
so that they are compatible with future connection to a network. The  potential 
will be further investigated during the preparation of the JAAP.  
 3.114 Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against 
the principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
 3.115 This broad location policy has set out the high level strategy and 
approach to future planning at the Harbour based on a  deliverable scale of 
development which aims to protect the economic opportunities offered by the Port and the environment of the local area. The detail of the proposals and 
associated planning policies will be set out in the JAAP to be jointly adopted by Adur District Council, Brighton & Hove City Council and West Sussex County C ouncil.  
                                  
 95 SA1 - The Seafront  
 
 
 
Context  
 
3.116 The seafront has been, and always will be, the ‘shop window’ of 
Brighton & Hove, encompassing a year round hub of leisure and recreation activities for residents and visitors. From the Marina in the east to the city boundary at Shoreham Harbour in the west, the coastline is heavily urbanised and is set against a largely Victorian and Regency townscape. It is considered by English Heritage to be one of the finest urban seafront townscapes in Britain.  
 3.117 In addition to recognising the significance of the coastline for leisure 
and recreational purposes, the importance of conserving coastal habitats and improving the marine environment , including sea water quality and coastal 
zone management , is also strongly recognised. Maximising the nature 
conservation potential of the seafront is an important part of the Biosphere Reserve initiative. The space along the seafront, the sea, the beach and the buildings behind the main road all of fer important opportunities for further 
improvement and enhancement . Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this policy 
 96 will help to deliver against the principles and local targets under the One 
Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city  to live 
within environmental limits.  
 SA1 - The Seafront  
 The council will work in partnership to ensure the on- going regeneration 
and maintenance of the seafront in an integrated and coordinated manner.  
 Proposals should support the year -round sport, leisure and cultural role 
of the seafront for residents and visitors whilst complementing its outstanding historic setting and natural landscape value. Proposals should ensure a good marine environment, enhance biodiversity in accordance with Biosphere object ives and consider options for small 
scale renewable energy provision.  
 A: Priorities for the whole seafront are to:  
 
• Enhance and improve the public realm and create a seafront for all; to ensure the seafront has adequate facilities for residents and visito rs (including public toilets, waste disposal facilities, seating, 
signage, lighting and opportunities for shelter and shade) and continue to improve access to the beach and shoreline and ensure the seafront is accessible to everyone;  
 
• Promote high quality architecture , urban design and public art  
which complements the natural heritage of the seafront and preserves and enhances the character and appearance of the Conservation Areas, and the historic squares and lawns that adjoin the seafront
88; 
 
• Secure improv ements to sustainable transport infrastructure 
along the A259, including a rapid/ express bus -based services 
(see CP9) and improve air and noise quality, pedestrian and cycle 
routes and crossing opportunities in order to achieve a modal shift and thereby r educe the impact of traffic;  
 
• Monitor, conserve and expand designated coastal habitats and secure nature conservation enhancements to the marine and coastal environment;  
 
• Work in partnership with Defra, the Environment Agency, Natural 
England and Southern Water to continue to maintain coastal 
defences and to ensure appropriate waste water treatment infrastructure.  
88 Kemp Town; East Cliff; Valley Gardens; Old Town; Regency Square; Brunswick Town; The  
Avenues; Cliftonville; Old Hove; Pembroke & Princes and Sackville Gardens.  
 97                                         • Development will be encouraged to consider low and zero carbon 
decentralised energy and in particular  heat networks and to either 
connect where a  suitable system is in place (or would be at the 
time of construction) or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network  
 B: Priorities for specific parts of the seafront are:  
 
Western Seafront (Medina Terrace to Boundary Road/Station Road)  
 
• To enhance and improve the public realm and create a more 
coherent townscape , that respects its adjoining context,  through 
greater consistency of scale, height and roofline along the north 
side of Kingsway.  
 
• Opportunities for tree planting and coastal habitat creation north and west of the Lagoon should be explored to soften the appearance of the A259, improve microclimate
89 and provide 
shade and enhance biodiversity.  
 
• The National Cycle Route 2 is of strategic importance and the council wi ll review and seek to improve areas of the route that are 
below national standards.  
 
Central Seafront (Medina Terrace to Palace Pier)  
 
• To secure ongoing improvements to and maintenance of the 
upper  and lower promenade, including Hove Lawns,  which 
respect the more tranquil areas west of the Peace Statue.  
 
• Develop a future vision and landscaping option for the lower  
promenade area either side of the West Pier site to complement 
the i360 Observation Tower proposal and maximise nature conservation opportunities . 
 
• Secure improvements to traffic flow, air quality and pedestrian and cycle routes and crossing opportunities related to the Brighton Centre redevelopment.  
 
• The council will work with the West Pier Trust and English Heritage to ensure any future proposal for the West Pier is of high quality, complements the seafront regeneration and values its 
biodiversity interest.  
 
East of Palace Pier to the Marina  
 
89 Local climatic conditions.  
 98                                         • Deliver the regeneration of Madeira Drive as a centre for sports 
and family based activities supported by a landscaping and public art strategy which also provides for an improved public realm and the conservation and enhancement of the historic and nature conservation features present in this location;  
 
• Safeguard the vibrant and important event space at Madei ra Drive 
as this presents a unique location for a mix of cultural, sport and leisure activity to take place; and  
 
• Improve beach and seafront access for pedestrians and cycle users, linking with access improvements at the Marina/Black Rock.  
 
East of the Mar ina 
 
• Safeguard the important community and recreation facility at Saltdean Lido.  
 
• The council will monitor the cliffs behind and to the east of the 
Marina and take appropriate measures to safeguard coastal 
communities, important infrastructure (A259 & trunk services) and coastal access in the longer term;  
 
• Ensure the nationally important nature conservation and 
geological interest of the cliff top, cliff and foreshore is conserved 
and promoted;  
 
• Adopt a risk- based approach to all new cliff top development a nd 
examine proposals rigorously in respect of cliff stability, nature conservation and impact on coastline views and Rottingdean Conservation Area; and 
 
• Recognise that part of this area falls within the South Downs National Park and ensure there are no adverse impacts on the setting of the South Downs National Park.  
 C: Strategic allocation for the Western Seafront:  
 
1. King Alfred/RNR site  
 Secure the redevelopment of the King Alfred/ RNR site to ensure the 
replacement of new indoor public wet and dry spor ts facilities which 
provide for the local Hove communities and contribute to the wider mix 
of facilities in the city.  Provision of a minimum 400 residential units.  
 
 99 Other D2 leisure uses in accordance with national planning policy, 
ancillary retail and café/restaurant uses and community health facilities would also be acceptable as part of a mixed use scheme.  
Proposals will be assessed against the priorities for the Seafront, city wide policies and the following criteria:  
a) The development will be required to achieve a high quality of design and sustainability which preserves and where possible enhances the setting of the three adjacent Conservation Areas, adjacent Listed Buildings, the character of the seafront and strategic views ; 
b) Provide active ground floor uses and high quality, integrated and attractive landscaping and public realm which promotes biodiversity in accordance with Biosphere objectives and improves connectivity between Kingsway and the seafront;  
c) Provide appropriate flood protection and mitiga tion measures in 
accordance with CP11;  
d) Provide for sustainable means of transport to and from the site and demonstrate good linkages for pedestrians and cyclists; 
e) The development must connect to the sewerage system off -site at 
the nearest point of adequate  capacity;  
f) The developer will enter into a training place agreement to secure training for local people,  
Development should accord with the council’s sports and development briefs for this site and any subsequent amendments
90. 
 Supporting text  
 3.118 The seafront is one of the unique attractions of the city. It is the city’s 
main public space and provides an important opportunity for the promotion and enhancement of both formal structured club and facilities based activities 
such as sailing and informal casu al recreation  such as walking and swimming . 
It is also the location of two exceptional groups of historic buildings fronting the sea, east of Palace Pier to the Marina and west of the Brighton Centre to Fourth Avenue. This historic ‘backcloth’ provides for  both commercial and 
residential uses and makes a significant contribution to the setting, heritage and vibrant character of the seafront. The seafront area as a whole varies in its intensity of activity with both lively and tranquil stretches. This variet y 
necessitates a sensitive and qualitative approach in terms of managing future change and development.  
 3.119 Since the early 1990s the central seafront area has been transformed 
through a mix of public and private investment much of which has been coordi nated through the Brighton Seafront Development Initiative
91. Through 
the emerging Seafront Strategy92, the council will continue to work towards 
achieving a seafront for all, and supports an integrated process of improvement and regeneration along the coast al strip.  Regeneration will be 
90 King Alfred/RNR Planning Brief SPG (2002).  
91 Brighton Strategic Seafront Development Initiative, 1992.  
92 Seafront Strategy is planned to be adopted in 2015. 
 100                                         designed to protect and enhance biodiversity and the natural environment, to 
achieve quality in the planning and urban design of the built environment, to preserve its setting and heritage and to develop the recreational potential of the area for both active and passive pursuits.  The identification of new sports 
and recreation facilities for people to be physically active on the seafront will help improve health and well -being.  
 3.120 Private development schemes have come forward for the i360 
Observation Tower in the West Pier area and development of the Yellowave beach sports facility (now open) . A number of other major regeneration 
opportunities have been identified along the length of the seafront
93: 
• Brighton Marina and Black  Rock – mixed use development including 
leisure/recreation development at Black Rock, see DA2.  
• The International Conference Centre – to replace the existing Brighton 
Centre, see DA1  
• Shoreham Harbour regeneration – see DA8.  
• The King Alfred L eisure Centre – a redevelopment opportunity to 
ensure the replacement of the existing swimming pool and leisure facilities.  
 
3.121 The council will continue to work towards a deliverable scheme for the 
redevelopment of the King Alfred/ RNR site
94 to deliver sport facilities which 
provide for the local Hove communities and to contribute to the wide mix of 
sports provision for the city. The council recognises that to secure the regeneration of the site to deliver new indoor public wet and dry sports facilities an appropriate mix of uses (of which housing is likely to be the 
predominant part) will be required. The overall development of the site needs to be of high quality which is sustainable and which positively enhances the seafront and surrounding area.   
 3.122 Saltdean Lido , near to the seafront is a prominent listed building and an 
important community facility including a library and community centre as well as the Lido outdoor swimming pool and health &  fitness facilities. The Lido 
itself is the largest enclosed outdoor s wimming facility for the city and 
therefore has a wider catchment area. The overriding requirement of the council is to seek a vibrant, accessible, high quality facility that befits the status of the Lido as a key asset of both the local and wider city com munity.   
 3.123 The need to enhance and improve the public realm along the length of 
the seafront is recognised. New opportunities should encourage people to extend the amount of time they spend at the seafront as well as exploring opportunities to provide shade and shelter
95. The popular cycle route which 
93 Brighton Centre SPD (2005); Brighton Marina SPG (2003) and PAN (2008)  
94 Planning permission was granted in 2007 for the redevelopment of the King Alfred/ RNR 
site. In November 2008, the council's agreement with the Developer for the Frank Gehry 
designed project on Hove seafront expired.  The Agreement which was to have delivered a 
new sports centre, 751 flats and a new public realm is no longer to be delivered due to 
withdrawal of funding from the principal funders for the project.  
95 Opportunities should relate to the Parks and Green Spaces Strategy; the Public Space and 
Public Life Study and the Tourism Study.  
 101                                         runs along the seafront forms part of the ‘National Cycle Network’ and 
opportunities for its further improvement will also be encouraged and supported, in particular along the Western Seafront . Opportuniti es will also be 
sought to standardise road capacity along the length of the A259 and to reduce its severance effect with the seafront and improvements to sustainable transport infrastructure along the A259 will be secured  supporting 
improvement to noise
96 and air quality . The Air Quality Further Review and 
Assessment (2010) and the Air Quality Action Plan (2011) identified certain junctions on the A259 as exceeding the annual nitrogen dioxide air quality objectives . Much of the A259 corridor is included within the 2013 Air Quality 
Management Area.  
 3.124 The importance of conserving coastal habitats and improving the 
marine environment including sea water quality and coastal zone management is also recognised. The beach, the shoreline and the marine environment are important natural assets providing valuable habitats that must be protected and enhanced for their biodiversity and geological value and because they have great potential to enhance the seafront experience for visitors, in accordance with Biosphere objectives.  A stretch of the seafront 
east of the Marina falls within the South Downs National Park and will be covered by the Local Plan to be produced by the South Downs National Park Authority (See SA5). Almost half of the coastline of Brighton and Hove is of 
national nature conservation importance and there are also four sites of city -
wide nature conservation importance between Brighton Marina and Shoreham. These smaller sites provide a reservoir from which to enhance and expand urban natural habitat as  part of regeneration schemes throughout 
the Seafront. For this reason, there is a presumption against proposals involving an increase in hard surfacing of the seafront at or in the vicinity of the sites of city -wide nature conservation importance  (refer t o policy CP10 
and DA2).  The Marine Management Organisation will be preparing a marine 
plan for the south coast of England which will inform and guide marine users and regulators and seek to manage the sustainable development of marine industries such as wi nd farms, shipping, marine aggregates and fishing 
alongside the need to conserve and protect marine species, habitats and leisure uses. Where appropriate , regard will be had to the marine plan in Part 
2 of the City Plan.  
  3.125 The coastal frontage of the city is considered to be at risk from tidal 
flooding
97. CP11 sets out the approach to managing flood risk. The defence of 
Brighton & Hove’s coastline over the next 50 years is addressed by strategies prepared in partnership with the Environment Agency and adjacent 
authorities. The reconstruction of the defences between Ovingdean and the Marina, under the ‘Brighton Marina to Ovingdean Coast Protection Scheme’ is now complete. The ‘Brighton Marina to River Adur Strategy’ recommends the maintenance of existing coastal defences with some enlargement of groynes 
96 The Noise Action Plan for the Brighton Agglomeration was produced by Defra in 2010. This 
identifies priority areas for action. The Defra mapping predicts that households most affected 
by traffic noise are those closest to major roads: London Road, Lewes Road & the seafront  
97 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment – 2008, updated in 2011  
 102                                         and beaches in the King Alfred area and a scheme to upgrade defences 
between the western end of Hove Lagoon and the River Adur through Shoreham Port. The Strategy is being revised following advice and funding from Defra. In Brighton & Hove the long term management of coastal flood risk and erosion is set out within the Beachy Head to Selsey Bill Shoreline 
Management Plan (SMP).
98The Shoreline Management Plan for the coastline 
west of the marina proposes to continue to ‘hold the line’ in terms of coastal defence.  
 
3.126 To the east of Black Rock and behind the Marina a chalk cliff line runs 
all the way to Newhaven. The landscape quality of the coastal area of downland countryside at Ovingdean Valley and Roede an bottom is such that 
it has been included in the South Downs National Park. The cliffs (Brighton to Newhaven Cliff), cliff top and foreshore are designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), a Regionally Important Geological Site (RIGS) and a Geological Conservation Review site (GCR). How the cliffs will react to changing climate is not yet fully understood. Adopting a monitoring and management approach to the coastline in this location will increase the longer 
term understanding of the evoluti on of the cliffs, in the light of climate change. 
This should advise and enable the council in partnership with Natural England 
and other key stakeholders and the local community to properly manage this unique and valuable natural feature and plan for the future.  
 
3.127 The National Planning Policy Framework requires  risk to be reduced 
from coastal change by avoiding inappropriate development in vulnerable areas or adding to the impacts of physical changes to the coast. Should a coastal change management ar ea
99 need to be identified for the stretch of the 
coastline east of the marina, this will be addressed in future development plan documents.  
 
3.128 Southern Water has constructed a storm water storage tunnel along  
Brighton Seafront as a buffer to control outflows from the combined sewerage system. Storm water from this tunnel will eventually connect to a new wastewater treatment works at Peacehaven. The policy supports the provision of further appropriate waste water treatment infrastructure that may be required along the length of the seafront.  
 
3.129 There are opportunities to consider small scale renewable energy 
provision such as solar and wind energy technologies along the seafront.  
The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified particular potential for  
District Heating networks in and around the seafront within a long list of priority areas. Development within the long -list of priority areas will be 
encouraged to consider  low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in 
particular heat networks and required to either connect where a suitable 
system is in place, or would be at the time of construction, or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network . 
98 The Seafront boundary has been informed by the Shoreline Management Plan.  
99 An area identified in Local Plans as likely to be affected by coastal change (physical 
change to the shoreline through erosion, coastal landslip, permanent inundation or coastal 
accretion).  
 103                                         SA2 Central Brighton 
 
 
 
Context  
 3.130 Central Brighton is a dense and complex area of urban quality 
townscape. It extends from Brighton Station in the north to the seafront in the south; with North Laine, The Lanes, The Royal Pavilion Estate and Old Steine to the east and the major seafront hotels, conference centres, Churchi ll 
Square shopping centre and major high street retailers along Western Road to the west. The area’s historic form is a fundamental part of its distinctive character and resulting sense of place. The area contains a unique independent retail sector, restaurants and cafes, a diverse evening economy (clubs, theatres, cinema and mixed arts entertainment venues), a commercial core and hub for media and creative industries as well as some of the city’s key cultural and heritage assets  and significant residential  areas . 
 SA2 Central Brighton  To reinforce central Brighton’s role as the city’s vibrant, thriving regional centre for shopping, leisure, tourism, cultural, office and commercial uses:  
 1. The Council will strengthen the distinctiveness and legibility of the ‘cultural quarter’
100 and ensure its long term success and viability 
100 ‘Cultural Quarter’: - the area centred on Church Street, Jubilee Square, the Royal Pavilion 
Estate and the Theatres  
 
 
 104                                         through ongoing improvements to the attractiveness of the physical 
environment and public realm; ensuring that historic buildings are maintained and enhanced and by requiring new development to support and maintain the vibrant mix of cultural activities, business, retail, leisure and tourism uses.  
 2. The focus for significant new retail development will be Brighton Regional Centre. New retail development should respect the different but interconnecting shopping identities of the following areas:  
• Churchill Square/ Western Road (see DA1)  
• Western Road (the secondary retail frontage that runs from 
Montpelier Road to the east and Holland Road to the west 
including Brunswick Town).  
• Queens Road/West Street  
• Old Town including the Lanes/ Duke Street/ East Street  
• The North Laine  
• North Street 
 The council will support proposals to improve and refurbish existing retail units and shop frontages and recognise the role of small independent/local traders  in maintaining the Regional Centre’s viability 
and attractiveness.  
 3.  Within Central Brighton existing office accommodation will be protected and their refurbishment and upgrade encouraged. Proposals that result in the loss of B1a office floorspace will  be permitted where 
owners/developers are able to demonstrate:  
a) The site has been marketed for B1a office use at a reasonable price 
and for a reasonable time period and no viable occupiers have expressed an interest in taking up the accommodation either as single/ multiple occupier so it has been concluded that the site is inherently unsuitable for continued B1a office use; and  
b) That the redevelopment or reuse would make a positive contribution 
to the vitality and vibrancy of Central Brighton and create  
employment opportunities; or  
c) That change of use was the only practicable means of preserving a 
listed building.  
Partial loss of office floorspace will be permitted where the change of use enables the refurbishment and upgrade of the remaining office floorspace.  
 4.  The Council will promote a balanced range of complementary evening and night -time economy uses which appeal to a wide range of 
age and social groups, avoid a spread of large bars/pubs and night clubs and address public safety concerns.  
 5.  Mixed use developments will be promoted which retain active ground floor uses and accord with a range of appropriate city centre uses, 
 105 including residential .101  Where other key policy issues are addressed, 
the Council will welcome proposals to create flats over shops and 
commercial premises.  
 6. Maintaining and strengthening the significant digital media and 
creative industries business cluster in the area through the delivery of ultrafast broadband and ensuring that workshops, office space, studios, storage  and other premises remain affordable, appropriate and available 
for use ; particul arly in the North Laine area ; 
 7. Ensure new development proposals take into account impact on local 
air quality and that improvements and/ or mitigation are sought wherever possible. The council will work with public transport 
providers, freight transport operators and secure road junction and 
urban realm improvements to reduce congestion and emissions , to 
improve air quality and encourage improved pedestrian and cycling move ments within the city centre (See CP13) . 
 8. Development within this area will be expected to incorporate 
infrastructure to support low and zero carbon decentralised energy in particular heat networks subject to viability.  
 Supporting Text  
 3.131 Within central Brighton, there is a concentration of nationally and 
internationally significant cultural businesses and buildings including the Royal Pavilion, the Brighton Museum and Art Gallery, the Brighton Dome, the Theatre Royal, the new Jubilee Library and the Komedia. At the heart of the area is the iconic and internationally famous Royal Pavilion without which little of the cultural and historic development of the city centre would have occurred. The wider area is described as the city’s cultural quarter. Cultural and creative industries and the retail, tourism and hospitality sectors continue to innovate, strengthen and grow within this area and it is important to ensure that the cultural role of the area is promoted and supported
102. Table 1 on 
page 26 sets o ut how this policy will help to deliver against the principles and 
local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
 3.132 As an integral part of the attraction of Brighton as a tourist destination, 
and in order to provide residents with the highest quality shopping provision, Brighton Regional Centre should continue to be the focus for significant new retail development. The Retail Study Update 2011 identifies that demand exists for new comparison retail floorspace in order for Brighton to secure its 
position as a Regional Centre.  
 
101 The National Planning Policy Framework March 2012 defines main town centres uses to 
include culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert 
halls, hotels and conference facilities).  
102 Creative Industries Workspace Study 2008  
 106                                         3.133 Whilst there are limited opportunities to find new sites within or on the 
edge of the Regional Centre, the opportunity to provide new comparison 
floorspace, possibly incorporating a new department store to attract new retailers to the city, as part of the Brighton Centre and Churchill Square development area should be investigated (see DA1). Further opportunities will be considered as part of the preparation of the City Plan Part 2.  
 3.134 The different but interconnecting shopping areas within the Regional 
Centre are identified and described in the Retail Study Update 2011
103 and 
there is active support for the protection of existing and provision of new small unit retail space, largely catering for local independent traders, located within The Lanes and North Laine. The balance and mix of uses in these areas will be carefully monitored and maintained (see CP4).  
 3.135 Environmental improvements and proposals to improve and refurbish 
existing retail units and shop frontages to help maintain the Regional Centre’s attraction to new retailers and shoppers will be supported. Improved connectivity and integration, including clear and improved pedestrian linkages, improved pedestrian circulation and ‘signposting’ between the different shopping ‘quarters’ within the Regional Centre is a key priority over the plan period.  
 3.136 The City’s prime office market is principally focussed within Central 
Bright on, located on the east and southern side of Brighton Station, within the 
New England Quarter and interspersed within the city centre. Much of the existing office stock is within older purpose built buildings or converted period buildings and offices above shops. Opportunities for significant new office 
floorspace within Central Brighton are limited and therefore DA3, DA4, DA5 and DA6 indicate the opportunities for new office floorspace on the edge or outside Central Brighton. Nevertheless over the timefram e of the City Plan, 
Central Brighton will continue to remain a location where high quality offices will be demanded for a variety of occupiers such as media, creative, financial, business and professional services and information communication industries. A good supply of high quality, modern and sustainable office accommodation is required to meet the needs of the city’s commercial occupiers. Policy SA2 therefore safeguards office accommodation within Central Brighton and encourages improvements in quality  to meet future business needs. 
Examples such as 1 Gloucester Place, Brighton demonstrate the trend of owners to refurbish and upgrade existing office accommodation to Grade A 
status with a BREEAM rating  of Very Good to secure occupation and 
improved rental levels . Given the current economic  climate which mitigates 
against  speculative office development, the willingness of property owners to 
invest in their existing properties to bring them up to modern standards is supported by the council.  
 3.137 In considering proposals for the loss of office floorspace, the Council 
will require clear demonstration that the site is no longer suitable for office 
103 Retail Study Update 2011 . 
 107                                         use. T he type and scale of marketing should be commensurate with the scale 
of the office  floorspace proposed to be lost. Therefore the council will require 
evidence that a marketing exercise has been carried out for at least 18 
months for purpose built, large scale Grade ‘A’ accommodation and at least 
12 months for other sites.   Evidence is required that the marketing price is 
realistic and that the marketing has been appropriate and genuine.   A record 
of all the required marketing will need to be presented with the application proposal.  In all cases the marketing process requires as a minimum:  
- Confirmation by the marketing agent on headed company paper that the premises were appropriately and extensively marketed for the required length of time as set out by the council.  
- Dated photographs of marketing board/s of an appropriate quality, size, 
scale, location and number, during this time, on the premises.  
- An enquiry log, how it was followed up and why it was unsuccessful  
- A copy of all advertisements in the local press and trade journals 
(should be at leas t four weeks’ worth of advertisements spread across 
a six month period).  
- Evidence of marketing via the internet.  
 
3.138 The period of marketing must have ended on a date within the six 
months prior to the date the planning application was submitted. In s ome 
instances, where the proposal includes the loss of significant office 
floorspace, the marketing process may need to be extended. The advice of the council should be sought prior to the commencement of any marketing campaign to ascertain the period and extent of marketing required.   Partial 
loss of office floorspace will only be considered where it is clearly 
demonstrated to enable the refurbishment of the remaining office floorspace; that the non office use is the minimum necessary to bring the employment floorspace up to modern standards required and the proposed use is a main town centre use.   3.139 As well as new retail opportunities, mixed use developments within the 
North Laine area and the Air Street/ North Street Quadrant have included important employment floorspace from new high quality office accommodation 
to new creative industries workspace. The Creative Industries Workspace 
Study 2008 identified the attractiveness of central Brighton to creative 
businesses including evidence of a vibrant cluster in the North Laine and Old Steine area. However creative industries clusters are vulnerable to redevelopment pressure and the importance of their role requires reinforcement and protection. New development should strengthen the mix of uses in central Brighton and retain active ground floor uses. The valuable 
contribution of small premises and workshops in supporting creative arts, IT and media related businesses within the North Laine area will be safeguarded, as they support small scale industry and encourage new enterprises to set up and add vitality to the cultural quarter
104. The council will 
work with providers to ensure the provision of appropriate information and 
104 Creative Industries Workspace Study 2008.  
 108                                         communication technology (ICT) infrastructure; in particular ultra- fast 
broadband infrastructure within this area to support the creative industries and 
digital media sector (CP2 Sustainable Economic Development).  
 
3.140 New development has also contributed towards residential 
accommodation, including affordable housing , in the central Brighton area. 
Residential uses, as part of mixed use developments or above shops, subject to other planning considerations can also contribute to enhancing the vitality of central Brighton and improving safety during the daytime and evening. Brighton & Hove’s  Empty Property Strategy encourages bringing flats above 
shops back into use.  
 3.141 Central Brighton and particularly the West Street area has been 
identified as a violent crime hotspot
105. Through effective coordination of 
relevant strategies and policy areas (e.g. licensing, policing and public safety)  
and working with the police, health agencies and other partners,  the council 
will seek to improve safety by encouraging a more balanced range of complementary evening and night -time economy uses which appeal  to a wide 
range of age and social groups and managing existing late night uses within identified parts of central Brighton. Local work to reduce violent crime is coordinated through the Local Public Service Agreement/Violent Crime Action Plan. In addition, a ‘Cumulative Impact Zone’ and a ‘Special Stress Area have 
been adopted by the Council’s Licensing Committee. These  grant greater 
powers to control the number and operation of licensed premises in the city centre.  
 3.142 Central Brighton is designated within an Air Quality Management Area 
with North Street, Queen’s Road and Western Road exceeding the annual nitrogen dioxide air quality objectives
106. New development proposals within 
the AQMA should take account of their impact on local air quality, be consi stent with the council Air Quality Action Plan and minimise increased 
exposure to existing poor quality. Where appropriate improvements and/  or 
mitigation measures will be sought . The council’s Air Quality Action Plan sets 
out the priorities to improve loc al air quality  and the Local Transport Plan and 
subsequent updates wi ll address junction improvements and traffic 
management in the area. The council is investigating the development of a Low Emission Zone in the central city area. Supporting this, t here will be a 
continuing programme of urban realm improvements
107 which will be 
informed, undertaken and developed as part of a consistent vision based on the findings of the Public Space , Public Life Study (2007).  
 3.143 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified viability for District 
Heating networks in and around this area within a short list of priority areas. Development within the short list of priority areas will be expected to incorporate infrastructure to support low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular heat networks subject to viability.  
105 Community Safety, Crime Reduction and Drugs Strategy 2011- 2014 
106 Air Quality Management Area 2013  
107 Local Transport Plan 3 (LTP3 2011- 2014)   
 109                                         SA3 Valley Gardens 
 
 
Context  
3.144 For the purposes of this policy, the Valley Gardens comprise the open 
spaces and surrounding roads that run in a linear manner from Old Steine in the south to the Level in the north, excluding the Pavilion Gardens. This area is of unique strategic and topographic significance to Brighton & Hove in the way in which a number of major issues co- exist and, in some cases, conflict. 
These include: the area’s role as an arrival/departure point for visitors; its 
function as a major traffic route (the A23 sustainable transport corridor); its cultural and heritage significance; its provision of public open space; its inclusion within the academic corridor; its wide mix of l and uses; and its role 
as a venue for major events. However, the area is currently failing to fulfil its potential.  
 SA3 Valley Gardens  The city council will work with public and private sector partners and the local community to enhance and regenerate the Valley Gardens area in an integrated manner that reinforces its strategic significance, emphasises its historic and cultural character, reduces the adverse impact of vehicular traffic, improves local air quality and creates a continuous green boulevard t hat reconnects the open space to the 
surrounding urban realm.  
 The seven overall aims are:  
 
1. Creating a vibrant and attractive new public park for the city centre.  
 110 2. Reducing the severance impact of traffic on the enjoyment of the 
public realm through environmental and transport improvements;  
3. Creating safe and legible links with adjoining areas;  
4. Enhancing the appearance and setting of historic buildings;  
5. Finding appropriate new uses for key buildings;  
6. Accommodating provision for high quality outdoor events; and 
7. Enhancing the biodiversity of the area.  
 
The distinct role and character of each green space will be clarified having regard to the following priorities:  
 
Old Steine - the hub 
 
• Emphasise its role as a visitor destination space.  
• Enhance the arrival and departure experience for visitors by 
ensuring simple, safe and comprehensible links to and from the 
seafront and the Lanes.  
• Ease the movement of pedestrians and cyclists through recapturing road space and creating direct crossing point s, 
particularly to reconnect St James’s Street with the city centre.  
 
Victoria Gardens - the cultural park  
 
• Pursue a comprehensive landscape / townscape scheme to:  
a) Improve navigable and safe links for pedestrians both between 
the two gardens and with the Cultural Quarter.  
 b) Redesign the gardens to include new pathways, tree planting, benches and public art and investigate the potential for a café building.  
 c) Improve the junctions with Kingswood Street, Morley Street and Richmond Parade through environmental improvements or redevelopment where appropriate.  
 
• Encourage a comprehensive solution to the re -use or  
redevelopment of buildings on Gloucester Place for a mix of uses.  
• Seek the restoration of historic buildings on Grand Parade.  
 
St Peter’s - the h istoric landmark  
 
• Enhance the setting of St Peter’s Church through public realm improvements.  
• Support proposals for refurbishment/enhancement of the facilities 
and appearance of the Phoenix Gallery building, possibly through 
a mixed use redevelopment.  
 111 • Enha nce the retail environment through alterations to, or 
redevelopment of, the supermarket building on the corner of 
Cheapside and through shop front improvements to York Place.  
 
The Level - the vibrant  recreation and leisure space  
 
• Improve the legibility and  safety of key pedestrian and cycle links 
to London Road and the Open Market.  
• Enhance the public realm to the south of The Level.  
 Development within the Valley Gardens area will be encouraged to 
consider low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in par ticular  
heat networks and to either connect where a suitable system is in place (or would be at the time of construction) or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network.  
 Supporting Text  
 3.145 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the strategic potential of the 
Valley Gardens as public open space is fully realised and that future proposals for the regeneration of this historic area are considered within the context of an overall spatial framework.   Two council studies , the Public 
Space Public Life Study and the LR2 Study
108, argue that Valley Gardens 
could become the grand civic route into the city and propose the creation of an attractive and inviting ‘green lung’, with each green space embodying a unique character and offering a different experience.  Table 1 on page 26 sets 
out how this policy will help to deliver against the principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental lim its. 
 3.146 The public open spaces of Valley Gardens have the potential to be 
linked together to create a single continuous public park, which would form a key connecting section of the ‘green network’ in the city. Accessibility to the open space will need to be improved, whilst new planted tree screening and 
water features, for example, can help towards improving local air quality and biodiversity as well as reducing the impact of traffic noise. Enhancing biodiversity should include provi sion for wildlife movement to and from other 
green space in the valley, including  private gardens. New landscaping and 
planting must also reinforce existing local character and. may include productive planting that contributes towards improving urban food productivity where appropriate.  The Level was restored and landscaped in line with the 
master plan for the comprehensive improvement of the park and was re-opened in 2013.  
 3.147 Reducing the severance impact of vehicular traffic will involve 
redressing the balance between road space and other land uses. This may 
108 Public Space , Public Life Study, 2007 and London Road and Lewes Road Regeneration 
Strategy, 2007.  
 112                                         include rerouting traffic and would need to be accompanied by improvements 
to provision for sustainable transport. Valley Gardens has bus lanes serving key city routes and cycles lanes that, with enhancement, would form a direct 
link from the seafront to the north of the city. Any such scheme will be subject to detailed traffic modelling and will need to include improvements to the functionality and appearance of the Aquarium Roundabout, to improve the pedestrian and cycle links between the Old Steine and the seafront.  
 3.148 The City Council will be reviewing and improving its existing transport 
modelling capability (see CP9 Sustainable Transport) which will allow for a rigorous basis for assessing the impact of future transport measures. As a result, details of significant measures that may result in changes to the road network in Valley Gardens will be reserved until such an assessment has been undertaken.  
 3.149 Throughout the area, but particularly on Grand Parade, there are 
historic buildings in visibly poor condition. A co- ordinated and pro- active 
approach will be necessary to address this issue. Allied to this, new uses must be found for key vacant historic buildings , notably at Old Steine and 
Gloucester Place . Arts-based uses will be encouraged in and around Victoria 
Gardens.  
 3.150 Parts of Valley Gardens, notably The Level and around St Peter’s 
Church have a poor reputation in terms of crime and anti -social behaviour and 
these problems must be actively addressed in all proposals for new uses and the layout of buildings and public spaces.  
 3.151 With regard to the Old Steine, its proximity to Pool Valley coach station, 
the seafront and the Lanes, as well as the presence of major hotels, warrant greater attention to the provision of legible routes, appropriate facilities and clear information for visitors.  
 3.152 Where appropriate, new developments will be expected to contribute 
towards these aims (where they relate to the development and meet the tests in the Na tional Planning Policy Framework). Such developments will include 
the nearby Circus Street site, which is clearly visible from Victoria Gardens (see policy DA5).   
 3.153 The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified particular potential for 
District Heat ing networks in and around this area within a long list of priority 
areas. Development within the long -list of priority areas will be encouraged to 
consider low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular  heat 
networks and required to either connect where a suitable system is in place, or would be at the time of construction, or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network . 
     
 113 SA4 – Urban Fringe  
 
 
 
Context  
 3.154 Most of the land surrounding the built up area of the city is managed as 
open space or farmed downland and much falls within the boundaries of the South Downs National Park. For the purposes of the City Plan the term ‘urban fringe’ applies to those areas of land that lie between the defined built up urban area boundary and the boundary of the South Downs National Park.  
 3.155 In many instances the South Downs National Park boundary is 
contiguous with the built up urban edge of the city. The urban fringe is therefore now made up of ‘pockets’ of residual green space rather than any homogenous green ‘belt’ around the city. Much of the city’s urban fringe meets the NPPF definition of existing open space and represents a significant proportion of the city’s open space resource. The urban fringe is also import ant in terms of biodiversity and designations includ e the South Downs 
Way Ahead Nature Improvement Area, Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) and Sites of Nature Conservation Interest
109.  
 3.156 Within the urban fringe, there will be some opportunities for 
developm ent to help citywide needs. The appropriate nature and form of any 
such development will need to reflect the need to retain the setting of the city in its downland landscape.  
  
109 SNCI’s have been reviewed and will be renamed Local Wildlife Sites in Part 2 of the City 
Plan. 
 114                                         SA4 Urban Fringe  
W
here appropriate, the council will promote and support the careful use 
and management of land within the urban fringe to achieve the following 
objectives:  
1
. The protection and enhancement of the wider landscape role of land
within the urban fringe, the setting of the South Downs National Park and the protection of strategic views into and out of the city.  
2
. Securing better management of the urban fringe, environmental
improvements and safe public access to the countryside through sustainable means.  
3
. The promotion of urban fringe land as part of the city’s green network
and, where appropriate,  encouraging opportunities for multi -functional 
uses such as, appropriate recreation and cultural experience, new allotments and local food production and biodiversity conservation and enhancements (see CP 10 Biodiversity) . 
4
. The protection of sensitive groundwater source protection zones from
pollution and encouraging land management practices that reduce rapid surface water runoff and soil erosion.  
5. T
he creation of ‘gateway’ facilities and interpretative facilities i n
connection with the South Downs National Park to support sustainable tourism.  
Development within the urban fringe will not be permitted except where:  
a) a site has been allocated for development in a development plandocument; or b) a countryside location can be justified;
an
d where it can be clearly demonstrated that:  
c) t
he proposal has had regard to the downland landscape setting of the
city; 
d)any adverse impacts of development are minimised and  appropriately
mitigated and/or compensated for; an d 
e) where appropriate, the proposal helps to achieve the policy objectives
set out above.  
S
hould proposals for development come forward prior to the adoption 
of Part 2 of the City Plan, the 2014 Urban Fringe Assessment will be a material planning conside ration in the determination of applications for 
residential development within the urban fringe.  
115 Supporting Text  
 
3.157 The spatial strategy for the City seeks to accommodate future 
development primarily within the existing built up area of the city.  Significant 
amounts of new development are directed to areas which either already 
benefit from close proximity to good sustainable transport links or are areas where accessibility can be improved; are areas which offer significant capacity for new development and are areas where new development can secure substantial benefits for the city. This approach ensures that transport impacts will be minimised and that areas of countryside and the South Downs National Park will continue to be protected.  
 
3.158 There are however some uses for which sites are unlikely to be found 
within the built up area but are necessary to service the needs of the city. Such uses might include new forms of waste or water management, renewable energy generation, local food production and the facilitation of 
gateway and interpretative facilities in connection with the National Park . Sites 
for such uses may need to be identified in Part 2 of the City Plan.  
 3.159 Some land within the city’s urban fringe has been identified as having 
potential to help meet the city’s housing requirements (see Part B, Policy CP1 Housing Delivery). Sites identified through the 2014 Urban Fringe Assessment Study (or parts of sites where relevant) will be considered to have potential for housing in the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment exercise. Further consideration and a more detailed assessment of potential housing sites will be undertaken to inform allocations made in Part 2 of the City Plan with a particular emphasis on delivering housing to meet 
local needs. As part of this process, the City Council will consider how best to ensure that opportunities for community land trusts, community -led 
development, right to build, and housing co- operatives are brought forward/ 
safeguarded in order to maximise housing opportunities that meet local housing needs. This will be taken forward through the City Plan Part 2. Sites coming forward for development ahead of the preparation of Part 2 of the City Plan will need to address criteria c) to e) set out in Policy SA4 above and satisfy detailed information requirements
110 at the planning application stage.  
 
3.160 Where appropriate, proposals for development within the urban fringe 
should help to achieve the five principal objectives as identified in the policy.  
These objectives reflect the key aims and objectives of other council strategies and plans and also reflect Biosphere Reserve principles and objectives which aim to bring people and nature together. For example, the council’s ‘Downland Initiative Strategy’ and the city’s ‘Rights of Way Improvement Plan’ seek to ensure that management of the downland estate achieves social, environmental and economic benefits and ‘reconnects the people of Brighton & Hove to a more biodiverse downland with better education and improved access and a better sense of connection to the 
110 This may include, for example, landscape assessment, ecology and archaeology surveys, 
traffic assessments and possibly Environmental Impact Assessment.  
 116                                         land’111.  The council works with other landowners and DEFRA to seek 
sustainable management of the Downland not in its ownership and control.  
 
3.161 Other types of development  may also justify an urb an fringe/countryside 
location. These might include, for example, householder extensions 
appropriate in scale and design to the parent building or farm diversification schemes which are necessary for the efficient operation of the farm and do not prejudice  the agricultural use
112. Proposals for farm diversification within 
the urban fringe should accord with the council’s adopted Planning Advice Note 01 Farm Diversification (October 2005) or subsequent revisions. The NPPF (March 2012) advises that local planning authorities should avoid new isolated homes in the countryside unless there are special circumstances
113. 
 
3.162 The protection of water supply and water quality are also key 
responsibilities in the urban fringe because the chalk under the downland around the city is the aquifer or groundwater storage that supplies the city. 
The EU Water Framework Directive introduces a new concept of ‘good status’ that is far more rigorous than current water environment quality measures and it includes the protection of g roundwater. This valuable resource needs to be 
protected from pollution and from land uses with a high risk of pollution. Towards this end, the city council has adopted a sustainable farming strategy for the management of its farmland to prevent soil erosi on, flooding and 
pollution of the city’s water supply. The River Basin Management Plan
114 
(South East River Basin Districts – including Adur and Ouse Catchment and 
prepared by the Environment Agency) looks to influence land management to reduce, or ensure no increase in, run- off rates and to encourage activities that 
may have the potential to reduce run- off rates from the South Downs and 
contribute to wider benefits (such as biodiversity, soil conservation and water quality improvements).  
 3.163 Table 1, sect ion 2 of the Plan sets out how this policy will help to deliver 
against the local targets under the One Planet  principles , which is a strategic 
approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
  
 
  
 
  
111 Downland Initiative Policy was first developed in 2005.  
112 Minor development proposals will not necessarily be expected to contribute towards the 
achievement of the five primary objectives set out in SA4.  
113 Paragraph 55, NPPF, March 2012.  
114 River Basin Management Plan – South East River Basin Dist ricts, Environment Agency, 
December 2009.   
 117                                         SA5 – The Setting of the South Downs  National Park  
 
 
 
Context  
3.164 The South Downs National Park, covering the chalk landscapes of the 
South Downs stretching from Hampshire in the west to Beachy Head in East Sussex, came into being in 2010
115. The National Park is administered by the 
South Downs National Park Authority (SDNPA), which has full planning 
responsibilities and a statutory duty to prepare development plans for the National Park.  When making decisions in relation to the National Park area consideration must be given to the purposes of the National Park, which are to conserve and enhance the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the park and; provide opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment of its special qualities by the public. The National Park Authority also, when carrying out these purposes, has the duty to: seek to foster the economic and social well being of local communities within the National Park.  
 3.165 For the administrative area of Brighton & Hove the South Downs 
National Park boundary includes most  of the land that was previously 
designated as part of the Sussex Downs AONB  and also a major tract of land 
west of Woodingdean and Ovingdean, south of the race course and the cliffs and coast south of Beacon Hill.  Much of the National Park boundary abuts  
the city’s convoluted built up area boundary . Within the City Plan area the 
115 The Secretary of State for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs confirmed the creation 
of the South Downs National Park on the 12 November 2009. The South Downs National 
Park came into being on 31 March 2010.  The South Downs National Park Authority was 
created on the 1 April 2010 and became fully operational on the 1 April 2011.  
 118                                         National Park designation is a material consideration in the making of any 
planning decision that may significantly affect the Park.  
S
A5 The Setting of the South Downs  National P ark 
The
 council will work in partnership with the South Downs National Park 
Authority and adjoining authorities and landowners to protect and enhance the natural beauty of the South Downs National Park. Proposals within the setting of the National Park must have regard to the impact on the National Park, in particular the purposes of the National Park and the ability of the South Downs National Park Authority to deliver its duty. Development within the setting of the National Park:  
a.S
hould be consistent with and not prejudice  National Park purposes
and where appropriate, the duty of the National Park Authority .  
b.Must respect and not significantly harm the National Park  and its
setting , in accordance with Section 62 of the Environment Act 1995.  Any 
adverse impacts must be minimised and appropriate mitigation or 
compensatory measures included. Such measures, including proposed enhancements, should have regard to landscape character and impacts; and c. Should have due regard to the City Council’s priorities for the SouthDowns where appropriate.  
S
upporting Text  
3.1
66 The South Downs National Park Authority is the planning authority for 
land within the National Park boundary and therefore responsible for producing a local development plan for the park area and the determination of planning applications within the National Park.  However Brighton & Hove City Council owns land within the National Park and is the local planning authority for the land outside and adjacent to the National Park within the city ’s 
administrative boundary, which includes land within the setting of the National Park (See Key Diagram and Policies Map)
116.  Proposals within the National 
Park are governed by the two statutory purposes of the National Park.  Proposals within the setting of the National Park must not undermine these purposes and will be expected to minimise any adverse impacts on the National Park which are being created by the proposal.  
3.1
67 The purpose of this policy is to provide clear planning guidance for 
proposals  within the setting of the National Park and also to set out the 
council’s aspirations for the South Downs  to inform planning proposals or  
future partnership working with the National Park Authority  as appropriate. 
The majority of the countryside within the city’s administrative boundary is 
owned and leased to tenants by the city council.  The council is currently working towards a more sustainable approach to the land management of the 
116 To facilitate partnership working the city council and the South Downs National Park 
Authority have signed a memorandum of understanding which sets out mutual expectations.
119 South Downs, by improving conservation, public access and recreation (as 
appropriate to the location) whilst maintaining financially viable farm businesses
117. In order to conserve and enhance downland habitats and 
species, specific biodiversity management plans will be drawn up for various downland sites within the council’s ownership. Further, in relation to the management of the chalk grassland, conservation mowing practices will be implemented to enhance and protect biodiversity . Table 1 on page 26 sets out 
how this policy will help to deliver against the principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits . 
 3.168 An important role of the National Park Authority is to promote 
understanding of the South Downs and to promote access to  the National 
Park by sustainable means. A number of these measures are likely to be implemented within the administrative area of Brighton and Hove and this emphasises the need for good partnership working. Stanmer Park is a Grade II registered park of special historic interest: a 485 hectare rural estate with landscaped park, buildings and gardens, a village, farmland, woodland and amenity grassland used as public open space and all falling within the National Park with much in the ownership of the city council. It is covered by a variety of nature conservation and conservation designations and is a major recreational resource for residents of and visitors to the city. Stanmer Park itself will be covered by the South Downs National Park Local Plan, however , 
there may be planning implications for the City Council because it seeks to promote access to the South Downs by developing Stanmer Park as a gateway, promoting open access and improving public transport. Similarly the 
need to manage parking at gateway locations in order to reduce the risk of degradation of these areas and to link them to a sustainable transport system  
could have planning implications for the City Council . 
 3.169 The chalk under the downland around the city is the aquifer or 
groundwater storage that supplies the city. It is therefore important that it is protected from any development or land use that could cause harm by polluting or affecting the water supply held in the chalk. There are also a number of sites of archaeological and biodiv ersity interest designated within 
the South Downs National Park area that are subject to national and regional protection.  
 3.170 The council, which is not the planning authority for the National Park but 
is a key landowner, recognises the following priorities for the South Downs within the city’s administrative area and will take them into account in future partnership working with the National Park Authority:  
 1. To promote Biosphere Reserve principles and objectives, bringing people and nature together;  
117 Downland Initiative, 2005 - A programme of action compiled by the city council to deliver a 
sustainable downland landscape by integrating farming, recreation, biodiversity conservation 
and landscape objectives.  
 120                                         2. To promote sustainable land use management systems on the Downs with
greater emphasis on local healthy food production, diversification and farming practices that are sympathetic to wider downland objectives;  
3.
To conserve and enhance downland habitat s and species to meet
Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) targets and recognise the role of the Downs in the city’s Green Network/Nature Improvement Area/open space framework (see CP10 Biodiversity and CP16 Open Space);  
4. T
o protect scheduled monuments118
 and other downland features;
5.
To protect sensitive aquifer protection zones and address catchment flood
management issues;  
6.
To increase the amount of accessible land adjacent to the urban area and
enhance access from the urban area to the Downs by sustainable transport including by walking, cycling and public transport modes (see CP9 Sustainable  Transport and CP18 Healthy City); and  
7.
To promote a stronger visitor experience between the city and the South
Downs,  facilitate sustainable eco tourism in the South Downs and provide 
gateway facilities  to the South Downs National Park. In particular, to 
recognise the role of Stanmer  Park within the National Park and the need to 
manage parking and traffic in order to reduce the risk of degradation of 
gateway areas and facilitate improved sustainable transport links (See SA4 
Urban Fringe, CP5 Culture and Tourism and CP9 Sustainable Transport).
118 A statutorily protected building, structure or feature of national importance because of its  
archaeological and historic interest.  
1 21 SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods  
 
 
 
Context  
3.171 The policy provides a strategic policy framework for Neighbourhood 
Planning alongside the other policies in the City Plan.  It relates to all residential areas and neighbourhoods in Brighton & Hove.  The aim of the city 
council is to facilitate  sustainable neighbourhoods  by working in partnership 
with the voluntary, public and private sectors  bringing together  and delivering  
the priorities agreed in city’s Sustainable Community Strategy
119 and other 
citywide strategies.   3.172 A sustainable neighbourhood is a place where there are good quality 
public services; mixed and integrated communities with a number of housing 
choices (including, size, type and for different incomes); places where people regardless of their identity or interests, feel they can influence decision-making and have pride in their community; where there is good access to jobs, shops and other local services and where there is a healthy and safe environment. As with other special area policies this will require effective partnership and collaborative working between the public, private and community and voluntary sectors and coordination of policy and strategies in the city.  
119 Sustainable Community Strategy 2010, Creating a City of Opportunities sets out a long 
term plan to improve the economic, s ocial and environmental well -being of the city. A number 
of the eight priority themes address the need to reduce inequality.  
 122                                         3.173 One of the biggest challenges for Brighton & Hove in creating a 
sustainable city is to reduce inequalities in health, employment, educational 
attainment, income, community safety and meas ures of child and family 
poverty120. Research (Reducing Inequality Review 2008121) shows that though 
the majority of low income residents are spread throughout the city, the most disadvantaged areas in the city remain significantly more deprived than the city as a whole. Twelve per cent of the city’s areas (19 out of 164) are in the 
10 per cent most deprived in England.  
 3.174 Neighbourhood Plans are a means by which local neighbourhood 
forums and parish councils can prepare plans to identify land use, design and development priorities for their area.  This is an opportunity for greater involvement of local communities and businesses to have a greater say in the future of their areas.     SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods  
 Create and maintain sustainable neighbourhoods and reduce inequalities between neighbourhoods by working with public, private and community and voluntary sector partners, businesses and local communities.  
 A. Identified city -wide priorities for sustainable neighbourhoods are to:  
 1.  Focus new dev elopment in neighbourhoods into local shopping 
centres and parades where proposals contribute to the range and viability of local facilities by maintaining and creating a focal point for community activities opening these up to disabled people through access improvements and encourage investment to improve sustainable 
transport.  
 2. Ensure a good balance and mix of uses in existing defined local shopping centres is maintained and carefully monitored and encourage redevelopment of local centres where proposals contribute to local facilities (see CP4 Retail Provision).  3. Support residents, stakeholders, equality groups  and local 
businesses in defining Neighbourhoods Forums and support and advise them in preparing Neighbourhood Plans, Neighbourhood Development Orders and Community Rights to Build.  
 4. Improve the quality of public services through joint working between public, private and community and voluntary sector partners and; carry 
out effective engagement, development and activities with residents and 
120 Brighton & Hove Child Poverty Commissioning Strategy 2012- 2015 (2012)  
121 Reducing Inequality Review 2008 was commissioned by the Local Strategic Partnership to 
assess the effectiveness of the city’s Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy, options for the future 
to reduce inequality and to provide measures for success that could be used as targets in the future.  
 123                                         neighbourhood groups 122 and equality groups . In particular, establish 
neighbourhood governance arrangements, measures and procedures 
that give communities the skills, confidence and power to shape and influence public services.  
5.
Work closely with public transport operators and improv e cycle and
walking links (see CP9 Sustainable Transport)  with the aim of i mprov ing 
sustainable transport access to and from areas in outer locations, especially where car ownership levels are low.  
6
. Promote and support environmental sustainability improvements to
new and existing buildings (CP8 Sustainable Buildings).  
7. I
n areas with a shortfall of community facilities ensure new or
enlarged community facilities (e.g. surgeries, education and schools, youth facilities, com munity buildings) are provided by working with 
partners to identify appropriate sites; ensure new development contributes to community priorities through developer contributions (see CP7 Infrastructure and Developer Contributions); and encourage shared use of existing and new community facilities.  
8. Deliver balanced communities through the requirement for newresidential development to provide an appropriate amount of affordable housing, mix of dwelling sizes and tenure types  and through the City 
Plan Par t 2 ensure new housing meets optional technical standards for 
access and the nationally described space standards. In areas where there is a concentration of social rented housing , a better choice of 
housing tenures will be sought (see CP1 Housing Delivery , CP19 
Housing Mix  and CP20 Affordable Housing).  
9
. The city council will support and promote sports, local food growing,
tree planting, physical activities, arts and cultural initiatives and projects that improve the environment and help to develop community cohesion.  
1
0. Encourage existing education and community organisations to
provide local communities with a greater range of services and facilities for learning and training.  
B
. Priorities to reduce inequalities between neighbourhoods are:  
1. S
ecur e good quality employment and training opportunities for
residents in areas with high levels of long term unemployment, for example, through planning obligations on major development schemes (see CP7).  
2
. In areas identified with significant environmental , community safety
and access concerns support improvements to the public realm, 
122 Copy of the Community Engagement Framework www.brightonhove.
gov.uk/index.cfm?request=c1189414    
1 24 biodiversity and open space (see CP13 Public Streets and Places and 
CP7 Infrastructure and Developer Contributions).  
3
. Support partners, programmes and strategies that aim t o reduce
health and learning inequalities between neighbourhoods and promote healthier lifestyles and wellbeing.  
S
upporting Text  
3.
175 The purpose of the policy is to facilitate sustainable communities and to 
reduce inequalities within and between neigh bourhoods  working with partners 
from the private, public and voluntary sectors. The overall main aims are to:  
•create balanced communities that meet the needs of all residents andreduce the inequalities between different areas;  
•engage with and listen to local communities;
•increase the availability of jobs and training;
•encourage healthier lifestyles and lifetime communities;
•improve accessibility and make roads in residential areas safer;
•encourage environmental sustainability;
•build active and inclusive c ommunities based on mutual respect ; and
•improve access to public art
•ensure new residential development provides for an appropriate mix of
dwelling types and tenures and meets  the new national technical
standards and through the City Plan Part 2 seek to apply the nationally
described space standards and optional technical standards in respectto accessibility, adaptability and wheelchair standards.
T
able 1  on page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against local 
targets under the One Planet principles.  
3.
176 The policy requires joint working between partners, including other 
public agencies for example NHS commissioning organisations and health care providers, the police, education providers (schools, colleges and universities), community and community and voluntary sector organisations, transport providers, businesses, and residents. Brighton & Hove Connected
123 
is the Local Strategic Partnership  for the city. Brighton & Hove Connected  and 
its ‘family of partnerships’124 will help to enable effective partnership working.  
3.
177 The policy provides a strategic policy framework for Neighbourhood 
Plans that are a tier of development plans introduced by the Localism Act 
123 Brighton & Hove Connected brings together representatives from the local statutory, 
voluntary, community and private sectors to address local problems, allocate funding, and 
discuss st rategies and initiatives. The first Local Strategic Partnerships were set up in 2000.  
They are responsible for agreeing an overarching Sustainable Community Strategy for the area. They aim to encourage joint working, and community involvement with the general aim of ensuring resources are better allocated at a local level.  
124 The Family of Partnerships underpin the Local Strategic Partnership. It is made up of 12  
partnerships including the Arts Commission, Economic Partnership, Crime and Disorder Reduction Partnership, Strategic Housing Partnership, Healthy City Partnership, Transport 
Partnership and the City Sustainability Partnership.  
1 25 2011.  Neighbourhood Plans can be prepared by Parish Councils or 
Neighbourhood Forums that are representative of the neighbourhood and have been agreed as being the plan- making forum by the Local Planning 
Authority (in accordance with the Neighbourhood Planning Regulations 2012).   
To be a forum a group must have at least 21 members that are representative of the residents, employees and businesses in the area.   Neighbourhood 
Plans will determine local priorities (e.g. outdoor sports facilities, defining local green spaces
125, biodiversity, community safety improvements, safer streets 
meas ures); improve access including disabled access to local and community 
facilities and; and decide where new development in a neighbourhood should 
go.  The city council has a commitment to support Neighbourhood Planning and information on becoming a neighbourhood forum and preparing plans is outlined on the Council’s website under Neighbourhood Planning.  
 3.178 Good quality development in local centres and hubs will be allowed 
where it helps to strengthen the provision and viability of local services includi ng shops and community facilities and where it represents a better use 
of land in the city  (see CP14 Housing Densities). S ignificant development can 
help improve public transport services to a neighbourhood, e.g. increased frequency of buses.  The Brighton & Hove Energy Study has identified 
particular potential for District Heating networks in and around the city . 
Development within the long -list of priority areas will be encouraged to 
consider low and zero carbon decentralised energy and in particular heat networks and required to either connect where a suitable system is in place, or would be at the time of construction, or design systems so that they are compatible with future connection to a network . 
 3.179 Local shopping centres and parades provide important local services to 
neighbourhoods and can often be a focal point for community activities. A sustainable community should have a reasonable range of shops, services, public houses and cafes within easy walking distance that serve day to day needs for l ocal residents. It contributes towards creating community cohesion 
and is particularly important for those without access to transport and gives alternatives to travel by car. Additionally easy access to fresh food can encourage healthier lifestyles. Parts  A1 and A2 of the strategy seek to secure 
investment in local parades/centres and ensure a healthy mix of uses is maintained. These centres should allow local communities and neighbourhoods to access fresh, locally produced food and key services.   
 3.180 A critical part of a sustainable community is robust and meaningful 
community engagement at all levels of participation and a thriving voluntary sector. This is a priority for all residential neighbourhoods in the city. A key action recommended in the Reducing Inequality Review, to achieve better outcomes for disadvantaged areas, is to improve engagement between services and local communities and empowering local communities.  Neighbourhood governance arrangements will be set up to encourage all residents to engage in decisions on local services.  
 
125 Local Green Space as defined by the National Planning Policy Framework paragraph 77.  
 126                                         3.181 Providing effective sustainable transport access the city’s 
neighbourhoods is important in enabling non- car owners to travel and in 
reducing the need to travel by car.  This will contribute to the city’s heal th 
priorities and Low Emissions Strategy to improve air quality in the city.  
3.
182 There remain several residential and suburban areas of the city in need 
of improved sustainable transport links. Work will be undertaken with partners 
to improve public transport links. These links will encourage active travel, cycling and walking;  and includ e improved public realm around key areas 
including local shopping areas and an integrated cycle network across the city (see CP9 Sustainable Transport).  Making it easier for people to cycle and walk can also encourage healthier lifestyles.  
3.
183 The strategy is directed at providing good quality community facilities 
where there is a shortfall within walking distance of neighbourhoods. These facilities include primary health care and community health facilities, education, training, youth facilities, children’s and health centres and community buildings. In terms of schools, the Brighton & Hove School Organisation Plan (2012- 2016) sets out a strategy to ensure the provisi on 
sufficient of primary and secondary school places across the city in response to growing school rolls and families moving into the city.  Primary schools are generally located within and serve local neighbourhoods.  Where there is an identified shortfal l of school places the city council will work with partners, 
including not for profit organisations, to identify sites and build new schools and expand successful schools (where possible, with consent of the school) Where a need has been identified, work will be undertaken with partners to help identify and allocate sites through Part 2 of the City Plan.  W here 
appropriate, developer contributions sought to meet a resulting shortfall in infrastructure (see CP7 Infrastructure and Planning Obligations).  
3.
184 Securing balanced communities includes providing for a better choice 
of housing type, size and tenure and affordability ranging from single households to larger families and including the needs of diverse groups such as older people, disabled people, the black and ethnic minority , LGBT
126 
community  and travellers (see policy CP22). In some disadvantaged areas of 
the city there is a concentration of social rented housing. Introducing a better balance of housing choice to these communities will be encouraged , for 
example, by allowing a higher proportion of intermediate housing as part of the affordable housing element of new developments (see policy CP20 Affordable Housing).  
3.
185 It has been demonstrated that local arts and culture projects and sports 
and food growing can contribute to building community cohesion as well as improving the environment. Work will be undertaken to encourage local arts, culture and sports groups to undertake projects with local communities.  Initiatives are underway and will continue to promote food growing (Food Growing Planning Advice Note and the Food Strategy 2012) and encourage 
126 Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Trans . 
1 27 communal composting  across the city ( successful communal composting has 
been introduced in Brunswick and St Peters and North Laine wards).  
 
3.186 Part A10 recognises the role that extending the use of existing sports 
and community facilities within schools, colleges and universities can have in facilitating and enabling community cohesion and healthy lifestyles (see also CP16). The shared use of school f acilities is already formally stated within the 
governments extended schools programme. The Strategy seeks to widen this to include colleges and the universities to allow shared use of their facilities too.  This work is being developed through the Sports Facilities Plan 2012.  Opportunities to share existing community buildings and facilities, like churches, will be maximised.  
 3.187 Shortfalls in the quantity and quality of open space, recreation and 
sports facilities have been identified in the Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study
127 and the findings will be taken forward into Open Space Strategies for 
the city. This will be tied in with identifying community safety priorities for improving open spaces, providing children’s play space and encouraging residents to use their parks. This will have associated health benefits for 
residents. Future strategies will be informed by Sport England’s Active Design Guide
128 which sets out how environmental design can encourage sport and 
physical activity and National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2008) Public Health guidance 8: Physical Activity and the Environment
129. 
 3.188 The city and its partners are working towards designation as a 
UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, a world class centre of excellence where the benefits of nature conservation to people are clearly demonstrated. The policy helps to deliver Biosphere objectives by encouraging the integration of beneficial biodiversity as an integral part of sustainable neighbourhoods.  
 3.189 Disadvantaged areas ar e characterised by high levels of long term 
unemployment, high levels of child and family poverty and high levels of people on Employment and Support Allowance. The strategy aims to address this through providing job and training opportunities for working age residents within sustainable travelling distance of the areas. The strategy proposes the requirement for developer contributions, linked to major development schemes in the city to include employment training places for residents. Small employment unit s in residential areas will continue to be protected. Initiatives 
127 Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study 200 8 establishes a baseline of existing provision 
and proposes standards for quality, quantity and accessibility. It identifies priorities for future 
open space, recreation and sport provision.  
128 Active Design (2007) was commissioned by Sport England and provides guidance to 
assist with environmental design which encourages sport and physical activity taking principles of character, continuity, quality and legibility. The Guide uses 3 objectives to frame advice on positive design: improving accessibility, enhancing amenity and increasing 
awareness.  
129 To see NICE guidance go to http://publications.nice.org.uk/physical -activity -and-the-
environment -ph8 
 
 128                                         that help reduce economic inequalities include access to affordable financial 
services and affordable childcare.  
 3.190 Community safety is a priority for all residents of Brighton & Hove. 
Often, in more disadvantaged neighbourhoods the fear of crime and levels of 
crime are higher than in other more affluent parts of the city. The Crime and Disorder Reduction Partnership identifies environment improvement zones (parts of the city identified as hotspots for crime) which are priority areas for community safety initiatives.  Matters relating to community safety are addressed in the Community Safety Strategy 2011.  
 3.191 Part B3 of the policy encourages effective working between Health, 
Housing and Adult and Social Care and other support providers to identify areas of disadvantage where renewal or redevelopment and a package of support measures (e.g. education, training opportunities) could transform the long term prospects for vulnerable people, f amilies and young people, their 
health prospects and the overall health of the neighbourhood. A vital way of improving how services are delivered in these areas is by working closely with residents, community development workers and community groups.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 129  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Section  Four 
City Wide Policies  
   
A Strong and Prosperous Economy  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 130 CP1 Housing Delivery 
A
: Scale of housing provision 
The
 council will make provision for at least 13,200 new homes to be built 
over the plan period 2010 – 2030 (this equates to an annual average rate 
of provision of 660 dwellings).  
T
his will be achieved by: 
a)Foc
ussing new development in accessible areas of the city and those
with the most capacity to accommodate new homes;
b) Promoting the efficient use and development of land/sites across the
city including higher densities in appropriate locations (see CP12
and CP14)
c)Making strategic site allocations in this Plan for at least 3,635
additional new homes;
d)Preparing Part 2 of the City Plan (Development Policies and Site
Allocations) to allocate additional sites to help ensure housing
delivery is maintained over the plan period;  and
e)Ensuring that all new housing development contributes to thecreation and/or maintenance of mixed and sustainable communities(see SA6) .
B
: Distribution of new housing. 
N
ew housing will be delivered broadly in line with the following 
distribution:  
Area / Source of Supply No. of new homes 
Development Area  
DA1 – Brighton Centre and 
Churchill Square Area   20 
DA2 – Brighton Marina, Gas 
Works and Black Rock Area  1940  
DA3 – Lewes Road Area 875 
DA4 – New England Quarter and 
London Road Area  1130  
DA5 – Eastern Road and Edward 
Street Area  515 
DA6 – Hove Station Area 525 
DA7 –Toad’s Hole Valley 700 
DA8 – Shoreham Harbour 300 
Development Area Total 6005  
Development Across Rest of 
City: 
1 31 a) Within the built up area  
b) Within the urban fringe130  4130  
1060  
  
Small identified sites  765 
Small Windfall Development  1250131 
  
Total  13,210  
 
C: Managing the rate of housing delivery  
 The release of land/sites for new housing will be managed so that it delivers the broad amount and distribution of housing as set out above. 
The adequacy of housing delivery (in terms of a five year supply of housing and in meeting planned housing delivery targets over the full plan period) will be assessed regularly in accordance with the Housing 
Implementation Strategy
132 and through annual reviews of the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment . Progress will be reported 
through the council’s A uthority  Monitoring Report.  
 Supporting text  
 4.1 A key objective of the City Plan is to provide people with a choice of 
decent quality housing to meet their needs for a stable home at a cost they can afford. There is a need to plan for the future scale of new residential 
development required (the overall amount of new housing), for the location of new housing and for a variety or mix of new housing (in terms of housing type, size and tenure see CP19 and CP20) to ensure that new development  meets 
a range of local housing requirements and contributes to the creation of mixed and sustainable communities.  This policy will also help to deliver against the 
local targets under the One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits (see Table 1 on page 26). 
 Scale and location of new housing development  
 4.2 To meet in full the city’s ‘objectively assessed housing need’ (housing 
demand and need) over the plan period to 2030 could mean needing to build 1,506 dwellings per annum or 30,120 dwellings to 2030
133.  
 4.3 There are however very significant constraints on the capacity of the city 
to physically accommodate this amount of development and this is particularly so in terms of environmental considerations such as the sea to the south and the South Downs (now a designated National Park) to the west, north and east of the city. With a limited legacy of derelict or vacant sites, these natural boundaries define and limit the outward expansion of t he city.  
130 As defined in policy SA4 of the City Plan Part 1  
131 An allowance for small windfall development has been made across the plan period. See 
2014 SH LAA.  
132 A Housing Implementation Strategy is set out as a separate annex to the Plan.  
133Objectively Assessed Need for Housing; Brighton & Hove, June 2015, GL Hearn Limited.  
 132                                         4.4 The City Plan housing target for a minimum of 13,200 new homes reflects 
the capacity and availability of land/sites in the city, the need to provide for a 
mix of homes to support the growth and maintenance of sustainable communities, the need  to make provision in the city for other essential 
development (for employment, retail, health and education facilities , other 
community and leisure facilities) and the need to respect the historic, built and natural environment of the city.  
4.
5 The fact  that the city’s housing delivery target does not match the 
objectively assessed full housing requirement means that there is a ‘duty to 
cooperate’ with the city’s neighbouring local authorities. Brighton & Hove’s strategic housing market and travel to work area extends westwards 
incorporating Adur District and parts of Worthing District; eastwards incorporating parts of Lewes and northwards to Mid Sussex, Horsham  and 
Crawley. Many of these areas also face similar challenges in meeting housing 
requirements.  Within Brighton & Hove, the council acknowledges that there is 
a significant housing shortfall
134 against the objectively assessed housing 
requirement of 30,120 dwellings to 2030.  In accordance with government 
guidance, the council will therefore continue t o engage constructively, actively 
and on an ongoing basis with neighbouring authorities and public bodies with regard to strategic planning matters including the provision for housing over sub-regional areas. This will include seeking commitment from neighbouring 
authorities to participate in further sub- regional work such as building upon 
the Local Strategic Statement for the Coastal West Sussex and Greater Brighton Area and the sub- regional work of the Greater Brighton Economic 
Board. This will allow long -term opportunities to be explored for meeting 
unmet housing needs and the identification of delivery mechanisms including local plan reviews.  
4.
6 The spatial strategy for the city is set out earlier in this Plan (see Spatial 
Strategy , Section  2). In bro ad terms, the strategy seeks to direct a significant 
amount of new development to eight identified Development Areas (see Policies DA1 -8) which either already benefit from close proximity to good 
sustainable transport links or are areas where accessibility  can be improved; 
are areas which offer significant capacity for new development and are areas where new development and/or regeneration and renewal will secure substantial benefits for the city. The strategy for accommodating growth in the 
city continues to maximise development opportunities from brownfield sites within the built up area but it also acknowledges that some housing development will come forward from some of the city’s urban fringe sites. This is reflected in part B of Policy CP1.  
4.
7 The e ight Development Areas account for 45% of the planned amount of 
new housing for the city. Within the Development Areas, the City Plan makes strategic allocations to secure the delivery of 3235 new dwellings (see spatial 
policies DA2 – DA8). In other parts of the city, there are also a significant 
range of opportunities for new residential development (through, for example conversions, redevelopment and changes of use) and such development will 
134 Equivalent to 16,920 units over the plan period to 2030.  
1 33 help to promote and secure the establishment of sustainable comm unities. 
Residential development will be required to respect the local character and 
distinctiveness of neighbourhoods (see also SA6, CP12 and CP14).  
  
Housing trajectory  
 
4.8 Over the last 15 years135 the average rate of new housing development in 
Brighton & Hove has been around 540 dwellings per annum. More recently , 
annual rates of housing delivery have been far lower than this reflecting the impacts of global economic recession
136.  
 4.9 The expected rate of housing delivery over the Plan period is illustr ated 
through a ‘housing trajectory’. This illustrates the amount of housing development that has already been built in the city since 2010 and that which 
is anticipated to come forward over the rest of the plan period.  The housing trajectory is also illustrated in the council’s Housing Implementation Strategy 
and will be monitored and updated on an annual basis through the council’s Authority  Monitoring Report and through roll forward and further reviews of the 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) for the city.  
 4.10 The city’s housing target implies an annual average rate of 660  dwellings 
per annum over the plan period as a whole. Based on the 201 4 SHLAA 
update, the housing  trajectory
137 demonstrates that housing delivery in the 
city has b een well below this in the first four years of the plan period (2010-
2014), reflecting the impacts of economic recession. The trajectory anticipates that housing delivery  will increase in the (post adoption) five year supply 
period 2014- 2019 and looks likely to achieve the planned average delivery 
rate of 660 units per annum. I n the following six to ten year supply period 
(2019- 2024), housing delivery rates are anticipated to increase significantly 
with delivery coming through from a number of the city’s larger strategic development sites. For the post 2024 period, the trajectory indicates that housing delivery is again likely to exceed the planned average delivery rate. The council’s Housing Implementation Strategy (HIS) identifies a range of 
positive planning actions  and measures  to ensure that housing delivery is 
achieved across the plan period in accordance with guidance in the NPPF for 
maintaining a five year supply of deliverable housing. The HIS also identifies that further site allocations will be made through the preparation of Part 2 of the City Plan.  
       
135 1999/00 - 2013/14 Residential Completions Data .  
136 Initiated by the credit crunch financial crisis of 2007/8. Housing completions 2010/11 at 
283 units were the lowest recorded for 20 years.  
137 As informed by the 2014 Revised Trajectory.  
 134                                         Figure 2: Housing Trajectory 2010 – 2030 (Based on 2014 SHLAA  
Update )  
 
 
 
 
   Components of housing land supply  
 4.11 Table 3 indicates the components of housing land supply for the period 
2010 - 2030. It draws upon the council’s latest Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (SHLAA) exercise
138.  
 4.12 The table below illustrates that approximately  3,740 dwellings have 
either already been built since 2010 or are currently ‘committed’ for development in terms of  either  sites having an extant planning permission or 
an allocat ion in the 2005 Brighton & Hove Local Plan. This plan makes 
strategic site allocations to achieve a further 3635 dwellings . Further capacity 
is identified for an additional 4585 dwellings and appropriate site allocations 
will need to be made in Part 2 of the City Plan. These ‘identified’ sources comprise 90% of the overall housing target to 2030.  
      
138 SHLAA 201 4 Update.  
 135                                         Table 3: Housing Delivery, Supply Breakdown 2010 – 2030 (Based on 
2014 SHLAA)   
Spatial  
Area Already 
Built or 
Committed  Strategic  
Allocations  Broad  
Location
s/ 
Source  Further 
Capacity  
Identified  
in SHLAA Allowance  
For 
windfall  Total 
DAs 
DA1 13 0 7 20 
DA2 855 1085  0 1940  
DA3 126 300 449 875 
DA4 380 615 135 1130  
DA5 10 335 170 515 
DA6  90 200 235 525 
DA7 0 700 0 700 
DA8 52 248 300 
DA 
Total  1525  3235  250 1000  6005  
Rest of City 
a)Built
up 
area 
b) Ur ban
fringe 1450
 400
 390
 1890
 
1060
 4130
 
1060
 
Small id. 
Sites 765 765 
Small  
Windfall  1250  1250  
Total 3740  3635  640 3945  1250  13,210 
M
aximising development of previously developed land 
4.
13 Brighton & Hove is a tightly constrained city. In many instances, the 
boundaries of the South Downs National Park are contiguous with the built up 
area of the city. As a consequence, the majority ( 87%) of new residential 
development will take place on previously developed land or ‘brownfield’ sites. The Plan does however make a strategic allocation for the development of land at Toad’ s Hole Valley to the north of the city which is a large greenfield 
site falling outside the boundaries of the National Park  (see DA7) . 
Development at this location will contribute a significant amount of new housing development for the city and, as part of a mixed use comprehensive development, will secure many other benefits for the city (see DA7). Part B of 
Policy CP1 also indicates that some sites within the city’s wider urban fringe will contribute to housing land supply. Sites will be taken forward for further consideration and detailed assessment as site allocations through Part 2 of the City Plan. The 2014 Urban Fringe Assessment Study will be a material consideration in the determination of any  applications for residential 
development on urban fringe sites that come forward prior to the adoption of Part 2 of the City Plan (see Policy SA4 Urban Fringe).  
136 Small site development  
 
4.14 A significant proportion of residential development across the ci ty takes 
place on smaller development sites (5 or less units)139. The nature of this type 
of development ( typically comprising small scale residential intensification, 
conversion activity and small scale changes of use) means that it is very difficult to ide ntify the emergence of such sites. For this reason, the Brighton & 
Hove SHLAA does not attempt to specifically identify and assess such sites. Where small sites have the benefit of a planning permission at the SHLAA study base date, they are counted.  
 4.15 National planning  policy requires sufficient specific sites and/or broad 
locations to be identified to meet planned housing targets for at least the first ten years of the plan
140. In reality, small ‘windfall’ site development (as 
described above) will com e forward throughout the plan period and will 
contribute towards meeting the planned housing requirements for the city and ongoing five year supply requirements. The potential supply from small windfall site development is reflected in the planned housing target for the city (see Part B of Policy CP1).  
 Management of housing land supply  
  4.16 The housing trajectory is based upon reasonable and realistic 
assumptions about the deliverability of housing over the plan period. The trajectory illustrates that the rate of housing delivery in the city is expected to increase over the first ten years of the plan period reflecting anticipated recovery in the economy and financial markets which has severely affected development rates in the early years of the plan period. The trajectory will be updated and reviewed on an annual basis to track delivery progress against planned housing requirements and the requirement to maintain a five year supply of housing land/sites. This will be reported through the council’s annual Authority  Monitoring Report. The council’s Housing Implementation Strategy 
outlines how housing delivery will be managed over the plan period.  
             
139 Small site develop ment has accounted for approximately 35% of total residential 
development across the city over the last 10 years.  
140 NPPF, paragraph 47.  
 137                                         CP2 Planning for Sustainable Economic Development 
The
 council will positively and proactively e ncourage sustainable 
economic growth and continue to work with partners in the city and the 
region to:  
1. P
romote and secure inward investment opportunities; retain existing
businesses and support indigenous business growth and support the 
diversification  of the city’s economy to ensure its resilience and 
versatility.  
2
. Support proposals that drive the city’s transition to a low carbon
economy and to secure the range of benefits this will bring.  
3
. Bring forward a mix of employment floorspace including  the provision
of small and medium sized, flexible floorspace and start up business space to support the city’s key employment sectors, in particular the knowledge -based economy, creative industries and environmental 
technologies through the preparation of  Supplementary Planning 
Documents and Planning Briefs for regeneration schemes and major mixed use sites across the city (see also CP7 and CP5).  
4.The
 council will support the provision and delivery of the information
and communication technology (ICT) i nfrastructure the city economy 
requires; in particular affordable, competitive broadband access meeting the needs of enterprises and individuals . 
5
. Support appropriate expansion plans of hospitals and higher and
further education establishments recognising their role as major employment generators (see also DA3 and DA5).  
6
. Recognise the importance of employment -generating non- B Class
uses to the local economy. Appropriate allocations for non- B Class uses 
will be made through the City Plan Part 2.  
7. Se
cure apprenticeships, training and job opportunities for local
residents through the Brighton & Hove Local Employment Scheme and the linked requirement for contributions from developers from major development schemes towards training (see SA6 and CP7).  
Suppor
ting Text  
4.
17 Brighton and Hove has one of the largest concentrations of employment 
in the South East region.  The City is expected to continue to function as an 
economic growth hub for the wider sub- region. Brighton & Hove has become 
part of the Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership area. The Coast to Capital LEP aims to support the development of 100,000 private sector jobs; promote entrepreneurship in schools and colleges and focus on supporting the growth of internationally trading busines ses. The city  needs to ensure a 
138 step- change  in economic performance, reducing the gap with South East 
regional economic performance. In this context, attracting new inward 
investment is an explicit priority, although given the existing economic climate this is recognised as a long term priority  for the council .
141 A City Prospectus 
has been launched by the council to promote and publicise inward investment opportunities and the council will work with businesses, both major established employers and new start up companies, to weather the downturn 
and take advantage of new opportunities as they arise to build resilience and versatility in the economy.  
 4.18 The Employment Land Study Review 2012 noted that the city has 
recorded significant job growth over the last 15 years (16.8%) outperforming both regional and national trends and has proved relatively resilient through the recession. The City Plan is a long -term plan and needs to ensure that, 
when the economy recovers, local conditions are conducive to enabling forecast business and jobs growth to be realised. This will be  addressed by 
supporting local businesses
 in the city’s core sectors such as retail, tourism 
and hospitality; (retaining and enhanc ing jobs in business & financial services,  
diversifying the local economy, focusing  on growth sectors (the knowledge 
based economy, creative industries, including  digital media, and 
environmental technologies) supporting social enterprises142; and  securing 
training places, apprenticeships  and jobs for local people as part of 
redevelopment schemes.  The need to continue to grow the economic base 
with higher value services and to fully utilise the city’s workforce assets are local priorities
143.  
 4.19 Given th e evidenced need for an appropriate supply of employment 
floorspac e to meet the needs of growing businesses  the focus of the City Plan 
is on ensuring that  an appropriate mix and type of employment floorspace is a 
principal element of all regeneration, development and renewal projects within the city.   4.20 The two Universities and City College  make the city well -placed to 
encourage higher level business growth through knowledge transfer partnerships within the city
144. It is therefore important that additional start -up 
office space offering small units on flexible terms and at affordable rates is provided for in the city  to support the growing role of the two universities in the 
local economy as well as addressing the needs of the city’s small medium 
141 Business Renewal Investment Initiative (2009)  
142 Social enterprise is a business with primarily social objectives whos e surpluses are 
principally reinvested for that purpose in the business or in the community, rather than being 
driven by the need to maximise profit for shareholders and owners (Department for Business, 
Enterprise and Regulatory Reform)  
143 See The City Employment and Skills Plan 2011- 14, Sustainable Community Strategy 
(2009 Refresh), The Brighton & Hove Economic Strategy (2009), Business Renewal Investment Initiative (2009) and the Employment Land Study  Review 2012  
144 The Economic Strategy 2008- 2016 cites the following successful examples: ProfitNet and 
the Collaborative Training Centre at the University of Brighton; the Innovation Centre (SInC) and the £1.35m collaboration with Animazoo at Sussex University and the SOLD project at City College  
 139                                         sized enterprises.145The City Plan through DA3 Lewes Road and DA7 Toad’s 
Hole Valley will encourage the creation of flexible incubation space for 
university spin out businesses and move- on space in the city. Lewes Road is 
a priority development  area forming an important gateway to the city for 
visitors and businesses. The vision is for it to become a neighbourhood of knowledge and enterprise focused around the universities.  The availability of 
development sites and the connections with the two university campuses and the Sussex Innovation Centre make its development a key priority.   
 
4.21 The growing digital and creative industries are seen as having a key role 
in reviving and sustaining the city’s economy. The sector is characterised as innovative, knowledge- based and future- proofed providing high value, highly 
paid jobs. Already Brighton & Hove is home to a cluster of around 1500 media- related companies employing 10,000 people, plus another 5000 
freelance individuals
146.  The council will support  the further innovation, 
growth and maturity of the creative industries sector to become globally relevant especially digital media, recognising the cities burgeoning success in 
the convergence of the creative, digital and information and technology  sector 
(CDIT) . A recent study
147 indicated that whilst there is a reasonable amount of 
provision for micro and small businesses up to around 20 people there is a 
shortage of workspace in central Brighton of a suitable size and configuration for premises suitable for medium and larger scale sector businesses. 
Therefore t hrough policies SA2 Central Brighton and DA4 New England 
Quarter the City Plan safeguards existing office accommodation, allocat es 
sites suitable for new office accommodation and in particular safeguards New 
England House to support further growth in this sector . The council will work 
with providers to ensure the delivery  of ultrafast broadband to further support 
growth in this sector .  
 
4.22 Environmental industries
148 are a growing sector in the city and provide 
an important enterprise and employment opportunity for the city. The sector 
contains organisations of varying sizes, ranging from large companies to micro businesses. In 2009 around 75 businesses f ell within the definition of 
environmental technologies
149. There is further potential for local jobs to be 
created through a move towards  decentralised and renewable energy 
provision in the city, including the Rampion offshore wind farm  and through 
council initiatives and events the role of the environmental technology sector 
145 Employment Land Study Review 2012  
146 Wired Sussex 2010  
147 New England House, Brighton Digital Media Innovation & Enterprise Hub Joint Vehicle 
Business Case, DCA, October 2010. The study also indicates that businesses are looking for 
workspace with competitive rents, big capacity data connectivity, easy in easy out terms and 
flexibility to expand. Other important considerations were on site bike parking, good public transport links and a central Brighton location.  
148 Locally defined as “…businesses operating in the broad disciplines of energy efficiency, 
recycling and waste, renewable energy, sustainable construction and maintenance, 
consultancy and other services”.  A report of the Culture, Tourism and Enterprise Overview 
and Scrutiny Committee Ad Hoc Panel October 2009  
149 Business Renewal Investment Initiative (2009)  
 140                                         will be promoted150. Brighton & Hove has many of the key attributes  needed 
to attract environmenta l industries. These include research specialisms 
connected to both the universities, the range of educati on and employment 
opportunities, the city’s reputation as a sustainable city and its enterprise 
culture. There is a need to support this sector as it grows151. Through the City 
Plan the council will support the development of an environmental technology 
cluster at Shoreham Harbour (DA8) and incubator space at Preston Barracks and Toad’s Hole Valley (DA3 and DA7) and through policies safeguarding and promoting new  office accommodation  (SA2, DA4 and CP3) .  
 4.23 Achieving a sustainable economy is one of the overall principles of sustainable development (see paragraph 2.8). Supporting the development of 
a globally competitive environmental industries sector will support the 
Council’s One Planet approach to improve quality of life, the environment and 
the economy of the city  and move towards a low carbon economy
152.  A low 
carbon economy can provide opportunities for a wide range of businesses, not just the ‘traditional' environmental sector. Businesses can benefit from a low carbon economy in two ways: diversify into new low carbon products or become more efficient in the way they work. The Brighton & Hove Economic Strategy
153 sets clear aspirations for the City that will help to demonstrate how 
it can move towards becoming a low carbon economy.  
 4.24 The council also encourages the growth of employment in socially 
focused businesses
154 and has signed up to the 2008 Social Enterprise 
Strategy. Brighton & Hove’s Third Sector (Voluntary & Community  sector) is 
well developed. It’s estimated 1,600 organisations  generate £96m for the local 
economy and employ 8,000 people with over 19,000 volunteers, but it is often 
under -appreciated. It  has an important part to play in delivering economic 
prosperity  and should be supported to ensure its potential is realised.  
 4.25 The council has prepared an ICT Strategy
155  and is working with 
partners to tackle a number of areas around digital inclusion and economic development including broadband upgrades , connectivity and shared 
infrastructure . Brighton & Hove is a unique digital media hub, and the council 
will work with providers to ensure the provision of appropriate infrastructure to equip the city  with acc ess to affordable, competitive broadband access 
meeting the needs of enterprises and individuals .  
 
150 Alongside the successful  Eco Technology Show  2012, there are plans to run an 'Invest in 
Sussex'  conference that will a focus on growth post recession and how this can be done in a 
sustainable way.  
151 A report of the Culture, Tourism and Enterprise Overview and Scrutiny Committee Ad Hoc 
Panel October 2009  
152 Brighton & Hove’s Climate Change Strategy 2011  
153 Adopted June 2013.  
154 A social enterprise is a business with primarily social objectives whose surpluses are 
principally reinvested for that purpose in the business or in the community, rather than being 
driven by the need to maximise profit and shareholders and owners" Dept of Trade 
& Industry  July 2002  
155 Brighton & Hove City Council ICT Strategy 2011- 2016  
 141                                         4.26 The city contains a number of major employment generators including 
the two universities and the Royal Sussex County Hospital and the council will work  with the higher and further education sector , Sussex University Hospital 
NHS Trusts and  NHS  Brighton & Hove to support appropriate expansion (see 
DA3 Lewes Road Area, DA5 Eastern Road and Edward Street Area and CP18 Healthy City).  Non- B Class uses are estimated to account for 
approximately 71% of all jobs in Brighton & Hove. This is expected to remain broadly consistent over the plan period to 2030. Development Area proposals, 
SA2 Central Brighton, CP4 Retail Provision and CP6 Culture and Tourism set out how the City Plan address es retail, culture, leisure and tourism needs to 
2030.  Appropriate allocations for employment -generating non- B Class uses 
will be included in the City Plan Part 2.  
 4.27 The Brighton & Hove labour market is highly competitive with globally 
recognised companies attracting talent from an international labour pool. In the context of continued economic uncertainty it is therefore more important than ever to equip local residents with the means to compete and access jobs.  Two key priorities for intervention in the city  are to increase the number 
of graduate positions in the city by supporting conditions for growth in key knowledge and innovation focussed growth sectors  and to equip local 
residents to be able to better access employment opportunities in the city through addressing key barriers, and providing skills, training and apprenticeships
156. The Brighton & Hove Local Employment Scheme 
originates from the City  Employment & Skills Plan157 and seeks to contribute 
towards reducing inequalities by securing training and job opportunities for unemployed and underemployed residents of Brighton & Hove
158. 
Contributions will be sought from new major development schemes towards training in building and construction skills  with a minimum 20% target 
requirement .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 Brighton & Hove City Employment & Skills Plan 2011 (CESP)  
157 The Brighton & Hove City Employment and Skills Plan 2011- 2014 indicates that the 
working age population is projected to increase by 12,650 over the next 10 years.  If these 
projections prove accurate,  the city may need to find work for an additional 6,000 residents by 
2014 just to keep the employment rate at the current level of 71.1%. However these need to be quality jobs that allow people to progress and to earn incomes that will enable them to live successfully and sustainably.  
158 At the start of 2011, 7.5 per cent of our young people aged 16 to 18 (between 400 
& 500 young people) were not in education, employment or training (NEET), down from  nine 
per cent in 2010. The highest numbers of  NEET young p eople are found in Moulsecoomb & 
Bevendean, Whitehawk & Queen’s Park & Cravendale.  
 142                                         CP3 Employment Land  
 
Sufficient employment sites and premises will be safeguarded in order to meet the needs of the city to 2030 to support job creation, the needs of modern business and the attractiveness of the city as a business locat ion. This will be achieved through:  
 1. Strategic proposals and allocations for B Use Class employment floorspace as set out in DA2 Brighton Marina, DA3 Lewes Road, DA4 New England Quarter and London Road, DA5 Edward Street and Eastern Road Area, DA6 Hove Station, DA7 Toad’s Hole Valley and DA8 Shoreham Harbour (including South Portslade) and at Patcham Court Farm.   
 2. The identification of Central Brighton as the city’s prime office location where B1a offices will be protected (see SA2 Central Brighton). The council will support proposals for the upgrade and refurbishment of existing office accommodation so that they meet modern standards required by business; are more resource efficient and improve the environment and townscape of the site or premise s. 
 3. Protection of the  following primary industrial estates and business 
parks for business, manufacturing and warehouse (B1, B2 and B8) use:  
Centenary Industrial Estate  
English Close Industrial Area, Old Shoreham Road  
Home Farm Industrial Area  Hove Technology Park , St Josephs Close, Old Shoreham Road   
Moulsecoomb & Fairways Industrial Estate Sussex House (including BT depot)  Woodingdean Business Park  
Hyde Business Park, Bevendean   
Bell Tower Industrial Estate  
Hollingbury Industrial Estate  
Hollingdean I ndustrial Estate  
Victoria Road  Industrial Estate  
Newtown Road Industrial Estate  
 The council will support proposals for the upgrade and refurbishment of these estates and premises so that they meet modern standards required by business, are more resource efficient and improve the environment or townscape of the site or premise s. 
 
Sui generis uses , including waste management facilities, appropriate in 
nature to an industrial estate location will also be acceptable, provided 
that they generate employment whi ch is quantitatively and qualitatively 
comparable to uses within B1 - B8 Use  Classes
159; do not harm the 
159 Employment generation is compared with average employment densities as set out in 
Table 3 of the HCA/Offpat Employment Densities Guide, 2010 or subsequent updates.  
 143                                         continuation of existing uses within those Classes  and comply with 
other City Plan policies  and for waste management facilities the Waste 
and Minerals Plan.  
 
4. In order to secure good quality modern, flexible employment 
floorspace the council will allow employment -led (residential and 
employment) mixed use development on the following employment sites:  
Franklin Road Industrial Estate  
School Road, Hove  
Melb ourne Street Industrial Area  
Portland Road Trading Estate (including EDF and Martello House)  
Land North of Newtown Road  
There should be no net loss in employment floorspace  unless this can 
be justified. Paragraph 4.36 sets out the factors that will be taken into consideration.  
 5. Loss of unallocated sites or  premises  in, or whose last use was, 
employment use (Use Classes B1- B8) will only be permitted where the 
site or premises can be demonstrated to be redundant and incapable of 
meeting the needs of alternative employment uses (Use Classes B1 -B8). 
Where loss is permitted the priority for re -use will be for alternative 
employment generating uses or housing (in accordance with CP20 Affordable Housing).   6. Preparing Part 2 of the City Plan to allocate addit ional employment 
sites and mixed use allocations to help ensure employment land 
delivery is maintained over the plan period.   Supporting Text  
 
4.28 A number of recent studies
160 have identif ied the need for new business  
space to meet the needs  of businesses  currently located in the city  and to 
attract businesses considering Brighton as a business location to allow the 
city to grow as an economic base for the wider  economic area.  
 
Employment Land Requirements  
4.29. The Employment Land Study Review 2012 recommended that the City Plan be guided by forecast growth requirements of 112,240 sq m of office floorspace (B1a, B1b) to 2030 and 43,430 sq m of industrial floorspace (B1c, B2 and B8) over the plan period. To ensure that there are sufficient employment sites and premises to meet this forecast requirement and to facilitate economic growth, Development Area proposals identify strategic allocations to bring forward new high quality employment floorspace (DA2-DA8).  
160 Empl oyment Land Study Review 2012, City Employment and Skills Plan 2011- 14, the 
Business Retention and Inward Investment Strategy (2009), and the Creative Industries 
Workspace Study (2007)  
 144                                          
4.30 The table below summarises how the employm ent floorspace 
requirements will be met in Brighton & Hove through the Development Area proposals.  Reflecting the city’s role as a regional employment centre, the forecast figures indicate positive employment growth over the plan period. Compared with previous employment land studies
161 this includes a positive 
requirement for industrial floorspace. Opportunities to increase the industrial floorspace capacity in allocations identified for industrial activities have been considered alongside whether opportuni ties exist for industrial floorspace to 
be brought forward on other strategic allocations; however this does not address all the forecast requirements. In terms of meeting office needs, the priority is to manage a greater delivery of office floorspace in t he city; 
particularly in Central Brighton but also the phasing of supply in other development areas over the plan period. The Employment Land Supply Trajectory 2013 indicates the potential delivery of new employment floorspace over the short, medium and long -term. Opportunities for additional B use class 
employment / mixed use allocations to meet outstanding requirements will be addressed through the City Plan Part 2 and through a coordinated partnership approach with neighbouring authorities and the Local Enterprise Partnership. Upgrading and renewal of the City’s existing office and industrial stock will also be important to ensure that this space is better utilised, remains competitive and attractive to the market. As CP2 indicates there is also a 
need to  deliver small scale, managed and affordable works space to 
encourage and retain indigenous business growth within the city.  
 Table 4 City Plan Employment Floorspace Provision  
 
Employment  Floorspace Requirements162 and Supply (sq 
m) 
 
B1a, B1b Office Requi rements  
 112,240  
DA3 Lewes Road  15,600  
DA4 London Road and New 
England Street  20,000  
DA5 Eastern Road and Edward 
Street  18,200 – 23,200  
DA6 Hove Station  1,000163 
DA7 Toad’s Hole Valley  25,000  
Patcham Court Farm  6,500  
Extant Planning Permission (not 
included within DA supply figures)  4,757  
Total:  91,000 - 96,000  (rounded)  
B1c, B2, B8 Industrial 43,430  
161 Employment Land Study Review 2006 and update 2009.  
162 Employment Land Study Review 2012 based on job- growth scenario of demand for B 
class employment space in Brighton & Hove to 2030.  
163 May not result in a total net gain in employment floorspace within DA6 area due to 
potential loss of employment space within the Conway Street Industrial Area.  
 145                                         Requirements   
DA2 Brighton Marina  2,000  
DA7 Toad’s Hole Valley  164 
DA8 Shoreham Harbour  7,500165 
Total:  9,500  
 
4.31 In light of the Employment Land Study Review 2012 identifying a 
qualitative and quantitative need for additional employment land over the plan period it is important that the strategic allocations set out in the Development Areas bring forward high quality employment floorspace as indicate d in Table 
4 to meet the council’s priorities regarding high quality job creation and to 
support its growth potential over the next 20 years . The Employment Land 
Supply Trajectory indicates the need for close monitoring of the office developments identified to come forward in 2014- 2019 to ensure they are 
delivered. However, it is also important to allow for reasonable flexibility, in the 
short term to promote successful regeneration and enable viable schemes to be delivered. Therefore proposals which bring forward employment floorspace 
less th an proposed on sites identified in T able 4 will be considered, taking into 
account whether:  
 
1. There is demonstrable benefit for early redevelopment and clear 
commercial and financial viability evidence that the figures in Table 4 are unlikely to be delivered within the next 5 years;  
2. Allowing a different scale or mix of development will secure particularly strong planning benefits;  
3. It is appropriate in light of ongoing monitoring  of delivery of new 
employment floorspace against the 2013 Employment Land Supply Trajectory and subsequent updates.   
 Industrial Estates and Premises  
 4.32 The Employment Land Study Review 2012 assessed the  city’s stock of  
industrial  estates/ business parks for their suitability for continued protection 
for employment use. The study found that these established areas remain 
popular, as demonstrated by high occupancy and low vacancy levels.  With 
limited spare capacity in existing industrial floorspace supply it is therefore important to continue to protect these employment sites whilst  encouraging 
new business investment and opportunities in order to facilitate renewal  and 
growth.  
 4.33. Better utilisation of space on these estates could be achieved by 
wholesale redevelopment opportunities/ the gradual redevelopment of individual plots (whereby one large older unit is redeveloped for modern small 
164 Potential for  B1a, B1b employment floorspace to be substituted by B1c light industrial 
floorspace subject to appropriate masterplanning.  
165 This figure also includes B1a as part of the mix of employment uses ongoing masterplan 
work indicates potential capacity for net  additional floorspace within Aldrington Basin, 
although this will need to be offset against potential floorspace losses associated with the 
redevelopment of South Portslade Industrial Estate.  
 146                                         units) or the sub- division of larger units. The council will consider how it can 
use its ownership of some these estates to help facilitate this and also 
continue to explore different funding sources to enable improvement works.  
The council will support proposals which:  
● refurbish and upgrade the employment floorspace; 
● makes more efficient and effective use of the site/premises delivering 
new floor space;  
● delivers significant environmental improvements in terms of the public 
realm and landscaping of industrial estates  and premises ;  
● improves the quality of the employ ment offer in terms of the type  of 
employment and density of jobs , and;  
● improves the environmental performance of buildings including  
improvements that will bring about reductions in water or energy consumption and improve resource efficiency.  
 4.34 These industrial estates/ premises  are also considered suitable for 
certain “sui generis” uses, that is , those with industrial characteristics which 
are not included within the Use Classes Order . For example, car breaking, or 
metal recycling which could potentially harm residential amenity are thus likely to be considered most suited to an industrial estate . With modern design and 
operation techniques, waste management facilities can increasingly be accommodated in general industrial areas as a B2 use
166. Whether or not a 
new sui generis use is judged to be acceptable will be considered against the comparabi lity and the extent of the employment it would create and the impact 
of the use on existing employment uses. A sui generis use would not be acceptable, for example, if it harmed the continuation of the employment uses which the policy protects. Similarly n ew uses should not be introduced into an 
industrial estate/ premise that would preclude industrial and/or warehousing 
type uses.  
 Employment -Led Mixed Use Sites  
 4.35 The council has identified at part four of the policy, five employment sites 
suitable for  employment led mixed use (residential and employment)  
development where the twin benefits of high quality modern business floorspace and additional housing units can be achieved through a more 
effective and efficient use of the sites . The starting position is that there 
should be no net loss of employment floorspace.   4.36 In considering proposals where a net loss of employment floorspace is being proposed the council will take into consideration the following factors : 
- Site c onstraints (current site coverage and opportunities for more 
effective and efficient use of the site)  
- The need for environmental and townscape improvements  
- Access arrangements (improved access/circulation space).  
- Safeguarding the amenity of surrounding users and occupiers  
166 See Policy WMP 7 of the Waste and Minerals Plan for East Sussex, South Downs and 
Brighton & Hove, adopted February 2013.  
 147                                         - T he quality of the employ ment offer in terms of the type of employment 
and density of jobs . 
- Viability  
Developments will need to be carefully designed and managed to ensure that 
residential and other occupiers of the sites will have an appropriate level of amenity.  An appropriate mix of housing and provision of affordable housing 
will be required to comply with CP19 Housing Mix and CP20 Affordable Housing.  
 Safeguarding Employment Sites  
 4.37 Alongside Central Brighton as the primary office location where existing 
office accommodation will be protected (SA2), office accommodation can also 
be found in clusters elsewhere in the city (such as at City Park  and along 
Preston Road) and scattered across the city. This office accommodation can 
be found within older purpose built  buildings or converted period buildings, 
upper  floor accommodation above shops , mews or modern flexible managed 
office space/ business centres. In the context of the delivery challenges for 
new office space in the short term, and the quantitative shortfal l of supply  a 
test of redundancy is required.  
 4.38 Together with the primary industrial estates / business parks identified in 
the policy, there are smaller industrial units/ workshops dispersed throughout 
the city which provide affordable accommodation f or local businesses. There 
is often pressure to redevelop these sites/ premises for other uses, 
particularly residential. This has especially been the case with many older 
poorer quality industrial buildings in predominantly  residential areas. There 
has also been pressure on these sites for warehousing and trade counter uses to support the local economy's service sector. In the context of the tight 
industrial market and quantitative shortfall of supply a test of redundancy is required.  
 4.39 Redundancy and unsuitability for modern employment uses of  
unallocated sites or premises in employment use (Use Classes B1- B8) will be 
determined by considering the following criteria:  
a) location of the site;  
b) quality of the buildings;  
c) site or floor layout;  
d) acce ssibility;  
e) proximity to public transport/ trunk routes;  
f) other uses in the neighbourhood  
g) cost of demolition/ refurbishment sets against its future value for employment uses;  
h) the length of time the site has been vacant  
i) documented evidence of t he marketing strategy adopted, particularly 
whether it has been marketed at a price that reflects local market prices and attempts to make the building attractive to different business or employment uses (the length of marketing will need to reflect the size and nature of the site or premise and therefore whilst a year is considered a 
 148 reasonable marketing period for small sites/ premises a longer period may 
be required for larger sites/ premises).  
j) for office uses the prevailing vacancy rate for the size and type of office in Brighton & Hove should also be considered;  
k) for an office building whether change of use is the only practicable way of preserving a building of architectural or historic interest.  
 4.40 Alternative employment generating uses are any uses that generate 
employment but are not classified as an employment use (uses falling outside the Use Class B1 - B8) including educational teaching space and health 
facilities . This excludes retail or leisure uses unless they comply with the tests 
of na tional planning policy.   
 
   
 
      
 
     
 
      
 
     
 
 
 149 CP4 Retail Provision 
 
Brighton & Hove’s hierarchy of shopping centres will be maintained and 
enhanced by encouraging a range of facilities and uses, consistent with the scale and function of the centre, to meet people’s day -to-day needs, 
whilst preserving the predominance of A1 use classes:  
 
Centre 
Definition  Defined Centres  Linked Policies  
 
Regional Centre  Brighton  DA1, SA2  
Town Centres  Hove   
London Road  DA4 
District Centres  St James’s Street   
Lewes Road  DA3 
Boundary Road/Station Road  DA8 
Local Centres  Mill Lane, Portslade  
Portland Road, Hove  
‘The Grenadier’, Hangleton Road  
Richardson Road, Hove Eldred Avenue, Withdean  
Old London Road, Patcham  
Ladies Mile Road, Patcham  
Seven Dials  
Fiveways  
Hollingbury Place, Hollingdean  
Beaconsfield Road, Preston Park  
St George’s Road, Kemptown Warren Way, Woodingdean  
Whitehawk Road, Whitehawk  
High Street, Rottingdean  
Lustrell’s Vale, Saltdean 
Longridge Avenue, Saltdean  SA6 
(all centres)  
 
 The performance of  existing centres will be monitored by the Council 
and this might result in a centre being moved higher or lower in the hierarchy; an amendment to an existing centre boundary; or, in the larger centres, a change to the defined prime retail frontage within that boundary.  
 New centres may come forward; particularly local centres in currently underprovided for areas (see SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods). Any change to the boundary, role or status of a centre, or a proposed new centre, will be brought forward through Development Plan Documents and not the planning application process.  
 Brighton Regional Shopping Centre should be the focus for future significant retail development (see policy DA1 and SA2). Consistent with the ‘Character Areas’ defined in policy SA2, major retail developments in Brighton Regional Centre should provide for a mix of small and large 
 150 unit retail floorspace to cater for both national retail occupiers and the 
demands of smaller independent and local traders.  
 Applications for new retail development within the boundaries of Brighton & Hove’s defined shopping centres will be permitted subject to the consideration of scale and mix of uses. Detailed policies regarding the appropriate mix of A1 and non A1 uses will be set out in the Part 2 of the City Plan.  
 Applications for all new edge and out of centre retail development will be required to address the tests set out in national policy
167. 
Applications will be required to complete an impact assessment at a locally set threshold
168 of 1,000 sqm ( net) floorspace or more.  
 Additional retail sites and proposed changes to retail centre boundaries will be allocated and/or amended in Part 2 of the City Plan.  
 Supporting text  
 4.41 Brighton & Hove has a wide variety of shopping centres. In addition to 
these defined centres, there are numerous small local shopping parades and 
individual ‘corner’ shops. It is important that Brighton & Hove’s shopping centres and local neighbourhood shopping facilities remain vibrant, attractive and accessible. Our larger centres have wider roles than just shopping destinations, functioning also as places to work, live, visit, spend leisure time and access transport services (see also policies SA6 and CP5).  
 4.42 Brighton Regional Centre includes the city’s most significant retail offer. 
The combination of shopping opportunities in both the large stores in Churchill Square and the small independent units in The Lanes and North Laine give Brighton a unique character, which is integral to its attraction as a major tourist desti nation. SA2 Central Brighton recognises the different but 
interconnecting shopping identities that make up the Regional Centre; Churchill Square/Western Road, Western Road (the secondary retail frontage that runs from Montpelier Road to the east and Holland Road to the west including Brunswick Town), Queens Road/West Street, Old Town including the Lanes/ Duke Street/ East Street; the North Laine and North Street.  
 4.43 The city has an established hierarchy of shopping centres and the 
council is committed t o ensuring that these existing shopping centres remain 
the focus for new retail development, which is appropriate to their role and function. A sustainable mix of A1 retail and non- A1 uses will be supported in 
these shopping centres. Detailed policies regarding the appropriate mix of A1 and non A1 uses will be set out in Part 2 of the City Plan (Development Policies and Site Allocations DPD). A major priority is to safeguard and enhance Brighton Shopping Centre as a primary Regional Centre and this is 
167 The National Planning Policy Framework March 2012  
168 The NPPF states that local authorities can set their own locally set floorspace threshold for 
the requirement of impact assessments  
 151                                         addressed in DA1 Brighton Centre, and Churchill Square and policy SA2 
Central Brighton.  
 4.44 The Brighton & Hove Retail Study Update (2011)
169 has reviewed the 
vitality and viability of each of the shopping centres. The Study does not recommend that any new cent res need to be designated but recommends 
that the District Centre designation for Brighton Marina should be removed. The Council’s approach for Brighton Marina is to enhance the choice and 
performance of retail activity through the encouragement of mixed r etail 
activity and improvements to the public realm, and to continue to address the development and future uses at this location using site specific policy DA2. A detailed policy regarding the appropriate type and mix of A1 and non A1 uses in the Marina will be set out in Part 2 of the City Plan.  
 4.45 The importance of a balanced network of local centres to facilitate 
access to food produce and key services on foot or by public transport is addressed in the policy SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods.  
 4.46 The Retail Study identifies capacity for new food and non- food retail 
floorspace to the period 2030
170. In accordance with Government policy the 
council will prefer to direct retail applications to the town centre in the first instance and then edge of centre locations. Only if suitable sites are not available will out of centre sites be considered. Impact assessments will be required as a locally set threshold for proposals of 1,000 sq  m net or more not 
within the town centre.  
 Table 5 Estimated Retail Need  
 
Retail Study Update (2011)  2011  2016  2021  2026  2030  
Comparison Floorspace (Sqm Net)  -4,476  25,259  36,283  47,689  58,313  
Convenience Floorspace (Sqm Net)  -1,325  -2,281  -534 1,260  2,967  
Retail Study Update 2011: Capacity identified 2011- 2030 (Comparison floorspace b ased on 
improved market share from 60.9% to 70%)  
 4.47 Any proposal in an edge or out of centre location must demonstrate that 
it meets the full requirements of national planning policy. The Retail Study 2011 identifies that there is additional capacity for comparison goods floorspace and recommends that this capacity should be directed into the redevelopment of the Brighton Centre and Churchill Square (DA1). Applications for additional comparison retail will be determined on their demonstration to satisfy the tests of national planning policy and on their 
impact on the delivery of the Brighton Centre and Churchill Square redevelopment.  
 4.48 The defined shopping centres will be regularly monitored to ensure that 
the hierarchy remains balanced, appropriate and representative. Regular monitoring will also determine whether it is appropriate to alter the boundaries 
169 Brighton & Hove Retail Study Update 2011  
170 Brighton & Hove Retail Study Update 2011, Table 4.1 and 4.2  
 152                                         of the centre, depending on changing retail characteristics and demand. 
Monitoring should include regular updates of the Brighton & Hove R etail 
Study, and annual audits of the defined shopping centres. On completion of the redevelopment of the Brighton Centre and Churchill Square the council will extend the designation of the prime retail frontage to include the retail elements of the scheme.  
 4.49 Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against 
the principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
                                        
 153 CP5 Culture and Tourism  
 
The council will work with partners to maintain and enhance the cultural offer of the city to benefit residents and visitors. It will support the role of the arts, creative industries and sustainable tourism secto r in 
creating a modern and exciting visitor destination with a range of high quality facilities, spaces, events and experiences.  
 1. New visitor attractions, arts and festival events will be expected, where appropriate to comply with the requirements of na tional planning 
policy
171 and:  
• be of a high environmental standard in terms of design, management and access;  
• complement and build on the city’s distinct tourism offer ; 
• contribute to a sense of place ; 
• reduce seasonality;  
• promote diversity;  
• widen local access ; 
• support the regeneration of the city  and benefit the city’s 
economy ; and 
• be accessible by public transport.  
 The council will support the retention, upgrading and enhancement of existing visitor facilities to meet changing consumer demands and high envir onmental standards in terms of design, management and access;  
 2. Recognising the role of the South Downs as a visitor, education and recreation asset, the council will work with the National Park Authority, adjoining authorities and tourism agencies such as Tourism South East 
and Royal Pavilion and Museum to promote eco- tourism and create a 
stronger visitor experience  (see SA4 Urban Fringe and SA5 The South 
Downs);  
 3. The provision of affordable
172 and appropriate arts and creative 
industries work space and  creation, storage, performance, showing and 
rehearsal space will be promoted in regeneration schemes and in major 
mixed use developments across the city;  
 4. Existing arts and performance venues including; museums, art galleries, cinemas, live music venues, theatres and exhibition space will 
171 The National Planning Policy Framework defines main town centres uses to include 
culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, 
hotels and conference facilities).  
172 Creative Industries Workspace Study 2008. The study indicated that affordable rents in the 
creative industries are generally at the lower end of the market range and in Brighton & Hove 
are in the region of £7.50 a square foot. However it should be noted that this average figure is 
higher than those generally considered affordable by some creative businesses and 
organisations. 
 
 154                                         be protected and enhanced to maintain the city’s cultural infrastructure. 
Proposals for change of use would need to demonstrate : 
a) availability of adequate provision elsewhere in the city ; and 
b) that the existing use was no longer viable or could no longer be 
sustained on a long- term basis;  or 
c) that change of use was the only practicable means of preserving a listed building.  
 5. The council will support investment in spaces suitable for outdoor events and cultural activities that take place in the public realm and the enhancement and retention of existing public art works;  
 6. The council will support the temporary use of vacant commercial buildings for creative industries, arts and cultural sector.  
 Supporting Text  
 4.50 Tourism is inextricably linked to the cultural life of the city and the historic 
built environment  and contributes to the prosperity of the local economy and 
region. Brighton & Hove is one of Britain’s leading and established visitor destinations with an approximate 8m tourist visitors per year and an estimated £732 m visitor spend in 2009
173. The city has a strong cultural and creative 
industries sector and is home to several arts and creative industries organisations of regional  and national importance
174. The city has a reputation 
as a ‘producing’ city where innovative and quality new works and products are 
exported worldwide and it serves as a cultural hub for the region. It hosts the 
largest arts festival in England (which brings £20m into the local economy 
each year175) as well as many other  major arts festivals and community 
festivals. Regency Brighton is regarded as a nationally significant historic built 
environment.  
 4.51 The tourism industry has been successful in responding to changing 
markets, tastes and style and the city has seen nearly a decade of steady investment in its tourism product. I f Brighton & Hove is to remain competitive 
as a tourist destination,  it needs to develop unique visitor attractions and 
experiences. A well -planned,  sustain able and prosperous tourism industry is a 
catalyst for improving the environment of the city and the wellbeing of its 
people. The Tourism Strategy  highlights specific products where there is real 
potential for growth and therefore  increasing the economic value of the visitor 
economy; these are health & activity;  culture & heritage, events & attractions, 
business conferences; film & television and architecture & the built 
environment ; study & education tourism . The Council will support 
improvements to existi ng facilities and seek the highest standard from new 
tourism proposals and ensure they accord with the council’s long -term vision   
173 The State of the City Report 2011.  
174 Creat ive Industries Workspace Study 2008  
175 Tourism Strategy 2008: A refreshed strategy for the visitor economy 2008/2018. (page 10)  
 155                                         for the city’s tourism industry  as set out in the Tourism Strategy176 and its four 
guiding principles177 and any subsequent touri sm strategy.  
 
4.52 Business tourism is vital for the city’s success. Business events such as 
conferences, meetings and exhibitions bring Brighton & Hove year -round, 
higher spending visitors, ensuring the city’s tourism industry invests in quality improveme nts and staff. The role of technology in the tourism, conferencing 
and business sectors is recognised as important in growing the economy of the City and encouraging business visitors. As such there is a commitment to seek delivery of next generation broadband access networks and improvements to access (see CP2).  
 4.53 As well as enjoying the seafront, leisure visitors come to the city to shop, 
eat out, and enjoy culture, the built heritage, entertainment and nightlife. The city has tapped into the growing short break and cultural tourism markets, still mainly at weekends, but this extends beyond the summer into the spring and autumn. It is also important to recognise the importance of the city’s natural environment , particularly the South Downs National Par k as a tourism asset 
and other areas of the city attractive to visitors. The Tourism Strategy identifies six tourism places across the city with a specific character and role when visitors come to the city
178 and this has been addressed in the City Plan 
Part 1 through DA1- 5 and SA1- SA5. With only three miles between the sea 
and the South Downs at the widest point there is the potential for the city to become one of the UK’s leading destinations for eco- tourism, reflecting the 
growing maturity of the city as  a tourist destination and the need to create a 
stronger visitor experience between the city and the South Downs.  Table 1 on 
page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against the local targets 
under the One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
 4.54 Developing and promoting culture is a key way of attracting valuable off -
peak visitors but also supports regeneration and sustainable communities. Recent investment by agencies such as the Arts Council  and through  Lottery 
funding for venues such as the Brighton Dome, Brighton Museum and Art Gallery have helped to establish a critical mass of cultural development around the Royal Pavilion and Dome (see SA2 Central Brighton). However the arts and cultural sector can also be found across the city including public art, open studios, retail galleries and exhibitions,  the universities and further 
education institutions,  street theatre and free arts events and festivals.  
176 The Refreshed Tourism Strategy 2008 has set out a vision that by 2018, Brighton & Hove 
will be a destination where the needs of  the visitor, the tourism industry, the community and 
the environment are in complete balance and consequently will make a significant 
contribution to improving the quality of life for local people.  
177 The Tourism Strategy 2008 sets out four guiding principles to take the vision forward: 
investment in infrastructure & physical environment; sustainable & responsible tourism; 
improving quality & raising standards and partnership & consultation.  
178 They are gateways to the city (in particular railway and coach stations but also the Lewes 
Road, London Road); the Seafront; Neighbourhoods (Kemptown, central Hove and 
Brunswick); The Downs & Villages (South Downs and Stanmer, Rottingdean); Central 
Brighton Retail areas (The Lanes & North Laine); Parks & Open Spaces (Preston Park, The Level, Pavilion Gardens)  
 156                                         4.55 Brighton & Hov e is the creative powerhouse of the region and has the 
potential to become a national cultural leader179.It is important that the city’s 
existing cultural infrastructure (arts, performance and creation space) is 
protected and enhanced and that new proposals complement and contribute 
to the city’s unique tourism offer. Examples include the Old Market in Hove and the Hippodrome in Brighton. To maintain the potential for a wide variety of arts and cultural uses existing venues  (including stand- alone venues, thos e 
that are part of other facilities, or are contained within educational or community buildings)  will be protected for their existing use or potential for 
such use. Proposals for change of use would need supporting documentation to demonstrate availability  of adequate provision, equally as accessible by the 
community, elsewhere in the city and that the existing use was no longer viable or could no longer be sustained on a long -term basis (through 
marketing information, a business case, and information on the availability of funding).  
 4.56 Opportunities for continued investment in cultural provision for the city 
and new creative industries workspace have been identified, where appropriate, in Development Area and Special Area proposals  to ensure the 
spatial distribution of artistic and cultural venues. This will help meet the 
significant forecast demands for new workspace over the next ten years
180 
and support the commitments in the council’s Cultural Strategy181. Demand 
remains for arts and creative industries w orkspace that is affordable in 
comparison with market rents, as well as flexible.  O pportunities will be sought 
through site allocations in the City Plan P art 2,  through Developer 
Contributions, SPDs  or development briefs in prepar ation  for regeneration 
schemes and major mixed use developments across the city.  
 4.57 The role of iconic buildings such as the Royal Pavilion to the 
attractiveness of the city as a visitor destination is recognised and the importance of culture to the city’s environment, image and prosperity is reflected in many of the City Plan  policies. These include CP12, CP13 and 
CP15 relating to high quality design and improving the public realm and heritage, seafront regeneration proposals (see SA1 The Seafront), regenerating the Valley Gardens (see SA3 Valley Gardens), maintaining and enhancing the role of central Brighton including supporting the Cultural Quarter (see SA2 Central Brighton) and through the major development opportunities identified at Brighton Marina, Gas Works and Black Roc k (DA2) 
and the Brighton Centre and Churchill Square redevelopment (DA1).  
       
179 Brighton & Hove City Council Cultural Strategy 2009  
180 Creative Industries Workspace Study 2008  
181 See footnote10.  
 157                                         CP6 Visitor Accommodation  
 
To support the city’s tourism and business conference economy the council will support the provision of a sufficient and wide ranging type of visito r accommodation:  
 1. Proposals for new hotel accommodation
182 will be assessed in line 
with the national planning policy framework  and the sequential 
approach183 to site selection with proposals for new hotel development 
directed firstly to central Brighton (S A2). 
 2. Proposals for new hotel accommodation should be accompanied by 
an impact assessment to identify how the proposal would add to and impact on the current supply and offer of accommodation; whether it has the ability to create new demand and how it might meet needs currently unsatisfied in the city.  
 3. The council will work with the hotel industry to encourage the 
creation of apprenticeship schemes/ local jobs.  
 4. Proposed extensions to existing hotels will be supported where this is 
required to upgrade existing accommodation to meet changing consumer demands.  
 5. Partial conversion of a hotel will be considered where there is 
adequate demonstration of the need to enable investment in the remaining hotel.  
 6. Within the Hotel Core Zone, loss of hotel s/ guest house s (serviced 
accommodation) will be considered where it can be demonstrated that:  
 
a) The premise s has limited potential to upgrade and position itself  
viably in the market;  and 
b) The loss of the premise s would not set an unacceptable 
precedent in relation to the concentration and role of nearby/ adjacent serviced accommodation; and  
c) The new use would be compatible with the character and other uses in the area. 
The Hotel Core Zone shown on the policies map indicates the area where the main  accommodat ion clusters and drivers of accommodation 
demand can be found.  
 Supporting text  
 4.58 It is vital that Brighton & Hove is able to support its tourism and business 
conference economy by providing a sufficient and wide ranging type of 
182 Good Practice Guide on Planning for Tourism (2006) identifies several types of hotel 
accommodation: major hotels, other hotels, budget hotels, motels and travel lodges  
183 As set out in NPP4 paragraph 24.  
 158                                         accommodation to cater for visitors. The Tourism Strategy (2008) recognises 
that good quality hotels help support a strong conference business offer for the city.
 
 4.59 The city has a significant stock of hotel and guest accommodation; a 
total of 160 hotels and guest accommodation predominantly located in central Brighton and along the seafront. The council undertook a capacity and needs analysis of hotel bedrooms  in the city to understand the future capacity of the 
city to absorb new hotel accommodation (2007 Hotel Futures Study). Since the study was completed 3 new hotels have come into operation (Jury’s Inn, MyHotel and Royal York hotel) adding 365 bedrooms  (although the latter is 
now operating as a 151 bed youth hostel).  Furthermore there is the potential 
for an additional 372  bedrooms  through recent outstanding planning 
commitments
184.  
 4.60 The hotel sector is currently facing a challenging time with a drop back in 
the market linked to the current recession which has impacted on occupancies, achieved room rates and revpar
185 across the UK  and locally. 
With the recent considerable increase in supply of new hotel accommodation in the city it is important that Brighton & Hove’s hotel sector is allowed a period of consolidation and recovery to  help demand and supply get back into 
balance, and restore confidence in the market place and amongst investors
. 
 
4.61 So whilst there remains continued interest in new hotel development in 
the city, the 2007 Hotel Futures Study projections for future requirements for hotel  development indicate that the council does not need to identify 
additional hotel sites over and above that which were already proposed/ planned to 2016 nor does it need to prioritise specific types and standards of hotel in terms of hotel investment marketing. The S tudy indicat ed that much of 
the long term future growth in demand for the additional accommodation is likely to relate to a redevelopment of the Brighton Centre. The importance of the continued development of the leisure break product through the implementation of planned major leisure development major projects such as the i360 Observation Tower and Black Rock is a recognised priority for the council which have the potential to secure further growth in the city’s hotel market.  
  4.62 New hotel proposals will be direc ted firstly to the central Brighton area. 
This approach is the most sustainable in planning terms, since it allows greater access by public transport and will allow visitors to easily access other facilities and attractions in central Brighton. It is impor tant that Brighton & 
Hove’s hotel sector is allowed a period of consolidation and recovery to  help 
demand and supply get back into balance, and restore confidence in the market place and amongst investors. Therefore t he council will require  an 
impact assessment to be undertaken to support applications for new hotel 
184 at the Block J site, Brighton Station,88- 92 Queens Road, Former Ice Rink, Queens Square 
and Mitre House).  
185 The net amount of rooms revenue that hotels achieve per available room  
 159                                         accommodation to ensure that the city is able to support additional bed 
spaces without a significant impact in existing hotels and guest houses.  Ongoing monitoring of hotel developments  and prevailing economic 
conditions  will inform the implementation of Part 2 of this policy.  
 4.63 It is recognised that there may be the potential to locate new 
development outside central Brighton either for a destination offer or to permit a hotel to serve a particular market, or potentially to help regenerate an area but national planning policy requirements for an out of centre location will need to be fully addressed.  
 4.64 The council will continue to protect existing hotel and guest 
accommodation within a de fined area of the city unless non- viability can be 
demonstrated. It is recognised that with a net  increase in hotel stock of that 
has occurred in the last 5 years, a period of consolidation and recovery is 
required to help demand and supply get back into balance. A more flexible 
approach is introduced  to allow those premises that have become poorly 
located in relation to the main generators of demand and with l imited potential 
to re-position themselves viably to exit the market. The implementation of this 
policy will be  through regular monitor ing of  losses and gains and impact on 
overall  suppl y. 
 
 4.65 The central Brighton seafront and streets and squares running 
immediately off it account for the majority of the city’s  current supply of hotel 
and guest accommodation. There is relatively little accommodation outside the city centre. Hotels and guesthouses are more widely spread in Hove, with no concentrations of establishments.  The Hotel Core Zone shown on the 
policies  map is focussed around the main accommodation clusters and 
drivers of accommodation demand. However it is acknowledged that over the life time of the plan that new drivers of accommodation could emerge impacting on the attractiveness of certain areas of the Hotel Core Zone and the boundary of the Hotel Core Zone will be kept under review.  The key 
objective is to support the tourism sector by ensuring that there is a sufficient range of types and quality of visitor accommodation to meet the needs of the 
city’s  visitors
 
 4.66 With regard to meeting  CP6.6b  applications  for change of use will need 
to be accompanied by:  
• Proof of marketing for sale – as a going concern for a minimum 
period of 12 months at a competitive price taking account of current trading performance and condition;  
• Evidence of busine ss performance  – details of occupancy and 
achieved occupancy rate data for the last 18 months along with accounts to explain how the business is performing in line with levels of occupancy typical of industry/ destination norms;  and 
• Evidence of professiona l management  – this includes details of 
marketing and business plans for the last 18 months to demonstrate investment plans and attempts to attract business . 
 
 160 4.67 The council will be flexible in its approach and have regard to all material  
considerations at the time of the application including being responsive to the 
changes in the market, the economy, and visitor accommodation supply.  It is 
recognised that for smaller ‘lifestyle’ businesses, commercial viability 
arguments are often more difficult to test  as the performance of such 
businesses varies so much depending on the business objectives, aspirations of owners and how the purchase of the business has been financed. In such cases proof of marketing for sale with specialist and local agents at a realis tic 
price may be sufficient on its own. Whilst those premises that are well -located 
or have something special to offer as a building and have potential to up-grade will need to be accompanied by evidence of attempts to save the business – for example, details of schemes to up -grade and re- position the 
business, partially convert to an alternative use in return for investment in the remaining rooms, and conversion to self -catering / other forms of serviced 
accommodation as  appropriate, with costs and performance forecasts and 
advice sought from by business support agencies and hotel advisors.
 
 4.68 Consideration will be given to the appropriateness of the proposed 
alternative use in a given locality and whether it enhances the role of the 
visitor/tourist economy and adds vitality.  For those premises that have 
become poorly located in relation to the main generators of demand, with  
limited potential to re- position themselves viably in the market , change of use 
to residential would be acceptable.  
 4.69 The policy  also supports the up- grading of existing accommodation, 
including the addition of appropriate facilities such as spas and health clubs. It is also recognised that there may be some circumstances where there may be a case to be made for the partial convers ion of a hotel to, for example, 
residential/ apartments, to enable investment in the remaining hotel. Applications will need to be accompanied by a clear evidence of the case for investment, the need for enabling development and the on- going viability of 
the accommodation. As a minimum 50 per cent of the hotel rooms/ floorspace 
should remain.  The council will work with the hotel industry and City College 
Brighton & Hove to encourage the creation of apprenticeship schemes/ local jobs in the visitor accommodation sector . 
 
              
 161 CP7 Infrastructure  and Developer Contributions  
To m
eet the needs of Brighton & Hove and the wider sub- region the 
council will work with partners to ensure that the necessary social, 
environmental and physical infrastructure is appropriately provided in time to serve the development. This will be achieved through the following:  
1
. Preparing, regularly updating and facilitating the implementation of an
Infrastructure Delivery Plan186 for the city that will set out the 
infrastructur e to be provided in the city by infrastructure partners 
including the public sector and utilities, to meet future needs.  
2.I
nvestigation into the possible implementation of a locally adopted
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)187 to provide for infrastruct ure with 
contributions that will deliver strategic  infrastructure to support wider 
area development.   The cumulative impact of all development and 
differing needs for infrastructure provision will be reflected in the CIL tariff.  
3. T
o make development acc eptable and enable the granting of planning
permission, inadequacies in infrastructure arising from proposed development will be required to be mitigated through s.106 P lanning 
Obligations via a legal agreement and will be sought where they meet 
the statutory tests of being:  
- necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
- directly related to the development; and  
- fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.  
S
upporting Text  
4.
70 To ensure the best for the city from all  development, the council will 
ensure the provision of adequate physical, social and environmental infrastructure. Contributions will be required towards such adequate and effective provision that may provide for new or upgraded infrastructure provision to ensure that development functions appropriately in its 
surroundings.  
4
.71 Subject to further evidence gathering and government guidance it is the 
longer term intention to investigate implementing a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL).  Future developmen t that is liable to contribute to CIL will provide 
for strategic city wide general infrastructure as identified in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan.  
186186 See Annex 2, Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
187 If progressed a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) will be adopted after 2014  
1 62 4.72 To mitigate site specific circumstances, contributions secured through 
s.106 Planning Obligations legal agreement s at the time of granting planning
permission will provide appropriate contributions to ensure that the impact of 
new development is minimised as well as improving the quality of the  built 
environment.  Planning Obligations will remain for pro vision of affordable 
housing, site impacts and  infrastructure requirements to directly mitigate the 
impact of a development as prioritised in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan for creating sustainable neighbourhoods as a whole.  
4
.73 The policy as set out above accords with current Government guidance 
in the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 6 April 2010 (as amended) . 
Local Authorities are not required to charge a CIL but there are restrictions on how Planning Obligations can be sought. The policy tests for Planning 
Obligations have been made statutory in the CIL Regulations and require that 
development that is capable of being charged CIL must meet all of the policy tests set out in the CIL Regulations.  Upon adoption of CIL or after 6 April 
2014 pooled contributions can only be sought from up to 5 separate planning obligations for an item of infrastructure. The restriction for pooling funding for such an item of infrastructure will also need to be considered for those agreements that have been entered into since 6 April 2010 when the CIL Regulations were introduced.  
4
.74 The requirement for development to contribute towards necessary 
physical and social infrastructure and environmental benefits is also highlighted in the detailed proposals for each of the City Plan Development Areas. It is important that all priorities in the relevant areas are adequately considered so necessary infrastructure is timely provided to support the needs 
of new development . The timely connection to provision of utilities, including 
wastewater infrastructure and sewerage systems will be required by developer’s liaising directly with service/utility providers.  Priorities will also 
derive from other relevant policies, key strategic objectives or key local needs 
identified in other strategies, plans and commissioned studies.  Table 1 on 
page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against the local targets 
under the One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental lim its. 
4
.75 The range of infrastructure and service provision that may potentially be 
supported by a future CIL  or where s106 Planning Obligation contributions 
may be sought will include:  
•A
ffordable housing, including accessible and adaptable homes
•Sustain able transport measures that will include initiatives to
encourage use of public transport, walking and cycling
•Employment and regeneration initiatives including securing localemployment, training and apprenticeship  to include young people who
are not in employment, education and training (NEET)
•Biodiversity, countryside and open space including access and
interpretation facilities
•Sustainable development initiatives including renewable and low
carbon decentralised energy systems, schemes and installations ,
163 carbon reduction and energy efficiency measures, and air quality 
management measures
•Sports, recreation, youth facilities, play space and amenity space
•Highways infrastructure and access provision
•Utility infrastructure, including water provision, wastewater treatment
and drainage
•Education and learning including schools and libraries
•Flood- risk prevention measures
•New/replacement community rooms and mixed use facilities
•Tourism, culture and heritage
•Reduci ng crime, policing and community safety
•Public Art including public realm, and environmental improvements
•Social services, health and well being
•Design & conservation of historic buildings .
4
.76 Further detail on the main types of contributions that are c ommonly 
sought is provided in the adopted Developer Contributions Technical 
Guidance document.  If required a Planning Obligations Supplementary 
Planning Document (SPD) will be produced that will provide further guidance on all the necessary contributions that may be required to support new 
development.  
1 64  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
Section  Four 
City Wide Policies  
  
 
A Sustainable City  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 165 CP8 Sustainable Buildings 
The
 council will seek that all new development incorporate sustainable 
design features to avoid expansion of the city’s ecological footprint, 
help deliver  the principles of the One Planet approach,  radical 
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, particularly CO 2 emissions, 
and mitigate against and adapt to climate change.  
U
nless it can be demonstrated that doing so is not technically feasible 
and/or would make the scheme unviable:  
1
. All development will be required to achieve the minimum standards as
set out below  unless superseded by national policy or legislation ; 
Residenti al (New Build)  
Energy Performance  19% carbon reduction improvement against Part L 
2013188 
Water performance Water efficiency ‘optional’ standard189 
Non - residential Development Size  
Non-major  Major and Greenfield  
BREEAM  Very Good Excellent  
2. Al
l development proposals including conversions, extensions and
changes of use will be expected to demonstrate how the development:  
a.ad
dresses climate change mitigation and adaptation;
b.contributes to a reduction in the city’s current level of greenhouse
gas emissions by delivering significant reductions in fuel use andgreenhouse gas emissions via: passive design  and orientation;
fabric performance; energy efficiency measures; and low carbonsolutions;
c.facilitates on-site low or zero carbon tech nologies , in particular
renewable energy technologies
190;
188 This standard is equivalent to Code for Sustainable Homes level 4 in energy use. See 
paragraph 4.85- 4.87 for guidance on demonstrating this standard.  
189 The ‘optional’ enhanced national standard is defined within the 2015 Approved Document 
G, Building Regulations ‘Sanitation, hot water safety and water efficiency’ March 2015, page 
15, G2(3). At 2015 this is defined as consumption 110 litres per person per day to be 
demonstrated http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/uploads/br/BR_PDF_AD_G_2015.pdf  
190 Zero carbon t echnologies  are those  that harness  renewable non fossil fuel energy to 
create heat or generate electricity. They are called zero carbon because they produce no 
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions when producing heat or power. These technologies are 
sometimes referred to as m icro generation, producing heat or energy locally on a small scale.  
Low carbon technologies are those that use fossil fuels in a highly efficient way.  
1 66 d.   connects , makes contributions to low and zero carbon energy 
schemes and/or incorporates provision to enable future connection 
to existing  or potential decentralised energy schemes;  
e.  aspires towards water neutrality191 by meeting high water efficiency 
standards and incorporating facilities to recycle, harvest and conserve water resources;  
f.  improves the sustainability of existing buildings, makes the most effective use of land and re- uses existing buildings;  
g.  protects occupant health and the wider environment by making the best use of site orientation, building form, layout, landscaping and materials to maximise natural light and heat, whilst avoiding internal overheating by providing passive cooling and ventilation;  
h.  reduces ‘heat island effect’
192 and surface water run -off; 
i. uses  materials that are sustainable and have low embodied 
carbon193:  
j.  enhances biodiversity;  
k.  minimises waste and facilitates recycling, composting and re- use; 
l.  reduces air , land  and water pollution and safeguards water supplies 
if development is within groundwater Source Protection Zones ; 
m.  maximises operational efficiency through ongoing evaluation, monitoring and improvement of building performance espe cially in 
relation to energy and water use;  
n.  introduces means to encourage users, tenants and householders to reduce their ecological footprint;  
o.   is adaptable to respond to changing needs; and  
p.   encourages food growing.  
 Technical guidance and clarification will be produced to help planning applicants  address this policy . 
 The Sustainability Checklist and the A uthority  Monitoring Report (AMR) 
will be used to assess planning applications, and monitor the 
effectiveness of the policy.   
 Supporting t ext 
4.77 The way in which buildings are designed , construct ed, operated and 
decommission ed have  significant impacts on the built and natural 
environment and require major resource inputs such as energy, water and 
191 See Environment Agency ‘Water Neutrality; An improved and expanded water resource 
management definition ’. Water neutrality is where ’for every new development, total water use 
… after the development [is] equal to or less than total water use …before the development’.  
192 On hot days urban areas can have temperatures 20 to 60% higher than the surrounding 
countryside. This is due to a phenomenon called the urban heat island effect that causes air 
temperatures in large cities to be warmer than in neighbouring suburbs and rural areas. Warmer air temperatures can impact on air quality, public health and the demand  for energy.  
Heat island effect can be mitigated by the greening of buildings via for instance green roofs, 
green walls and tree planting.  
193 These include materials that are produced locally where possible, procuring materials 
sustainably and ethically, and seeking to avoid materials which are polluting or with high 
embodied carbon and energy inputs;  
 167                                         materials. Designing and constructing buildings that help to reduce or avoid 
adverse impacts can reduce not only resource inputs and the city’s ecological footprint but also costs for developers and occupants. As such, encouraging high standards of sustainable building design and construction in new and 
existing buildings is an essential part of the City Plan’s response to the challenges of climate change, natural resource depletion, energy security, habitat loss, and wider environmental issues.  
 4.78 Brighton & Hove is particularly vulnerable to t he impacts of present and 
future climate change. Opportunities for growth and expansion are constrained by the South Downs to the north of the city and the sea to the south. The city also contains a high proportion of protected and/or old buildings
194. Withi n this context, the need to secure improvement in the 
environmental performance of the existing stock as well as more resource efficient and low carbon development whilst delivering homes and jobs 
through development is challenging.  Energy, water and waste have been 
identified as key resource issues of particular concern in relation to growth in the city
195. 
 4.79 The City Plan reflects the council’s and the city’s commitment towards 
achieving excellence in sustainable building design. The purpose of this pol icy 
is to ensure development in Brighton & Hove fulfils this commitment whilst helping deliver European, national and Sustainable Community Strategy targets
196. As such, all development  will be encouraged to contribute to the 
City Plan’s vision for energy, water and waste neutral, high- standard, cost -
effective, resource- efficient future and the development of a low carbon 
economy for the city.  
 4.80 The council’s approach to deliver low carbon growth is through highly 
energy efficient buildings and connections to existing or planned local energy infrastructure. Energy efficient design is an essential element of the excellence in design envisioned in the City Plan being the most cost -effective, 
194 17.4% of the city’s built up area is within conservation areas. The proportion of stock built 
before 1919 and during the inter -war period is 43.4% for England and 65.7% for Brighton & 
Hove (Brighton and East Sussex Together House Condition Surveys – Overview Report 
October 2008).  
195 The latest data (2009) indicates that activities in Brighton & Hove emit about 1,230 kilo 
tonnes (1.2m tonnes)  million tonnes of CO2 every year, with the domestic sector alone 
accounting for 42% of total direct emissions (mostly from energy use), significantly higher than 31% regionally and 30% nationally.  The city is within a ‘highly water stressed’ region (Environment Agency) with above regional average per capita consumption (South East average 150- 160 litres per person per day (l/p/d); Brighton & Hove’s is 169 l/p/d – Audit 
Commission). The adopted East Sussex, South Downs and Brighton & Hove Waste and 
Minerals Plan identifies a  need for additional waste recycling and recovery capacity to support 
further increases in the diversion of waste from landfill.  
196 The Brighton & Hove Sustainable Community Strategy commits to reducing the city’s 
carbon emissions by 42% by 2020 and by 80%  by 2050 from the 2005 baseline of 5.7 tonnes 
per person  reflecting the national commitment via the Climate Change Act . It also commits to: 
‘from a starting point of no increase in 2012/13 on the 2006 per capita City Ecological Footprint baseline of 5.72 global hectares (gha) per person, achieve a reduction to: 2.5 gha 
per person by 2020; and 1.25 gha per person by 2050’. Commitment to delivering these targets are further detailed in the city’s Climate Change Strategy.  
 168                                         efficient way of reducing carbon emissions from buildings (focusing on 
building fabric, orientation, layout, insulation, natural light, solar gains and shading, and passive ventilation). Once the demand for energy has been reduced to a minimum in a building the next step is to supply energy efficiently via renewable and low carbon energy and connection to decentralised heat and energy networks
197. 
 4.81. A Renewable and Sustainable Energy Study  has been undertaken for 
Brighton & Hove assessing opportunities for carbon reduction in the city. The study inform s planning policies around low and zero carbon energy 
particularly for Development Plan and Supplementary Planning Documents. Any wind turbine proposals will be considered against the Written Ministerial Statement (HCWS42) published on the 18
th June 2015 or the latest 
gove rnment guidance thereafter.  
 4.82. The Study recognises that to deliver  significant carbon savings during 
the Plan period emissions associated with the existing building stock  must be 
addressed in addition to setting standards for new development. A combi nation of approaches will be required. This includes: retrofit 
improvements to the existing building stock; supplying low carbon decentralised energy solutions such as  district heating; and installing 
renewable energy technologies.  
 4.83. The Study explores opportunities for district heating in the city and 
identifies areas with enhanced potential to implement district heating solutions and decentralised energy schemes. Where appropriate new development and retrofit projects will be required to connect to and/or make contributions to low or zero carbon energy schemes and/or to incorporate provision to enable future connection to any existing / potential decentralized energy schemes .
198. 
The energy study also provides an energy opportunities map which identifies  
particular areas of opportunity for different low and zero carbon technologies . 
 4.84 The Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment 
Method  (BREEAM) is a widely recognised, accredited, independent method 
for assessing environmental performance of non- residential buildings. Until 
superseded by nationally prescribed standards, the BREEAM standards for non-residential buildings will be required. Equivalent standards  for non-
residential buildings by nationally recognised certification bodies ma y also be 
accepted
199. Any changes to nationally described standards and or revised 
Building Regulations will be addressed through Part 2 of the City Plan or a review of this Policy.   4.85 An assessment of the energy demand and carbon dioxide emissions will  
be expected from  all residential and  proposed major developments, which 
197 Decentralised energy generation is a series of local systems generating heat and power, 
at or near the point of use, connected to local distribution networks.  
198 See Brighton & Hove Renewable and Sustainable Energy Study. This includes maps 
identifying opportunities for renewables and priority areas with enhanced potential for district 
heat networks.  
199 Such as Passivhaus or AECB standards.  
 169                                         should demonstrate the expected energy and carbon dioxide emission 
savings from energy efficiency and renewable energy measures incorporated in the development, including the feasibil ity of CHP/CCHP and community 
heating systems. The assessment should include:  
• calculation of baseline energy demand and carbon dioxide emissions ; 
• compliance against Part L of Building Regulations;  
• proposals for the reduction of energy demand and carbon dioxide 
emissions from heating, cooling and electrical power ;  
• proposals for meeting residual energy demands through sustainable 
energy measures; and  
• calculation of the remaining energy demand and carbon dioxide 
emissions.  
 
4.86 The National Home Energy Rating (NHER), Standard Assessment 
Procedure (SAP), Energy Performance Certificates (EPC) and Simplified Building Energy Model (SBEM) and other recognised, certified energy and carbon assessment procedures will be used to assess building performance and quantify emissions.  
 4.87 Rather than an inflexible blanket policy for all development, standards 
are set by development size, see Table 6 below . 
 
Table 6 - Definition of Development Size  
Development size  Definition  
Non-major  
Non-residential  extensions, conversions and 
changes of use;  Retail 151 -999 sq m; or other 
development 236 sq m – 1000 
sqm. 
Major  
Non-residential developments.  
 Development over 1,000 sq m; or 
development on a site of 0.5ha or 
more.  
 
4.88 The council will consider site constraints, technical restrictions; financial 
viability and the delivery of additional benefits to the city  where requirements 
of the policy cannot be met. Given the contextual nature of these issues, the 
council will expect developers to make a case on a site by site basis.   4.89 The challenge to reduce the ecological footprint of the city means that 
there is a need to for the council and planning applicants to identify opportunities for improving standards in retrofitting the existing stock. Measures should be implemented which lower the environmental impact from the existing stock through reuse and refurbishment of buildings, reducing carbon dioxide emissions and fossil energy use, increasing thermal efficiency, reducing waste and noise impacts, and conserving w ater, materials and other 
resources.   
 4.90 Developments will, where appropriate, be required to demonstrate how 
sustainability has been addressed by submitting a completed Sustainability Checklist. An Energy Statement and other relevant information may also be needed as part of an application.  
 4.91 This policy has important links with CP12 Urban Design.  
 170 CP9 Sustainable Transport  
 
The council will work with partners, stakeholders and communities to provide an integrated, safe and sustainable transport system that will accommodate new development; support the city’s role as a sub -
regional service and employment hub; and improve accessibility.   It will promote and provide measures that will help to manage and improve mobility and lead to a transfer of people and freight onto sustainable forms of transport to reduce the impact of traffic and congestion, increase physical activity and therefore improve people’s 
health, safety and quality of life.  
 A. Implementing the city’s Transport Strategy to manage, maintain and improve travel and movement.   
1. Regional  - Support and manage the role of the city as a sub regional 
centre for jobs, shopping, tourism and services by:  
 a. Working with adjoining authorities, the Highways Agency, businesses and public transport operators to improve and provide cross -boundary 
sustainable transport links.  
 b. Promote and facilitate better use of existing large car parks on the periphery of the city and transfer journeys onto existing and improved bus and rail services through partne rship working with public transport 
providers, businesses/landowners and adjoining authorities.  
 
2 Local  - Ensuring the priorities of the Transport Strategy are delivered 
within the city by:  
 a. Directing significant development into areas with good susta inable 
transport links and ensuring that major development will be located in areas where measures can be taken to secure accessibility improvements for all (see DA1- DA8 Development Areas). Sustainable 
transport measures will be focused into these areas.  
 b. Improving access to significant uses, facilities and services by supporting or providing sustainable transport measures (public transport, cycle and pedestrian and wheelchair friendly ), better public 
realm and improved safety.  
 c. Ensuring that all new,  major development schemes submit a 
Transport Assessment to identify the likely effects of the demand for travel they create and include measures to mitigate their impacts by reducing car use, implementing agreed travel plans  and making 
appropriate contributions towards sustainable transport measures (see CP7 Infrastructure and Developer Contributions).  
 
 171 d. Working with communities to identify priorities for improved public 
realm, safer areas  (e.g. child -friendly streets) and sustainable transport 
improveme nts (see SA6 Sustainable Communities).  
 B. The following transport measures will be undertaken to manage the demand for travel within and to/from the city, and deliver the Transport Strategy priorities.  
 1. Bus, Coaches and Taxis  
Implement strategic bus n etwork investment including priority lanes on 
key routes into and across the city.  Priority routes are:  
• Lewes Road (A270)  
• Edward Street and Eastern Road  
• A259 Seafront serving Brighton Marina, Brighton Centre & Churchill Square and Shoreham Harbour Development areas.  
• London Road 
• Valley Gardens 
 Ensure that sustainable transport infrastructure is in place to enable the introduction of rapid/express bus -based services with both east -west 
and north- south routes, by 2024.  
 2. Rail 
Work with partners to:  
• improve  capacity and efficiency of rail services, particularly at 
weekends; and  
• promote transfer of journeys from car to rail by encouraging people to use station parking facilities when travel ling into and 
out of  the city .  
 3. Cars and Freight  
Work with communi ties and partners to promote and provide measures 
including  :  
• traffic management measures including Intelligent Transport Systems that will improve traffic flow and reduce congestion;  
• prepare and implement a Highways Asset Management Plan;  
• car clubs;  
• 20mp h zones in residential areas;  
• promote use of alternative fuels and provide associated 
equipment, e.g. electric charging points ; and  
• specialised drop -off areas and appropriately located disabled 
parking bays for people with mobility difficulties.  
 
Prepare and implement a Freight Strategy for the city.  
 4. Walking and Cycling 
Improve the public realm in key areas, and the routes leading to them, to encourage and enable walking (including wheelchair access) and 
 172 cycling. Measures will be undertaken in a number  of areas including the 
following:  
• Valley Gardens 
• Brighton Station Gateway , Queens Road and West Street  
• Lewes Road  
• London Road 
• Edward Street and Eastern Road  
• Old Shoreham Road  
• A259 Seafront  
• Seven Dials  
• Hove Station  
• Pool Valley  
• Local shopping areas  
 
Implem ent an integrated cycle network by 2030.  
 Promote cycling and walking as ‘active travel’ by providing advice and information to residents, worker and visitors to the city.  
 Improve Rights of Way and access to open spaces and the National Park , including wh eelchair friendly provision . 
 5. Travel Plans  
Working with partners to increase and implement travel and mobility management measures to encourage more journeys by sustainable transport  in order  to reduce the number of car journeys to, from and 
within the city. Measures will include:  
• school travel plans; and 
• workplace travel plans.  
• personalised travel planning 
 6. Parking  
Co-ordinate the provision of public parking and traffic management 
measures across the city through an integrated approach to car parking  
charges, car park improvements, (including signing and information), controlled parking zones and ensure that capacity  of car parks used by 
the public are  not increased in central areas.  
 Prepar e new guidance on parking and servicing requirements for new 
developments that will put a priority on minimising off -street car parking 
provision in accessible locations; cycle parking standards;  establish 
clear criteria for car -free housing; allow provision of disabled parking 
bays and incorporate new technologies e.g electric vehicle charging 
points or parking management . 
 Prepare and implement a strategy to manage coach parking.  
   
 173 Supporting Text  
 
4.92 Brighton & Hove is a popular city in which to work, live and visit.  It is a 
compact and historic city and is ranked as the fifth most densely populated area in the South East region.  Road and rail links into the city have been determined by the geography of the area with the main links from the north 
being the A23 and north- south rail link to London.  The main eas t-west links 
are the A27 bypass, the A259 coast road and the Coastway rail links.  
 4.93 To ensure that Brighton & Hove continues to be attractive and thrive in 
the context of a growing population, more development and jobs it is important to maintain and i mprove travel and access into and within the city 
whilst providing a safe, clean and healthy environment.  To help achieve this, the Transport Strategy for the city, adopted in May 2011 within the council’s 
third Local Transport Plan [ LTP3 ], has the follow ing priorities:  
• support economic growth;  
• reduce  carbon emissions;  
• promote equality and opportunity;  
• improve safety, security and health; and  
• increase quality of life.  
 
4.94 The LTP3 provides a long -term policy  and short -term delivery  framework 
for capital  investment in schemes and measures to maintain roads , 
pavements , street lights and street furniture;  manage  and provide increased 
transport choices ; and improve access, infrastructure and the environment , 
with a focus on reducing pollution and carbon emis sions.  The LTP3 sets out 
a 15 year S trategy to 2026 and a Delivery Plan for investment covering the 
period from 2011- 14. 
 
4.95 Sustainable transport is a key principle in the city’s One Planet a pproach 
to sustainability  and will help to achieve One Planet  designation.  It is  one of 
the five outcomes of the city’s Climate Change Strategy ( December 2011). It 
is estimated that transport contributes around 26  per cent  to Brighton & 
Hove’s carbon footprint, or 317,000 tonnes per year (2009).   The main source 
of transport CO
2 emissions come from road transport , although overall 
transport emissions  have been reducing since 2005.    
 4.96 Transport technology will play an important role in managing movement 
and travel and therefore reducing carbon  emissions . Local measures can also 
make a difference, including:  
 - Greater use of public transport – bus, rail, coach and taxis  
- Greater use of zero carbon transport options – walking and cycling 
- Changes in travel patterns and behaviour – such as powered two-
wheelers, car s haring or flexible working  
- Reducing the need to travel – such as videoconferences, use of the 
internet or mobile services  
 
4.97 By informing and influencing journey patterns, promoting and 
encouraging the use of more sustainable transport options, and providing 
 174 measures that increase people’s travel options, the council and city can help 
tackle climate change and reduce carbon emissions.   
 4.98 Addressing air quality issues caused by road transport is a key priority, 
following the designation of an Air Qu ality Management Area [AQMA].  The 
associated Air Quality Action Plan ( 2010 ) identifies the need for successful 
transport planning and associated measures and initiatives to achieve a 
significant improvement in air quality, and therefore people’s health.  The 
development of a Sussex Low Emission Strategy (2011 ) seeks to promote 
measures through planning to reduce emissions.  These include locating development in accessible locations and promoting clean technologies such as installing electricity charging points. These measures are included in part B of the policy.   Significant health benefits will also arise from more sustainable 
travel as it encourages more active lifestyles and helps to reduce air and noise pollution  from transport . 
 
4.99 Brighton & Hove has a significant role as a regional transport ‘hub’ (an 
area with a high level of accessibility and interchange) which will be supported 
and implemented through partnership working with adjacent authorities, the Highways Agency and public transport operators (including bus, coach and rail) to provide alternative transport choices for some journeys and improve movement and access along the ‘spokes’ (A/M23, A27 and adjacent rail corridors).   Bus services that provide cross -links with adjacent authorities 
have improved and have become increasingly important in providing reliable 
choices and reducing the need to travel by car. Measures introduced on the A259 between Rottingdean and Peacehaven are a good example of this.  Joint working between authorities and transport operators will continue to ensure such opportunities are identified and developed through ongoing work on transport schemes affecting or that adjoin boundaries. The city has concentrations of land uses and high level economic, cultural and service 
activities that will benefit from improved connections. The need for rail service 
capacity and line improvements between the Sussex Coast and London, 
including the reinstatement of the rail line between Lewes and Uckfield, are supported.  
 4.100 Significant  pressure results from car journeys entering the city at peak 
times during the week and from shoppers and visitors at weekends, especially during the summer months.  To address this pressure the council is proposing to advise and work with landowners and businesses with existing large car parks (over 200 spaces) on the periphery of the city, where there are good road links, to promote their use for informal park + ride. The main purpose will be to intercept car journeys into the city and transfer workers and visitors onto existing and improved bus or rail routes. Work will be undertaken with adjoining authorities and public transport providers to promote and facilitate this approach.  Where planning permission is sought for increasing the 
capacity of existin g car parks the following matters  will be considered:  
 - safe and easy access to the site from the main road network;  
- associated priority measures on routes that link the informal park + ride 
service to the central area;  
 175 - a pricing and management strategy will be submitted as part of the 
application;  
- there will be no significant adverse effects on residential amenity and the local environment of the area;  
- where a proposal involves an increase in parking provision, measures will be taken to ensure that any adverse impacts are minimised to an acceptable level; and  
- informal park + ride locations will not have a significant adverse impact on 
a site of European Nature Conservation Importance.  
 
4.101 Part A2 of the policy addresses matters relating to reducing the number 
of car journeys within the city.   The  main part of the strategy is to locate major 
new development in accessible locations or in places which can be made 
sustainable through investment in walking, cycling and public transport improvements.  These are identified as Development Areas.  The exception is 
DA7 Toad’s Hole Valley which is a greenfield site.  It will be expected to meet 
high levels of sustainability and safety in terms of transport and access.  Increased development in some areas, particularly  neighbourhoods, may 
provide the opportunity to improve access to the transport network and important services such as employment, education, health and leisure.   
Developer contributions will be secured from new major development to mitigate travel impacts  of a development that will be assessed through a 
transport assessment.   
 4.102 Improving the environment around, and on routes to, schools and 
increasing the transport options available to reach centres of economic activity and employment can assist in reducing congestion. Measures include those that will assist in encouraging travel behaviour change, such as workplace and school travel planning, in addition to the development of the popular JourneyOn website and the Personalised Travel Planning programme.  These help to increase travel awareness and inform travel 
decisions and therefore achieve more sustainable travel patterns within, and to and from, the city.  
 4.103 Local shopping centres are a focus for many communities and provide 
a variety of facilitie s and services that can help to reduce the need to make a 
number of separate journeys. Enabling these locations to be more accessible and attractive to everybody and function practically e.g. deliveries and servicing, provides the opportunity for them to thrive as part of the local economy.    
 4.104 Improving accessibility, safety and the environment of residential areas 
is a priority and will include measures to create safer communities and shared 
spaces and reduce the impact of traffic, especially driver speeds.  It is 
expected that local priorities for improving neighbourhood roads can be brought forward through Neighbourhood Planning (see SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods).  
   
 176 Measures  
 
4.105 Part B of the policy details the measures to be undertaken in relation to 
6 main aspects of transport in the city  
 Buses, Coaches and Taxis  
4.106 Between 2001 and 2010 Brighton & Hove has experienced a significant 
increase in bus patronage by 11 million journeys per year from 30.2 million in 2001 to 41.1million in 2010.   This success has been due to excellent 
partnership working with bus operators and by securing infrastructure 
investment like real time bus information and bus priority lanes. The city council aims to carry this work forward and has a priority to invest in the sustainable transport corridors set out in part B1 of the policy.  These measures include providing bus and taxi lanes, bus stop improvements and real time bus information.  Funding has been secured to improve the Lewes Road and Eastern Road/ Edward S treet corridors in terms of bus priority as 
well as walking and cycling by 2016 (see part B4).  Pro- active measures will 
be undertaken to secure funding for the other priority corridors to deliver improvements by 2030. Expansion of the bus passenger inform ation system 
on the corridor from Peacehaven, Newhaven and Eastbourne will be implemented jointly with East Sussex County Council.   
 4.107 In terms of rapid/express bus -based services  for the city, the focus will 
initially be on ensuring that the infrastructure is in place to enable these services to be implemented.  It is important that future rapid bus services link key sites on the seafront, particularly Brighton Marina, the Brighton Centre and Shoreham Harbour.  Additionally a north- south route rapid bus -based 
service remains a priority for the city.   4.108 The council will continue to work closely with the Taxi Trade to ensure 
better provision for taxis across the city.  
 Rail 
4.109 The city council will work with Network Rail and train operators to 
minimise the disruption to rail services at weekends arising from essential rail 
improvement works.  The aim is to increase the quality and use of the north-south and east -west rail services to the city and encourage car users to park 
at stations and visit Brighton & Hove by train.  Car use should be minimised and car sharing promoted as well as other sustainable means to travel to train stations.  This will involve close working with rail providers and adjoining authorities    
 4.110 Further work will be undertaken with rail companies, including joint 
funded projects, to encourage increases in train patronage, capacity  and 
improve interchanges between sustainable forms of transport.  Measures to 
improve access and safety in and around all eight  stations in the city  will be a 
priority. This will include improving real time rail information both in and 
around stations and through the councils ‘journey on’ website and other media.  
 
 177 Cars and Freight  
4.111 Managing road travel and congestion in the city is a critical issue in the 
context of a growing population and the levels of development expected over 
the life of the City Plan.   
 4.112 The council will continue to develop and implement Intelligent Transport 
Systems which will improve the way the highway network is managed in real time to reduce congestion.  This will be achieved by enhancing the current network of traffic signals, expansion of CCTV, ANPR cameras and updating and extending the city’s existing Urban Traffic Management and Control System (UTMC).  
 4.113 The council is currently developing a Highways Asset Management 
Plan (HAMP) that will involve identifying and account for the city’s highway assets that will be used to prepare medium and long -term programmes of 
works to maintain the highway asset.  
 4.114 Car clubs provide people with access to car without having to own one. 
The council will continue to work in partnership with the Car Club providers to ensure that on street provision is located across the city to encourage use of car clubs as an alternative to car ownership.  
 4.115 The council will introduce a city wide speed limit of 20 mph within 
neighbourhoods and near schools.  The aim will be to improve road safety while encouraging more people to walk and cycle.  
 4.116 The council has installed ei ght electric vehicle charging points across 
the city and will continue to work with providers to explore further opportunities to expand the network. This will include potential provision in council and private car parks, and working with car club operator s, to 
encourage the use of electric vehicles.   4.117 In terms of freight, the council will establish a Freight Strategy that will 
create an efficient system and network for delivery vehicles that supports economic growth particularly with local business and assists in reducing the impact of goods vehicles on the city’s environment  particularly air quality . 
 Walking and Cycling   4.118 Cycling and walking are the best ways of exploring Brighton & Hove 
and can benefit personal health and wellbeing. The city council is committed to secure funding for, and implementing, improvements to the public realm to encourage cycling and walking in the areas specified in the policy.  The Brighton Station Gateway Project is being developed in partnership with Southern Rail  and Network Rail  to create: 
 178 • a safe and  accessible environment ; 
• a better walking and cycling environment;  
• an environment that encourages businesses ;  
• better use of routes to the east of the Station; 
• a high quality northern , as well as southern, station ent rance . 
 
4.119 Funding has been secured for improvements to walking and cycle 
facilities on Lewes Road.  The council’s Public Space Public Life Strategy sets the importance of negotiating the city from a pedestrian and cyclists perspective  and emphasises the need for improved legibility and the importance of the public realm in relation to the ‘liveability’ of Brighton & Hove.  
 4.120 A coherent pedestrian and cycle network is vital to the legibility and 
overall quality of the city. An audit has been undertaken of the existing network of cycle routes in the city with a view to linking routes to create a comprehensive network within the life of the City Plan. There is an aim  to 
contribute 10% of the Transport budget towards promoting walking and cycling.    
 4.121 As well as establishing a core cycling network, additional improvements 
will include : 
• one-way ‘except cycles’ networks;  
• toucan crossings;  
• on-street Cycle Parking;  
• cycle provision in pedestrian priority streets;  
• improve junctions for cyclists; and 
• conti nue to invest in Bikeability training for children.  
 
4.122 The council will continue to develop a coherent walking network and 
reduce the physical and mental barriers to walking and improve the links between key locations in the city such as the seafront and the city centre. Measures will include:  
• ensuring provision is pedestrian and wheelchair friendly;  
• introduction of more pedestrian priority routes;  
• better crossing facilities;  
• continue to introduce raised crossings & dropped kerbs;  
• decluttering streets and improving Way Finding signs;  
• continue to introduce drop kerbs;  
• maintain and improve footways; and  
• provide informal crossing points  
 4.123 There will also be continued investment in Rights of Way and access to 
open spaces and the South Downs National Park, reflecting priorities in the Rights of Way Improvement Plan [ROWIP] and Downland Initiative.  
 Travel Plans  
4.124 Other measures that make a significant contribution towards promoting 
and improving the use of sustainable transport travel management measures  
are known as ‘smarter choices’ initiatives . These include travel plans for 
 179 residential developments, schools and businesses to  enable people to make 
more informed and active sustainable choices. This will involve sustained 
partnership working to develop measures which will help reduce car journeys 
into the city and within the city.   
 
4.125 There will also be a sustained Personalised Travel Planning project 
targeting large areas on the city. This will involved working closely with individuals and community groups to assist them in making more informed travel choices with particular emphasis on more active travel to improve health and wellbeing.  
 Parking  
4.126 Car parking can have a significant role in generating traffic.  It is 
important that the city council has an integrated approach to parking in the city including setting parking charges, improving car parks
200; encouraging better 
use of out of centre car parks and implementing controlled parking zones (CPZs). The aim of this parking strategy will be to ease congestion in the city centre. A programme of CPZs will be prepared in consultation with residents and stakeholders and be considered alongside the wider parking issues of the city.  A key measure to tackle congestion will be to ensure there is no enlargement of public parking provision in central Brighton alongside 
measures to encourage the transfer of car journeys onto sustainable modes.  It is recognised that there will be the need for some disabled people to use private cars for travel and therefore the associated parking need.  
 4.127 In terms of new development, it will be a priority to review and prepare 
an up to date Supplementary Planning Document  (SPD)  setting out parking 
and servicing standards for new development.  Car parking standards will  
accord with the NPPF and the SPD will also include standards for cycle, disabled driver and motorcycle parking.   Standards and requirements for  
meeting the needs for new technologies including electric vehicle charging points and opportunities for ‘car fre e’ housing proposals will  also be 
addressed in the SPD.   4.128 Coach parking is an important matter for the city, especially in relation 
to the regeneration and development of the seafront,  and a strategy will be 
developed and implemented to manage this i ssue.  
        
200 The council has an on -going refurbishment programme of its eleven  off street car parks 
and will work towards achieving the industry standard ‘Park Mark’ for all its car parks 
(administered jointly by the Police and British Parking association) which is awarded to car parks that have good physical design and a high standard information management systems.  
 180                                         CP10 Biodiversity 
 
The council will develop programmes and strategies which aim to conserve, restore and enhance biodiversity and promote improved access to it through the following:  
 1. Working with neighbouring local authorities, contribut e to the delivery 
of biodiversity improvements within the South Downs Way Ahead Nature Improvement Area (NIA) , which incorporates parts of the urban 
area, the urban fringe, the seafront and surrounding downland. Within the NIA, a strategic approach to nature conservation enhancement will 
be taken, with the objectives of:  
 
• linking and repairing habitats and nature conservation sites to achieve landscape scale improvements to biodiversity;  
• conserving, restoring, recreating and managing priority habitats and protecting and recovering priority species populations  to 
contribute to Local Biodiversity Action Plan targets;  
• enabling people to have improved access to and understanding of 
local habitats and species;  and 
• ensuring development delivers measurable biodiver sity 
improvements.  
 
2. Ensure that all development proposals:  
 a) Provide adequate up- to-date information about the biodiversity which 
may be affected;  
 b) Conserve existing biodiversity, protecting it from the negative indirect effects of development, including noise and light pollution;  
 c) Provide net gains for biodiversity wherever possible, taking account of the wider ecological context of the development and of local Biosphere objectives; and 
 d) Contribute positively to ecosystem services, by minimising any negative impacts and seeking to improve the delivery of ecosystem services by a developmen t. 
 3. Establish criteria- based policies against which development 
proposals affecting designated sites of international, national and local importance; prote cted species; and biodiversity in the wider 
environment will be judged. Such policies will distinguish between the relative importance of each of these nature conservation features to provide clarity about when development may be permitted and about any mi tigation, conservation and enhancement which may be required.  
 4. Monitor progress with the delivery of biodiversity objectives through suitably devised indicators.  
 
 181 Supporting Text  
 
4.129 Biodiversity is the variety of life on earth, and includes all spec ies of 
plants and animals and the natural systems that support them. Through ‘ecosystem services’, such as air and water purification and the amelioration of the effects of Climate Change, biodiversity is a core component of sustainable development, underpinning economic development and prosperity. It also has an essential role in maintaining and improving quality of life, particularly in urban areas, and contributes to developing locally distinctive and sustainable communities.  
 4.130 All local authorities  have a duty under the Natural Environment and 
Rural Communities Act 2006 to have regard to the conservation of biodiversity 
in exercising all their functions. The duty aims to make biodiversity conservation an integral part of policy and decision making.  
 4.131 Brighton & Hove has a strong foundation for biodiversity conservation, 
having two Sites of Special Scientific Interest (including one Special Area of Conservation), eight Local Nature Reserves (either proposed or declared) and a suite of Sites of Na ture Conservation Importance.  
 4.132 Working in partnership with the Sussex Environment Partnership and 
the Sussex Wildlife Trust, the council has defined a Green Network for the city. The Green Network takes a landscape- scale approach, connecting the 
urban area, urban fringe and downland. Areas of new natural green space 
within it will contribute to the requirement for additional natural green space and new habitat identified in the council’s Open Space Study and the Local Biodiversity Action Plan.
201 
 4.133 The South Downs Way Ahead Nature Improvement Area (NIA) includes 
all of the city’s Green Network and much of the surrounding downland. The boundary of the NIA / Green Network is shown on the policies  map. This 
landscape scale designation was announced by  the Government in February 
2012 to deliver significant improvements for wildlife and people through the sustainable use of natural resources, restoring and creating wildlife habitats, connecting local sites and joining up local action. Within the setting of the NIA, 
development will be particularly encouraged to incorporate innovative approaches to nature conservation enhancement, such as the inclusion of biodiverse roofs and walls on buildings.  
 4.134 Brighton & Hove is working with local partners to achieve designation 
and then implementation of the city and surrounding area as a Biosphere Reserve. Biosphere Reserves are designated by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation as ‘centres of excellence’ to 
201 The Green Network addresses the citywide need for additional natural green space 
identified in the Open Space Sport and Recreation Study (October 2008) and Local 
Biodiversity Action Plan, but it does not address areas of deficiency in natural green space within the city. This requirement is addressed by Po licy CP1 6. 
 182                                         demonstrate conservati on and sustainable development in practice, by 
bringing nature and people closer together. They aim to deliver three 
objectives, through an integrated management strategy and spatial zonation 
of the environment :
Conservation  - of landscapes, ecosystems, species and genetic diversity . 
Development  - economic and social development which is culturally and 
ecologically sustainable.  
Knowledge  – environmental education, research and training to test and 
demonstrate innovative approaches to nature conservation and sustainable development . 
4.
135 Local opinion and national policy all strongly support the need for 
biodiversity enhancements, including those which extend habitats, reduce the isolation of existing areas of habitat and improve ‘local biodiversity’ close to where people can appreciate it on a daily basis. The priority habitats and species for conservation action in Brighton and Hove are described in the City Biodiversity Action Plan which also sets specific targets for their recovery and describes the ac tions needed to achieve them.  Involving local communities in 
delivering Action Plan objectives will be critically important to success. The role of local community and wildlife groups, schools, arts and culture (including the city’s museums) in promoting, raising awareness in delivering Biodiversity Action Plan objectives is recognised.  
4.
136 Working with the Sussex Biodiversity Record Centre, Brighton & Hove 
Council has carried out a detailed audit of the habitats of value to the city. This has established a baseline for monitoring the achievement of priority habitat and species targets. The audit highlights fragments of isolated habitat and identifies strategic opportunities for their reconnection as part of the Nature Improvement Area / Green Network.  
4.
137 Supplementary Planning Document 11 ‘Nature Conservation and  
Development’ includes a clear procedure for identifying existing nature conservation features which may be affected by a development and for quantifying the amount of new nature conservation features which should be 
delivered, either on or off site. Off site provision will be directed to the Green Network / NIA wherever possible. The SPD will also be used to quantify the amount of developer contributions which will be required from development proposals which do not deliver adequate nature conservation benefits. These contributions will also be used by the council to deliver pre- defined objectives 
within the Green Network / NIA.  
4.
138 Table 1  on page 26 sets out how this policy will help to deliver against 
the principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
1 83 CP11 Managing Flood Risk 
 
The council will seek to manage and reduce flood risk and any  potential 
adverse effects on people or property in Brighton & Hove, in accordance with the findings of the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA).  
 Development proposals in locations that have been subject to previous localised flooding events (including,  surface water/muddy floods, 
groundwater, or sewer floods) will need to demonstrate that the issue has been taken into account and appropriate mitigation measures
202 
incorporated. Where a risk is identified then planning applications must be accompanied by a  site specific flood risk assessment identifying how 
flood risk will be mitigated and minimised.  
 Where site- specific flood risk assessments are required they must be 
consistent with the latest guidance in the SFRA, national planning policy framework and t echnical guidance, and any supplementary information 
from the Environment Agency. In particular development should include appropriate sustainable drainage systems
203 in order to avoid any 
increase in flood risk and to ideally reduce flood risk.  
 Where flood risk management or mitigation measures are required, the 
opportunity to simultaneously achieve wider sustainability and biodiversity objectives for the city (as identified in CP8 and CP10) should be investigated and will be encouraged.  
 The council is producing a Surface Water Management Plan
204 to 
manage surface water flood risk and help mitigate the effects of climate change on the city.  
 Supporting Text  
 4.139 The city’s position on the coast and the potential for flooding and 
coastal erosion means that homes, buildings and infrastructure require protection and that the city is adapting well to climate change. In order to help appraise, manage and reduce flood risk in relation to the location of new development in the city the council commissioned a Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA
205), to assess the nature and extent of the flood risk. The 
SFRA identifies the current and potential future risks from different forms of 
202 Actions to prevent, avoid or minimise the actual or potential adverse effects of a 
plan, policy, development, project, etc.  
203 SUDS - An approach to drainage which seeks to decrease the amount of surface runoff, 
decrease the velocity of surface runoff, or divert it for other useful purposes, thereby reducing 
the contribution it makes to sewer discharge and flooding.  
204 A SWMP is a framework through which key local partners with responsibility for surface 
water and drainage in their area work together to understand the causes of surface water 
flooding and agree the most cost effective way of managing surface water flood risk.  
205 Brighton & Hove Strategic Flood Risk Assessment produced in April 2008, updated in 
2011  
 184                                         flooding across the city, including taking into account climate change and 
likely assoc iated rises in sea levels. The SFRA will be regularly reviewed to 
ensure that it contains the latest data and reflects the latest national planning policy, technical guidance
206 and legislation.   Table 1 on page 26 sets out how 
this policy will help to deliv er against the principles and local targets under the 
One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits . 
 4.140 There are no surface water courses in the city so there is limited risk of 
flooding fr om main rivers or ordinary watercourses (‘fluvial flooding’) identified 
in the SFRA . However the SFRA identifies risks from other sources of 
flooding. As a coastal city, there is a risk of tidal flooding in some areas along the coastal frontage which lie within Flood Zones 2 (medium probability) and 3 (high probability/functional floodplain). Surface water flooding is a particular risk because of the highly urbanised nature of the city and in particular “muddy” flooding in suburbs of the city when surface water runs off the agricultural land on the South Downs during periods of high rainfall. Groundwater flooding is also a potential risk for the whole city due to the high permeability of the underlying chalk South Downs, and linked to this is the potential f or sewer flooding if infrastructure becomes inundated with 
groundwater.  
 4.141 The proposed approach to accommodating growth in the city has been 
screened against all types of flood risk and the SFRA has informed the spatial strategy and the identification of Development Areas, whereby development 
has been steered to the areas of lowest flood risk first.
207 
 4.142 It has not been possible, consistent with wider sustainability objectives 
for the city, for all the proposed Development Areas to be located wholly  
within Flood Zone 1 (low probability of flooding). Two of the proposed development areas: DA2 Brighton Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock Area and DA7 Shoreham Harbour Area are both in Flood Risk Zone 3 and were therefore considered in a more- detailed flood risk assessment (a Level 2 
SFRA). This provided consideration of the flood hazards in more detail and for sets out a framework for managing flood risk whilst still allowing necessary development to occur
208 subject to further, more detailed, flood risk 
asse ssments for specific sites in those areas. Nonetheless the more 
vulnerable land uses, such as residential development, should be directed to the parts of the Development Areas that lie in the areas of least flood risk. The risk of tidal flooding along the coastal frontage and specific requirements to manage that flood risk are addressed in DA2 Brighton Marina, Gas Works and Black Rock Area, DA7 Shoreham Harbour Area, and SA1 The Seafront.  
 
206 Technical guidance on flood risk has been published alongside the National Planning 
Policy Framework March 2012  
207 Sequential Test 2008  
208 Exception Test 2008 for Brighton Marina, and 2011 for Shoreham Harbour  
 
 185                                         4.143 Where flood risk management or mitigation measures are required, 
there is often scope to simultaneously achieve wider sustainability and 
biodiversity objectives for the city as identified in CP8 and CP10. For example green roofs can offer multiple benefits of helping to reduce surface water run-off, making buildings more sustainable, and enhancing biodiversity and the 
green network. Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS) can offer a similar range of sustainability benefits in addition to managing surface water. Solutions that offer multiple sustainability benefits will be encouraged.  
 4.144 Surface Water Management Plans (SWMPs) are identified as a tool to 
manage surface water flood risk on a local basis by improving and optimising coordination between relevant stakeholders by working together to understand the causes and  effects of surface water flooding and agree the 
most cost effective way of managing surface water flood risk for the long term. Background work is underway to develop a Surface Water Management Plan for the city, and a Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment has been completed and a Phase 2 (Detailed risk assessment) is underway and is due to be completed in 2013.  The council has a new role as Lead Local Flood Authority 
with a responsibility for surface and groundwater flooding , SuDS approval and 
other responsibilities derived from the Flood and Water  Management Act 
2010 and is a source of information and technical assistance.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 186  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section  Four 
City Wide Policies  
 
 
 
An Attractive City  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 187 CP12 Urban Design 
 
A city -wide Urban  Design Framework will identify and set out areas of 
the city which should largely be conserved; areas of the city suitable for localised, incremental development and enhancement; and areas of the city where positive and pro- active measures are required to  secure 
major enhancement. Where appropriate, density will be raised through predominantly low -to-medium rise development but making most 
effective use of those identified areas which have the potential for taller developments, defined as 18 metres or more in height (approximately 6 
storeys). The areas with such potential are:  
 
• Brighton Marina  
• Brighton Station / New England area  
• Central Seafront  
• Eastern Road / Edward Street  
• Hove Station area  
• Lewes Road corridor  
• London Road / Preston Road corridor  
• Western Se afront / Kingsway 
_ 
• Shoreham Harbour  
 All new development will be expected to:  
 1. Raise the standard of architecture and design in the city;  
2. Establish a st rong sense of place by respecting the diverse character 
and urban grain
209 of the city’s identified  neighbourhoods;  
3. Achieve  excellence in sustainable building design and construction;  
4. Conserve or enhance the city’s built and archaeological heritage and 
its setting s; 
5. Have regard to impact on the purposes of the National Park, where within the setting of the National Park;  
6. Protect or enhance strategic views into, out of and within the city;  
7. Be inclusive, adaptable and accessible:  
8. Ensure that the design of the external spaces is an integral element of 
the overall design approach, in a mann er which provides a legible 
distinction between public and private realm; and  
9. Incorporate design features which deter crime or disorder and the fear 
of crime;  
 Supporting Text  
 4.145 The purpose of this policy is to provide a statutory basis for the 
proposed Urban Design Framework and to enable as much certainty and 
clarity as possible about where the city will broadly accommodate any taller development. The Urban Design Framework will s et out priorities for 
209 General layout, pattern and footprint of buildings and streets as viewed overhead in plan 
form.  
 188                                         preparing planning briefs  and supplementary planning documents for 
development areas and other areas requiring positive enhancement. It will 
include identification of the key strategic views into, out of and within the city  
which require protection or which may benefit from development that would enhance them.  
 4.146 Given the city’s physical constraints there is a need to increase density 
on existing brownfield land in a sustainable manner. Taller buildings (in the 
context of  the city’s prevailing built form) offer one potential way of achieving 
this in appropriate locations. This policy seeks to ensure that such proposals 
are directed towards those broad areas where such potential has been 
identified. The areas are described in  greater detail as follows:  
 
• Brighton Marina – is a node
210 limited to the b oundaries formed by the 
eastern and western breakwaters and the undercliff walk to the north.  
• Brighton Station / New England area – is a node situated to the east of  
Brighton Station, to the north of Trafalgar Street and along New England Street.  
• Central S eafront  – is a node comprising a small area to the east of 
Sussex Heights that includes Churchill Square, the Brighton Centre and the Odeon Cinema complex.  
• Eastern Road / Edward Street  – is a linear corridor broadly stretching 
from William Street in the we st to Bristol Gate in the east and which 
focuses on the opportunities around existing tall buildings, particularly those at the County Hospital.  
• Hove Station area  – is a node situated on both sides of the rail corridor, 
extending westward to include the existing group of tall residential buildings to the north of Clarendon Road, together with the adjoining industrial areas.  
• Lewes Road corridor  – is a linear area centred on the University of 
Brighton’s Moulsecoomb campus and the former Preston Barracks site.  
• London Road / Preston Road corridor  – is a linear area focused around 
existing ‘mid rise’ tall buildings that front the western edges of Preston Park, Surrenden Field and Withdean Park.  
• Western Seafront / Kingsway  – is a linear corridor along the stretch of 
Kingsway that directly overlooks Hove’s Western Lawns  as far west as 
Wish Road. 
• Shoreham Harbour  – is a node focused on the eastern- most area of 
the harbour within the Brighton & Hove City boundary, including both the docksides and the commercial area i mmediately north of 
Wellington Road.  
 4.147 Further detail on the boundaries of the tall building areas and guidance 
on appropriate height ranges will be provided in the Urban Design Framework. It should be noted that inclusion of a particular site within one of the tall building areas does not warrant certainty that a taller building would be acceptable on that site and particular regard must be had to any potential 
210 Node: A place where activity and routes are concentrated.  
 189                                         impact on heritage assets and their settings, in accordance with Policy CP15. 
The identified tall building areas are generally outside of conservation areas (with the exception of part of the Western Seafront/Kingsway corridor) but some are adjacent to conservation areas or may include other heritage assets or their settings.  
 4.148 All applicat ions that fall within the definition of a tall building will be 
required to be accompanied by a Tall Building Statement, as currently set out in the adopted Tall Buildings Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG 15) , 
which will be superseded by the Urban Design Framework.  
 4.149 This policy also sets out the general strategic design criteria expected 
of new development. Innovative contemporary architecture, which enhances the reputation of the city, and mixed use schemes which add distinctiveness to local neig hbourhoods, will be actively encouraged. The function and design 
of the spaces and routes between and around new buildings should be 
considered from the outset of the design process to ensure that they are fully integrated into the development as a whole and that they link positively to the wider urban or suburban context. Planted green spaces may  provide areas for  
relaxation that also aid urban cooling . Developers of major housing schemes 
will be encouraged to demonstrate, as part of their Design and Acces s 
Statement, how the development would meet the Building for Life
211 criteria.  
 4.150 The Urban Characterisation Study provides a comprehensive 
understanding of the diversity and quality of the city’s urban character, its sensitivity to change and the development trends and pressures that affect Brighton & Hove. It has identified distinct landscape character types within the city and, within those, distinct neighbourhoods, in addition to the central conservation areas. Each of the neighbourhoods are studied in detail and this will assist in judging which areas are best able to accommodate, or might merit, positive changes in density and/or built form. The central conservation areas are partly  covered by the Historic Character Assessment report for 
Brighton & Hove carried out as part of the Sussex Extensive Urban Survey. Both documents will inform the proposed Urban Design Framework.  
 4.151 Until that is adopted
212, the Urban Characterisation Study will be used 
to guide consideration of backland or infill developments and more detail will be set out in the City Plan Part 2. The council will aim to ensure that high quality is maintained through the rigorous enforcement of planning permissions.  
 4.152 Inclusive design includes removing physical barriers and exclusions 
imposed on people by poor design of buildings and their surroundings and ensuring that it reflects the needs and aspirations of minority groups. The council will therefore critically examine proposals to ensure accessibility to and between buildings and the adjoining private and public realm, to meet the 
211 A national standard for well -designed homes and neighbourhoods produced by the 
Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (now part of the Design Council).  
212 The anticipated adoption date for the Urban Design Framework is January 2017. 
 190                                         needs of all sections of the community. With regard to adaptability,  the 
government has introduced national technical standards related to 
accessibility, adaptability and wheelchair standards. Through the City Plan Part 2 the council will provide evidence and seek to introduce a policy to provide enhanced accessibility or adaptability .
213  
 4.153 This policy will also help to deliver against the local targets under the 
One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits (see Table 1 on page 26).This policy complements 
policy CP14 Housing Density and has important links with CP8 Sustainable Buildings, CP13 Public Streets and Spaces and CP18 Healthy Cit y. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
213 Optional, enhanced accessibility requirements are set out in Part M of the Building 
Regulations.  
 191                                         CP13 Public Streets and Spaces 
 
The quality, legibility and accessibility of the city’s public urban realm will be improved in a comprehensive manner, in conjunction with other partners, though new development schemes, transport s chemes and 
regeneration schemes. Such improvements will be required to produce attractive and adaptable streets and public spaces that enrich people’s quality of life and provide for the needs of all users by:  
 1. Positively contributing to the network of public streets and spaces in the city;  
2. Enhancing the local distinctiveness of the city’s neighbourhoods;  
3. Conserving or enhancing the setting of the city’s built heritage;  
4. Reducing the adverse impact of vehicular traffic and car parking;  
5. Utilising high quality, robust and sustainable materials for all elements of the street scene;  
6. Incorporating street trees and biodiversity wherever possible;  
7. Encouraging active living and healthier lifestyles;  
8. Helping to create safe and inclusive public spaces;  
9. Incorporating an appropriate and integral public art element; and 10. Reducing the clutter of street furniture  and signage . 
 In appropriate cases new developments will be expected to make a contribution to achieving these requirements (see CP7).  
 Supporting Text  
 4.154 Brighton and Hove’s streets and public urban spaces do not always do 
the city justice. The pedestrian and cycle links between the areas that people want to get to are not as good as they could be, streets can be cluttered, material s are inconsistent and there may be too few places to rest. An 
opportunity exists to create a simpler but high quality urban realm that is pedestrian and cycle- friendly but accommodates the needs of all people. This 
may be in conjunction with improvements to sustainable transport (see policy CP9). The purpose of this policy is to ensure that new development contributes towards the implementation of public urban realm improvements proposed by the Public Space Public Life Study (2007), where appropriate, and that all public realm works (whether publicly or privately funded) are 
designed to achieve consistent aims and standards and use locally sourced materials where possible. The council’s Streetscape Design Guidelines (2010) set out the appropriate street furniture etc. for use in the city.  
 4.155 The Public Space Public Life Study introduced to Brighton & Hove the 
concept of a public realm network which operates across the city. The principle underpinning this is that a distinctive hierarchy of routes should be 
developed and that the experience of moving through the city should be continuous and consistent. The award winning re- design of New Road in 
Brighton was the first project to be implemented using the approach advocated by this Study. The council will actively explore with local communities the potential for further pedestrian priority and shared space 
 192 treatment, as part of the wider public realm network. New and improved public 
urban realm will be expected to make a positive contribution towards Lifetime Neighbourhoods. This will include ensuring that it meets people’s whole lifetime needs: children; parents with pushchairs; people with mobility difficulties or visual impairment; those with temporary or permanent disabilities; and the elderly. The aim is to make it easier for everyone to move around the city, including clear signage, shade from the sun, removing obstacles and the provision of public seating to allow regular opportunity to stop and rest. In this respect schemes will be expected to do more t han 
simply meet minimum accessibility standards.  
 4.156 Tree and other planting should be incorporated into schemes in a 
manner that is integral to their design and will contribute to enhancing the city’s ‘green network’ and to the city’s Biosphere Reserve objectives as set 
out in policy CP10 Biodiversity. Where appropriate this may include productive planting that contributes towards improving urban food productivity.  
 4.157 The artistic tradition of Brighton & Hove is an important part of its 
identity. Th e provision of public art can create and enhance local 
distinctiveness in the public realm and help develop a desirable sense of place as well as improving legibility (e.g. the Aids Memorial in New Steine). Public art schemes will provide important opportunities to involve the local 
community and all will offer work opportunities to artists, many of whom will be local.  Public art may take many forms and, in relation to the public realm, can include construction details, landscape schemes, sculpture, water features, 
street furniture and lighting effects. Planning guidance on the implementation of public art will be produced to support this policy.  
 4.158 Public spaces often have a temporary function for outdoor events and 
community uses and good design can facilitate this (with removable street furniture for example).  
 4.159 Priority for implementation will be given to those urban areas set out in 
policy CP9 Sustainable Transport, namely Valley Gardens, Station Gateway, Lewes Road, London Road, Edward Street/ Eastern Road, Old Shoreham 
Road, A259 Seafront, Seven Dials, Hove Station, Pool Valley and local shopping areas . Developer contributions for improvements to the public realm 
will be required where they relate to the development and meet the tests in the National Planning Policy Framework  (see CP9).  This policy will also help 
to deliver against the local targets under the One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits (see Table 1  on page 26). 
 4.160 This policy complements policy CP12 Urban Design and has important 
links with CP18 Healthy City and CP9 Sustainable Transport.  
     
 193 CP14 Housing Density 
 
Residential development should be of a density that is appropriate to the identified positive character of the neighbourhood and be 
determined on a case by case basis. Development will be permitted at higher densities than those typically found in the locality where it can be adequately demonstrated that the proposal:  
 1. Would be of a high standard of design and would help to maintain or create a coherent townscape;  
 2. Would respect, reinforce or repair the character of the neighbourhood and contribute positively to its sense of place;  
 3. Would include a mix of dwelling types, tenures and sizes that  reflect 
identified local needs;  
 4. Is easily accessible by sustainable transport or has the potential to be easily accessible;  
 5. Is well served by local services and community facilities; and  
 6. Provides for outdoor recreation space appropriate to the  demand it 
would generate and contributes towards the ‘green network’ where an identified gap exists.  
 To make full, efficient and sustainable use of the land available, new residential development in Brighton & Hove will be expected to achieve a minimum net density of  50 dwellings per hectare (dph), provided it 
contributes positively to creating or maintaining sustainable neighbourhoods and that all of the above criteria can be satisfactorily met. 
 Within the Development Areas covered by policies DA1 to  DA6 and  DA8, 
the density of new residential development will be expected to achieve a minimum of  100 dph on major development sites, provided that all of the 
above criteria can be satisfactorily met. Where any site- specific policy is 
in place for the site, the density level in that policy should be met.  
 Where a proposed development is below 50dph, a lower density will be accepted where it can be adequately demonstrated that the development would reflect the neighbourhood’s positive characteristics, would me et 
the housing needs of a particular group or groups within the community and would better contribute towards creating a sustainable neighbourhood.  
     
 194 Supporting Text  
 
4.161 In order to boost significantly the supply of housing, national planning 
policy214  encourages local planning authorities to set out their own approach 
to housing density. The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the city, which is compact and constrained, makes the most efficient use of the limited brownfield land available whilst ensuring that sustainable neighbourhoods are achieved.  
 4.162 Net dwelling density is calculated by including only those site areas 
developed for housing and directly associated uses, including access roads within the site, private garden space, car parking areas, incidental open space and landscaping and children’s play areas, where these are provided. National statistics show that in 2010 new dwellings were built at an average density of 43 dwellings per hectare (dph), whilst on brownfield land this figur e 
was 48 dph
.215  
 4.163 The council’s Urban Characterisation Study (2007) has shown that the 
19
th century terraced development that typifies much of the existing urban 
core of the city now supports net density levels ranging between around 60 and over 200 dph. The upper range of these figures is comparable to some of the city’s purpose built tall blocks of flats. Semi -detached dwellings in the 
urban core range between 25 and 80 dph, depending upon size and the degree of conversion to flats. In some outer 20
th century suburbs the figure 
falls below 20 dph.  
 4.164 Over the three year period 2006 – 2009, 85 per cent of new dwellings 
completed in the city (including conversions and change of use) were built at over 50 dph, with a further 15  per cent  built at betw een 30 – 50 dph
216. 
Densities of at least 100 dph were frequently achieved in central areas of the city and over 300 dph in some cases. The minimum density requirements set out in this policy are therefore considered to be realistic  and achievable. 
 4.165 Successful higher density development will depend upon a ‘design- led’ 
approach that respects its local context and minimises impacts on its surroundings. Higher density housing should also include measures that enable residents to make more informed and sust ainable choices on 
transport, as set out in Policy CP9 Sustainable Transport. The Urban Characterisation Study will be used to guide consideration of backland or infill developments until more detailed policies are set out in the City Wide Plan Part 2 and the Urban Design Framework SPD.  
 4.166 Higher densities may not be achievable in those parts of suburban and 
village neighbourhoods where existing low density development contributes to a positive sense of place and community. Density may also be constrained by 
214 National Planning Policy Framework (2012) – part 6.  
215 Land Use Change Statistics (England) 2010 – provisional estimates (July 2011)  
216 Calculations based on schemes of 10 or more dwellings.  
 195                                         the need to retain key heritage assets in their settings and/or important 
landscape features.  
 4.167 In the case of mixed use schemes, the residential site area should be 
calculated using total net site area apportioned between the various uses, on a pro rata basis (i.e. reducing the site area by the same ratio as that of the 
residential to non- residential floor space). However, in assessing density on 
mixed use sites, the council will be mindful of the overall benefits of the proposals.  
 4.168 This p olicy will also help to deliver against the local targets under the 
One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits (see Table 1 on page 26).This policy is 
complemented by city wide policy CP12 Urban Design and will assist in the implementation of Development Area policies (DA1 - 8) and in creating and 
maintaining sustainable neighbourhoods (SA6). The council’s approach to achieving an appropriate mix of housing type, tenure and size is set out i n 
policy CP1 Housing Delivery and CP19 Housing Mix.  
                                
 196 CP15 Heritage 
 
The council will work with partners to promote the city’s heritage and to 
ensure that the historic environment plays an integral part in the wider social, cu ltural, economic and environmental future of the city through 
the following aims:  
 1. The city’s historic environment will be conserved and enhanced in accordance with its identified significance, giving the greatest weight to designated heritage assets and their settings and prioritising positive 
action for those assets at risk through, neglect, decay, vacancy or other threats. The council will further ensure that the city’s built heritage guides local distinctiveness for new development in historic areas and 
heritage settings;  
 2. Where proposals are promoted for their contribution to mitigating climate change, the public benefit of this will be weighed against any harm which may be caused to the significance of the heritage asset or its setting; and  
 3. The Conservation Strategy
217  will be taken forward and reviewed as a 
framework for future conservation area management proposals ; to 
provide criteria for future conservation area designations and other local designations, controls and priorities; and to set  out the council’s 
approach to dealing with heritage at risk.  
 Supporting Text  
 4.169 The city’s rich architectural heritage encompasses the internationally 
renowned Royal Pavilion a nd nearly 3,400 other listed buildings as well as 15 
scheduled monuments, six registered parks or gardens of special historic 
interest, 34 conservation areas, numerous locally listed heritage assets  and 
over 80 A rchaeological  Notification Areas
218. The council will promote better 
understanding of the extent and significance of all  the city’s heritage assets 
and their settings in order to ensure a well informed and proportionate approach to their conservation. Undesignated heritage assets will be identified by means of a comprehensive review of the current Local List, through early discussions with applicants and, in the case of archaeological sites such as downland features, through partnership working with the County Archaeologist.  
 4.170 A requirement to conserve the identified special character of 
conservation areas, and the set tings of other heritage assets, will be reflected 
217 The Strategy for the Conservation of Brighton & Hove’s Historic Built Environment (2003) 
(and subsequent revisions)  
218 These are sites that have been compiled by the County Archaeologist as part of the Sites 
and Monuments Record. These areas are judged to have county and city wide importance 
and are known to have archaeological remains or features. Some might on further detailed investigation merit designation as a Scheduled Monument.  
 197                                         in Planning Briefs and area- based Supplementary Planning Documents where 
appropriate and will inform the Urban Design Framework proposed under 
Policy CP12. New development in conservation areas, and within the setting of heritage assets, should take the opportunity to enhance the significance of those areas or settings wherever possible.
 Some of the city’s conservation 
areas are very cohesive and would often be  best enhanced through careful 
infill buildings that authentically reflect  historic precedents.  Other  areas  are 
more diverse in appearance and are very capable of accepting bold and innovative contemporary designs as long as , for example, rhythm and 
proportion respect  the prevailing historic context.  
 4.171 The council will continue to maintain a register of those listed buildings 
considered to be ‘at risk’ or ‘vulnerable’ through neglect, decay, vacancy or other threats and will actively seek to bring such buildings back into appropriate use and/or a g ood state of repair. Conservation areas and other 
assets ‘at risk’ will also be monitored and action identified that would remove or mitigate the threats to their special interest. Such action may include the introduction of Article 4 Directions to control  permitted development rights 
where such rights are undermining the aims for the historic environment.  
 4.172 Keeping heritage assets in use is inherently sustainable as it avoids the 
consumption of building materials and energy and the generation of waste from the construction of replacement buildings. Where proposals that are promoted for their contribution to climate change objectives have a potentially negative effect on a heritage asset, the council will wherever possible help the applicant to identify  feasible solutions that deliver similar climate change 
objectives but with less or no harm to the heritage asset and its setting.  This 
policy will also help to deliver against the local targets under the One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits (see Table 1  on page 26 ). 
 4.173 The council’s Conservation Strategy (2003) seeks to actively manage 
change within the historic environment and to ensure that available resources are put to the best possible use. I t will be reviewed and revised in respect of 
any changes in legislation and governmental policy advice and, subject to 
public consultation, to reflect future local priorities . A Historic Character 
Assessment report for Brighton & Hove (2007), carried out as part of the Sussex Extensive Urban Survey, provides an assessment of the city’s historic core and will inform relevant conservation area character statements and 
management plans.   4.174 CP5 Culture and Tourism recognises the relationship of the wealth and 
importance of the city’s historic environment with tourism and cultural industries in the city.  This policy also has important links to CP13 Public 
Streets and Spaces.  
    
 
 198 CP16 Open Space 
The
 council will work collaboratively to safeguard, improve, expand and 
promote access to Brighton & Hove’s open spaces (public and private)  
and the diverse range of experiences offered by these spaces.  This will 
be achieved through the following:  
Retaining and enhancing open space  
1
. The council  will require the retention of and seek better, more
effective and appropriate use of all existing open space, as shown on the policies  map, having regard to the Open Space, Sports and 
Recreation Study  and the Open Space Update Study
219.  
P
lanning permission resulting in the loss of open space, including the 
beach,  will only be granted where : 
a
) The loss results from a development allocation in a development plan
and regard has been given to maintaining some open space (physically and visually); or  
b) The
 site is not part of a playing field (current or historical) and the
loss is necessary to bring about significant and demonstrable long term 
enhancements to the city’s public open space offer as a whole; or   
c
) The proposed development is ancillary to the  use of the open space
and will result in only a small loss of open space, provides improvements to and better use of the remaining space and optimises public access; or;  
d)T
he site is:
•physically incapable of meeting the city’s wider open space needs;
•is not part of the beach or a playing field (current or historical) ;
and,
•in accordance with the Open Space Study Update 2011 (orsubsequent approved revisions), is of a poor quality withoutpotential for improvement (current and potential) and there is anidentified surplus (current and future) in all types of open space
within the locality (ward and sub area). In order to test theimportance of the site to the local community the site must beactively marketed at a price that reflects its use, condition and local
market prices for at least a year with no success before alternativeproposals can be considered.
e) T
he 2014 Urban Fringe Assessment will be a material  consideration in
the determination of applications of residential development in the urban fringe prior to the adoption of Part 2 of the City Plan.  
219 And any subsequent revisions, audits and strategies.  
1 99 New development and requirements for new open space  
 
2. New development will be required to contribute to the provision of and improve the quality, quantity, variety and accessibility of public open spac e to meet the needs it generates in accordance with the 
criteria and local standards set out below
220.  
 a) Developments will be required to optimise the provision of safe on-site public open space with good passive surveillance and accord with Biosphere Res erve principles and objectives. Where it is not practicable 
for all or part of the open space requirements to be provided on site, an appropriate alternative agreed provision and/or contributions towards off-site provision will be required; and   
 b) Devel opments, especially those located in an area with open space 
deficiencies, will be expected to help improve sustainable means of access to open space and facilitate appropriate links to the city’s open 
space framework (which comprises the open spaces shown  on the 
policies  map, the Nature Improvement Area, beaches, the countryside 
and new open space allocations and links).  The provision of public open space will be in addition to incidental amenity and landscaped areas.  (See also CP7 and CP9)  
 c) All new p rovision should optimise accessibility to all users (including 
the local community and visitors), reflect the open space requirements, facilitate sustainable means of access, provide measures to improve public safety within and around the respective spaces  and seek to 
improve the variety and quality of safe provision in the city.  
 d) The community use of private and schools open spaces will be sought when considering proposals affecting these sites including the temporary use of redundant or undeveloped si tes. The council will seek 
to allocate new open space in the City Plan Part 2.   
 e) Where appropriate, help to secure investment in poor quality, under -
used open spaces, particularly in disadvantaged areas (see SA6) and areas with open space deficiencies to bring about enhancements in 
quality and public use.  
 f) Seek proactive and appropriate management of open spaces including the enforcement of by -laws and seek the enhancement and 
improvement of open spaces and features.  All open space proposals 
will be  expected to have an agreed funded maintenance plan for the 
space. Lighting proposals, including floodlighting, will be required to 
minimise light pollution, help reduce crime and not cause significant harm.  
  
220 Or subsequent approved revisions or open space strategies  
 200                                         Open Space Standards*  
 Quantity Standard  
(hectare / 1,000 pop)  Accessibility 
Standards**  
Parks and Gardens  0.92 15 minute walk time 
(720m)  
Natural Semi -Natural  2.8 15 minute walk time 
(720m)  
Amenity Greenspace  0.582  10 minute walk time 
(480m)  
Allotments  0.23 15 minute walk time 
(720m)  
Children &  Young 
People (equipped play)  0.055  15 minute walk time 
(720m)  
Outdoor Sport  See CP17  See CP17  
Total –excl. outdoor 
sport (brackets show 
total inc. outdoor sport).  4.587 hectares/1,000 
pop (5.057 ha/1,000 
pop)  
* The 2008 Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study contains detailed information on Quality  
Standards expected.    
** The accessibility standards for the city provide the maximum distance a person would 
normally walk from their home and/or work to get to the respective type of open space (existing physical constraints limit how this is met in practice so innovative solutions will be sought which may include consideration of accessibility by bus/bicycle etc).  They help to 
show open space catchment areas and thus help in the assessment of locational deficiencies.  
They also help in the assessment of open space priorities when considering development proposals.  
 
Supporting Text  
 
4.175 Brighton & Hove’s green and open spaces play an essential role in 
maintaining and improving quality of life and also contribute to developing 
locally distinctive and sustainable communities. They are also important in aiding movement around the city and enabling physical activity. Green open spaces contribute to physical, mental, and emotional well -being and can offer 
lasting economic, social, cultural and environmental benefits. They act as heat sinks, help to cool urban environments and offer visual relief from the urban character of the city. Parks, outdoor sports areas, play areas, cemeteries, natural/semi -natural areas,  school grounds, amenity spaces within housing 
estates and allotments are all part of this rich mix. Public consultation always highlights the importance of open spaces to both residents of and visitors to Brighton & Hove.  
 4.176 National policy and research recognises the importance of open space.   
It is therefore appropriate, in view of the competing pressures within the city, that the Council takes a proactive strategic approach to open space. The Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study 2008; which assesses the current and future open space needs and then recommends the local open space standards for accessibility, quality and quantity has not identified any open space to be surplus to the city’s open space requirements (current or in the future). It demo nstrates that the city will need to retain and use all existing 
(both public and private) open space more effectively and create additional areas of open space in order to meet the needs of an increasing population.   
 201 4.177 Due to the city’s housing requirements a review of the capacity and 
need for open space was required and the findings of the Open Space, Sport 
and Recreation Study 2008 were further assessed through the Open Space 
Study Update 2011.  The Update Study endorsed the local open space standar ds and the approach taken in the 2008 study.  It devised a scoring 
system to assess open space which was applied to private open spaces and used to inform the 2010 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment. However the factors that produce a low open space offer (a combined assessment of ‘quantity’, ‘accessibility’ and ‘quality’ including potential) also limit a site’s suitability for housing and no additional open space sites were identified through the study as suitable for housing.  However through the 
2014 Urban Fringe Site Assessment Study some open spaces within the city’s urban fringe have been identified as having potential to help meet the city’s housing requirements (see policies SA4 and CP1). Unlike other urban open spaces the loss of these sites can more readily be mitigated through the provision of new publically accessible space, enhancement to existing space or by alternative provision within the National Park and/ or compensated for by the National Park’s open space offer.  
 4.178 When th e open space standards are applied, a significant increase in 
open space will be required by 2030 (an additional 293 hectares should be 
provided when ONS population projections are applied, however  when the 
City Plan housing target of 13,200 is taken into account  the generated 
demand equates to approximately 167 hectares  
221). It is therefore important 
new developments seek to provide the open space requirements generated respectively.  However due to the city’s physical constraints, between the sea and the S outh Downs National Park , it is recognised that the future open 
space requirements are unlikely to be met in full. To compensate, more intensive use of existing open space will be needed in an attempt to maintain current quality of life including the opening up of school grounds to the community/public and an expectation that owners should endeavour to enable better open space use of under -used private spaces.  There will also be a 
need to better connect green spaces together to improve accessibility and to improve access for quiet recreation to the South Downs National Park.  
 4.179 The Open Space Update Study undertook further analysis of open 
space at both a sub area and ward level having regard to open space offer.  A significant variation in access to open space was found.  Innovative solutions therefore need to be explored to overcome accessibility, improve quality and to enable people in areas with deficiency to access the open spaces in the areas with sufficient supply. The openness and offer of the ci ty’s beach is 
recognised.  It is important to protect the intrinsic geological and aesthetic 
221 ONS stands for Office for National Statistics. The 2030 population figure applied is 
310,900 based on ONS 2012- based Subnational Population Projections. The indicative 
generated demand of 13,200 residential units is calculated using the council’s excel open 
space standards calculator and by assuming an average unit size of 2 bedrooms. The 
difference between the two figures is considered to be due to the accumulative quantitative 
shortfall in open space arising since the base year of 2006 and also the potential of the housing target to restrict growth in population.  
 202                                         interest of this expanse of shingle stones which forms such a major open 
space between the land and the sea.  The offer of the beach and sea was taken into account  when the open space standards were devised so proximity 
to the seafront will not reduce future development open space requirements.  However the provision of storage facilities for the drying and storing of water recreation equipment can help developments  increase the opportunities 
offered by the sea  and can help address some of the needs .   
 4.180 A strategic approach therefore needs to be applied when considering 
local open space issues. Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this policy will help 
to deliver against the principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits. It is widely recognised that the closer the open space, the greater the likelihood that people will use it or pass through and therefore gain from the health and well being benefits. However, some compensation can be provided for the lack of offer within areas of deficiency by improving the ease of access to other city spaces.  Such an approach would n ot, 
however, justify the loss of an existing open space within the urban area and/or serving a local community.   4.181 The retention of open space within the city is therefore important in view 
of the finite nature of the open space that serves the compact urban area. It is not sustainable to assume a reduction in open space can meet the needs of the city’s increasing population.  There is no statutory duty on a council to provide open space (except cemeteries and allotments) the policy approach to open space therefore applies to public and private open space.  A clear approach of retention helps to set realistic open space land values, minimises land being left vacant by land owners seeking development opportunities in preference to open space uses and makes it more viable for local communities to purchase spaces in order to meet their open space requirements.   
 4.182 Whilst the open space standards are set for different recreational uses 
(such as children’s play areas or parks) regard will also be given  to the multi -
use of open spaces and take account of the existing and potential recreational, historical, visual, biodiversity, educational, cultural, sporting and community site value. Particular value can be attached to community gardens  
and community open space initiatives which help provide access to nature, 
local food growing and well being benefits as well as social cohesion . It may 
be appropriate to reclassify and redistribute open space within the city to make the spread in type more even, to facilitate the opening up of private sites to community/public use and to address disputes and changes made by private owners.   
 
4.183 The policy, however, does reflect that there may be instances when the 
loss of some open space could achieve overriding open space benefits and/or be justified due to open space surpluses in a localised area combined with a low quality offer so that it is unable to meet wider open space needs and/or citywide requirements. For example, the site is too small, steep or its configurati on significantly limits its use that people in the areas with open 
 203 space deficiencies cannot be encouraged to use the site even if its offer is 
maximised and accessibility improvements are made and/or services included enabling visits to be longer (eg toilets, refreshment kiosk etc). A ny such loss 
should not conflict with other environmental objectives.  
 
4.184 A priority is placed on retaining existing playing fields (including 
historical playing fields that currently lay vacant and unused or in an alternat ive open space use). In comparison with other authorities the provision 
of outdoor sports space is low and in view of the compact, dense and hilly nature of the city the delivery of additional outdoor sports facilities, which require large level spaces, is  considered less likely than other types of open 
space.  People are prepared to travel into and across the city to use formal outdoor sports facilities and to participate in matches. These factors therefore 
place a priority on retaining playing fields. The retention of current and 
historical playing fields helps to protect them as an asset for outdoor sports but, due to their potential multifunctional nature, does not preclude their use for alternative open space uses to meet changes in trends.  In addition to this 
the Sports Facilities Plan 2012- 2022 identifies a demand for artificial grass 
pitches, the suitability of spaces for such a use should therefore be explored.  
 
4.185 The provision and enhancement of well -designed green spaces that 
meet identified local needs should be planned positively and is the aim of open space and sport strategies  or plans. New development will be expected 
to contribute towards open space provision by optimising additional on-site/off -site good quality open space provision in accordance with the local 
standards and, where there are shortfalls, to financially contribute towards existing open spaces and/or open space co- ordinators or similar in order to 
meet the needs generated by the development. On- site food growing 
initiatives a nd outdoor play opportunities will be required and should be 
designed to provide flexibility in use to reflect changes in trends.  Proposals will be expected to accord with Biosphere Reserve principles, which seek to bring together people and nature, and s hould therefore aim to provide greener 
living and working environments. Innovative solutions will be explored to increase accessibility and for the pooling of funds to enable the best solutions for this compact city. The maintenance and consequent funding of open space is key to providing good quality provision and will be sought as part of the provision of open space.  
 
4.186 Where possible, new open space sites will be allocated in the City Plan 
Part 2.  The designation of Local Green Space will also be considered through the City Plan Part 2  and the Neighbourhood Planning process. The protection 
and enhancement of quiet open spaces will be explored and where appropriate a criteria based policy will be included within the City Plan Part 2.  All existing and  new open space, the urban fringe, the National Park, 
seafront/beaches and the Green Network/Nature Improvement Area form the open space framework. Improvements to the links between these spaces will be investigated. The council will actively work with tenant farmers to create more Open Access trails.   4.187 It should be noted that whilst outdoor sport facilities are included within 
the term ‘open space’ they are covered in more detail by policy CP17.  
 204 CP17 Sports Provision 
 
To facilitate the council’s aspi ration to increase participation in sports 
and physical activity, the council will safeguard, expand, enhance and promote access to Brighton & Hove’s sports services, facilities and spaces through the following:  
 1. Support for the delivery of the replacement and enhancement  of 
sports provision currently provided at the King Alfred (see SA1).  
 2. Require the retention, seek the enhancement and more effective use of existing indoor and outdoor sports facilities and spaces in accordance with the Sports Facili ties Plan and the Open Space, Sport 
and Recreation Study and subsequent approved revisions, audits and strategies recognising the importance of major sporting venues such as the American Express Community Stadium , County Cricket Ground, 
Withdean Sports Com plex and Brighton Racecourse.  Planning 
permission resulting in the loss of indoor and outdoor sports facilities and spaces will not be granted except where:  
 In respect of buildings:  
• The building has been demonstrated to be redundant for a sports use and  marketed for at least 18 months at a price that reflects its 
condition and market value, any loss in the surrounding space is minimised and necessary to provide improvements to and better use of the remaining space in accordance with the Open Space policy  (CP16); or,  
• the facilities are to be replaced by improved facilities that help meet the sporting needs of the city and optimises access by sustainable transport modes.  
 
In respect of outdoor sports facilities and spaces  
• The land has been marketed as detailed above and the proposal complies with the Open Space policy (CP16).  
 The 2014 Urban Fringe Assessment will be a material consideration in the determination of applications for residential development in the urban fringe prior to the adoption of Part 2 of the City Plan.  
 3. Develop sports strategies and plans to guide the future provision of sports services, facilities and spaces and to inform the City Plan Part 2. The council will also investigate the potential for a new indoor multi -
sports wet and dryside leisure centre, additional pool space and indoor sports halls.  
 4. Work with partners to secure investment in poor quality, under -used 
sports services, facilities and spaces particularly in disadvantaged areas (see SA6) to bring about enhancements in quality and public use.  
 
 205 5. Require new development to contribute to the provision and 
improvement of the quality, quantity and accessibility of sports services, facilities and spaces to meet the needs it generates in accordance with the local standards set  out below (or subsequent 
approved revisions  and / or approved assessments/ strategies) (See 
also CP7 Infrastructure and Developer Contributions).  
 6. New sports services, facilities and spaces (including extensions to existing provision) will be encourage d especially those that meet 
identified needs. All new provision should meet quality standards, optimise their accessibility and affordability to all users, including the local community and visitors. Proposals should seek to improve the variety of provisi on in the city and increase participation in sport and 
physical activity, especially from sectors of the community currently under represented.  
 7. Proposals seeking to improve regional/sub- regional or tourist sport 
provision will be supported where they a lso address local needs, are of 
high quality, have an agreed and funded maintenance plan and add to Brighton & Hove’s vibrancy.  
 8. The council will seek the opening up for community use of private and school sports facilities and spaces.  
 
Standard for In door and Outdoor Sports Facilities  
Indoor Sports  
Quantity (indoor sport)  
Modelling undertaken in line with 
Sport England parameters.  
Standards to comply with national best practice.  The Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation Study recommends the council shoul d aim to provide a new 
multi- sports wet/dryside leisure centre 
(in addition to the replacement of provision currently provided for the King Alfred Leisure Centre) and indicates a further potential need for additional pool space and indoor sports halls. The  study also indicates a 
demand for an indoor arena and ice rink (See also the Sports Facility Plan 
for further recommendations).  
Accessibility (indoor sport)  
Standards to comply with national best practice.  
Quality (indoor sport)  
All facilities should be built or provided in accordance with national best 
practice  
Outdoor Sports  
Quantity (outdoor sport)  
 206 Current  
Provision  Current Provision  
(Ha/1,000 pop)  Proposed  
Standard  
(Ha/1,000 pop)  Additional Space  
required by 
2030222 
Approx 118.5  
Hectares  0.47 0.47 Approx 15.5 to 28 
hectares  
Accessibility (outdoor sport)  
20 minute walk time (960 metres)  
Quality (outdoor sport)  
Clean, litter -free sports facilities should be provided with appropriate, 
welldrained, well maintained surfaces. Ancillary accommodation should 
include toilets, changing facilities, dog waste bins and litter bins and 
appropriate amenity and sports lighting.  
 
Standard for Indoor and Outdoor Sports Facilities  
All sites should meet the minimum specifications of the appropriate National  
Gove rning Body of sport and meet Equality Act 2010 guidance.  
 Supporting text  
 4.188 The city is a major tourist destination and is of regional sporting 
importance. The city also helps to support the surrounding villages and towns, offering a wider range of facilities than those that can reasonably be provided within smaller urban areas. The city therefore needs to ensure it provides appropriate sports and recreational facilities to reflect its regional status and aspirations. Existing facilities such as the American Express Community Stadium, Sussex County Cricket Ground, Brighton Racecourse and Withdean Sports Complex should be retained and where possible improved with greater public access and uses provided to promote physical activity and sport. The replace ment and enhancement of the King Alfred sports provision (see SA1) 
will all help to ensure Brighton & Hove provides the type and quality of facilities expected from a regional centre.  
 4.189 The London 2012 Olympic Games and Paralympic Games legacy is an 
increased interest in sport  that will be both encouraged and facilitated. The 
legacy of the Olympics  can generate opportunities for the city of not just 
sporting benefit but also cultural, health, educational, tourist, business and economic benefit  for generations to come . 
 4.190 As well as providing fun, exercise and a sense of achievement, 
participation in sport and active recreation helps to create sustainable communities, improve health and well being, supports social inclusion and 
222Applying a 2030 population figure of 310,900, based on ONS 2012- based Subnational 
Population Projections, an additional 27.6 hectares of outdoor sport space will be required. 
However, when the indicative generated demand of the City Plan’s housing target of 13,200 residential units is calculated  (using the council’s excel open space standards calculator and 
by assuming an average unit size of 2 bedrooms) an additional 15.5 hectares is required. The 
difference between the two figures is considered to be due to the accumulative quantitative 
shortfall in outdoor sport arising since the base year of 2006 and also the potential of the housing target to restrict growth in population. ONS stands for Office for National Statistics.  
 207                                         educational attainment and helps to reduce crime.  A varied choice of 
activities helps to appeal and engage more people in physical activity and helps in the adoption of a ‘lifetime habit’ of participation in sport and to bring about the associated wider benefits.  
4
.191 The O pen Space, Sport and Recreation Study (2008/9) provides a 
robust evidence base to support the need to retain and effectively use existing (both public and private) sports services, facilities and space. It also suggests the need for additional sports space provision and facilities to meet the needs 
of an increasing population. The study evaluates indoor and outdoor sports provision and recommends standards for accessibility, quality and quantity. The city’s outdoor sports space provision is low compared to other local authorities. However the compact and dense nature of the city means the delivery of additional outdoor sports facilities and spaces will be challenging. The study recognises that qualitative improvements can increase capacity within existing ou tdoor sports spaces and takes a pragmatic approach by 
recommending a local quantity standard based on current provision. Not surprisingly when the study applies the standard across the city no surplus outdoor sports space is identified.  
4
.192 Whilst the s tudy indicates localised deficiencies it again recognises the 
likely problems in finding new space and recommends innovative solutions. Some of these might include multi -use sports areas (MUSAs), other flexible 
sports facilities including synthetic turf pi tches (STPs) and a need to explore 
community/public use of educational sports space where the full space requirement cannot be found. Whilst formal outdoor sport primarily takes place on pitches, wickets, courts etc, casual and informal recreational activi ties can take place in virtually all types of open space and therefore the 
multifunctional use of such space is and should continue to be recognised.  The special regard to retaining playing fields is addressed in the Open Space policy, it is considered reasonable to expect their loss to be considered through the plan making process rather than an ad hoc basis. The restrictions on the loss of premises in sports use reflect the identified needs. The marketing period is considered reasonable and necessary because the decision to leave a premises would be taken in advance of vacating and a 
period of time is needed to ensure the use is genuinely redundant in view of the city’s sports needs and fluctuations in market conditions.  
4
.193 The study also suggests that the council should explore the provision of 
additional adrenaline or less conventional sports facilities, such as climbing/bouldering, ultimate Frisbee and skating. Improvements in services such as the provision of sports co- ordinators can also help prom ote and 
intensify the use of existing provision.  In 2011 an Open Space Update was completed.  The study verified the appropriateness of all the local open space standards, devised a scoring system to assess ‘open space offer’ and undertook further analysi s of the supply of all open space at both a sub area 
and ward level.  It provides an additional level of information to assist in the consideration of existing and future outdoor sports provision.  
208 4.194 In April 2012 the council adopted a Sports Facilities Plan 2012 -2022.   
The plan is based on the current and future demands of residents from 2012 
through to 2022 and builds on the findings of the Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study.  It concentrated primarily upon council provided indoor facilities but  it also assessed the provision of athletic tracks and artificial turf 
pitches.   It identified a need to expand and improve public facilities especially swimming pools, sports halls, health and fitness suites, artificial grass pitches and noted that many respondents felt a new major flagship centre was needed. It also identified a demand for specialist sport facilities such as a gymnastics centre, ice rink and large climbing centre and an improvement in the geographical spread in facilities .  
 4.195 The council will consider existing and prepare further sports strategies 
and plans to provide more detailed assessments of the need for specific facility types across the city which will inform the City Plan Part 2. The council will also explore partnership arrangements with schools, through secured community access and initiatives, to meet the future demand for outdoor and indoor sports. The provision of additional indoor facilities will be investigated. Where new sites can be found these will be identified in the City Plan Part 2.  The council will work with Sport England and, where appropriate, neighbouring authorities to develop sports hubs and clusters or centres of excellence that benefit the local community and wider public. In view of the range of sporting  facilities in close proximity to Falmer, the respective area 
acts an existing sports hub (eg University of Sussex’s indoor sports centre and outdoor playing fields, American Express Community Stadium, the health and racquet club, Stanmer Park). The council will identify a rolling programme of maintenance works to the city  council 's existing outdoor sports pavilions.  
 4.196 With the demand for additional housing and commercial development 
and the move towards increased residential densities it is important that new development is accompanied by appropriate amounts of sports services, facilities and space (both outdoor and indoor). This should be provided on- site 
where appropriate. Any shortfalls should be addressed via off -site provision 
and/or financial contributions towards enhancement of existing, sports co-ordinators and/or similar in order to meet the needs generated by the development (see CP7). The maintenance and consequent funding of sports facilities and spaces is key to providing good quality provision and will be sought as part of any new provision.  Table 1 on page 26 sets out how this 
policy will help to deliver against the principles and local targets under the One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within  environmental limits  
 
 
       
 209 Section  Four 
City Wide Policies  
H
ealthy and Balanced Communities 
2 10 CP18 Healthy City 
 
Planning will support programmes and strategies which aim to reduce health inequalities and promote healthier lifestyles through the following:  
 1. Carry out health impact assessments (HIA or incorporated into a sustainability appraisal) on all planning policy documents.  
 2. Require HIA on all strategic developments in the city.  
 3. Require larger developmen ts to demonstrate how they  minimise 
negative impacts and  maximise positive impacts on health within the 
development or in adjoining areas (where the benefits of new development can be maximised).  
 4. Encourage development that works towards Lifetime Neighbourhood
223 principles; promotes health, safety and active living 
for all age groups, including healthy living options for older people (see also CP12 and CP13), active space for children and encourages physically active modes of transport.  
 5. Recognise, saf eguard and encourage the role of allotments; garden 
plots within developments; small scale agriculture and farmers markets in providing access to healthy, affordable locally produced food options.  
 6. Joint working with health providers to help deliver and protect a sub 
regional network of critical care hospitals and a citywide integrated network of health facilities that is within reasonable walking distance of public transport.  
 7. Through the City Plan Part 2 appropriate sites for health use with good access will be identified and safeguarded taking into account future growth and demand for health services in the city.  
 Supporting Text  
 4.197 Brighton & Hove is a member of the World Health Organisation’s 
Healthy Cities Network, whose healthy urban environment principles include:  
• human health as a key element of sustainable development;  
• co- operation between planning and health agencies;  
• integrating health considerations into plans, strategies  and policies.  
 
223 The CLG (Lifetime Neighbourhoods - December 2011) has recognised the importance of  
neighbourhood as a determinant of well- being in later life and its crucial role in supporting 
older people’s independence. The main components that make up a lifetime neighbourhood 
includes: supporting residents to develop lifetime neighbourhoo ds – especially resident 
empowerment; access, services and amenities, built and natural environments, social 
networks/well -being and housing.  
 211                                         4.198 Healthy urban environments aim to positively influence the 
determinants of health particularly by the encouragement of healthy lifestyles 
and through the design and provision of infrastructure which supports active and healthy living including access to safe open space (see CP16). This encompasses a need to facilitate access to healthy housing, sport facilities, 
recreation, cultural and community facilities, healthy food, care and health facilities. There are strong links between this policy and the City Plan policies on Urban Design (CP12); Public Streets and spaces (CP13); and Open space (CP16) where urban design, the provision, design of and access to open space (including natural green space) and the design of the public realm can encourage more active lifestyles and adaptations that facilitate t his. 
Furthermore, the council is working with partners to achieve designation of the 
city as a Biosphere Reserve (see CP10). Healthy lifestyles can be promoted by good engagement with the natural world including access to natural green space close to home.  This policy will also help to deliver against the local 
targets under the One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits (see Table 1 on page 26). 
 4.199 The geographical inequalities in health in Brighton & Hove are such that 
there are marked differences in physical and mental health and life expectancy between the most deprived and most affluent neighbourhoods in the city. The purpose of this policy is to help reduce these inequalities (see also SA6 - Sustainable Neighbourhoods). It is also recognised that alongside 
this geographical inequality; health issues affect different communities differently. The determinants of health are closely linked to quality of life factors such as the ability to earn a reasonable wage, access to healthy housing, open space, an active lifestyle, cultural and community facilities, healthy food, care and health facilities together with the impact of noise and air quality. Environmental factors and constraints in the public realm are increasingly being recognised in national guidance as having a significant impact on health. The council will investigate the possibility of establishing a ‘Care Farms
224’ programme with tenant farmers that encourage farms to 
develop opportunities for respite care, ‘Farm to Fork’ activities, mind exercise and nutrition.  
 4.200 Planning can have a real influence on these factors . This can be 
particular relevant to achieving heal thy weight and reducing obesity.  The 
policy promotes access to healthy lifestyles including access to healthy food, facilitating healthy transport options including the potential for walking and cycling in new developments. It promotes access to community and cultural facilities that affect mental health especially in older people, ensuring a range of services that are responsive to the diverse needs of the city’s residents, and an integrated network of primary and secondary care.  Poor air quality can 
cause serious health problems and reduces the quality of life and lif e 
expectancy. Development proposals will be expected to protect and improve 
224 The National Care Farming Initiative involves commercial farms working with health and 
social care agencies to provide farming activities to improve physical and mental health and 
wellbeing of clients with various educational and mental health needs.  
 212                                         local air quality and should be appropriately and sensitively designed to 
mitigate negative impacts on air quality.  
 4.201 The policy aims to ensure that developments and policies are tested to 
ensure that they reduce adverse impacts (through HIA; parts 1and 2 of the policy) and maximise positive impacts on health. A HIA best practice guidance 
or Planning advice note will be prepared to assist developers undertaking HIA. Developers are asked
225 to demonstrate that they have made provision 
for accessing green space, cultural facilities, transport options, exercise, and healthy food (parts 3 – 5 of the policy). Developers should consider the whole 
lifetime needs of occupiers and overcome  barriers to access to facilities both 
within and beyond the development. Strategic developments are defined as all developments requiring an EIA and developments covered by the Development Area proposals in this document or of an equivalent size. HIA’s should pay special regard to sensitive communities that the HEQIA has 
identified as having a potential for adverse impacts. The type of health 
facilities referred to in part 6 include walk -in polyclinics, health centres, 
multipractice GPs surgeries, substanc e misuse clinics, ambulance facilities 
and similar health facilities as well as critical care facilities including extension 
of the Royal Sussex County Hospital . The council will continue to engage with 
the relevant NHS organisation for the area
226 and other  health care trusts  and 
providers  in identifying health care service provision requirements attributable 
to new development  or the growing population.  
                  
225 Also through the council’s Sustainability Checklist.  
226 Brighton and Hove GPs have worked together to establish an emerging clinical 
commissioning group  which covers the city, from Saltdean in the east to Portslade in the 
west. The clinical commissioning group will become a statutory organisation in April 2013 
when the PCT ceases to exist.   Until that date it is working as a formal sub- committee of the 
NHS Sussex Board.   Some PCT functions will be passed to clinical commissioning groups, 
some to the new NHS Commissioning Board,  and the responsibility for public health 
is transferring to local authorities.  
 213                                         CP19 Housing Mix 
To i
mprove housing choice and ensure that an appropriate mix of 
housi ng (in terms of housing type, size and tenure) is achieved across 
the city, the council’s approach to housing delivery (CP1) will be further 
developed as follows:  
a. T
he City Plan (Parts 1 and 2) will set out policies and site allocations
responding to key objectives set out in the council’s Housing Strategy
227. Policies will seek to respond to:  
i)the accommodation requirements of specific groups within the
City, for example, f amilies with children; older and disabled people; 
extra care housing; housing for smaller household types; the 
accommodation n eeds of t ravellers and t he city’s need f or purpose 
built s tudent a ccommodation ( see also C P18, C P20, C P21 and CP22) ; 
ii)t
he need to retain residential uses in the city and to make the best
use of the existi ng housing stock. 
iii)S
eek to apply the requirements of the nationally described space
standard in Part 2of the plan to secure the quality and sustainability in new residential development.  
b.
At site level, a housing mix (in terms of housing type, siz e and tenure)
may be set for individual sites identified in Parts 1 and 2 of the City Plan; Action Area Plans; Supplementary Planning Documents and Site Planning Briefs.  
c
. Sites coming forward as ‘windfall’ development will be required to
demonstrate that proposals have had regard to housing mix considerations and have been informed by local assessments of 
housing demand and need.  
d
. All new residential development will have regard to the characteristics
of existing neighbourhoods and communities to ensure that development makes a positive contribution to the achievement of mixed and sustainable communities (see also SA6 and CP14).  
S
upporting text: 
4.2
02 As well as achieving an appropriate scale of new housing development 
(in terms of the overall amount and location of new housing to be delivered in 
the city), the council gives a high priority to the importance of achieving a good housing mix and a choice of housing (in terms of types and sizes of 
accommodation) in order to meet the diverse accommodation needs of the 
local community over the plan period.  Table 1  on page 26 sets out how this 
227 Housing Strategy 2009 – 2014 , Healthy homes, healthy lives, healthy city.  
2 14 policy will help to deliver against the principles and local targets under the 
One Planet approach, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits   
4.
203 In this respect , planning policies will be further developed within the 
wider context of the council’s Housing Strategy228 which sets out three key 
priorities for housing provision. These are:  
•T
o improve housing supply to make sure that the city has the right type
of housing to meet the needs of the residents;
•To improve the quality of housing so that residents are able to live in
decent homes suitable for their needs; and
•To improve housing support to make sure residents are supported to
maintain and increase their independence.
4.
204 Government guidance encourages local planning authorities to plan for 
a mix of housing on the basis of current and future demographic trends; market trends and the needs of different groups in the community
229.  
4.
205 In doing this, the council will have regard to the diverse range of 
accommodation requirements across the city including the city’s need for more affordable housing ; the need for more family sized housing; a range of 
housing options suitable for the elderly and disabled, housing for smaller 
household types, for student housing and also the need to address the accommodation requirements of travellers (see also policies CP20 Affordable Housing, CP21 Student Housing, CP22 Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation and SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods). The need to encourage active living for all age groups including healthy living options for older people is addressed in CP18 Healthy City and the need for developments to be inclusive, adaptable and accessible is addressed in CP12 Urban Design.  Part 
2 of the plan will, subject to evidence of need and impact of viability, include a development management policy relating to requiring the nationally described space standard.  
4.
206 The city’s Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA, 2008)230 and 
subsequent Housing Requirements Studies  (2011 and 2012 Update )231 
indicate that a range of factors are likely to influence both the demand and need for different housing types and sizes. These include the profile o f the 
existing housing stock; housing affordability within the city; demographic changes (the scale of population and household growth and changes to the age structure); the quality of place; the local economy in terms of its influence 
228 Housing Strategy 2009 – 2014, Healthy homes, healthy lives and healthy city and 
subsequent revisions.  
229 National Planning Policy Framework, March 2012, para.50  
230 Brighton & Hove Strategic Housing Market Assessment  SHMA , DTZ April 2008.  
231 Brighton & Hove Housing Requirements Study June 2011, Supplementary Papers: 
Implications of Demographic Change on Demand for Homes in Brighton & Hove (March 
2012) and Demographic Implications of the Housing Trajectory (March 2012) and Housing Requirements Study Update October 2012.  
2 15 on income and labour  demand and the general accessibility of the city in 
terms of its relationship to other employment locations.  
4.207 In terms of the city’s current housing offer, 83 % of the housing stock is 
in private ownership (approximately 53% owner occupation and 30% private 
rented) with the affordable housing stock accounting for around 16 % which 
while below the national average (18. 5%) is slightly above the South East 
average (15%)232.  
4.208 The city has a particular concentration of flats , maisonettes  and 
apartment s which account for 50 % of the total housing stock (compared to 
21% for the South East) and a low proportion of detached (10 %) and semi -
detached ( 19%) housing ( compared to the South East average of 28% 
detached and 28% semi -detached)233. Terraced homes account for 2 1% of 
the city’s housing stock.  
4.209 The bias towards smaller flats and terraced homes is not dissimilar to 
that found in many other cities and urban areas . In Brighton and Hove it is 
likely to reflect the historic pattern of development that has  taken place in the 
city in terms of the many large seafront terraces that lend themselves to 
conversion; the city’s constrained land supply and, in more recent times, the impact of higher house prices, intense affordability pressures and a lack of available large development sites. Taken together, these factors have 
encouraged the development of higher density housing in more recent years
234.  
4.210 In terms of the local population, demographic information indicates that 
the city has a relatively young population, with population growth over the last 20 years concentrated in the 15- 44 age groups
235. Average household size is 
relatively small (2. 25)236 and there are significant levels of single person 
(single pensioner and other single adults) households (36 %). F amily -type  
households with dependent children comprise about 25 % of the city’s 
households. Couple households comprise 17 % of the city’s households237 .  
4
.211 Looking ahead over the next 20 years, the city’s population will continue 
to be focused on households aged in their 20s, 30s and 40s .  Changes in the 
population structure will also occur as the population ages. Population growth is likely to be strongest in those people aged 50- 69 (as the current population 
aged in their 30s, and 40s gets older). The school age population is expected 
to grow (reflecting current high levels of births) and the population over  
retirement age will increase but with the largest increases affecting those people in their late 60s .
238.  
232 2011 Census ONS Table KS402EW Tenure.  
233 2011 Census ONS Table KS401EW Dwellings  
234 See 2008 SHMA, Section 6, para. 6.5 and Housing Requirements Study Update, para. 
4.36 
235 2008 SHMA, para. 4.9 and Housing Requirements Study2011 Executive Summary,  
236 Housing Requirements Study Update, October 2012, para. 2.52  
237 Based on 2011 Census data. Table KS105EW. Other household types account for 12%.  
238 Para. 1.13, Figure 1.6 , Demographic Implications of the Housing Trajectory, GL Hearn, 
March 2012 and Housing Requirements Update, Figures 3.4 and 3.5, October 2012.  
2 16  
4.212 The relationship between household type and size and dwelling size is 
not a straightforward one. The profile of households in an area does not necessarily translate directly into the types and sizes of property to be 
provided.  In the market sector, for example, households are able to buy or 
rent any size or type of property subject to what they can afford. Therefore the size of housing which households occupy relates more to their wealth and age rather than the number of people which they contain. Whilst 1 and 2 bed dwellings are almost exclusively lived in by small households, significant numbers of larger properties accommodate just one or two person households  which indicates significant levels of ‘under -occupancy’
239.  
 4.213 A demographic analysis of the demand/ need for homes in the city  over 
the plan period
240 indicates that an estimated 65% of the overall 
need/demand (for both market and affordable homes) will be for two and three bedroom properties (34% and 31% respectively); 24% for 1 bedroom properties and 11% for four -plus bedroom pro perties. In terms of the demand 
for market housing, the greatest demand is likely to be for 2 and 3 bedroom properties (35% and 36% respectively); while for affordable housing the majority of the requirement is likely to be for one and two bedroom homes (46% and 33% respectively) although there is also likely to be a considerable 
requirement for three or more bedroom sized properties
241.  
 4.214 As noted above, w ithin the city’s existing housing stock there is clear 
evidence of a ‘bias’ towards smaller dwelling types. This has also been the 
case in terms of the pattern of recent residential development in the city. This points towards a lack of ‘choice’ across the housing market in terms of property types and sizes available to current and future households and this is particularly so in terms of the availability of larger family sized types of dwellings. In practice, the city’s land availability constraints are likely to restrict 
the provision of larger properties. It will be important therefore to maximise opportunities to secure additional family sized housing on suitable sites  
 4.215 Where appropriate (in terms of site suitability and with reference to the 
characteristics of existing communities/neighbourhoods), the intention will be to secure, through new development, a wider variety of housing types and sizes to meet the accommodation requirements of particular groups within the city. For larger sites, where new development will make an important contribution to existing communities in terms of regeneration and/or helping to make them more sustainable places to live, site allocations may set a required housing mix (in terms of housing type, size and tenure) to be achieved. Similarly, where there are problems with particular neighbourhoods which might (in part) be tackled through changes to the types and sizes of dwellings 
239 Nationally, about 36% of households  under -occupy with slightly higher figures in the South 
East, see para. 4.9 HRS Update October 2012  
240 HRS Update, para. 4.35 – 4.36 
241 See Figures 4.9 and 4.11, Housing Requirements Update Study, October 2012 and 
subsequent updates .  
 217                                         available then the mix of any new housing development will be an important 
consideration (see Policy SA6).    
 4.216 Policy CP20 Affordable Housing is clearly linked to housing mix 
consider ations and sets out further information regarding the city’s 
requirements for affordable housing .  
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 218 CP20 Affordable Housing 
 
The Council will require the provision of affordable housing242 on all 
sites of 5 or more dwellings ( net) and will negotiate to achieve the 
following affordable housing targets:  
  
a) 40% onsite affordable housing provision on sites of 15 or more 
(net) dwellings;  
b) 30% onsite affordable housing provision on sites of between 10 
and 14 (net) dwellings or as an equivalent financial contribution;  
c) 20% affordable housing as an equivalent financial contribution on sites of between 5 and 9 (net) dwellings.  
 This policy will apply to all types of residential development including conversions and changes of use. Where feasible, the affordable housing units should be appropriately integrated throughout the development.   The targets set out above may be applied more flexibly where the council considers this to be justified. In assessing the appropriate level and type of affordable housing provision, consideration will be given to:   i. local need in respect of the mix of dwelling types and sizes including the city’s need to provide more family -sized affordable housing;  
ii. the accessibility of the site to local services and  facilities and public 
transport;  
iii. the costs relating to the development; in particular the financial viability of developing the site (using an approved viability model);  
iv. the extent to which the provision of affordable housing would prejudice the realisation of other planning objectives; and  
v. the need to achieve a successful housing development  
 Affordable housing provision should incorporate a mix of tenures. The exact tenure split on each site will be a matter for negotiation and should be informed by up to date assessments of local housing need and individual site and/or neighbourhood characteristics.  
 In terms of the affordable housing unit size mix, the preferred mix to be achieved across the city is 30% one bedroom units; 45% two bedroom units and 25% 3+ bedroom units. On individual sites, the preferred 
affordable housing mix (in terms of unit size and type of dwelling) will be determined through negotiation and informed by up to date assessments of local housing needs and site/neighbourhood characteristics.  
 NB: Enabling residential development on identified employment sites will be subject to the same requirements for affordable housing as set out in the above preferred option (see CP2 and CP3).  
242 The definition of affordable housing is that as set out in the National Planning Policy 
Framework.  
 219                                         Supporting text  
 
4.217 Housing affordability is a major issue for many residents within the city, 
particularly for many families and for newly forming households. The council is committed to enabling the provision of high quality affordable housing for people who are unable to access or afford market housing as well as helping people make the step from social or affordable- rented housing to home 
ownership. It will be essential to tailor the provision of affordable housing to the local housing needs of particular household groups including families, the elderly, key workers
243 and groups with particular support needs.  
 4.218 In the period 1997– 2007, average house prices in Brighton & Hove 
almost tripled. Although there has been some decrease in house prices since their peak in 2007, prices remain relatively high in relation to local incomes
244. 
Current (as at 2012) house price data suggests that a 1- bedroom flat would 
be unaffordable to those households with average household incomes245 . To 
purchase an average priced one bedroom flat in the city would require an 
annual household income of around £40,000 .  To purchase an average priced 
3-bedroom house would require a household income of approximately 
£72,5 00246. New households wishing to enter the market face difficulties not 
only in having sufficient income to finance a mortgage but also in raising the finance for a deposit and m any family households wishing to move to larger 
properties  will face difficulties in financing the additional mortgage needed to 
purchase a larger family home.  
 4.219 There is also evidence of affordability problems within the private rented 
sector
247.  To rent a 1- bedroom flat in the city costs an average of £767 per 
month  (equivalent to the repayments on a mortgage of £131,000)  and 
requires  a household income of £40,000 . To rent a 3- bedroo m house costs an 
average of £1,358 per month (equivalent to the repayments on a £ 232,000 
mortgage ) and requires  a household income of £71,500 .  In addition , many 
households who are in receipt of housing benefit find that a proportion of 
private rental mark et properties are unaffordable due to the cost to rent 
exceeding the local housing allowance limits.  This becomes more acute for households needing to rent family homes with the shortfall between housing allowance limits and rental costs increasing as the size of the property needed 
becomes larger.   4.220 The council’s 2012 ‘Assessment of Affordable Housing Need’ considers 
the need for affordable housing within Brighton & Hove over the period 2012 – 
243 A worker whose services are essential to local communities, who need to live close to 
those communities and the people they serve. Government guidance targets specific 
workforce groups such as teachers, nurses, social workers, fire and rescue officers, probation officers and the police.  
244 Median income estimated to be £28,240 with a mean income of around £37,000. 
Paragraph 8.2. Assessment of Affordable Housing Need, GL Hearn. December 2012.  
245 Housing Costs Update April to June 2012.  
246 Housing Costs Update: April to June 2012 - average purchase price 1- bed flat £174, 647 
and 3- bed house £3 14,207 
247 Housing Costs Update: April to June 2012  
 220                                         2017. It draws upon data from the council’s Joint Housing Register, 
demographic projections and income information. On the basis of assuming no more than 25% of households’ gross income is spent on housing costs, the study concludes there is likely to be a net housing need for 17,400 affordable homes over the 2 012 – 2017 period
248. Given the city’s high housing costs, a n 
alternative analysis (based on the assumption that, in practice, many 
households may spend up to 35% gross household income on housing costs) indicates a net need for 12,550 affordable homes for t he same period
249. The 
needs evidence suggests a significant need for affordable housing. Given the current stock of affordable housing in the city, the uncertainties regarding future funding mechanisms for the delivery of new affordable housing and the city’s constrained housing land supply it is unrealistic to assume that all 
housing need can be met through the provision of new affordable homes. In practice, it is likely that the private rented sector will continue to play an important role in meeting the housing needs of the city.     
 4.221 When setting targets for the delivery of affordable housing from new 
development , the city council considers that the most pragmatic approach is 
to require that all new suitable residential development (as defined with reference to the site size thresholds set out in the policy) provide a viable and deliverable proportion of affordable housing or (where appropriate) an equivalent financial contribution in lieu of onsite provision which can be used to help enable the further provision of affordable housing elsewhere in the 
city. 
 4.222 Drawing on the findings of the council’s  most recent Affordable 
Housing Development Viability Study
250 and taking account of a number of 
considerations  (for example, the city’s housing land supply, housing market trends, local needs and affordability, together with wider planning obligations) the council will aim to achieve onsite provision of affordable housing on all suitable larger development sites (40% on sites  of 15 units or more and, where practicable,  30% on sites of between 10 and 14 units) and a financial 
contribution equivalent to a lower target quota of 20% on smaller development sites of between 5 and 9 units.  
 4.223 The council will seek the maximum reasonable amount of affordable 
housing when negotiating on individual schemes and the appropriate proportion and type of affordable housing will be assessed against the criteria i-iv as set out in the policy.   
 4.224 Only in exceptional circumstances, will the council accept a comm uted 
sum or free serviced land in lieu of onsite provision on larger sites
251. These 
circumstances might include, for example, where the Registered Provider finds it uneconomic or impractical to provide the units agreed. Any financial 
248 Assessment of Affordable Housing Need,  GL Hearn, December 2012. See Section 9 and 
subsequent updates.   
249 Both estimates take account of future affordable housing supply from re- lets and 
affordable housing in the pipeline.  
250Affordable Housing Development viability Study, March 2012.  
251 As set o ut in the Council’s Developer Contributions Guidance.  
 221                                         contributions will be pooled and used to enable affordable housing provision 
within the City.   4.225 In terms of the preferred affordable housing mix (including dwelling type 
and tenure balance), ongoing monitoring of local housing needs together with individual site and neighbourhood characteristics will inform the approach to the application of the policy to individual sites. Affordable housing achieved across the city should reflect the distinct needs of different sections of the community including provision for the elderly,  specialist groups in need of 
supported housing, families and key workers. City wide  policy CP 22 
addresses the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers
252. In 
accordance with policy SA6 Sustainable Neighbourhoods, it may be appropriate to allow higher proportions of intermediate housing in disadvantaged areas to help facilitate regeneration in those areas and achieve mixed and sustainable communities. Such an approach is supported by the 2008 SHMA.  
 4.226 In terms of the unit size of affordable housing required, the Housing 
Register  indicates that amongst those households identified as in the highest 
priority need (Bands A and B), approximately 50% need a 2 bedroom or larger 
property
253 often because they are young families with children. The SHMA 
also identifies that although the greatest need (in numerical terms) is for smaller (one/two bedroom) properties there are also significant pressures on the availability of larger family homes which results in an ongoing priority for a number of three/four bedroom properties
254. These findings are confirmed by 
more recent work regarding the city’s housing requirements255. The need for 
family sized affordable housing will be a specific consideration when assessing the overall amount and type of affordable housing that is  required 
to be provided by suitable development proposals.  
 4.227 Table 1 , page 26 of the Plan sets out how this policy will help to deliver 
against the local targets under the One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city to live within environmental limits.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
252 Publicly funded Gypsy and Traveller pitches count as affordable housing provision.  
253 Brighton & Hove City Council, Housing Register,  July 2012  
254 Strategic Housing Market Assessment (April 2008), Section 11.  
255 Housing Requirements Study Update, GL Hearn October 2012.  
 222                                         Policy CP21 Student Accommodation and Houses in 
Multiple Occupation 
 To meet increasing accommodation demands from students and to create mixed, healthy and inclusive communities, the Council will support the provision of additional purpose built accommodation and actively manage the location of new Houses in Multiple Occupation.  The Council will continue to work closely with the two universities and other education providers to achieve these goals.  
 i) Purpose Buil t Student Accommodation 
 A. The council will encourage the provision of purpose built accommodation to help meet the housing needs of the city’s students.  Proposals for new purpose built student accommodation will need to demonstrate that the following cr iteria have been addressed:  
 
1. Proposals should demonstrate that there will be no unacceptable impact upon residential amenity in the surrounding area through issues such as increased noise  and 
disturbance;  
2. High density developments will be encouraged but only in locations where they are compatible with the existing townscape (see CP 12 Urban Design);  
3. Sites should be located along sustainable transport corridors where accommodation is easily accessible to the university campuses or other educational establishm ents by walking, 
cycling and existing or proposed bus routes;  
4. Proposals should demonstrate that they would not lead to an unacceptable increase in on -street parking in the surrounding 
area;  
5. Proposals should be designed to be safe and secure for their occupants whilst respecting the character and permeability of the surrounding area;  
6. Schemes should demonstrate that they have entered into a 
formal agreement with one of the city’s two Universities or 
other existing educational establishments within Brighton and 
Hove .  The council will seek appropriate controls to ensure 
that approved schemes are occupied solely as student accommodation and managed effectively;  
7. Permanent purpose built student accommodation will not be supported on sites allocated for housing or  with either an 
extant planning permission for residential development or sites identified as potential housing sites.
256 
   
256 Sites identified as potential housing sites will include those identified in other City Plan 
policies and those listed in the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment.  
 223                                         B) Strategic Allocations for Purpose Built Student Housing 
 In conjunction with the Universities and City College, the council will allocate the following sites for purpose -built student accommodation:  
 
1. Varley Halls, Coldean Lane, Brighton  
• Redevelopment of the remaining parts of the site wholly for student accommodation  
• 150 bedspaces  
 
2. Preston Barracks and the University of Brighton,  Lewes Road, 
Brighton (See DA3 Lewes Road Area)  
• Delivery of this site as part of a wider mixed use scheme  
• 750 bedspaces
257  
 
3. Pelham Street, Brighton (See DA4 New England Quarter and London Road Area)  
• Delivery of this site as part of a wider mixed use scheme  
• 300 bedspaces  
 
4. Circus Street, Brighton (See DA5 Eastern Road and Edward Street Area)  
• Delivery of this site as part of a wider mixed use scheme  
• 400 bedspaces  
 5. East Slope and land adjoining to the east, University of Sussex, Brighton (See DA3 Lewes Road Ar ea) 
• Redevelopment of existing accommodation and 
development of adjoining land for student 
accommodation providing a net increase over the existing 592 bedspaces in the East Slope Residences, subject to positive enhancement of the visual appearance of this part of the campus within the surrounding landscape  
 
ii) Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO’s)  
 In order to support mixed and balanced communities and to ensure that a range of housing needs continue to be accommodated throughout the city, applications fo r new build HMO, and applications for the change of 
use to a Class C4 (Houses in multiple occupation) use, a mixed C3/C4 use or to a sui generis House in Multiple Occupation use (more than six 
people sharing)  will not be permitted where:  
• More than 10  per c ent of dwellings  within a radius of 50 metres 
of the application site are already in use as Class C4, mixed C3/C4 or other types of HMO in a sui generis use.  
257 Lewes Road (Preston Barracks and University of Brighton) Planning Brief – September 
2011  
 224                                          
Supporting Text  
 
4.228 The city’s educational establishments and their students make an 
important contribution to the economic and cultural life of the city.  There are approximately 35,200 students at the Universities of Brighton and Sussex, 
which includes 4,000 students from  non EU countries
258. Many students also 
attend other educational establishments, such as City College, the language schools and Brighton Institute of Modern Music.  The Council will work with students and their education providers to ensure that the accommodation needs of the students are met in a sustainable way and that healthy  and 
inclusive communities
259 are maintained and developed in the future.  
 4.229 Brighton & Hove City Council’s ‘Student Housing Strategy 2009 -2014’  
identified a number of key issues associated with the large student population that need to be addressed in partnership with the city’s two universities, other educational establishments, students, landlords and developers. The Strategy sets out several objectives, one of which is to promote and enable the 
appropriate development of purpose built student accommodation at sui table 
locations within the city .  The council will continue to work closely with 
education providers to identify and seek to address the housing requirements of their students.  Where appropriate, the council will liaise with partners, such as the police and health agencies, to address issues affecting the student 
population.  
 4.230 Over recent years the City Council has received an increasing number 
of speculative enquiries from developers regarding purpose built student accommodation. Assessing proposals for new purpose built accommodation against the above criteria will ensure that schemes are developed to a high standard and in appropriate locations which meet council, residents, students and educational institutions’ priorities . In consideri ng the effect of new 
development on residential amenity, this will include an assessment of the cumulative impact of other existing and proposed purpose- built student 
housing schemes close to the application site.  When planning permission is 
granted for new student accommodation, a planning agreement or condition will be used to robustly secure that use .
 
 4.231 Five sites are specifically allocated for new purpose built student 
accommodation.  Redevelopment of part of the Varley Halls site by the University  of Brighton is underway.  Although proposals must address the 
significant constraints imposed by the site’s sensitive location in terms of landscape, ecology and archaeology, further redevelopment will create 150 net additional bedspaces.  The Lewes Road (Preston Barracks and University of Brighton) planning brief adopted in September 2011 sets out three possible development scenarios.  Each scenario includes 750 student bedspaces, as part of the wider proposed mixed use development.  In 2009, the City Council resolved to grant planning permission for a mixed use development at City 
258 HESA 2011/12  
259 As stipulated in the National Planning Policy Framework  
 225                                         College’s Pelham Street campus incorporating 300 bedspaces for students.  
That development did not proceed, but the City Council will work with City College and its partners to secure the redevelopment and improvement of the campus, including the provision of purpose built student accommodation.  Circus Street is allocated for mixed use development, including 400 student bedspaces catering for the adjacent university site.  Finally, the University of Sussex propose to redevelop their existing East Slope Residences and to develop adjoining land to the east.  East Slope Residences currently has a significant negative impact upon views within the campus and upon the sensitive landscape setting.  The setting includes the South Downs National Park and Stanmer historic park.  The Council supports the principle of developing this land to allow the University to better meet accommodation demands, provided that the scheme significantly improves the visual appearance and setting of the campus and surrounding landscape.  
 4.232 The provision of additional bed spaces in purpose built student 
accommodation will also assist in encouraging students to choose managed accommodation over HMO’s, which is particularly important for first year 
students.  
 4.233 The city has a high number of HMOs, partly as the supply of purpose-
built accommodation has not matched the expansion of the student population and partly due to housing prices and availability within the city. The private sector has responded positively to the increasing demand for student housing and there has been a significant conversion of family housing to student occupied HMOs in many neighbourhoods. Another aim of the Student Housing Strategy is to s upport and enhance the quality and management of 
housing and residential e nvironments within HMO dominated 
neighbourhoods . 
 4.234 In 2010 a new C4 use class for Houses in Multiple Occupation was 
created.  The council already had concerns about the over -concentration of 
HMOs in certain parts of Brighton & Hove, as expressed through the Student Housing Strategy, and felt that these areas had the exceptional circumstances necessary to warrant an article 4 direction.  An article 4 direction was subseq uently made, meaning that planning permission is required for 
changes of use to small HMO (C4) uses in five of the city’s electoral wards.    4.235 This policy will be used to control future changes of use to small (C4), 
mixed C3/C4 uses and large (sui generis) Houses in Multiple Occupation to address the potential impact of concentrations of HMOs upon their surroundings and to ensure that healthy and inclusive communities are maintained across the city.  
 4.236 To aid implementation of this policy, the Council will maintain a 
database of properties in HMO use.  It will include properties in small HMO (C4) use, mixed C3/C4 uses and larger, sui generis HMO uses.  The database will use a variety of information sources including planning records, details of HMO s licensed by the council and those properties identified as 
student housing through Council Tax records.   
 226  
4.237 In assessing planning applications for new Houses in Multiple 
Occupation, a circle with a radius of 50 metres will be drawn from the centre point of the application site’s  front curtilage boundary.  Residential properties 
partly or wholly within the circle will be checked to identify which are in HMO use (including C4, mixed C3/C4 or sui generis uses).  Planning permission for the change of use will not be granted where more than 10 per cent  of these 
neighbouring properties are already in HMO use.  The assessment will include only residential properties and will exclude commercial uses, such as retail or office units.   
 4.238 The 10  per cent  threshold contained in the policy above will be 
reviewed regularly to ensure that it continues to provide opportunities for a balance of household types. The baseline data of the current distribution of HMO’s will be regularly kept up to date.                                     
 227 CP22 Traveller Accommodation 
 
Provision will be made to meet the city’s needs for permanent and transit traveller accommodation
260.  
 
a) The council will seek to deliver 18 permanent pitches to meet 
assessed requirements to 201 9261.  
b) Travell er accommodation needs will be reviewed  to cover the 
remaining plan period to 2030;   
c) Additional or outstanding pitch requirements will be facilitated 
through site allocations in Part 2 of the City Plan or through joint Development Plan working with adjacent local planning 
authorities
262.  
d) An early review of this policy may be required to incorporate pitch requirements over the full plan period.  
 In assessing the suitability of new traveller sites  (or extensions to 
existing sites), the local planning authority will have regard to the following planning considerations and will need to be satisfied that:  
 i) there is safe and convenient access to the road network;  
ii) there is satisfactory access to local services and facilities (including health services, GPs, schools, shops);  
iii) the potential for noise and other disturbance from the movement of vehicles to and from the site and any on -site business activities is not 
detrimental to the character and appearance of surrounding areas;  
iv) there is scope for appropriate landscaping and planting to help give 
structure and privacy and to maintain visual amenity;  v) there is capacity to provide the necessary physical and social 
infrastructure (water, electricity, drainage, sanitation, play areas);  and 
vi) the locatio n of sites will not compromise the essential features of 
designated areas of landscape, historical or nature conservation protection including the South Downs National Park . 
 The following locations should be avoided:  
• Sites on or near to significantly cont aminated land, industrial 
processes or other hazards where there would be a detrimental effect on the general health and well -being of residents;  
• Sites in areas of high flood risk; and  
• SACs, SPAs, Ramsar Sites and other areas with internationally  
recognis ed designations.  
 
260 The definition of traveller accords with the definition of Gypsies and Travellers as set out in 
gover nment guidance ‘Planning Policy for Traveller sites’, March 2012.  
261 Or an updated target identified through a revised assessment of traveller accommodation 
needs.  
262 In accordance with pitch targets resulting from a revised assessment of traveller 
accommodation needs.  
 228                                         Existing traveller sites will be safeguarded. Proposals that would result 
in the loss of all or part of an existing site will be refused unless:  
a) the local planning authority is satisfied that the need for the provision of the site no l onger exists; or  
b) the proposal complies with the policies in the development plan and a replacement site is to be provided in a suitable location.  
  Supporting text  
 4.239 The council’s Traveller Commissioning Strategy  (March 2012) aims to 
promote community cohesion and to protect the rights and needs of both the settled and travelling communities. The Strategy acknowledges that traveller communities have a right to a nomadic lifestyle, to equal access to services (such as education, health and accommodation) and to protection from discrimination and harassment. The city’s Traveller Commissioning Strategy , 
national policy and the local evidence base
263 provide the appropriate context 
for planning to meet the accommodation requirements of travellers either 
living in or passing through the city.   
 2.240 The city’s local need for permanent (residential) pitch provision to 2016 
was established through the Partial Review of the South East Plan process (2007 – 2010). Technical work undertaken as part of that proces s provides a 
robust evidence base and establishes a need for 16 pitches to be provided in 
Brighton & Hove by 2016.  This is additional to the short term transit site 
provision
264 that the council currently makes at the Horsdean site just north of 
the A27 . There is no local evidence of any need for Travelling Showpeople 
plots in the city265. Goal 4 within the city’s 2012 Traveller Strategy is to 
consider the need for future site provision which includes a commitment to carry out a new Traveller accommodation needs assessment to cover the period post 2016.  
 4.241 In addition to setting pitch targets to meet locally assessed 
accommodation need, national policy ‘ Planning for traveller sites’
266 also 
requires local planning authorities to identify sufficient sites to meet those 
needs over a reasonable timescale. In terms of the first five years of the City Plan (post adoption 2014 – 2019); the council has assessed that permanent 
pitch requirements to 2019 are likely to be for a minimum of 18 pitches.   
 
263 Local evidence base consists of the East Sussex and Brighton & Hove Gypsy and 
Traveller Study as benchmarked, audited and amended through the Partial Review of the 
South East Plan process (2007 – 2010) and further needs assessment exercises.  A summary 
of the partial review process is provided in the paper ‘Joint Evidence Paper – Provision for 
Gypsies and Travellers in East Sussex’ April 2011 produced by ESCC, East Sussex District and BHCC officers.  
264 Transit site provision – Horsdean provides  23 pitches for temporary accommodation for up 
to 3 months.  
265 Draft Panel Report, Examination in Public of Partial Review of the South East Plan, 2010.  
266 Communities and Local Government, March 2012.   
 229                                         Permanent pitch requirements to 2019 
Year to 3% Pitch 
need growth Total  
Requirement Total  
Requirement 
(rounded)  Needs over 
City Plan 
first  
5 years.  
March 2016  - 16.00  16 5 years 
2014 – 2019:  
16 +2 pitches  March 2017  +0.48  16.48  17 
March 2018  +0.49  16.97  17 
March 2019  +0.51  17.48  18 
4
.242 Over the longer term, levels of need for both permanent and transit site 
provision267 will clearly need to be kept under review and updated through 
further local assessments of the need for traveller accommodation. The 
council will work with its adjacent local planning authorities to secure the provision of suitable sites should it not prove to be possible to identify sufficient sites within the City.  
4
.243 In terms of identifying and bringing forward site provision, the council 
has undertaken a comprehensive site search exercise and has identified sites with potential to accommodate its permanent need requirements to 201 9
268.   
4
.244 Government planning guidance also advises that plans should set out 
the relevant planning criteria and considerations to guide the allocation of new traveller sites and to assess any planning applications that may come forward. 
These criteria can be used to meet unexpected demand for sites and to assist the city council in granting planning consent for suitable applications in advance of the formal adoption of Local Plan Documents.  
4
.245 There is a need to ensure that all sites (whether new or 
existing/improved):  
•ar
e sustainable, easy to manage and maintain;
•are of a decent standard, equitable to that which would be expected foraffordable housing in the settled community; and
•support harmonious relations between gypsies and travellers and thesettled community.
4
.246 Any sites considered for allocation in Part 2 of the City Plan will be 
subject to consultation and have their social, environmental and economic 
impacts assessed in accordance with the requirements of the sustainability appraisal.  Table 1 on page 26 of the Plan sets out how this policy will help to 
deliver against the local targets under the One Planet principles, which is a strategic approach to enabling the city live within environmental limits.  
267 Transit site provision relates to temporary provision and may include stopping places 
rather than additional formal transit provision  
268 Site Search exercise and the selection of a preferred site was reported to the Council’s 
Cabinet Meeting, 15th March 2012.  
2 30 Appendix 1: Glossary of terms  
T
his glossary provides a brief explanation of some terms used in this 
document.  
Term  Definition  
Affordable 
Housing Affordable housing includes social rented, affordable 
rented and intermediate housing provided to eligible 
households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. Affordable housing should include 
provisions to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.  
S
ocial rented housing is owned by local authorities and 
private registered providers (as defined in section 80 of the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008), for which  
guideline target rents are determined through the national rent regime. It may also be owned by other persons and provided under equivalent rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local authority or with the Homes and Communities Agency.  
A
ffordable rented housing is let by local authorities or 
private registered providers of social housing to households who are eligible for social rented housing.  
Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require a 
rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent (including service charges, where applicable).  
I
ntermediate housing is homes for sale and rent provided 
at a cost above social rent, but below market levels subject to the criteria in the Affordable Housing definition above. These can include shared equity (shared ownership and equity loans), other low cost homes for sale and intermediate rent, but not affordable rented housing.  
H
omes that do not meet the above definition of affordable 
housing, such as “low cost market” housing, may not be considered as affordable housing for planning purposes.  
Air Quality 
Management Area (AQMA)  Areas designated by local authorities because they are 
not likely to achieve national air quality objectives by the relevant deadlines.  
Aquifer Rock that provides a natural underground store for water. 
In Brighton & Hove aquifers are used to provide drinking 
water.  
2 31 Biodiversity 
(Biological 
Diversity)  The range and varie ty of life (including plants, animals and 
micro -organisms), ecosystems and ecological processes.  
Biosphere 
Reserve These are designated by the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) as centres 
of excellence to demonstrate conservation and sustainable practice by bringing nature and people 
together.  
BREEAM  
 Building Research Establishment Environmental 
Assessment Method - the most widely used means of 
reviewing and improving the environmental performance 
of buildings  
Brownfield or 
‘previously developed land’  
 Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure,  
including the curtilage of the developed land (although it should not be assumed that the whole of the cartilage should be developed) and any associated fixed surface infrastructure.  
This excludes:  
• Land that is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings;  
• Land that has been developed for minerals extraction or waste disposal by landfill purposes where provision for restoration has been made through development control procedures;  
• Land in built -up areas such as private residential 
gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments, which, although it may feature paths, pavilions and other buildings, has not been previously developed, and; 
• Land that was previously -developed but where the 
remains of the permanent structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the landscape in the process of time (to the extent that it can reasonably be considered as part of the natural surroundings).  
 
Built He ritage 
(or Historic Built 
Environment)  Buildings and other structures considered to be of a 
special architectural or historic quality or interest. Includes, but not limited to, Listed Buildings and 
Conservation Areas.  
Built up area  
 Area identified withi n which the development of the city 
has occurred already. The outer limits of the built up area 
are defined on a policies map.  
Carbon 
Footprint  The term “carbon footprint” refers to the amount of carbon 
dioxide (CO2) emitted as a result of specific activities. The carbon footprint is often considered over the period of a year and often is used specifically in relation to emissions resulting from energy use from buildings. ‘Zero carbon’ means that there will be no net annual CO2 emissions 
resulting from en ergy use in a building  
Community A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds  
 232 Infrastructure 
Levy (CIL)  from owners or developers of land undertaking new 
building projects in their area.  
Climate Change  
 Accounts for long -term changes in temperature,  
precipitation, wind and all other aspects of the Earth's 
climate. Often regarded as a result of human activity and 
fossil fuel consumption.  
Code for 
Sustainable Homes (CSH)  The Code for Sustainable Homes (CSH) is an 
environmental assessment method for r ating and 
certifying the performance of new homes. It is a Government owned national standard intended to encourage improvement in sustainable home building. The Code looks at various aspects of design such as (but not limited to): energy and carbon emissions; water; 
materials; ecology; waste; flood risk and health impacts  
Connectivity  
 Connectivity or permeability refers to the visual and 
physical accessibility into and within an area.  
Conservation 
Area  
 An area of special architectural or historic inte rest, the 
character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance. In respect of Brighton & Hove they are usually designated by the city council, though the 
Secretary of State can also designate them.  
Creative 
Industries  
 The creative ind ustries include: advertising; architecture; 
art and antiques markets; computer and video games; crafts; design; designer fashion; film and  video; music; performing arts; publishing; software; and television and 
radio.  
Density 
(dwellings)  
 Measure used to  describe the numbers of housing units 
associated with a given area e.g. dwellings per hectare. Net density includes access roads within the site; private garden space; car parking areas; incidental open space and landscaping; and local children's play areas where 
these are to be provided.  
District Centre  Groups of shops often containing at least one 
supermarket or superstore and a range of non retail services such as banks and restaurants as well as local public facilities such as a library. Smaller in size than 
Town and Regional centres.  
District Heating 
Network  This term is generally given to a system where a 
centralised heat generating plant (using any one of a range of technologies) provides heat to surrounding buildings in the area by means of a network of pipes 
carrying hot water or steam.  
Downland  
 Usually treeless open land with only a thin covering of soil 
on the chalk uplands.  
Ecological 
footprint  
 An “ecological footprint ” measures the total amount of 
land and resources needed by an individual, and includes 
their carbon footprint  
Environment  
Agency  The leading public body for protecting and improving the  
environment of air, land and water in England and Wales.  
Exception Test  Applied following application of the Sequential Test (see 
 233 separate definition), where it is not possible, consistent 
with wider sustainability objectives, for the development to 
be located in zones of lower probability of flooding the 
Exception Test can be applied. This provides a method of managing flood risk while still allowing necessary 
development to occur.  
Green Network 
(GN)  
 A series of interlinked natural green spaces and na ture 
conservation features connecting the urban area, urban 
fringe, the seafront and surrounding downland.  
Greenfield Land  
 Site that has not been previously been built on (includes 
areas such as playing fields, allotments, countryside and 
gardens).  
Gyps ies and 
Travellers  
 Gypsies and Travellers are defined as persons of a 
nomadic habit of life, whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family's or dependants' educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excluding members of an organised 
group of travelling show people or circus people travelling 
together as such.  
Health Impact 
Assessment 
(HIA)  
 HIA is a practical approach that determines how a 
proposal (such as a development scheme or a policy) will 
affect people's health. Recommendations to 'increase the positive' and 'decrease the negative' aspects of the 
proposal are produced to inform decision -makers.  
Historic Parks 
and Gardens  
 Gardens, parks and l andscapes whose character reflects 
the period (or periods) of their design, and sometimes also the style of a particular designer. English Heritage compiles the list on the Register of Parks and Gardens of 
Special Historic Interest in England.  
Hotel Core Zone  
 An area identified on a Policies Map within which tourist 
accommodation would be afforded special protection by 
planning policy.  
Housing 
Trajectory  
 The purpose of a housing trajectory is to track the 
provision of housing supply over the entire lif espan of a 
development plan and support the plan, monitor and manage approach to housing delivery by monitoring both 
past and anticipated completions.  
Legibility  
 The degree to which a place can be easily understood 
and traversed by people.  
Listed Build ing  
 A building of national importance due to its architectural or 
historic interest. They are buildings which have been included in the Statutory List of Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest. The List is compiled by the Secretary of  
State (Department of Culture, Media and Sport), with 
advice from English Heritage and other specialist 
organisations, using agreed national criteria.  
 234 Local Centre  Include a range of small shops of a local nature, serving a 
small catchment. Typically, local centres might include, 
amongst other shops, a small supermarket, a newsagent, post office and a pharmacy. Other facilities could include a 
hot food takeaway and launderette.  
Local 
Enterprise Partnership  A body, designated by the Secretary of State for  
Com munities and Local Government, established for the 
purpose of creating or improving the conditions for economic growth in an area.  
Local Nature 
Reserve (LNR)  Local Nature Reserves are for both people and wildlife. 
They are places with wildlife or geologic al features that 
are of special interest locally. They offer people special opportunities to study or learn about nature or simply to 
enjoy it.  
Local Transport 
Plan (LTP)  
 (Also called the Full Local Transport Plan when it has 
been approved by the Governm ent). It is the document 
prepared by the city council which sets out its transport policy and proposals and is prepared in order to bid for 
Government funding for all forms of transport.  
Mixed use 
developments  A development that contains two or more uses e.g. 
residential, employment, leisure, community uses.  
Natural England  
 A statutory body formed in 2006 with the bringing together 
of English Nature, the landscape, access and recreation elements of the Countryside Agency and the environmental land management functions of the Rural 
Development Service.  
Nature 
Improvement 
Areas  Inter-connected networks of wildlife habitats  
intended to re- establish thriving wildlife populations and 
help species respond to the challenges of climate change.  
One Planet 
Appr oach  The ‘One Planet Living’ 10 guiding principles are a simple 
way to plan, deliver, communicate and mainstream 
sustainable development and a sustainable economy.  
Permeability  
 The degree of movement possible or permitted between 
public outside and priv ate inside or between urban areas, 
buildings, places and spaces.  
Planning 
Obligations/ Developer contributions  
 Planning Obligations or Developer Contributions are 
secured through Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the impac ts of a 
development proposal. They are a legally enforceable 
obligation entered into under section 106 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990.   
Policies Map  
 Map which identifies sites/areas to which particular 
policies apply.  
Public Art  Public art  includes permanent and temporary work, art 
facilities and arts training. Public art can create and 
enhance local distinctiveness and help develop a desirable sense of place. They often provide important opportunities to involve the local community and wil l offer 
work opportunities to local artists.  
 235 Public Realm  
 This is the space between and within buildings that are 
publicly accessible, including streets, squares, forecourts, 
open spaces and public and civic buildings.  
Regional Centre  The highest level  of shopping centre (also known as the 
city centre) serving a wide catchment area.  
Renewable 
Energy  
 Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as 
generating electricity. Renewable energy covers those 
energy flows that occur naturally and repeatedly in the environment – from the wind, the fall of water, the 
movement of the oceans, from the sun and also from 
biomass and deep geothermal heat.  
Sequential 
approach  
 The preferred hierarchy of land for certain uses in 
descending order of preference.  
Sequ ential Test  
 A risk based approach to assessing flood risk, which gives 
priority to sites in ascending order of flood risk, i.e. lowest 
risk first.  
Shoreline  
Management Plan  
(SMP)  Provides a large -scale assessment of the risks associated 
with coastal processes and present a long term policy framework to reduce these risks to people and the developed, historic and natural environment in a sustainable manner. A SMP is a high level document that forms an important element of the strategy for flood and 
coasta l erosion risk management.  
Site of Nature 
Conservation Importance 
(SNCI)  These are locally designated wildlife sites to support both 
locally and nationally threatened wildlife, and many sites will contain habitats and species that are priorities under 
the county or UK Biodiversity Action Plans (BAP)  
Sites of Special 
Scientific Interests (SSSIs)  
 These are designated by Natural England (the 
government nature conservation agency) under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Such sites are of special national interest by reason of their flora, fauna, 
geological features or landforms.  
South Downs 
National Park Authority (SDNPA)  The South Downs National Park came into being on 31st March 2010. As a National Park, the SDNPA has 
statutory  purposes and socio- econ omic responsibilities as 
specified in the Environment Act of 1995.  
Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC)  
 SACs are designated by the European Commission (EC) 
under the EC Directive on the conservation of habitats and wild flora and fauna (The Habitats and Species Directive 1992). The Habitats Regulations 1994 translate the Directive into UK legislation. SACs are outstanding examples of selected habitat types important for the continuing wellbeing and survival of selected non- bird 
species (birds are protected under their own European legislation). The Directive states that SACs are to be 
afforded absolute protection subject to 'imperative reasons 
of overriding public interest'.  
Special Areas which have been identified as being of inter national 
 236 Protection  
Areas (SPAs)  
 importance for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the 
migration of rare and vulnerable species of birds found 
within European Union countries. They are European 
designated sites, classified under the Birds Directive.  
Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment  
(SHMA)  This assessment is to help understand the nature and 
level of housing demand and need within the joined market area and provides information and guidance for a variety of housing and planning policies including those in 
the City Plan.  
Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessment  
(SFRA)  Created to help appraise, manage and reduce flood risk in 
relation to the location of potential new development in the 
city. 
Strategic View  The line of sight from a particular point to an important 
landmark or skyline.  
Supplementary  
Planning  
Document (SPD)  Documents which add further detail to the policies in the 
Local Plan. They can be used to provide further guidance for development on specific sites, or on particular issues, such as design. Supplementary Planning Doc uments are 
capable of being a material consideration in planning 
decisions but are not part of the development plan.  
Sustainability 
Appraisal (SA)  The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 
requires Local Development Documents to be prepared with a view to contributing to the Sustainability  Appraisal 
(SA) achievement of sustainable development. A 
sustainability appraisal is a systematic process, to appraise the social, environmental and economic effects of the strategies and policies in a Local Development 
Document.  
Sustainable 
Transport Modes  Any efficient, safe and accessible means of transport with 
overall low impact on the environment, including walking and cycling, low and ultra low emission vehicles, car 
sharing and public transport.  
Sustainab le 
Community Strategy  
 Document that sets out the vision and plans of the 
agencies, organisations and communities who work together through the 2020 Community Partnership to 
improve the quality of life in Brighton & Hove.  
Tenure  Housing tenure describes the legal status under which 
people have the right to occupy their accommodation. The most common forms of tenure are home- ownership 
(including homes owned outright and mortgaged) and renting (including social rented housing and private rented 
housing)  
Town Centre  
 Area defined on the local authority’s proposal map, 
including the primary shopping area and areas predominantly occupied by main town centre uses within or adjacent to the primary shopping area. References to town centres or centres apply to ci ty centres, town 
centres, district centres and local centres but exclude 
small parades of shops of purely neighbourhood 
 237 significance. Unless they are identified as centres in Local 
Plans, existing out -of-centre developments, comprising or 
including main town centre uses, do not constitute town 
centres.    
Townscape  
 General view, appearance and character of an urban 
scene/landscape.  
Transport 
Assessment  
 A comprehensive and systematic process of looking at the 
impact on transport of a proposed development. It 
identifies  what measures will be required to improve 
accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, particularly for alternatives to the car such as walking, cycling, and public transport and what measures will need to be taken to deal with the anticipated transport impacts of the 
development.   
UNESCO 
Biosphere Reserve 
 Biosphere reserves are sites recognised under 
UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere Programmes, which innovate and demonstrate approaches to conservation and sustainable development. They share their 
experience and ideas nationally, regionally and 
internationally within the World Network of Biosphere 
Reserves.  
Urban Fringe  
 The land between the defined built up area boundary and 
the South Downs National Park.  
Windfall Site  
 Windfall s ites are those which have not been specifically 
identified as available in the local plan process. They comprise previously -developed sites that have 
unexpectedly become available.  
Zero carbon  
 ‘Zero carbon’ means that there will be no net annual CO2 
emissions resulting from energy use in a building  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 238    Development Areas:
- Administrative boundary- The Seafront (SA1)- Shopping centres (CP4)
- Hospital
- Sustainable neighbourhoods (SA6)DA6: Hove StationDA1: Central Seafront and Churchill Square
DA4: New England Quarter & London RoadDA3: Lewes Road
DA5: Edward Street and Eastern RoadDA2: Brighton Marina and Black Rock site
- Universities campuses
 - Central Brighton (SA2) 
- Valley Gardens (SA3)City Plan Key Diagram version 03/16.
Based on Ordnance Survey mapping with the permission of the 
Controller of H.M. Stationery Ofﬁce. © Crown copyright. Unauthorised reproduction infringes Crown copyright and may lead to prosecution or Civil Proceedings.   Brighton & Hove City Council. Licence : 100020999, 2016.ooo ooooo
- Urban Fringe (SA4)DA7: Toads Hole Valley
- Built-up area boundaryDA8: Shoreham Harbour and South Portslade
- Boundary of City Plan AreaA23 to Gatwick Airport
Shoreham Airport
to Newhaven*Inset map
*See inset mapA270 OLD SHOREHAM RD
Brighton
RailwayStation
Royal
Pavilion
Brighton
PierWest
PierSt. Anns Wells
GardensDA4
DA5  LOND
 
 DA3Hollingdean
OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOA
NO
RO
O5 29AKINGSROAD
ANARGRDPADEDA
SA2SA3
DA1
O
OOOOOOOOOOOOOO O
OOO
OOOOOOOOO
OOO
OOOOO
OO
OOOOOOO
OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCity Plan Part One Key Diagram
DA6
DA2DA8SA3
SA2DA1DA7
DA5Portslade
Railway StationHove
RailwayStation
Brighton
Railway
StationPreston Park
Railway Station
London
RoadFalmer
Railway
Station
Volks RailwayAldringtonRailway StationMoulsecoombRailway Station
DA4
Shoreham HarbourA270  OLD SHOREHAM ROAD
A5  29KINGS ROAD
A259  MARINE PARADEA27 BY-PASSA23 GRAND PARADE
A259  MARINE DRIVEA270
A259A27 BY-PASS
A270 OLD SHOREHAM ROAD
A259 KINGSWAYA27
By-pass
LONDON RO
ADA270 LEWES ROAD
EDWARD STREETST JAMES'S STREETEASTERN ROAD
A23
A23  PRESTON ROA
DA270 LEWES ROAD
Royal
Pavilion
Brighton MarinaBrighton
PierWest
PierPreston
Park
St. Anns Wells
GardensHove
ParkEasthill
ParkHangleton
ParkWithdean Park Hollingbury Park
Golf Course
Queens ParkSheepcote
ValleyEast Brighton
Golf CourseRace
Course
Beacon
HillMount
Pleasant
Wick
BottomUpper
BevendeanStanmer
Park
Dyke Road
ParkMile Oak
Hangleton
PortsladeWest
Blatchington
AldringtonPrestonWestdenePatcham
Hollingbury
Hollingdean
WhitehawkColdean
North
Moulsecoomb
East
Moulsecoomb
Moulsecoomb
Bevendean
Woodingdean
OvingdeanHove
BrightonWaterhall
RottingdeanSaltdeanDA3Appendix 2
page 239