EnvironmentInfrastructureHomes
CommunitiesDelivery Economy
The Greater Norwich
Local Plan
Working withwww.gnlp.org.ukPre-Submission Draft Strategy
Regulation 19 Publication Stage 
1 February – 15 March 20211 Greater Norwich Local Plan 
Publication Draft Plan  
DOCUMENT 1 THE STRATEGY  
Contents  
Chapter  Content  Page 
Number  
Regulation 19 Publication information (not part of the plan)  3 
Foreword  Foreword from the Chair of the G reater Norwich Development 
Partnership . 5 
1.Introduction An outline of our reasons for producing the plan, including the 
higher -level policy background and how the plan is set out.  6 
2.Greater
Norwich
ProfileA Spatial Portrait of the area detailing the main social, 
economic and environmental issues in Greater Norwich and the 
key matters the local plan addresses.  11 
3.Vision and
ObjectivesThis section sets out what the GNLP aims to achieve for 
Greater Norwich up to 2038.  34 
4.Delivery
and Climate
Change
StatementsThe Delivery statement explains how the plan will be achieved 
and what the priorities are.  
The Climate Change statement sets out how the plan will 
address climate change.  39 
5.The
StrategyPolicy 1 The Growth Strategy – outlines the broad strategic 
approach to growth and housing.  45 
Policy 2 Sustainable Communities – details 10 strategic 
issues which all developments must be designed to address to 
be sustainable.  58 
Policy 3 Environmental Protection and Enhancement – 
addresses the requirements for conserving and enhancing our 
natural and built environment and heritage.  66 
Policy 4 Strategic Infrastructure – identifies how growth in 
Greater Norwich will be supported and delivered through 
necessary infrastructure improvements.  74 
Policy 5 Homes – provides detail on how new homes must 
address different housing needs including affordable homes, 
homes for older people, and student accommodation.  82 
Policy 6 The Economy (including retail) – sets out details of 
the key strategic employment areas, the main  business sectors, 
and additional jobs needed up to 2038.  87 2 
 Strategy for the areas of growth  
This section specifies where new housing and employment 
growth will be distributed, and any specific policies linked to 
each location. The areas covered are:  
Policy 7.1 Norwich urban area including the fringe 
parishes  
Policy 7.2 The main towns  
Policy 7.3 The key service centres  
Policy 7.4 Village clusters  
Policy 7.5 Small scale windfall housing development  
Policy 7.6 New Settlements   94 
6. Appendices  Appendices:  
1. Infrastructure requirements  
2. Glossary  
3. Monitoring framework  
4. Retained and superseded plans  
5. Village clusters  
6. Housing delivery trajector y  
7. Implementation of policy 7.5  122 
 
DOCUMENT 2 THE SITES  (this is a separate document)  
 
Site Allocations  Introduction  
The Sites document is organised according to the settlement hiera rchy by:  
Norwich and the fringe parishes, Main towns, Key service centres and 
Village clusters in Broadland (see policies 1 and 7 for further details).  
It includes  maps and site allocation policies . 
 
  3 
  
THE REGULATION 19 PUBLICATION GREATER NORWICH LOCAL PLAN  (Note – this box 
is for information only and is not part of the Publication draft plan)  
What is this document?  
This  is the Publication draft version of the Greater Norwich Local Plan (GNLP) , also called 
the Regulation 1 9 Pre-submission Draft Plan. It is the councils’ chosen plan . 
Consultation has informed the content of the plan. As a result, a t this stage comments should be 
limited to matters of soundness and legal compliance. These comments will be provided to the 
Government appointed Planning Inspector when the plan is submitted for examination  and will 
help to inform the content of the examination of the plan. Advice on what soundness matters are 
can be found in the National Planning Policy Framework1.    
There are two parts to the Publication draft of the GNLP : 
1. The first is this Publication draft GNLP Strategy . It contains the planning strategy for 
growth in Greater Norwich from 2018 to 2038.  
2. The second is the Publication draft GNLP Sites  document. It has  planning allocation 
policies for the sites to deliver the strategy2. 
The plan documents are supported by a  Sustainability Appraisal  which evaluates the draft 
plan and other evidence  which is also available for comment  on soundness and legal 
compliance .  
The GNLP stages  
The table below sets out the timetable for the GNLP, highlighting the current stage.  
 
Stage  Dates  
Call for Sites    May to July 2016  
Regulation 18 Preparation Stage  
Stage 
A  Growth Options and Site Proposals consultation  January to March 2018  
Stage 
B  New, Revised and Small Sites consultation  October to December 
2018  
Stage 
C  Regulation 18 Draft Plan consultation  January – March 2020  
Regulation 19 Publication Stage  
Pre-submission Draft Plan for representations on soundness 
and legal compliance  February  – March 
2021  
Regulations 22 to 26 Submission, Examination and Adoption Stages  
Submission of GNLP to the Secretary of State   July 2021  
Public Examination  November/December 
2021  
Adoption of the Greater Norwich Local Plan  September 2022  
 
To get to this stage, in early 2018 we consulted on options for the broad planning strategy for 
the area, along with more than 600 sites suggested for allocation by site owners or agents. A 
 
1 Available here. See paragraph 35.  
2 The two parts of the plan meet the requirements of Regulation 19 of the Town and Country (Local Planning) 
Regulations 2012 (as amended) for plan making.  4 
 second consultation on more than 200 additional suggested sites fo llowed in late 2018 . The 
draft plan with our preferred strategy and sites, along with reasonable alternatives, was 
consulted on in early 2020 . 
How you can make comments        
There are two ways you can make comments on this plan  – by submitting them  online, or in 
writing. Ideally, please submit your  comments  to us online at www.gnlp.org.uk . However, written 
responses can also be made on a response form, which you can request by phoning us o n 
01603 306603 or emailing gnlp@norfolk.gov.uk . We will submit all comments to the Planning 
Inspectorate with the plan in July 2021.  
Please note that comments must be sent to us between 09.00  on 1st  February  and 17.00  
(5 p.m.) on 15 March 202 1. 
Please also note that co mments  will be available publicly.  
 
 
 
  5 
 FOREWORD  
 
We know the world has changed but the fundamentals of what makes our area a great place to 
live, work and invest have not. That is why, more than ever, we need to make sure that our unique 
area is well -planned, that growth brings with it benefits for all a nd provides for a sustainable future.  
 
The collective task facing us all is how we build back better, stronger and greener than we were 
pre Covid -19. This Greater Norwich Local Plan can play a part in achieving that.  
 
The planned growth set out in these p roposals needs to deliver high -quality homes, new jobs and 
supporting infrastructure – which increasingly includes broadband connectivity as well as roads, 
schools and health care.  We need to find housing sites that are sustainable in the longer -term and 
provide homes for all, from young people looking for their first home through to meeting the needs 
of an ageing population.   
 
Protecting our environment and habitats and creating new green spaces are also key 
considerations as we develop a low carbon economy and respond to climate change.  
 
The Government is consulting on changes to the planning system which are likely to take ef fect 
during the life of this current plan and our strategy as outlined here will serve as a bridge between 
the existing system and the proposed new one.  This will ensure that whatever new planning 
system or challenges lie ahead we are well placed to delive r the homes, jobs and infrastructure 
Greater Norwich needs.  
 
Irrespective of the changes to come, however, our local economy has strong foundations. If we 
are to play our part in the wider national recovery, then economic growth needs to be encouraged 
in the right locations, providing opportunities for businesses to expand or relocate to our area, 
encouraging innovation and building on our strengths, particularly in the agri -tech and scientific 
sectors.  
 
This plan identifies where growth is needed from 2018  to 2038, with Government targets leading 
to around 49,500 new homes being required. The good news is we already have plans in place 
that identify locations for 74% of the new homes and over 5,000 of the homes were built between 
2018 and 2020.  We have als o already planned for new jobs, green spaces and the additional 
infrastructure.  
 
What’s more, our plan will stimulate the creation of a strong, enterprising, productive, broad -based 
and post -carbon economy, together with the growth of a wide range of econ omic sectors from life 
sciences to advanced manufacturing, from agri -tech to digital creative industries - each supported 
by an increasingly skilled workforce.  
 
In developing this plan the district councils, county council and the Broads Authority have be en 
working together to make best use of the current infrastructure and identify the new infrastructure 
we will need.   
 
Collectively we stand ready to deliver on these far -reaching ambitions for all of us who live 
and work in Greater Norwich.  
 
We believe the Greater Norwich Local Plan contains a blueprint which will help our area realise its 
potential. It will deliver the homes, jobs, infrastructure, environmental benefits and low carbon 
growth which we need. We look forward to submitting it to the  Planning Inspector.  
 
Councillor Shaun Vincent, Chair of the Greater Norwich Development Partnership  6 
 SECTION 1 – INTRODUCTION  
 
What is a local plan?  
 
1. All planning authorities must  produce a local plan to guide growth in their area. In the 
Greater Norwich a rea, Broadland District Council, Norwich City Council and South Norfolk 
Council have worked together to produce this joint strategic plan, the Greater Norwich Local 
Plan (GNLP) . This also includes working closely with Norfolk County Council and the 
Broads Authority.  
 
2. The G NLP identifies the strategy for growth  in this first part of the plan , the GNLP Strategy . 
The sites to deliver the strategy are in the second part of the plan , the GNLP Sites 
document. Th e plan will be used to help to assess planning applications.  
 
3. The plan runs from 2018 to 2038 . It provid es up-to-date policies to guide development in 
rapidly changing times and meet s Government requirements  set out in t he National 
Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF) .  
 
4. This plan has been prepared under transitional arrangements ahead of the implementation 
of the new system for plan -making Government has committed to introducing. It is highly 
likely that the GNLP will be superseded  by a subsequent loca l plan produced under the new 
planning system within a very few years of its adoption3.  
 
5. Therefore , the GNLP will play a  key role in guiding the transition to the new planning 
system, helping to ensure sustainable housing and jobs growth in Greater Norwi ch.  
 
Setting the scene – a vibrant place to live and work  
 
6. The Greater Norwich economy draws on Norwich’s role as the regional capital, the 
dynamism of other strategic employment locations such as Norwich Research Park, 
excellent higher education facilities including the University of East Anglia and Norwich 
University of the Arts, as well as rapidly improving transport links.  
 
7. Our strengths also include the excellent quality of life on offer, our wonderful natural 
environment, and our he ritage - from the vibrant and historic city centre of Norwich to our 
dynamic market towns and villages. Combined, these will play a pivotal role in Greater 
Norwich’s economic success.  
 
8. In 2020 Covid -19 is having a major economic impact and there may be fur ther short -term 
impacts from Brexit. However, Greater Norwich is well -placed to bounce back and play its 
part in national economic recovery over the short, medium and longer term. In putting this 
plan together, we must take a long -term view of our developm ent needs to allow the 
housing, jobs, services and infrastructure we need to be provided at the right time and in 
 
3 The commitment to a new system of local plan making was made through  the “Planning for the Future ” white paper 
in August 2020.  As drafted in late 2020, the transitional arrangements for the next round of l ocal plans require such 
new plans to be adopted either 30 months from the legislation being brought into force, or 42 months for those who 
have adopted a local plan within the previous three years or where a local plan has been submitted to the Secretary o f 
State for examination. Whatever the content of the final transitional arrangements and the timing of the adoption of the 
GNLP , it is thus very likely to be superseded within a few years of adoption.  
 7 
 the right places. Such a long -term plan -led approach is both good planning and required by 
Government.   
 
9. The GNLP both continues and adds to the long -term and successful approach  set from the 
second decade of the century in the Joint Core Strategy for Broadland, Norwich and South 
Norfolk  (JCS) , and provides an excellent basis for the new approach to strategic planning 
that the Government intend s to introduce.     
 
Planning to our strengths  
 
10. Greater Norwich is recognised nationally as a key engine of growth and one of the fastest 
growing parts of the country. It is an area establishing itself as a leader in science, 
technology and advanced manufa cturing with strong connections to Cambridge as part of 
the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor. We must continue to build on our strengths and are 
committed to help turn world class knowledge and ideas into world class jobs, particularly in 
life sciences and biotechnology, agri -tech, food and drink, information and communication 
technology (ICT), digital creative industries and high -value engineering. These are all 
significant growth sectors, but we also need to support and boost other sectors 
underpinning our  economy such as financial services, culture and tourism.  
 
11. To do this, we must make the most of our main strengths whilst also planning flexibly for 
new jobs, homes and infrastructure. The GNLP must also assist the move to a post -carbon 
economy and protec t and enhance our many environmental assets. It needs to ensure that 
we can deliver well -designed new development to create attractive, sustainable, resilient 
and inclusive new communities. This will ensure that Greater Norwich continues to be both 
a great  place to live, work and visit, as well as a place capable of attracting new investment 
and jobs.  
 
12. Making sure that jobs, infrastructure and housing developments take place is key to the 
success of the GNLP. In recent years, significant new infrastructure such as the Broadland 
Northway road and public transport and cycling improvements have been delivered, with 
more planned, while jobs growth has been strong and there has been a major recent 
increase in housebuilding.  
Planning flexibly for a changing world  
 
13. We live in a world of rapid technological, economic, population and climate change.  This 
provides both challenges and opportunities, with Greater Norwich in a strong position to 
make a major contribution to the UK’s transition to a post -carbon economy  and a world 
needing to recover from the Covid pandemic . Our world leading role at the forefront of food 
and health research at Norwich Research Park, fast growing digital creative industries in 
the city centre and high value engineering at Hethel are just so me of the examples of how 
we are well placed to play a leading role in clean growth.  
 
14. The proposed 2025 ban of heating new homes with fossil fuels , the proposed 2030 ban on 
petrol and diesel engines  and the nation’s 2050 commitment to achieving zero greenhouse 
gas emissions will be major factors affecting development through the plan period, 
particularly in relation to energy policy and transportation. It is therefore essential that we 
plan flexibly for this changing world.  
 8 
  
How the GNLP fits in with  other planning bodies and strategies  
 
15. Our ambitions for delivering sustainable growth through the GNLP must reflect the 
Government’s requirements for local plans set out in the NPPF. This, along with other 
national, regional, county and local strategies, agreements, initiatives and priorities, provide 
the context for development in Greater Norwich.  
 
16. Projects of national significance, such as infrastructure linking offshore windfarms to the 
national grid and improvements to trunk roads (the A11 and A47 in Greater Norwich), are 
assessed at the national level.  
 
17. At the regional level important strategies and initiatives include the New Anglia Local 
Enterprise Partnership’s existing Norfolk and Suffolk Economic Strategy (NSES), the 
emerging Norfolk and Suffolk Local Industrial Strategy, which builds on the NSES, an d the 
Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor initiative. These set the context for economic growth.  
 
18. At the county level, the Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework (NSPF) is an agreement 
between planning authorities on approaches to strategic infrastructure, hous ing and jobs 
numbers and common policy approaches. Importantly, the NSPF, along with agreements 
with neighbours in Suffolk, states that Greater Norwich will provide for all its housing and 
jobs growth needs within its own boundaries as will its neighbours.  It also states that 
Greater Norwich City Deal growth requirements, agreed with Government in 2013, will be 
met through the GNLP. The NSPF and work with Suffolk authorities meet the Government’s 
requirement for a Statement of Common Ground and the “Duty to  Co-operate”.  
 
19. Transport priorities which influence the GNLP are set out in several other strategies 
including: the Norfolk Local Transport Plan; the Norwich Area Transportation Strategy; the 
emerging Transport for Norwich strategy and Transforming Cities4 . These are in addition to 
national and regional rail and road investment strategies and programmes.  
 
20. Norfolk County Council is the Minerals and Waste local authority.  It is preparing a local 
plan review to consolidate its three current adopted plans into one and to extend its plan 
period to 2036. The GNLP therefore does not cover minerals and waste issues.   
 
21. At the local level the district councils’ visions, objectives, priorities and ambitions have 
influenced this strategy, mainly through the GNLP V ision and Objectives. These documents 
are the Norwich City Vision 2040 and Broadland and South Norfolk’s Our Plan 2020 to 
2024 . 
 
The GNLP and other local plan documents  
 
22. The currently adopted strategy plan to 2026, the JCS, along with adopted Site Allocati ons 
Plans, Area Action Plans (AAPs) for the Growth Triangle, Long Stratton and Wymondham 
and Neighbourhood Plans in each of the three districts, already set out where a high 
proportion of the housing ( 74%) and jobs growth required by the GNLP to 2038 will be 
located.  
 
 
4 Transforming Cities is a national fund for sustaina ble travel improvements which Transport for Norwich  secured £6.1 
million from in early 2019 an d is bidding for further funding.  9 
 23. When adopted, the GNLP will supersede the current JCS and the Site Allocations Plans in 
each of the three districts, except for the smaller villages in South Norfolk that will be 
addressed through a new South Norfolk Village Clusters Housing Allocations Local Plan  
and the Diss,  Scole and Burston area, for which a Neighbourhood Plan is being produced 
which will allocate sites .  The great majority of the undeveloped sites in the Site Allocations 
plans are re -allocated through the GNLP5.   
 
24. The GNLP will not replace existing adopted Area Action Plans (AAPs) for Long Stratton, 
Wymondham and the Growth Triangle (NEGT), though in some cases additional allocations 
are made through the GNLP in these areas. The GNLP will be used in conjunction with the  
adopted AAPs, Development Management Plans  for the three districts and Neighbourhood 
Plans.  
 
25. Further detail on superseded and retained plans, including new allocations affecting the 
AAPs, is in appendix 4.  
 
26. While the GNLP sets out plans for the additional growth needed to 2038 and identifies the 
best ways for establishing long -term growth, we also need to  take account of the 
Government’s commitment  to simplified rules based local plans  and increasing housing  
supply, particularly in areas with high affordability pressures, which will assist in increasing 
home ownership and providing for affordable rents.   The GNLP does this by setting a 
strategy that can be sustainably added to , providing locations that can b e zoned for growth, 
renewal and protection in the longer term, and by providing for sufficient growth to both 
meet currently established needs and to set us on the path to meeting the higher long -term 
housing needs Government aims to provide for .   
 
27. This d ocument proposes a broad locational strategy for sites and contains thematic 
strategic policies covering crucial issues such as supporting the economy, environmental 
protection and good design.    
 
28. With the exception of sites in smaller villages in South N orfolk (see below)  and the Diss 
area, the GNLP Sites document details the proposed sites for growth. This includes those 
that have already been identified which are being carried forward, together with new ones.  
 
29. The GNLP promotes housing choice and suppo rts economic activity within the rural 
parishes that surround market towns and key service centres. It also aims to provide a 
greater degree of opportunity for smaller builders to develop with their local supply chains 
and bespoke designs. Such development  helps address rural housing need and demand 
and supports and sustains local services and facilities in the rural area, such as village 
schools, community venues, shops, pubs and bus services.   Recently, the effects of the 
Covid -19 pandemic have strengthen ed the shift to ‘working from home’ and reduced the 
need to travel frequently to central locations to work. The wider availability of faster and 
more reliable broadband has resulted in a change in the desirability of more rural properties 
in village locati ons. 
 
30. South Norfolk has twice as many parishes as neighbouring Broadland, more market town 
catchments (including around Beccles and Bungay in Suffolk), significantly less urban 
fringe, and a substantially larger rural territory.   Rural South Norfolk includ es two key 
strategic employment areas, at Hethel and Wymondham, and has a number of villages 
associated with the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor.    
 
5 Subject to evidence of delivery by 2038.  10 
  
31. Consequently, South Norfolk Council is preparing a separate and complementary village 
clusters plan coverin g sites for small -scale housing in the rural parishes of South Norfolk 
that collectively form primary school clusters. The Broadland village clusters form part of 
this Greater Norwich Local Plan.  
 
32. South Norfolk District Council is at an advanced stage wit h its Village Clusters Housing 
Allocations Local Plan . The Regulation 18 preferred options consultation is anticipated in 
Spring 2021 . There is  an aspiration for every village cluster to have new  housing sites 
allocated , with a focus on smaller sites , and to be in accordance with the overarching GNLP 
strategy which identifies sites for a minimum of 1,200 additional homes on top of the 
existing commitment of 1,392 homes. Therefore, it is not one of the objectives of the GNLP 
to identify the village clusters in South Norfolk and consequential housing allocation sites in 
these areas.  
 
33. The GNLP should be read as a whole for development proposals , so all relevant policies 
will be considered for planning applications . 
 
34. All policies in the GNLP Strategy document are strategic6. The GNLP Strategy and Sites 
document s identify and allocate strategic mixed use/housing locations and sites, as well as 
locations and sites for employment , and provide for environmental protection and 
enhancement . Other allocations in the Sites document provide the housing sites and other 
sites to meet the strategic needs set out in the GNLP Strategy, without being strategic in 
themselves.  
 
35. This means that the GNLP policies provide the strategic background for:  
a. existing local plan policies;  
b. future revisions to local plan documents and  
c. policies and proposals in Neighbourhood Plans, which should be in conformity with 
the GNLP.  
  
 
6 This is in line with National Pl anning Policy Framework  paragraph 23. Neighbourhood Plans can allocate sites.  11 
 SECTION 2 GREATER NORWICH PROFILE  
 
Introduction  
 
36. This spatial profile outlines the mai n social, economic, and environmental issues in Greater 
Norwich which provide context for the local plan ’s vision and objectives and policies . It 
identifies key trends and issues locally which the plan, where possible, aims to take account 
of and address.   
Population  
 
37. The estimated total population7 of the three districts in 2018 was 40 9,000. Of this, 55% of 
the population live in the Norwich urban area8, with around 10% living in the market towns 
of Aylsham, Diss, Long Stratton, Harleston and Wymondham. Around 35% of the 
population live in smaller towns and villages.   
 
38. Parishes close to the city have a strong relationship with Norwich, while parts of the area 
look to the network  of towns and larger villages to meet every day  needs and provide 
employment.  
 
Table 1 - Population of the largest settlements in Greater Norwich, 20119 
 
Settlement  Population 2011 
census  
Norwich urban area  213,166  
Wymondham  14,405  
Diss 7,572  
Aylsham  6,016  
Hethersett  5,691  
Poringland (including Framingham Earl)  4,826  
Harleston  4,641  
Long Stratton  4,425  
Horsford  4,163  
Brundall  4,019  
Blofield  3,316  
Acle 2,824  
Reepham  2,709  
Hingham  2,367  
Loddon and Chedgrave  2,284  
Wroxham  1,502  
 
39. Long term trends underpin the need for the GNLP to plan for continued population growth. 
The numbers of people living in Greater Norwich rose steadily from 351,000 in 2001 to 
 
7  ONS 2018 based sub -national population projections  
8 The Norwich urban area is Norwich and the built -up parts of the fringe parishes of Colney, Costessey, Cringleford, 
Drayton, Easton, Hellesdon, Old Catton, Sprowston, Taverham, Thorpe St. Andrew, Trowse and the remainder of t he 
Growth Triangle.  
9 ONS census 2011 from https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/reports/localarea     12 
 381,000 in 201110.  This was due to both natural increase, such as people living longer, and 
people moving into the area, largely from elsewhere in the U nited Kingdom .  
 
40. Estimates shown in the graph below are based on the 2014 and 2018 -based population 
projections. These suggest that increase s will continue in the years up to 2038, with the 
population rising to between 463,000 and 470,000 by 203811.  Our housing need calculation 
is derived from the standard methodology and its requirement to base it on 2014 based 
projections, and our targets reflect this, but we recognise the 2018 -based   projections are 
different and we have a plan with the flexibility to provide for this additional growth.  
 
 
 
The population mix  
 
41. The population of Greater Norwich has relatively high proportions of older people compared 
to national figures and this pattern is set to increase to 2038 as shown in the charts below12. 
Broadland and South Norfolk have proportions of older people significantly above the 
national average. F urther growth of the older population will add to already significant 
pressure on res idential and home care services, so it is important that the GNLP plans for 
changing housing needs.  
 
10 Census data as above  
11 ONS 2014 based  and ONS 2018 -based sub -national population projections  
12 Source ONS 2018 projections   370,000380,000390,000400,000410,000420,000430,000440,000450,000460,000470,000480,000Greater Norwich estimated population 2018 to 2038
2014 ONS Population 2018 ONS Population13 
  
 
42. Birth rates have declined in recent years, both locally and nationally.  The birth rate in 
Greater Norwich fell from 11.3 in 2011 to 9.6 in 201813 reflecting the national pattern. The 
birth rate in England and Wales in 2018 was the lowest ever recorded.  
 
43. However, there are higher than average proportions of young adults in Norwich and the pie 
charts above show that this trend is set to continue. Th is is largely due to the high and 
growing student population. Graduate retention in our area is good. But demographic 
changes mean more and more older people will be supported by fewer people of working 
age, therefore it is important that the plan helps to  keep young people in our area by 
assisting in providing suitable jobs and housing.  
 
44. While the overall proportion of minority ethnic residents is relatively low, there was a 
significant increase from 1.8% in the Greater Norwich area in 2001 to 4.8% in 2011 . This 
increase is particularly relevant to Norwich, which saw an increase from 3.2% in 2001 to 
9.3% in 2011.  
 
Health and wellbeing  
 
45. The health of people in Broadland and South Norfolk is generally better than the national 
average, but in Norwich it is ma rkedly worse. There is also marked variation within the city 
itself with life expectancy at birth being 10.9 years lower for men in the most deprived areas 
than in the least deprived14. 
 
46. The  Greater Norwich authorities work with providers to help ensure  required additional 
health care facilities are planned for . Service provision will need to be planned to take 
account of demographic changes , including the ag eing population , and the integration of 
health services . The design of development should  support technological changes  as such  
 
13 Source ONS  – the birth rate is the number of live births per year per thousand people  
14 Index of Multiple Deprivation   
14 
 changes are leading to different ways of providing health care  such as on -line 
consultations .  
 
47. Development will also need to be designed to include high quality green infrastructure and 
community facilities to encoura ge healthy and active lifestyles , including healthy ag eing and 
active retirement . Good quality housing and local access to facilities for all will be needed to 
reduce inequalities. This will assist in reduc ing health inequalities.    
 
48. There are higher crime levels in inner urban wards, particularly in areas with a 
concentration of late -night drinking establishments. Overall, according to ONS data for 
201915 , crime rates in the Norfolk police force area remain relatively low (10th out of 43 for 
crime rate16). Statistics relating to knife crime show Norfolk to be amongst the lowest in the 
country (9th lowest out of 43). However,   Norwich experienced an increase in knife crime 
between 2016 -18 to a rate of 10 per 10,000 people, compared to 1.1 per 1 0,000 in both 
Broadland and South Norfolk17. 
 
49. Statistics relating to drug related crime show Norfolk to be 25th out of police 43 areas in 
England and Wales in 2019.  Research18 found that Norfolk is the top county affected by 
London individuals linked (or suspected to be linked) to County Lines, with Norwich listed 
as the most prominent city.  
 
50. It is important that the local plan ensures that new development is designed to minimise 
crime.   
Housing  
 
51. This GNLP needs to plan for additional housing needs above and beyond existing 
commitments  based on evidence. It also needs to plan for changes in th e types of homes 
we need. Several factors are driving this increase in the need for more and different types 
of housing including rising population levels, an increase in the number of older people , 
more younger people sharing homes  and a limited supply of  housing over much of the last 
decade.  
 
52. Between adoption of the Joint Core Strategy (JCS) in 2011 and 20 20, 90% of the housing 
target has been delivered.  Whilst housing completions were well below target in the early 
years of the JCS plan period, there was a generally a steady annual increase in 
completions, and delivery was around and above the JCS annual target  in the most recent 
years (see the housing completions graph below).  
 
53. In both 2018 /19 and 2019/20 Greater Norwich had a five -year housing supply, including the 
5% buffer required by the NPPF.  
 
 
15https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/policeforceareadatatables  
16 Official UK Crime Rate (CR) statistic, CR is best understood in totality as “Crimes per 1,000 resident people as per 
the latest officia l Census over a selected time period”  
17 Norwich: https://ukcrimestats.com/Subdivisions/DIS/6759/  
Broadland: https://ukcrimestats.com/Subdivisions/DIS/6553/  
South Norfolk: https://ukcrimestats.com/Subdivisions/DIS/6724/  
 
18 The research was carried out by the Mayor of London and published in the docum ent: “Rescue and Response 
County Lines Project – Supporting young Londoners affected by county lines exploitation – Strateg ic Assessment 
(August) 2019  ” 15 
  
 
 
 
 
54. Part of the reason for the increase in housing delivery  in 2018/19 is that changes in 
Government policy have allowed new purpose -built student accommodation delivery to be 
included in the housing figures at a rate of 1 home per 2.5 student bedrooms. Between 
2018 and 2020 over 1,000 new student bedrooms were de livered, the equivalent of around 
400 new homes 19.  This reflects a growing trend in recent years for new student 
accommodation development, particularly at the University of East Anglia (UEA) and in the 
city centre. If, as currently planned,  the UEA and the Norwich University of the Arts (NUA) 
expand f urther and some students continue to seek better quality accommodation, this 
trend could continue to 2038.  While it is too early to judge the long -term impacts of Covid -
19, there is currently no evidence that ongoing provision of student accommodation will  
slow over the plan period.  Care Home bed spaces can also now be counted against 
housing need at a suitable discounted rate.  
 
55. The contribution from housing delivered through change  of use has also increased in recent 
years. A significant proportion of thi s has been delivered through permitted development, 
particularly through the conversion of offices in central Norwich. There is likely to be a 
continuing supply of dwellings from office conversions through the plan period. However, 
with the uncertainty aro und the impact of both Covid -19 and Brexit on the wider economy 
and on the demand for office space, and with a diminishing stock of buildings suitable for 
conversion, it is unclear whether the rate of supply will increase or decrease over time.  
Given the u ncertainty, it is reasonable to assume that supply will continue at the same rate . 
Broadland and South Norfolk have had very low numbers of homes delivered through 
change of use.  
 
56. Broadland and South Norfolk are dominated by owner  occupied housing, whilst Norwich 
has a much higher percentage of social rented and private rented properties (see table 2 
 
19 Source: Data from Greater Norwich Annual Monitoring Report s  
2046 2046 2046 2046 2046 2046 2046 2046 2046
1182 1214 12411681 17282251
20342936
2304
2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20Housing Completions (homes per year)
JCS Target Greater Norwich Completions16 
 below)20. The figures for owner occupation compare to a national figure of 63%. The area’s 
tenure mix has changed since 2001, with fal ls in home ownership and social renting and 
corresponding rises in the percentage of private rented properties across all three districts, 
mirroring the national picture. This trend seems likely to continue.    
 
Table 2: Tenure mix of housing in Greater Norwich districts in 2018:  
 
 Owner occupied  Private rented  Social rented  
Broadland  79% 12% 9% 
Norwich  39% 30% 31% 
South Norfolk  76% 12% 12% 
 
57. In 2018, the property price to earnings ratio was 9.2 in Broadland, 7 in Norwich and 8.8 in 
South Norfolk, compared to a national average of 7.821.  Affordability is a major barrier to 
home ownership locally.    
 
58. Local evidence22 identifies that 28% of the housing required from 2015 to 2038 should be 
affordable housing. It also shows that the mix of housing tenures required differs by the 
type of home as illustrated in the graph below. The highest requirement for general market 
housing is for three bed homes. Affordable housing needs can be different. Th e most up to 
date breakdown of affordable housing need across the three districts will be used by the 
individual local authorities when planning applications are being considered.  
 
 
59. This plan seeks to address this by developing the required number , tenures  and types of 
homes to meet this demand.  The mix of requirements will change through the plan period 
as different needs are met by development.  
 
60. Owing  to the projected  increase in the numbers of older people, local evidence in the 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment suggests that around 3,900 additional communal 
establishment places for over 75s will be required to 2038. The plan will need to have 
 
20 Source: Office for National Statistics  
21 Source: Office for National Statistics  
22 ORS Central Norfolk Strategic Housing Market Assessment ( SHMA ) 2017  
17 
 policies which specifi cally support the delivery of housing suitable for older people  and 
support active retirement .  
 
61. The provision of sites for Gypsies and Travellers consisted of 84 pitches in 2017. These are 
on large sites at Swanton Road (Norwich), Roundwell (Costessey) an d Harford Bridge 
(Keswick), and on several small sites around the area. There are 55 plots for travelling 
show people at Hooper Lane in Norwich.  There will be a need for some additional 
accommodation during the plan period.  
 
62. There  are some wards and more  localised areas with high levels of deprivation in 
Norwich23. Although the surburban and rural parts of Greater Norwich are relatively affluent, 
there are pockets of deprivation elsewhere too. It is important that inclusive growth and 
regeneration is supported through the GNLP to help to reduce deprivation.  
The ec onomy  
 
63. Greater Norwich is key to the region’s economy with considerable potential for growth in 
world class knowledge intensive jobs. As a major part of the country’s largest agri -food 
sector, and as a world leader in plant, microbial and climate change r esearch, the growing 
economy of Greater Norwich is well -placed to make a major contribution to living with 
environmental change and ensuring food security. Advanced intelligent information 
technology businesses in Greater Norwich, along with the wider area ’s position as the 
world’s leading provider of offshore wind energy, mean that the area can also play a key 
role in promoting energy security through sustainable sources. Taken together, this means 
that Greater Norwich is well equipped to make a significan t contribution to the major 
environmental and economic challenges of the 21st century, developing a post -carbon 
economy locally which will contribute greatly to sustainable economic change nationally and 
internationally.    
 
64. Strategic employment sites and competitive land and business lets24, mainly those in and 
around the Norwich and Wymondham area, support the globally significant growth axis 
within the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor25 (as shown in map 126 below)   
 
65. The vibrant, attractive city centre of Norwich is a nationally significant retail centre and a 
catalyst for economic growth across Greater Norwich, encouraging investment into the 
area. Market towns at Diss, Harleston and Aylsham and other local employment  sites 
provide accessible employment for rural areas.  
 
66. Between 2011 -18 modelling27 shows a 14.6% rise in total employment (29,100 jobs). This 
included notable increases in jobs in the accommodation and food sectors, IT and 
communications, professional, sc ientific and technical professions, education and health , 
contributing to the 50% regional growth in Science and Research and Development 
employment since 2007 compared with 19% UK average28. However, employment in 
agriculture, manufacturing and insurance fell.  
 
23 2019 Index  of Multiple Deprivation (IMD)  
24 Source as above – On average, business lets are 45% cheaper in Greater Norwich than in London or Cambridge  
25 See https://www.techcorridor.co.uk/  
26 Source: Invest in Greater Norwich  
27 Source: Cambridge Econometrics: ‘ East of England Forecasting Model: 2016 baseline results ’ 
28 Source: Norfolk and Suffolk Unlimited – Draft Local Industrial Strategy (2020)  18 
  
67. Greater Norwich also strongly features most of the sectors identified as having high growth 
potential regionally29. These include: advanced manufacturing and engineering at Hethel; 
agri-tech, health and life sciences at the Norwich Researc h Park (NRP) and the Food 
Enterprise Park; and IT and communications and digital creative industries in the city 
centre. Greater Norwich’s other strengths include financial services, tourism, retail, media 
and the arts. The area also benefits from a strong  and growing tertiary education sector 
provided by UEA, NUA, City College Norwich and Easton College which contribute 
research expertise and a skilled workforce.  
 
Highlights of the Greater Norwich economy30  
 
a. The life -science sector has a skilled workforc e of 15,000 in the Norwich cluster and 
the Norwich Research Park is the UK’s largest site for research in food, health and 
life sciences;  
b. Agri-tech is a sector worth £3.6 billion and Easton College provides 5,000 students 
with training in the area which fe ed into the sector;  
c. IT and communications and digital creative industries account for a sector worth £1.4 
billion with over 100 companies in Norwich and a workforce of 7,500, including large 
numbers of graduates from the local universities;  
d. The financial s ector employs more than 11,500 people and contributes £1 billion to 
the local economy;  
e. Greater Norwich boasts an extensive and varied leisure and culture offer. The 
tourism sector is worth £3  billion and the visitor economy supports 54,000 skilled 
workers thanks to the growing number of day visitors, currently estimated at 40 
million per year, and 12 million overnight visitors. Visitor attractions include a wide 
variety of historic buildings, parks and museums, cultural festivals and other regular 
events, a long with access to the Broads and the coast. Sports and leisure facilities 
include numerous attractive open spaces and routes for walking and cycling, a dry 
ski slope, the only Olympic sized swimming pool in the region, leisure centres, 
Norwich City Footb all Club, theatres, cinemas, music venues and restaurants and 
bars;  
f. Retail remains the largest provider of employment in the area. Norwich is rated as 
the 13th best performing retail centre nationally and our market towns also have a 
strong local retail o ffer. 
 
68. In December 2013, the Greater Norwich City Deal was signed, which is building on the 
area’s leading status in science, technology and advanced manufacturing and focusses on 
enterprise, skills and infrastructure.  
 
69. Employment rates in Greater Norwich compares favourably to national trends, with rates of 
claimants for Jobs Seekers Allowance and Universal Credit below regional and national 
levels.31  
 
70. Rural enterprises are important to the local economy and home working is increasing in 
significa nce. The proportion of micro -businesses employing up to nine people is above the 
 
29 Sectors identified in the New Anglia Local Ente rprise Partnership’s Economic Strategy for Norfolk and Suffolk . 
30 Source: Invest in Greater Norwich  
31 Source: https://www.norfolkinsight.org.uk/economy -and-employment/  19 
 national average in Broadland and South Norfolk. Signs are that new and small businesses 
can flourish and the survival rate of newly established enterprises is good32.  
 
71. The G NLP should support the growth of a wide ranging and changing economy, ranging 
from high tech businesses with the capacity for major growth through to smaller rural 
enterprises.  
 
 Overleaf – Map 1 The Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor  
 
32 Source: ONS, Inter De partmental Business Register  
 20 
  
21 
 Education and social mobility  
 
72. Whilst tertiary education plays an important role in supporting a growing economy, in more 
deprived parts of the area educational attainment is low. Norwich has slightly lower than the 
national average percentage of people educated to NVQ4 level33 (first year of degree level) . 
It also has  above the  national average level of 16 -17-year olds not in education, 
employment or training (NEETs)34 at 9.2%. No rwich  performs particularly poorly for social 
mobility35 with an overall ranking of 294th out of 324 local authority areas in 2017.  
 
73. The picture for education and social mobility in Broadland and South Norfolk is generally 
better. Broadland has the lowes t levels of 16 -18-year olds who are NEET in the country at 
3.3%, above the national average of residents educated to NVQ4 level, and higher levels of 
social mobility ranked at 93rd.  South Norfolk has 3.9% of 16 to 18 -year olds who are 
NEET, is ranked 152n d in the social mobility index, but has lower than national average 
figures for percentage of the population educated to NVQ4 level.   
 
74. The GNLP will need to plan for inclusive growth to help to address social mobility and 
educational attainment issues.  
 
75. As of May 2019, there are 24 secondary and 149 primary schools in Greater Norwich. The 
GNLP will need to make provision for additional schools and school places to serve growth.  
Infrastructure  
 
76. Historically relatively poor strategic infrastructure links limited growth in the area. But recent 
and planned infrastructure improvements are set to assist growth (see map 2 below and the 
Key Diagram).  
  The road network  
 
77. The A11 corridor is a major focu s of growth, with the route providing key strategic access to 
London, Cambridge and much of the rest of the UK via the M11 and A14. Dualling was 
completed in 2014 and the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor initiative aims to take 
advantage of this to boost ec onomic development.  
 
78. The main east -west road link is the A47. It connects the area to Great Yarmouth and 
Lowestoft to the east. Both are coastal resorts and industrial towns with significant 
regeneration needs. The development of Eastport at Great Yarmouth provides access for 
offshore industries. To the west the A47 provides access to the Midlands, the North and to 
growth areas locally at Dereham and King’s Lynn.  
 
33 Source: Nomis  Norwich has 38.5% of its population educated to NVQ4 level and above, Broadland 39.7% and 
South Norfolk 36.9%. The Great Britain figure is 39.3%.   
34 Source: Government NEET statistics  
35 Source: Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Jan 2016  22 
  
Map 2 Greater Norwich main transport links  
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
  
79. Full dualling of the A47  route is promoted through the A47 Alliance, which brings together 
the business community, local authorities, MPs and stakeholders along the whole of the 
trunk road route between Peterborough and Lowestoft. The Government’s Roads 
Investment Strategy is com mitted to A47 improvements within the Greater Norwich area 
with Blofield to North Burlingham dualling, Thickthorn A11/A47 junction improvements, and 
Easton to East Tuddenham dualling. These will all progress through the NSIP process and 
are all scheduled t o start construction in 2022/23.  
 
80. Greater Norwich also includes two routes which form part of the Government’s Major Road 
Network (MRN) - local non -trunk roads of national importance.  Within the Greater Norwich 
area, this includes the A140 both north and  south of Norwich (including the A1270 
Broadland Northway, also known as the Norwich Northern Distributor Road) and the A146 
connecting Norwich to Lowestoft. Working with Transport East, the sub -national transport 
body, the Long Stratton bypass has been id entified as a regional MRN priority and given 
conditional approval for Government funding.  
 
81. To the south, the A140 provides access to Ipswich and London and to Bury St. Edmunds 
and Cambridge from the south of the area. It also provides local links to Diss and Harleston 
and is almost entirely single carriageway. To ease congestion through Long Str atton, a 
bypass is planned to be delivered alongside 1,800 new homes. Subject to full approval by 
Government, construction of the Long Stratton bypass could commence in 2022.   
 
82. The A1270 Broadland Northway was opened in 2018. It has reduced congestion thr ough 
the north of Norwich and improved access to the airport, coast and Broads. Related 
improvements to public transport in Norwich are an integral part of the scheme.  
 
83. A preferred route for a dual carriageway “Western Link” between the A1270 and the A47 
was confirmed in July 2019. The Department for Transport (DfT) approved the Strategic 
Outline Business Case in May 2020 giving the project conditional entry into its ‘Large Local 
Majors’ funding programme and awarding more than £1 million of development fu nding for 
the project in the 2020/21 financial year.  
 
The rail network  
 
84. The main rail services to and from Norwich provide direct access to Wymondham, Ely, 
Cambridge, the Midlands and the North and to Diss, Ipswich and London. Improvements 
including faster  services to London and direct services to Stansted have been delivered. 
The east-west rail route linking directly to major growth areas around Milton Keynes and 
Oxford is a long -term aspiration.  
 
85. The Bittern and Wherry Lines provide local rail links and options for commuting from areas 
such as Great Yarmouth, Lowestoft, Brundall, Acle, North Walsham, Cromer and 
Sheringham. New rolling stock has been delivered and further i mprovements  are planned . 
 
Airports and ports  
 
86. Norwich Airport is a catalyst for economic growth and has seen an increase in passenger 
numbers in recent years. As well as the key scheduled service to Schiphol (Amsterdam) 
which provides a hub for links to over 1,000 international destinations, there is significant 
business from offshore industries and domestic flights. Other principal international 24 
 connections are via Stansted Airport and ports at Felixstowe and Harwich. These ports are 
the gateway to exports of goods worth £2.9  billion every year.  
 
The cycle network  
 
87. Norwich is in the top five districts in the country for cycle use and recent monitoring 
conducted in the Norwich urban area36 showed that there has been a 40% increase in 
cycling since 2013.  
 
88. There is a relatively good network of cycle routes linking settlements within Greater 
Norwich, including the Marriott’s Way, which links the city to Reepham and Aylsham. 
Significant grant funding has been secured to improve the cycle network in and around the 
city, linking the Norwich Research Park and the city centre to the Growth Triangle in 
Broadland, and to invest in other routes including between Wymondham, Norwich and 
Sprowston.  
 
Transport for Norwich and the Transforming Cities programme  
 
89. Norwich has also been successful in securing a place in the Government‘s Transforming 
Cities programme which has the potential to bring significant investment to the transport 
networks in the city a nd surrounding areas. £6.1 million was secured from the fund in early 
2019 and a further £32  million has been secured since (see paragraph 236). The 
programme seeks to promote modal shift away from use of the private car in a time of 
rapidly changing vehicle technologies.  Evidence of such a shift was already seen after First 
Eastern Counties reported a 375,000 increase in Norwich bus journeys in 2015 following 
the completion of Transport for Norwich changes to improve accessibility to the cit y centre 
for buses.   
 
90. The Transport for Norwich review will guide future transport policy and investment in and 
around the city. The network will continue to be developed to promote public transport use 
in growth areas such as Wymondham, the airport and Br oadland Business Park. This will 
include the Park -and Ride network around Norwich which, with 6 sites, forms one of the 
most comprehensive networks in the country and is well -connected to other bus routes.  
 
91. Transport improvements outside of the Transport for Norwich area are dealt with on a local 
basis. For example, Norfolk County Council has commenced a programme of Market Town 
Network Improvement Strategies (NIS). The Connecting Norfolk initiative also promotes 
increasing use of demand responsive transpo rt services and car sharing in rural areas.  
 
Digital infrastructure  
 
92. There is variable access to high speed broadband and mobile phone connectivity can be 
poor, particularly in rural areas. To help address this, the Better Broadband for Norfolk 
programme i s a partnership funded through Norfolk County Council. It aims to make high -
speed broadband available to more than 95% of Norfolk’s premises.  The next generation 
of mobile phone networks is 5G, and the rollout commence d from 2020.   
 
 
 
 
36 Source: Norfolk County Council / Norwich City Council  25 
 Emissions and clima te change  
 
93. Mitigating the effects of climate change within the Greater Norwich area is a cornerstone of 
the GNLP. This section looks at current activity around measuring air quality as well as 
future trends in emissions, rainfall and flooding levels.  
 
94. There is an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) which covers the whole of the city 
centre . Figures from 201937 show nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter pollution levels 
are on a downward trend . Improvements in air quality are being achieved by promoting 
public transport use and other initiatives, including encouraging active travel (walking and 
cycling). However, this remains an important issue with more work to be done.  Monitoring is 
also in place in Long Stratton, supporting the need to bypass the settlement.  
 
95. Per capita carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions, at 5.1 tonnes CO 2 equivalent per year, are 
below the national average (5.3 tonnes CO 2 equivalent). In recent years, they have 
declined in line with regional trends and slightly slower than national trends38. However, 
they are above the national average in rural parts of the area, partly due to a greater 
reliance on car journeys.  
 
96. Research by the world leading UEA quoting Met . Office projections39 provides estimates of  
how our climate is likely to change in the East of England up to 2040  in comparison with the 
1981 to 2000 baseline . It pr ojects  higher temperatures, less rain in summer and wetter 
winters , indicat ing: 
 
• An increase in mean summer temperature of 1.2°C to 1.6°C ; 
• An increase in mean winter temperature of 1.0°C to 1.3°C ; 
• A decrease in mean summer precipitation of 1% to 13% ; 
• An increase in mean winter precipitation of 5% to 8%.  
 
97. Policies in the GNLP will need to contribute to national targets to reduce emissions, plan for 
transition to a post -carbon economy and ensure new development is adapted to a changed 
climate.  
Flood Risk  
 
98. The main inhabited area at risk of fluvial (river) flooding in Greater Norwich is in the 
Wensum valley covering parts of central  Norwich (see map 3 below).  
 
99. There are small scale flood defences across Greater Norwich with more extensive defences 
by the River Wensum within The Close area of central Norwich and on the River Bure at 
Buxton. There are also flood defences within the ne ighbouring Broads Authority planning 
area, with an extensive programme of improvements being implemented within the 
Broads40.  
 
 
37 Source: Nor wich City Council Monitoring  
38 Source: Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy  Between 2005 a nd 2017, Greater Norwich 
emissions fell by 35%, East of England emissions by 35% and UK emissions by 39%.  
39 Source: Scoping Report for the New Anglia LEP Climate Change and Adaptation and Carbon Reduction Action Plan 
(July 2019)   
40 Source: Greater Norwich Area Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  26 
 100. Whilst the great majority of development in recent years has been away from areas of flood 
risk from rivers, recent development on brownfield sites to provide urban regeneration 
adjacent to the River Wensum in Norwich has been designed to withstand flood.  
 
101. Measures to address surface water flood risk in areas at the greatest risk, including  parts 
of Norwich and Drayton, have incl uded maintenance of drainage systems, the introduction of 
detailed development management policies covering such areas and funding bids for 
mitigation works.  
 
102. This plan will need to provide strategic level policies to address flood risk in new 
development , locating the great majority of development away from areas at risk of flood  and 
promoting development which supports more natural functioning of the water environment .  
  27 
 Map 3 Fluvial and Tidal Flood Zones  
 
Renewable Energy  
 
103. Recent years have seen an increase in renewable energy generation locally, chiefly from 
solar power (both small and large -scale), with some wind and biomass developments. Our 
plan should support further development of decentralised, renewable and low carbon 
sources of energy  in appropriate locations . 
 
Environmental assets  
 
The built and historic environment  
 
104. Greater Norwich has a rich concentration of heritage assets. At its core is the City of 
Norwich, formerly England’s second city, with its two cathedrals and many other historic 
buildings, including the greatest number of medieval churches in northern Europe, monastic 
halls, former merchants’ houses, the city wall and industrial heritage.  The city centre’s current 
street pattern still broadly reflects these historic inf luences.   
 
105. The city is linked to a hinterland of settlements which also have a rich heritage reflecting the 
area’s relative prosperity and high density of settlement through history, particularly prior to 
the industrial revolution.  
 
106. Market towns, villages and hamlets show a pattern of development that has built up over 
the centuries, with a wealth of medieval churches, including a number of round tower 
churches, farmsteads and historic halls.  A number of areas of formal parkland, such as 
those at Raveningh am and Blickling Halls, are designated by Historic England.    
 
28 
 107. In total, there are around 5,800 listed buildings and 90 conservation areas. Scheduled 
monuments and significant archaeological potential add a further layer to this historic 
character.  
Table  3 – Numbers of Conservation Areas, Listed Buildings,  Scheduled  Monuments and 
Registered  Parks and Gardens  
Feature  Norwich  Broadland  South 
Norfolk  Greater 
Norwich  
Conservation Areas  17 21 52 90 
Listed Buildings  1,500  980 3,310  5,790  
Scheduled Monuments  25 22 38 85 
Registered  Parks & 
Gardens (Historic 
England)  9 5 7 21 
Historic Parks & 
Gardens (locally listed)  10 18 17 45 
 
The natural environment  
 
108. Greater Norwich has and neighbours a wealth of natural environmental assets designated 
for both habitat and species protection. Many of these are marshland, rivers or broads of 
international and national status classified as Special Areas of Conservation ( SACs), Special 
Protection Areas (SPAs) and Ramsar sites for wetland importance. The internationally 
protected European  sites subject to the Habitats Regulations in the Broads and elsewhere in 
Norfolk, including on the coast, could potentially be affected b y growth in Greater Norwich 
(see map 4 below).  
 
109. Water quality is a major issue for the sensitive wetland habitats and dealing with pollution 
brings particular challenges. Increased pressure from housing growth within Greater Norwich 
combined with an incre ase in already high visitor numbers may also have potentially negative 
impacts on some sites.  The GNLP must ensure that development does not have a negative 
impact on internationally designated sites , including minimising vis itor impact and protecting 
water quality . 
 
110. SACs in Greater Norwich itself include the Wensum chalk river valley and valleys and fens 
at Booton Common and Buxton Heath. There are also 45 nationally important Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) designated for their  biodiversity and geodiversity value.  
Pinebanks Pits in Thorpe St Andrew and Catton Chalk Pits are examples of sites designated 
for their geodiversity value.  
 
111. In addition, Greater Norwich has large numbers of locally protected sites. There were 447 
County  Wildlife Sites covering around 4,700 hectares of land in 2018. Sites include valleys, 
meadows and wetlands, such as parts of the Bure, Waveney and Yare valleys, heaths such 
as Mousehold, grasslands including commons such as those at Hapton, Mulbarton and Salle, 
and an extensive network of hedgerows and woodlands spread across the area.  
 
 
 29 
 Map 4 - Major Habitat Sites in Norfolk  
 
Table 4 - Numbers of and internationally, nationally and locally designated nature 
conservation sites, 201541 
 
Feature  Greater Norwich  
numbers  
Special Areas of Conservation  3 
Special Protection Areas  2 
Ramsar Sites  2 
Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest  45 
National Nature Reserves  2 
Local Nature Reserves  18 
Roadside Nature Reserves  52 
County Wildlife Sites  428 
 
112. Long -term work is ongoing to improve and expand the green infrastructure network 
throughout Greater Norwich and beyond. Green infrastructure is vital to supporting 
biodiversity, combating climate change, reducing pollution, helping to create attractive ho mes 
 
41 Sources: Norfolk Biodiversity Information Service  and Natural England . Some sites have several designations, so 
are counted more than once in the table.  
30 
 and workplaces, enhancing landscapes, reducing flood risk and aiding active lifestyles and 
wellbeing.  
 
113. As our area is located adjacent to the Broads and other areas of national and international 
importance, the aim is to provide sufficient high quality  green spaces to provide biodiversity 
buffer zones, promote active leisure and travel and provide alternative destinations to help 
manage visitor pressure on biodiversity.  
 
114. Parks and other types of open space also play an important role in providing a network of 
locally accessible green and urban spaces.  
 
115. Overall , the plan should promote the protection, enhancement and delivery of a strategic 
green infrastructure network whi ch addresses the scale of development proposed in the plan. 
It must be capable of protecting species, supporting habitats and delivering a wider range of 
environmental services to meet development needs.  
 
Landscape  
 
116. The varied landscape character areas42 in and adjacent to Greater Norwich area consist of: 
the fens and marshes of the Broads to the east of Greater Norwich (area 80 on map 5 
below) ; a more intimate landscape of small fields and hedgerows adjacent to the Broads, 
also in the east (area 79); rolli ng landscapes of varied geology including woodland, heath 
and former parkland estates in the west and north (areas 84 and 78) and an extensive open 
clay plateau in the south (area 83).  
 
117. These nationally identified landscape char acter areas inform local lan dscape character 
studies. Locally significant landscapes include strategic gaps between settlements, river 
valleys (including the Wensum, Waveney, Bure, Tiffey, Tas, Chet), undeveloped approaches 
to Norwich and the setting of the Broads.  
 
118. Greater Norwich does not have a nationally designated Green Belt. National policy is clear 
that new Green Belts should very rarely be established. Therefore this plan will need to carry 
forward policies for protecting our valued landscapes .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 Natural England, Natural Character Area profiles 2014  31 
  
Map 5 - Natural England Landscape Character Areas  
 
 
 
  
32 
 Soils  
 
119. Large tracts of rural Greater Norwich are valuable for their agricultural land. As map 6 
below shows, a high proportion of Greater Norwich’s agricultural land is of high quality 
(grades 1-3), with the majority of the most valuable land being located between Norwich and 
Acle43 . Protecting high quality soils is an important consideration both for supporting 
agriculture and shaping our rural landscape character . This will need to be balance d with 
development needs through the plan . 
 
Map 6 - Agricultural land grading in Greater Norwich  
 
 
 
Water  
 
120. Water is supplied in Greater Norwich from groundwater sources and from the River 
Wensum.  
 
121. Relatively low rainfall totals and extensive agricultural water use demand mean that the 
whole area is defined as suffering from serious water stress44. Local planning policy and 
water company strategy45 place a focus on promoting water efficiency.  
 
43 Note: The map is indicative as it does not break down category 3 into a and b classes  
44 Water Stressed areas – final classification, Environment Agency 2013  
45 Anglian Water – Water Resources Management Plan  December 2019  
33 
  
122. Overall, plan policies for the natural environment should aim to promote biodiversity net 
gain through development, reduce  habitat fragmentation  and address  climate change and 
pollution  issues .  
 
 34 
 SECTION 3 - THE VISION AND OBJECTIVES FOR GREATER NORWICH  
 
123. The vision and objectives below set out what the GNLP aims to achieve for Greater 
Norwich to 2038.  
 The Vision for Greater Norwich in 2038  
 
124. By promoting this Greater Norwich Local Plan our aim is that it will support growth of a 
diverse low carbon economy which will compete globally through its world class knowledge -
intensive jobs in the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor.  
 
125. As a result, by 2038 Greater Norwich will have vibrant, healthy, inclusive and growing 
communities supported by the delivery of new homes, infrastructure and an enhanced 
environment. Growth will make the best of Greater Norwich’s distinct built, natural and 
historic assets.  
 
126. To achieve this, growth will be clean and resource efficient, with significantly reduced 
emissions to ensure that Greater Norwich plays a full part in meeting national commitments 
on tackling climate change and is moving towards a post -carbon economy. The focus on 
three high growth sectors: clean energy, agri -food and ICT/digital, along with the high 
environmental standards and significant further improvements to our extensive green 
infrastructure network promoted through this plan, will support Norfolk and  Suffolk as the 
United Kingdom ’s clean growth region.  
 
Economy  
 
127. Generating the right levels of growth in the right places will help our local economy by 
stimulating economic investment, new infrastructure, new technologies and environmental 
improvements. This will improve access across Greater Norwich to services and jobs, and 
lead to better environmental quality.  
 
128. Our plan will stimulate economic recovery leading to the creation of a strong, enterprising, 
productive and broad -based economy, and the growth  of a wide range of economic sectors, 
supported by an increasingly skilled workforce. We will see a focus on our local strengths in 
knowledge intensive sectors. This will include significant growth in digital creative industries 
in the city centre and in h ealth, life sciences, agri - and bio - technology at the Norwich 
Research Park and the Food Enterprise Park at Honingham, along with advanced 
manufacturing and engineering at Hethel. This clean growth will place Greater Norwich at the 
forefront of tackling t he global challenges and opportunities of energy, environment, life 
sciences, genetics and climate change. Together these will strengthen our leading role 
nationally and internationally in these sectors which will be critical to moving towards the 
post-carbon economy.  
 
129. Most of the jobs growth we expect to see will be delivered on key strategic sites in and 
around Norwich with good access to public transport, the major road network and a 
comprehensive cycling network. This will contribute to the growing nat ional importance of the 
Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor and strengthen Norwich’s role as the regional capital.  
 
130. The city centre will continue to play a significant role as the economic dynamo of the area 
by providing excellent retail and leisure facilities  along with a broad range of cultural and 35 
 tourism attractions and new jobs needed to support housing growth across the Greater 
Norwich area.  
 
131. Parallel to this, the role of smaller scale employment sites elsewhere in the urban area, 
market towns and villages will help to deliver good access to jobs for all. New technologies 
and improved broadband and mobile phone infrastructure will also facilitate changes to the 
way we work, including the growth of small -scale businesses, more working from home and 
remote working.  
Communities  
 
132. The growth of mixed, inclusive, resilient and sustainable communities  will mean that  our 
new communities will be well integrated with our existing communities and will be safe and 
attractive places to live. People of all ages wi ll have good access to services and facilities 
including schools, health care, shops, leisure and community facilities and libraries – which 
will in turn reduce the need to travel. This will also help create communities in which people 
can interact sociall y, be independent and have the opportunity for healthy and active 
lifestyles. New technologies will provide more ways of travelling and accessing services and 
our new communities will be designed to make active travel and public transport the easiest 
trave l choices.    
Homes  
 
133. High quality new homes will be built to meet the growing and changing needs of Greater 
Norwich. There will be a variety of type, tenure and sizes of homes in the mixed and inclusive 
communities, catering for the needs of all as they ch ange over time and providing both 
market and affordable homes to meet different needs in our urban and rural areas.  
 
134. Our plan envisages delivering the right number of homes to meet a variety of housing 
needs for those living and working in Greater Norwich. These include the rising ageing 
population, families and younger people, single occupants and those looking to share  a 
home with others. The needs of groups in our community such as Gypsies and Travellers, 
Travelling Show People and those who live in residential caravans will be provided for in 
accessible locations.   
 
135. We plan to concentrate the building of new homes in  and around Norwich and in the 
Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor. In Norwich city centre and other highly accessible and 
sustainable locations, higher density homes including flats will be built, providing particularly 
for the needs of younger people and inc luding purpose -built student accommodation, whilst 
also meeting the needs of other members of our community. This will have helped to create 
lively and vibrant city and district centres, enabling people to access services and jobs easily 
and to travel sust ainably.  
 
136. Our suburbs, market towns and villages will also be vibrant places to live with good access 
to services and facilities, supported by new housing and jobs and changing technologies. 
Homes here will be built at appropriate densities to respect and  enhance local character and 
to meet the needs of all in mixed communities.  
 36 
 137. New homes will be large enough to provide a good quality of life, with adaptable homes 
built to meet the varied and changing needs of our communities. Many homes across 
Greater N orwich will also be self and custom -built, along with live -work units . 
 
Infrastructure  
 
138. By 2038 our transport system will be enhanced by a combination of infrastructure 
improvements and new technologies. Connectivity will improve both within Greater Norwic h 
and to other parts of the country and beyond. This will include better rail services to London, 
Cambridge, Stansted, Milton Keynes, Oxford and the West, growth at Norwich International 
Airport and road improvements to the A11, A47, the Norwich Western Li nk and the A140.  
 
139. Together  these will provide greater travel choices and allow people to make the best use of 
evolving sustainable transport networks, particularly in the urban area. They will also 
continue to support Norwich’s role as the regional capital and improve access to our  rural 
areas.  
 
140. The coming decades will see significant changes in how much and how people travel. This 
plan will help to reduce the impact of travel both by concentrating activities close to centres of 
population  and by assisting an increase in home and r emote working. Combined with 
technological improvements including the addition of new and different transport 
infrastructure, emissions from transport consequently will be significantly reduced.  
 
141. For journeys that are still needed there will be a radical shift away from the use of the 
private car, with many people walking, cycling or using clean public transport. This will be 
especially evident in the Norwich urban area and the main towns with safe, attractive and 
well-designed routes for pedestrians and c yclists and fast, frequent and reliable public 
transport services.  Electric vehicles will predominate throughout Greater Norwich and 
connected and autonomous vehicles (CAVs) will become more commonplace, initially with 
taxis and shared demand responsive b uses and ultimately for buses, deliveries and private 
vehicles.  
 
142. In addition, the delivery of improved telecommunications, broadband and utilities 
infrastructure throughout the area will both support businesses development, home working, 
carbon reductions  and access to services while also reducing transport emissions.  
 
143. Existing schools and health facilities will be expanded, and new facilities provided to serve 
growing communities , with greater use of technology to access some types of health care .  
 
Deliv ery 
 
144. We will achieve our vision for sustainable and inclusive growth by a variety of means. 
These include our proactive approach to co -ordinating development providers, organisations 
and agencies as well as through interventions in cases where the market c annot deliver 
infrastructure. The protection and enhancement of a high -quality environment will also have 
assisted delivery by attracting inward investment. Our GNLP will meet housing need by 37 
 providing choice and flexibility so that homes will be delivered  on allocated and windfall46 
housing sites.  
Environment  
 
145. Greater efficiency in water and energy usage will minimise the need for new infrastructure, 
and further reductions in carbon emissions will be delivered through the increased use of 
sustainable local energy sources. New water efficient buildings will also contribute to the 
protection of our water resources and water quality, helping to ensure the protection of our 
rivers, the Broads and our other wetland habitats.   
 
146. Air pollution levels will be reduced through a combination of better design and location of 
development, supported by technological changes. Improved air quality will mean that there 
will no longer be any Air Quality Management Areas in Greater Norwich.  
 
147. This GNLP will protect and enhance the distinctive local characteristics of our city, towns 
and villages and their separate identities . This will be achieved by shaping high quality , well 
designed and beautiful new development, with homes large enough to p rovide for a good 
quality of life.  
 
148. Development will make efficient use of brownfield sites and minimise the loss of greenfield 
land.  
 
149. The development of a multi -functional green infrastructure network will continue across 
Greater Norwich. This enhanced n etwork will help our communities mitigate and adapt to the 
effects of climate change, by providing for biodiversity gain through improved and linked 
habitats, reducing flood risk and improving opportunities for active travel and leisure. 
Improved access to  the countryside will be provided and the quality of our environmental 
assets will be enhanced. Visitor pressure on the Broads and other internationally and 
nationally protected sites will be reduced by new and improved green infrastructure both on 
and lin ked to developments, including delivery of the North West Woodland Country Park in 
Horsford.   
 
150. Critically, our plan will have helped to achieve reductions in our greenhouse gas emissions 
to contribute to the national zero emission target by 2050.   
 
  
 
46 Windfall sites are those which gain planning permission without having been allocated in a local or neighbourhoo d 
plan 38 
 The plan’s objectives  
 
151. The wide -ranging vision for Greater Norwich above has helped us to establish the plan’s 
objectives below. Together, the vision and objectives provide the context for the policies and 
monitoring indicators in this plan.  
 
Economy  
 
To support and promote clean growth and progress towards a post -carbon economy 
through the expansion of internationally important knowledge -based industries in 
the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor as part of a  wider  entrepreneurial, 
enterprising, creative and broad -based economy with high productivity and a skilled 
workforce.  
 
Communities  
 
To grow vibrant, healthy communities giving people a high quality of life in well -
designed developments with good access to jobs, services and facilities, helping to 
close th e gap between life chances in disadvantaged and other communities.  
 
Homes  
 
To enable delivery of high -quality homes of the right density, size, mix and tenure to 
meet people’s needs throughout their lives and to make efficient use of land.  
 
Infrastructure  
 
To promote the timely delivery of infrastructure to support existing communities, 
growth and modal shift in transport use; and to improve connectivity to allow access 
to economic and social opportunities.  
 
Delivery  
 
To promote the delivery  of housing, jobs and infrastructure to meet identified needs, 
supported by intervention mechanisms where the market is unable to deliver.   
 
Environment  
 
To protect and enhance the built, natural and historic environments, make best use 
of natural resourc es, and to significantly reduce emissions to ensure that Greater 
Norwich is adapted to climate change and plays a full part in meeting national 
commitments to achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.   
  39 
 SECTION 4 – THE DELIVERY OF GROWTH AND ADDRESSING CLIMATE 
CHANGE  
 
152. To achieve this plan’s visions and objectives it is essential that we deliver planned growth 
through an effective policy framework which will both help decarbonise development and 
assist in addressing climate change. The delivery  and climate change statements below are 
not policies in themselves, but rather set out how the GNLP addresses these two key issues. 
These priorities are important in guiding the plan’s strategy and content.  
 
DELIVERY  
 
153. The GNLP is part of a wider package of joined up measures the councils are taking to work 
with the Government, New Anglia LEP, the development industry and service and 
infrastructure providers to fund and deliver the high -quality growth Greater Norwich needs.   
 
154. The councils also work in part nership as the Greater Norwich Growth Board (GNGB), which 
oversees decisions on investment in infrastructure to support growth and deliver existing 
planning targets.   
 
155. The statement below sets out how the GNLP prioritises the delivery of development.  
DELIVERY STATEMENT  
 
Delivery of inclusive growth and sustainable development are key priorities for the 
Greater Norwich Local Plan. Delivery of housing, jobs and infrastructure are interlinked 
and mutually supportive.  
 
Growth offers the opportunity to strengt hen Greater Norwich’s role as a key part of the 
national economy, with the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor becoming an increasingly 
important axis linking to two other nationally significant growth corridors, between 
London, Stansted and Cambridge and alon g the Cambridge - Milton Keynes - Oxford 
Arc. 
 
The authorities will continue to work:  
• through the Greater Norwich Growth Board (or any successor) to facilitate and 
coordinate delivery across the plan area;  
• With the private sector to promote the area and to overcome constraints on 
housing and employment sites.  
 
Each of the authorities have development companies directly delivering homes and 
jobs. The Greater Norwich Growth Board will continue to review options for joint Special 
Purpose Vehicles.  
 
Housing  
 
The plan promotes a pro -active approach to delivery through only allocating housing 
sites where a reasonable prospect of delivery, taking account of policy requirements in 
this plan, can be evidenced.  
 
In addition, delivery plans are required to be submit ted with planning applications to 
guide ongoing contact with developers. Where delivery cannot be demonstrated to be in 
accordance with agreed delivery plans for individual sites, the authorities will, as 40 
 appropriate, make use of their legal powers to brin g about strategically significant 
development, including compulsory purchase.  
 
This plan also provides choice and flexibility by ensuring there are enough committed 
sites to accommodate 22% more homes than “need”, along with a “contingency” 
location for gr owth, should they be required to offset any non -delivery.  Additional 
opportunities will be provided, particularly for small scale growth at villages and on 
small brownfield sites across Greater Norwich, through additional windfall development.  
 
Taken tog ether, these measures will ensure that housing needs to 2038 will be fully met.  
 
Economic development  
 
To promote delivery of jobs, this plan provides choice and flexibility by providing for a 
wide range of type and size of employment sites. These include  strategic sites capable 
of accommodating large scale development and high growth knowledge -intensive 
sectors. Most key strategic sites are extensions of already successful developments. 
Norwich City Centre is the largest concentration of employment in Gre ater Norwich with 
potential to grow further and will be a focus of employment growth to support the 
delivery of housing and other development across the wider plan area.  
 
Smaller scale and rural employment sites are less likely to be constrained by 
infras tructure requirements and will be supported in accessible and sustainable 
locations. Together, these varied sites provide for growth of both a broad based and a 
high value knowledge economy.  
 
Economic development is also supported by policies that promote  housing delivery, 
infrastructure and a high -quality environment. Other activities of the partners promote 
inclusive economic development, inward investment and skills.  
 
Infrastructure  
 
Infrastructure priorities benefit existing communities, support growth, improve 
connectivity and access to economic and social opportunities, and deliver sustainable 
and active travel choices to promote modal shift.  
 
The Greater Norwich partners will continue to work to coordinate delivery with other 
providers includin g Highways England, Anglian Water, other transport and utilities 
companies, town and parish councils and local health care providers. Infrastructure will 
be delivered through:  
- On-site and off -site provision required of development through conditions or 
legal agreements;  
- Pooled use of the Community Infrastructure Levy47, or any successor source 
of infrastructure payment ; 
- Maximising opportunities to access Government and other sources of funding;  
- Capital investment of public bodies and utilities companies; and  
- Locally led delivery vehicles.  
 
 
47 CIL has been in operation in Greater Norwich since 2011. It has helped to deliver a wide range of projects including 
transport, green infrastructure leisure and community facilities. Examples include CIL funding in 2018 providing 
improved green sp aces, a new pedestrian bridge linking Bowthorpe to the Norwich Research Park, self -access 
technology improvements in 8 libraries and a new artificial grass pitch in Wymondham.  41 
   42 
 ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE  
 
156. The NPPF requires local plans such as this one to “ Support appropriate measures to 
ensure the future resilience of communities and infrastructure to climate change impacts ” and 
to set strategic polices which address climate change mitigation and adaptation.  
 
157. The climate change statement below sets out how the GNLP seizes the opportunities 
available locally to promote low carbon development and address climate change.  
 
CLIMATE CH ANGE STATEMENT  
 
The way in which local plans such as this can support the transition to a post -carbon future 
is set out in joint Royal Town Planning Institute (RTPI) and Town and Country Planning 
Association (TCPA) guidance48. Table 5 below shows how the measures the guidance 
identifies are addressed through the GNLP.  
 
Table 5 GNLP coverage of climate change issues  
 
Measu re GNLP coverage  
Requiring the location and 
design of development to:  
1. deliver the highest viable 
energy efficiency, 
including the use of 
decentralised energy;  
2. reduce the need to travel, 
particularly by private 
car; 
3. secure the highest 
possible share of trips 
made by sustainable 
travel.  Location of development : Policies 1 and 7  
 
The policies covering the location of development 
ensure that new housing will be close to every -day 
services and jobs. The great majority of the 
development is in urban areas and  large villages, 
where sustainable access to services and jobs is best, 
thus reducing the need to travel and making it easier to 
walk, cycle and use public transport. Growth in villages 
is located where there is good access to services to 
support their ret ention. The distribution of the great 
majority of growth thus reduces the need to travel.   
Design of development : Policies 1, 2, 3 and 4  
 
Policy 2, in conjunction with other plan policies, 
requires development to be designed to minimise 
emissions. It i s a broad strategic policy covering a 
wide range of design issues which is supported by the 
requirement for a Sustainability Statement to show 
how development will be low carbon. It also provides 
flexibility in what will undoubtedly be an era of rapid 
technological change to 2038 to ensure development 
seizes the broad range of opportunities to be designed 
to reduce emissions.  
 
To achieve this, development must be designed to 
promote local service provision, include green 
infrastructure and reduce the need t o travel. It must 
promote the use of public transport and active travel, 
along with supporting electric vehicle use.  
 
48 Rising to the Climate Crisis - A Guide for Local Authorities on Planning for Climate Change (2018)  43 
  
The policy also requires development to be designed 
and orientated to minimise energy use, promote low 
carbon generation and energy and w ater efficiency, 
including using sustainable materials, promoting solar 
gain and reducing overheating. By setting high 
standards for resource efficiency the plan contributes 
to the Local Industrial Strategy49 priority to make 
Norfolk and Suffolk the UK’s c lean growth region.  
Support delivery of 
decentralised, renewable and 
low-carbon energy 
generation and grid 
infrastructure.  Policies 2 and 4 promote improvements to the energy 
grid, the development of local, renewable and low 
carbon energy networks to serve major new 
developments and an increase in free standing 
renewable energy generation, such as solar farms. As 
required by the NPPF, wind farm development needs to 
have clear local support so is encouraged through the 
Neighbourhood Plan pro cess.  
Shape places and secure 
new development to  
minimise vulnerability and 
provide resilience to  
impacts from climate 
change.  Policies 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 support further development of 
the green infrastructure network which will provide for 
mitigation of and adaptation to climate change, 
including promoting biodiversity net gain and 
improved and linked habitats.  
 
In addition, the GNLP minimises flood risk through the 
location of development. Most of the development is 
located away from areas at risk of flooding from rivers. 
The exception is a small number of brownfield sites by 
the Rivers Wensum and Yare in the city centre and 
East Norwich where new development can create new 
quarters for the city and flood mitigation measures are 
required. De velopment in the small number of allocated 
sites which have some areas of surface water flood 
risk should be located away from the parts of the site 
at risk of flooding and all suitable developments are 
required to use sustainable drainage.  
Encourage community -led 
initiatives such as the 
promotion of decentralised, 
renewable and low carbon 
energy use or securing land 
for local food sourcing.  Policy 2 encourages communities to promote 
sustainable energy locally through neighbourhood 
plans, inc luding wind energy development where there 
is local support. The requirement for significant 
amounts of green infrastructure in new development 
promotes local food sourcing by providing allotments.  
Increase sustainable 
transport use and local 
transport s olutions.  Policies 2 and 4 support the further development of low 
carbon transport networks. This includes improved 
walking and cycling facilities, the promotion of bus 
travel, Park and Ride and rail use, increased use of 
electric vehicles and demand manag ement measures.  
Have an effective monitoring 
regime to ensure evidence Carbon emissions in Greater Norwich will conti nue to 
be monitored using district wide figures produced by 
 
49 Draft Autumn 2019 available  here 44 
 on reducing carbon dioxide 
emissions, recorded against 
the Climate Change Act and 
other key national statutory 
and policy frameworks.50   Government on transport, domestic and industrial 
emissions. Our ambition is to reduce per capita 
emissions and thereby contribute to meeting the 
national target to bring all greenhouse gas emissio ns 
to net zero by 205051, as well as helping to meet local 
targets, statements and plans52. Measures contained 
within the GNLP will enable further emissions 
reductions, continuing recent year -on-year trends.  
 
  
 
50 Local planning authorities should have regard to the following In relation to climate change policy:  
1. S. 19(1A) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004   
2. National Planning Policy Framework , including Chapter 14 on climate change  
3. Climate Change Act 2008  and footnote 48 of NPPF  
4. Environmental Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004  
5. Planning Practice Guidance  
6. Duty to Co -operate section 33A of the Planning and Com pulsory Purchase Act 2004 (link above)  
7. The monitoring obligations under s. 35 of the 2004 Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act (link 
above) and Regulation 35 of the Town and Count ry Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 
2012.   
 
51 2019 UK Government greenhouse gas emissions target  
52 Norfolk County Council has ad opted a target of achieving net zero carbon emissions by 2030 for council owned land 
and buildings and for travel. In addition, they will work towards carbon neutrality for the county, also by 2030.  
Broadland District Council and South Norfolk Council adop ted their joint Environmental Policy Statement and Action 
Plan in July 2020. Norwich City Council are working on a new Carbon Management Plan and have adopted a vision 
document which commits to carbon neutrality by 2050. The GNLP will support achievement o f any objectives or 
targets identified in adopted local strategies.  45 
 SECTION 5 – THE STRATEGY  
 
POLICY 1 THE SUSTAINABLE GROWTH STRATEGY  
 
Introduction  
 
158. This document meets the NPPF ’s primary purpose for a local plan by providing the planning 
strategy for the pattern and scale of development to meet growth needs in Greater N orwich 
from 2018 to 2038.  
 
159. It identifies growth and renewal areas on greenfield and brownfield sites and limits growth in 
areas for long -term protection .  
 
160. Policy 1 sets out the broad strategic approach which is illustrated on the key diagram. It 
also provides the context for subsequent more detailed strategic locational, thematic and 
sites policies in the plan.  
 
161. Achieving sustainable development is at the heart of the planning system.  This means 
striving to meet social, economic and environmental needs to provide a good quality of life for 
existing and future generations.  The aim is to retain and enhance the dis tinctive qualities of 
Greater Norwich and create environmentally sustainable, resilient and socially inclusive 
communities. As required by the NPPF, policy 1 promotes sustainable development.   
 
162. The strategy takes a flexible approach in what will be a time  of rapid change in how we 
work, travel and live owing to expected technological, economic and environmental changes.  
It aims to make the most of Greater Norwich’s substantial economic growth potential to 
develop its leading role in the national economy a nd to meet housing need, whilst also 
protecting and enhancing the special environment of our area and promoting low carbon 
development.  
 
163. The strategy meets national planning policy requirements, is informed by consultation 
feedback and is based on an exte nsive evidence base covering a wide variety of issues 
including infrastructure needs, Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) considerations and 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA).  
 
164. Policy 1 establishes that five -year housing land supply will be calculated across  the whole 
of the three districts and commits the councils to reviewing the plan to comply with  
government requirements .  
 
165. This local plan also provides a “direction of travel” for the longer term by identifying 
opportunities for growth which could be take n forward to meet additional needs in the next 
local plan. A significant part of this long -term need is likely to be met in a future plan through 
the development of new settlements (see policy 7.6).  
 
166. The GNLP therefore provides the strategic framework to give the clarity on where growth on 
Greater Norwich is sustainable ahead of the implementation of the new planning system the 
Government is promoting.53 
 
53 Government consultations in autumn 2020 pointed to significant reforms to the planning system, including to the form and 
role of local plans, and strongly suggest that additional housing  growth will be needed in the next review of the plan. As set out 
in paragraph 4, this plan is being progressed under transitional arrangements provided by government as part of the reforms.  46 
  
Employment Growth Needs  
 
167. The NPPF requires local plans to set out an economic strategy.  
 
168. Building on recent success in terms of the delivery of new jobs, the overall target for jobs 
growth is for an increase of 33,000 jobs from 2018 to 2038. This figure has been established 
through local trend -based evidence54. 
 
169. Providing the right sites in th e right places for sectors with the greatest economic potential 
will support continued growth and a vibrant economy. Evidence55 shows that:  
 
a. a range of sectors will drive economic and employment growth, many of which are 
within high value knowledge -intensi ve sectors that are increasingly important to the 
wider UK economy. Greater Norwich is home to several internationally recognised 
businesses and boasts a diverse property portfolio. Its increasingly entrepreneurial 
economy is underpinned by a strong founda tion of academic and commercial 
research, making it well positioned nationally and internationally to compete for 
future business investment as part of the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor as well 
as continuing to grow its own business base;  
b. growth potentia l is greatest in five high impact sectors identified in the Norfolk and 
Suffolk Economic Strategy56: advanced manufacturing and engineering; agri -tech; 
energy; ICT/digital culture and life sciences . Growth of these sectors will help 
Greater Norwich to play  a key role nationally and internationally in assisting the 
transformation to a post -carbon economy57.  
c. the total amount of allocated and permitted employment land in 2018 is more than  
enough to provide for expected and promoted growth, so the policy does  not make 
significant additional allocations of employment land beyond those already identified 
in existing local plan documents.   
 
170. This plan therefore allocates employment sites totalling around 360 hectares including key 
strategic employment land in Nor wich City Centre, the Norwich Airport area, Rackheath, 
Broadland Business Park, Broadland Gate, Norwich Research Park (NRP), 
Wymondham/Hethel, Longwater and the Food Enterprise Park. These are set out in the Key 
Diagram and in policy 1. The strategic emplo yment locations provide for growth of all the key 
sectors and are supported by good quality infrastructure and nearby housing, either existing 
or planned.  
 
171. Parts of the NRP have Enterprise Zone status with simplified planning rules, business rate 
discount s and superfast broadband designed to promote research -based business growth. 
The Food Enterprise Park has Food Enterprise Zone status and a Local Development Order 
on parts of the site to encourage and support food production, processing and agriculture 
through the co -location of commercial enterprises.  
 
 
54 The East of England Forecast Model ( EEFM ) 
55 The 2017 Greater Norwich Employment, Retail and Town Centres Study ( the GVA study ) and its 2020 addendum  
56 Available here   
57 The emerging Local Industrial Strategy  supports clean growth  47 
 172. The key strategic sites contribute to the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor, supporting a 
globally significant axis between Cambridge University, UEA/NRP and their associated 
businesses. The Tech Corridor links to other significant growth corridors: London -Stansted -
Cambridge and the Cambridge - Milton Keynes -Oxford Arc (CaMkOx).  
 
173. Supporting and demonstrating a link to nationally significant growth corridors will assist in 
attracting inwar d investment and accessing funding opportunities as Government funding will 
be linked to the delivery of the Norfolk and Suffolk Economic Strategy and the emerging 
Local Industrial Strategy for Norfolk and Suffolk.  
 
174. The GNLP  also allocates land and allows for additional windfall delivery of smaller scale 
sites to provide for jobs growth elsewhere in the urban area, towns and villages, providing 
local job opportunities and supporting small -scale businesses and a vibrant rural economy.  
 
175. Evidence shows that there is an underlying demand for good quality office growth and 
employment space in Norwich city centre. The policies for the economy (policy 6) and for 
Norwich urban area (policy 7.1) address the need to ensure that high den sity employment 
uses are concentrated in highly accessible locations, particularly in the city centre , whilst at 
the same time recognising that there will be an increase in home and remote working during 
the plan period.   
Housing Growth Needs  
 
176. The existin g commitment58 of housing land at April 2020 is large and shapes the GNLP 
strategy. The existing allocations, including Site Allocation plans, Area Action Plans and 
Neighbourhood Plans, derive from the Joint Core Strategy (JCS). These allocations have 
been  demonstrated to be sustainable and, except for later phases of some larger sites where 
delivery is unlikely before 2038, they are included in this strategy. This deliverable 
commitment, including uplift on existing allocat ions an d homes delivered since th e start of the 
plan period in April 2018, provides 74% of the total housing growth identified in this plan to 
2038.  
 
177. The Government produced a standard methodology for identifying local housing need in  
December 202059 which requires forecasts to be based on the 2014 household projections 
unless there are exceptional local circumstances. Consequently, this plan follows the 
required approach and local housing need derived from the 2014 -based household 
projections is set out in row A of Table 6 below. This local hous ing need is the target against 
which land supply will be measured  (see appendix 6) .  
 
178.  To ensure the identified need can be met, it is normal practice to identify additional 
potential supply to buffer against u nder-delivery, typically around 10%.  This plan includes a 
significantly larger buffer to provide the potential to accommodate higher growth rates as 
signalled both by the Government’s “Planning for the Future” consultation and by the 2018 -
based projection s for Greater Norwich which are somewhat higher than the 2014 -based 
projections. The potential growth indicated by the 2018 -based projections would equate to 
 
58 Housing Commitment is sites which are allocated or have permission for housing development  
59 Detail available here. The GNLP is being produced  using the 2014 household forecasts as the basis for establishing 
housing need as required by the guidance. R ecognising that the 2018 -based projections indicate that growth may be 
higher, t here is a significant delivery buffer, a contingency site and the p lan makes use of only a proportion of its 
projected windfall delivery as a windfall allowance.   48 
 the identification of around 5,000 additional homes. Table 6 below sets out how the resulting 
total housing figure from 2018 to 2038 for the GNLP has been established using the standard 
methodology and including a significant buffer to ensure delivery:  
Table 6 Establishing the Plan’s total housing potential figure  
 Number of Homes  Explanation  
A Local housing 
need (2018 to 
2038)  40,541  The minimum local housing need figure 
has been identified using the 
Government’s standard methodology using 
2014 -based projections .  
B Delivery 
2018/2019 and 
2019/20  5,240  The number of homes built in 2018/2019 
and 2019/20 (including student 
accommodation and housing for the 
elderly).  
C Existing 
commitment 
(at April 2020)  
to be delivered 
to 2038 
(including uplift 
on allocated 
sites)  31,452 
 The existing commitment is the 
undelivered sites which are already 
allocated and/or permitted, with par ts of or 
whole sites unlikely to be delivered by 
2038 excluded. Uplifts on existing 
allocations are included here.  
D New 
allocations  10,704  These are the homes to be provided on 
new sites allocated through the GNLP 
(9,254), the South Norfolk Village Clusters 
Housing Sites Allocation Plan (1,200) and 
the Diss and area Neighbourhood Plan 
(250).  
E Homes 
delivered 
through policy 
7.5  800 Policy 7.5 provides for delivery of 3 to 5 
homes on small scale sites adjacent to 
settlement boundaries or on small sites 
within  recognisable group of dwellings60. 
F Windfall 
allowance  1,296  There is a limited reliance on windfall sites. 
Evidence provides an estimated 4,450 
homes resulting from windfall development 
during the remainder of the plan period61. 
As windfall delivery is likely to remain 
robustly high it is appropriate to include a 
limited proportion as part of total potential 
delivery.  
G = B + C + 
D + E + F  Total housing 
potential  49,492  The total housing potential for the plan 
consists of d elivery (B), commitments (C), 
new allocations (D), h omes delivered 
 
60 See policy 7.5 and appendix 7 for further information.  
61 The projection of delivery from windfall sites is based on the method used in the 5 Year Housing Land Supply 
Statement  for Greater Norwich for the period beginning 1 April 2019, publ ished on 5 February 2020.    49 
 through policy 7.5 (E)  and the windfall 
allowance (F). This provides a  buffer  of 
22% to cater for the potential for higher 
growth rates. It also mitigates any risk of 
non-delivery of sites to ensure delivery of 
local housing need .  
 
179. In line with the above figures, policy 1 provides for around 49,500 new homes . This is the 
total provision in the plan  and is not the need or target against which land supply will be 
measured  (see appendix 6) . The residual annual target for the 18 years of the remainder of 
the period, taking account of delivery between 2018 and 2020,  is 40,541 (Row A) minus 
5,240 (Row B), divided by 18 which equals 1,961 per annum .  
 
180. In addition to the allocations in this plan, a minimum of 1,200 of these homes will be 
allocated in the South Norfolk Village Clusters Housing Site Allocations document a nd 250 
will be provided through allocations in the Diss and area Neighbourhood Plan. These 1,400 
homes are included in the allocations in Row D.  
 
181. To provide additional flexibility to ensure housing need can be met, a contingency site at 
Costessey for around 800 homes is included in this plan should this prove to be required due 
to low delivery of allocated housing sites.  
 
182. Policy 7.5 also allows for limited further development on small sites of 3 homes in smaller 
parishes and 5 dwellings in larger paris h during the plan period.  
 
183. Windfall developments provide additional potential for housing delivery . Policy 1 supports 
appropriate windfall development, including sites in and adjacent to villages and small 
brownfield sites.  
 
184. Based on previous local trend s, the likely scale of windfall housing development is in the 
region of 4,450 dwellings in the remainder of the plan period to 2038 . The table above shows 
that 30% of the estimated windfall delivery is counted as a windfall allowance.  Demand will 
determine whether windfall development is instead of, or in addition to, allocated growth.  
 
185. The Government encourages authorities to consider higher levels of growth than that 
required to meet local housing need, particularly where there is the potential for significant 
economic growth. Our overall approach, including to windfalls , contingency  and having a 
significant buffer , builds in flexibility to support higher than trend economic growth 
incorporating the Greater Norwich City Deal.  
 
186. It also sets us on the path to the higher housing numbers which recent projections  and  
“Planning for the Future” indicate will be required locally  to address affordability issues. This 
provid es continuity between the current and future direction of travel in Government policy to 
provide more housing to address needs.   
 
187. A significant element of any further growth required in the next plan under the new planning 
system will be at a new settlement or settlements  (see policy 7.6) .   50 
  
The Growth Strategy  
 
188. To ensure sustainable development, minimise carbon emissions, promote s trong,  resilient, 
inclusive and vibrant communities and meet other Government requirements set out in the 
NPPF, the strategy for the location of growth:  
 
a. Maximises brownfield development and regeneration opportunities, which are mainly 
in Norwich. The brow nfield/greenfield split for new homes in the plan is  around 
22%/78%;  
 
b. Broadly follows the settlement hierarchy set out in policy 1 (the Norwich urban area; 
main towns; key service centres and village clusters) in terms of scales of growth as 
this reflects  access to services and jobs;  
 
c. Focusses most of the growth in locations with the best access to jobs, services and 
existing and planned infrastructure in and around the Norwich urban area and the 
Cambridge Norwich Tech corridor;  
 
d. Focusses reasonable level s of growth in the main towns, key service centres and 
village clusters to support a vibrant rural economy. The approach to village clusters 
is innovative. It  reflects the way people access services in rural areas and enhances 
social sustainability by pro moting appropriate growth in smaller villages. It will 
support local services, whilst at the same time protecting the character of the 
villages.  
 
e. Allocates strategic scale housing sites (1,000 dwellings +) in accessible locations;  
 
f. Allocates a significant number of medium scale and smaller scale sites in the urban 
area, towns and villages, providing a balanced range of site types to allow for choice, 
assist delivery and allow smaller scale developers and builders into the market. 
Overall, 12% of  the homes allocated through the plan are on sites of no larger than 1 
hectare, meeting national requirements62 . More small -scale housing developments 
will be provided by policy 7.5 and through windfall development ;  
 
g. Sets a minimum allocation size of 12 -15 dwellings to ensure that a readily 
deliverable amount of affordable housing is provided on all allocated sit es.  
 
189. The strategy for the distribution of growth set in policy 1 takes account of the above 
principles, the scale of existing and deliverability of commitment and assessments of sites 
submitted to the GNLP.   
 
62 Paragraph 68 a) of the NPPF  requires plans to identify land to accommodate at lea st 10% of the housing 
requirement on sites of no larger than one hectare. The 12% figure is calculated from sites allocated through this plan. 
More small sites will be provided, including in the South Norfolk village clusters and as a result of policy 7.5.  of this 
plan.      
 51 
 190. The authorities will continue to work together  through the Greater Norwich Growth Board to 
ensure necessary infrastructure to support growth is delivered. The programme for delivery 
of key infrastructure will be set out in the Greater Norwich Infrastructure Plan.  
The Settlement Hierarchy  
191. Housing growt h is distributed in line with the following settlement hierarchy:  
 
I. The Norwich urban area  which consists of Norwich  and the built -up parts of the 
fringe parishes  of Colney, Costessey, Cringleford, Drayton, Easton, Hellesdon, 
Old Catton, Sprowston, Taverham , Thorpe St. Andrew, Trowse and the 
remainder of the Growth Triangle.  
 
II. The main towns  which are Aylsham, Diss (including part of Roydon), Long 
Stratton, Harleston and Wymondham.  
 
III. The key service centres  which are Acle, Blofield, Brundall, Hethersett, Hingham, 
Loddon/Chedgrave, Poringland/Framingham Earl, Reepham and Wroxham.  
 
IV. Village clus ters which cover the remainder of the Greater Norwich Local Plan 
area.  
 
192. Table 7 below sets out the amount and proportion of growth in the different settlement 
hierarchy areas established by the strategy and provides estimates for homes there will be in 
each area in 2038.   
 
Table 7 Housing growth 2018 to 2038 (figures rounded)  
 
Area  Homes 2018  Homes 2038 (and 
increase)  Increase 
% % of total 
housing growth  
Norwich urban 
area 106,100  138,791 
(+32,691)         31   66 
The Main 
Towns  19,400  26,206 
(+ 6,806)  35 14 
The Key 
Service 
Centres  15,900  19,579 
(+ 3,679)  23 7 
Village clusters  46,100  50,320 
(+ 4,220) 9 9 
Windfall  + 
homes from 
policy 7.5  NA 2,096 NA 4 
Total  187,50063 236,992 
(+ 49,492 ) 26  
 
 
 
63 Source: Council tax records  52 
 The strategic growth area   
 
193.  The strategy distributes around 7 4% of the growth in the “Strategic Growth Area”. This 
area is broadly defined on the Key Diagram and shown in map 7 to include:  
• The main Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor area, including Norwic h, the 
North East Growth Triangle, the remainder of the Norwich Fringe, Hethersett 
and Wymondham;  
• All the key strategic employment areas in the plan;  
• All but one of the strategic scale housing growth locations (the exception is 
Long Stratton);  
• High quality public transport, road and cycling infrastructure (both existing and 
planned) and  
• The great majority of brownfield sites in the area.  
194. Identifyin g this area promotes the strategic economic strengths and sectors of Greater 
Norwich. By linking to other regional growth corridors, it places Greater Norwich firmly on the 
national stage for growth and accessing external funding.   
 
195. With Norwich playing a n anchoring role in the strategic growth area, it also recognises the 
role the city plays as a driver of the regional economy, supporting the vitality and 
regeneration of the city centre, including maximising the potential of brownfield sites.  
The Key Diag ram 
 
196. Strategic local plans are required to include a Key Diagram which illustrates key elements 
of the strategy in the plan  on an indicative map.     53 
 KEY DIAGRAM  
 
 
54 
 197. Map 7 below provides further detail for housing by illustrating the location and scale of 
housing growth allocated through the plan  across Greater Norwich.  
Map 7 Housing Growth Locations  
 
55 
   POLICY 1 – THE SUSTAINABLE GROWTH STRATEGY  
POLICY 1 – THE SUSTAINABLE GROWTH STRATEGY  
 
Sustainable development and inclusive growth are supported by delivery of the following 
between 2018 and 2038:  
 
• to meet the need for around 40,550 new homes, provision is made64 for a minimum 
of 49,492  new homes;  
• to aid delivery of 33,000 additional jobs and support key economic sectors, around 
360 hectares of employment land is allocated, and employment opportunities are 
promoted at the local level;  
• supporting infrastructure will be provided in line with policies  2 and 4;  
• environmental protection and enhancement measures including further 
improvements to the green infrastructure network will be delivered.  
 
The sustainable growth strategy is illustrated in the Key Diagram.  
 
SETTLEMENT HIERARCHY  
 
The settlement hie rarchy is:  
 
1. Norwich urban area (Norwich and Norwich Fringe65) 
2. Main towns  
3. Key service centres  
4. Village clusters.  
 
Growth is distributed in line with the settlement hierarchy to provide good access to 
services, employment and infrastructure. It is provided through urban and rural 
regeneration, along with sustainable urban and village extensions.  
 
Most of the housing, employment and infrastructure growth is focussed in the Strategic 
Growth Area illustrated on the Key Diagram. This includes Greater No rwich’s part of the 
Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor, including the Norwich urban area, Hethersett and 
Wymondham and key strategic jobs sites at Hethel and the Norwich Research Park. 
Growth is also focussed in towns and villages to support vibrant rural com munities.  
 
HOUSING  
 
Housing commitments are located to meet the need for homes across the area, providing 
good access to services, facilities and jobs, supporting sustainable urban and rural 
living. Accordingly, housing commitments are distributed as foll ows:   
 
 
 
 
 
Area  Existing 
deliverable New 
allocations  Total minimum 
deliverable 
 
64 This includes existing allocated sites carried forward, new allocations made through the GNLP, sites with planning 
consent and allowances for delivery on small scale (from policy 7.5) and other windfall sites.  
65 The Norwich fringe is the built up parts of the fringe parishes of Colney, Costessey, Cringleford, Drayton, Easton, 
Hellesdon, Old Catton, Sprowston, Taverham, Thorpe St. Andrew, Trowse and the remainder of the Growth Triangle.  56 
 commitment 
(including 
uplift and 
delivery 
2018/19  and 
2019/20 )  housing 
commitment  
2018 - 2038  
Norwich urban area  26,019 6,672 32,691 
The main towns of Wymondham, 
Aylsham, Diss (with part of Roydon), 
Harleston and Long Stratton  5,151 1,655 6,806 
The key service centres of Acle, Blofield, 
Brundall, Hethersett, Hingham, Loddon / 
Chedgrave, Poringland / Framingham 
Earl, Reepham and Wroxham  2,984 695 3,679 
Village 
clusters  
(see appendix 
5 details of the 
clusters)  In the remaining parts of 
Broadland (see policy 
7.4 and the GNLP Sites 
Plan for specific sites)  1,146 482 4,220 
In South Norfolk (see 
policy 7.4 and the South 
Norfolk Village Clusters 
Housing Site Allocations 
Local Plan for specific 
allocations)  1,392 A 
minimum 
of 1,200  
Allocations Total  36,692 10,704 47,396 
Homes delivered though policy 7.5  NA 800 
Windfall allowance  NA 1,296 
Overall Total  49,492  
 
Policies 7.1 to 7.5 provide details on distribution and the Sites document provides 
individual site policies. Individual site policies for villages in South Norfolk will be in the 
South Norfolk Village Clusters Housing Site Allocations Local Plan.  
 
To provide choice and aid delivery of housing, proposals for additional “windfall” 
housing growth will be considered acceptable in principle at appropriate scales and 
locations where they would not hav e a negative impact on the character and scale of the 
settlement, and subject to other local plan policies:  
 
1. Within settlement boundaries in accordance with the above settlement hierarchy;   
 
2. Elsewhere in village clusters, subject to the requirements of policy 7.4.  
 
3. On sites of up to 3 to 5 dwellings in all parishes, subject to the requirements of 
policy 7.5.  
 
Plan review and five -year housing land supply  57 
  
This plan will be reviewed  in line with the requirements on the new plan -making sys tem.  
Five-year housing land supply will be calculated across the whole of the three districts. 
The plan  provides enough allocations to provide a five -year housing land supply on 
adoption66.  
 
ECONOMY  
 
Key Strategic employment locations in the Key Diagram are protected from other forms of 
development and will support both a broad range of employment and key economic 
sectors as set out in policy 6. The key strategic locations are:  
 
• Norwich city centre;  
• the N orwich Airport area;  
• Browick Interchange, Wymondham;  
• Longwater;  
• Rackheath;  
• Broadland Business Park;  
• Broadland Gate;  
• Norwich Research Park;  
• Hethel and  
• The Food Enterprise Park at Easton/Honingham.  
  
In addition, smaller scale employment sites are allocated in urban areas, towns and large 
villages to provide local job opportunities, supporting small businesses and vibrant 
urban and rural economies.  
 
INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
The sustainable growth strategy will be supported by improvements to the transport 
system, green infrastructure and services.  
 
  
 
66 This will be confirmed through the housing delivery trajectory to be included as an appendix to the plan when it is 
taken to cabinets. We have written to all of the site owners/agents for the preferred options and reasonable alternative 
housing sites. Thi s is to require the site owners/agents to evidence when their sites will deliver in the plan period.  58 
 POLICY 2 - SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES  
 
Introduction  
 
198. The Sustainable Communities policy is wide ranging. It aims to ensure that the design of 
development is high quality, contributes to the establishment and maintenance of resilient 
and inclusive communities, promotes low carbon development and helps to addr ess climate 
change. It is a key strategic policy, covering many aspects of the vision and objectives of the 
plan. Together with policy 3, which focuses on the design of development reflecting local 
character and sense of place using local design guidance, the policy promotes well -designed 
places as required by section 12 of the NPPF.  
 
199. The policy covers ten key social, economic and environmental issues which all 
developments must address through their design. These are set out in table 8 below. The 
table also references other relevant plan policies and supporting supplementary planning 
documents.   
 
Table 8 - Key issues addressed by policy 2  
Issue number in 
policy 2  Requirement and justification  
1. Access to 
services and 
facilities  Developments are required to provide convenient, safe and sustainable access 
to new on -site services and facil ities or to existing facilities as appropriate. This 
reduces the need to travel and provides local access to services and facilities, 
supporting their viability. The provision of safe and accessible green 
infrastructure, sports facilities, local shops, acc ess to healthier food, allotments 
and layouts that encourage walking and cycling also helps to support healthy 
lifestyles.  In this respect, regard should be had to Sport England’s Active 
Design document. S trategic infrastructure is provided for through po licy 4.  
2. New 
technologies  The policy requires development to make provision for the delivery of new 
technologies. Such a strategic approach is important for economic growth and 
will have environmental and social benefits, such as assisting in home working. 
The policy encourages dev elopers to work with service providers on the delivery 
of a broad range of existing, developing and future technologies, with broadband 
and mobile phone networks a current focus.  
Developers must therefore ensure broadband infrastructure is provided for ne w 
developments. To do this, they should register new sites with broadband 
infrastructure providers.   The preference is that all residential developments over 
10 dwellings and all employment developments will provide Fibre to the 
Premises (FTTP) for high co nnection speeds. For smaller schemes, the 
expectation is that FTTP will be provided where practical. Where this is not 
possible, then non -Next Generation Access (NGA) technologies that can provide 
speeds more than 24Mbps should be delivered.  
The policy als o provides the basis for more detailed supplementary planning 
documents for measures to support new technologies in times of rapid change, 
including modern construction techniques and the use of electric and possibly 
hydrogen vehicles.   
3. Green 
infrastruct ure Developments are required to provide on -site green infrastructure appropriate to 
their scale and location. The three main benefits of green infrastructure: 
biodiversity gain; the promotion of active travel and the reduction of flood risk, 
are key NPPF priorities. On -site provision will link and contribute to the further 
development of an area -wide green infrastructure network, promoted through 59 
 policies 3 and 4, which has now been in development in Greater Norwich for 
over a decade in accordance with the  Greater Norwich Green Infrastructure 
Strategy and delivery plans, and other document s such as the River Wensum 
Strategy.   
4. Densities  In line with the NPPF, developments are required through this policy to make 
effective use of land. To do this, the policy establishes minimum net densities for 
different part s of the area.  It requires higher densities in the most sustainable 
locations. T hese are mainly in Norwich and in the city centre where, dependent 
on design issues, high densities have and can be delivered. It also establishes a 
minimum density elsewhere to ensure the effective use of land. In determining 
the appropriate density for a  development , regard will need to be had to the type 
and size of housing; for example, a greater number of 1 - bedroom properties 
can be accommodated compared to 5 -bedroom properties. The policy will be 
used with policy 3 which focuses on design creating a distinct sense of place 
and reflecting local character.  
5. Local 
character 
(including  
landscape, 
townscape, 
heritage )  The NPPF requires local plans to recognise the intrinsic character and beauty of 
the countryside, and respect local character an d the historic environment  
Accordingly, the policy requires development to respect local character, based 
on existing and any future landscape , townscape or historic character 
assessments, and avoids harm to locally valued landscapes and the historic 
environment from inappropriate development. It continues the well -established 
approach in Greater Norwich of having strong landscape protection policies. To 
do this, it provides the continued strategic policy basis for more detailed, location 
specific developm ent management policies covering the strategic gaps and 
landscape settings including river valleys, undeveloped approaches to Norwich 
and the setting of the Broads. This is the most suitable approach to landscape 
protection locally given that Greater Norwi ch does not have the exceptional 
circumstances required by Government to establish a Green Belt.    
6. Travel  The policy requires appropriate development to be designed to manage travel 
demand, promote active and sustainable travel and to ensure parking is 
addressed effectively. The design of development, as well as its location67, and 
the local availability of services addressed in point 1 of this policy, play an 
important role in determining how much and how people travel. This is 
particularly the case on l arger sites where good design can significantly 
influence travel habits. In addition, the policy requires sites to be designed to 
accommodate parking without impacting on the amenity of residents  or over 
dominating the site .   
7. Inclusive and 
safe 
communities  In line with the NPPF, this element of the policy covers social aspects of the 
design of development. The requirement focuses firstly on ensuring services are 
accessible either within or from new developments. Secondly, the policy covers 
the cr eation and maintenance of resilient, safe and inclusive communities in 
which all members of society can interact. Thirdly, the design of development is 
required to promote healthy and active lifestyles.  
8. Resource 
efficiency 
and pollution  This part of the policy covers a range of the environmental issues that new 
development must focus on, most of which have an impact on addressing 
climate change. In terms of maintaining air quality, particular regard to this will 
be expected of developments within or near identified Air Quality Management 
Areas or main roads.  Point 8 provides the strategic basis for any more detailed 
guidance on resource efficiency, pollution, overheating and ground conditions.   
9. Water  Point 9 of the policy covers the range of issues rela ted to water affecting new 
development, including flood risk, water quality, sustainable drainage (SUDS) 
 
67 Addressed through policy 1 of this plan.  60 
 and water efficiency. As evidenced by the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, the 
great majority of development promoted through this plan avoids areas at  risk of 
flood. Any mitigation required, mainly in parts of Norwich city centre and East 
Norwich, will come forward as part of specific developments and will be guided 
by the level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment.  
Government policy expects local plannin g authorities to adopt proactive 
strategies to adapt to climate change, taking account of water supply and 
demand considerations. It allows local plans to set a higher standard of water 
efficiency than the Building Regulations where evidence justifies it. For housing 
development, only the higher Building Regulations standard for water prescribed 
by Government (110 litres per person per day) can be applied through local 
plans and more demanding standards cannot be set.  If the potential to set more 
demanding  standards locally is established by the Government in the future, 
these will be applied in Greater Norwich. For non -housing development, broadly 
equivalent standards can be required using BREEAM assessments.  
In Greater Norwich, evidence and justification on the need for water efficiency 
measures includes:  
 
• The Environment Agency (EA) has identified Greater Norwich as 
water stressed in its ‘Water Stress Area Final Classification (2013), 
the primary source of evidence which supports a tighter water 
efficiency standard;  
• The need for water efficiency is particularly significant in Greater 
Norwich given its proximity to internationally protected water 
environments, including the River Wensum and the Broads;  
• Anglian Water’s strategic approach68 to provid ing water supplies to 
meet growth needs includes a major focus on water efficiency 
measures;  
• The Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework and the key relevant 
organisations, the Environment Agency and Natural England, all 
support retaining this approach which has been in place in Greater 
Norwich since 2011;  
• The cost of such a policy, implemented using water efficient 
fixtures and fittings, is negligible69. It can be easily achieved 
through a flexible variety of measures to suit different types of 
homes and bui ldings. The cheapest approach is the use of water 
efficient fixtures and fittings. Solutions can also include the use of 
greywater recycling and rainwater capture. It will have no effect on 
development viability and will lead to financial savings for 
house holders and users of other developments, along with carbon 
emissions reductions.  
Implementation of the standards for water efficiency will be supported by an 
updated advice note.  
10. Energy  Point 10 of the policy requires development to be designed and orie ntated to 
minimise energy use, an easily achievable and cost -effective means of 
promoting low carbon development. It also supports decarbonised energy 
supplies locally by promoting measures such as decentralised, renewable and 
low carbon energy generation,  co-locating potential heat customer and 
suppliers, and battery storage, as well as energy efficiency in new 
developments.  
 
68 Anglian Wate r - Water Resources Management Plan  December 2019  
69 Estimated by the Government at £6 -9 per dwelling  (The Housing St andards Review , 2014)  61 
 This approach to energy in new developments is required as:  
 
• Evidence70 shows that a positive approach to promoting energy 
efficiency and locally generated sustainable sources of energy, as 
well as promotion of the use of battery storage, is required to 
address local energy network capacity constraints and to ensure 
the timel y delivery of growth;  
• The NPPF requires a positive approach to be taken to promoting 
energy efficiency. In doing so, policy 2 anticipates the 
Government’s “Future Homes Standard” currently scheduled to be 
introduced by 2025, which will require all new buil d homes to have 
low carbon heating and high levels of energy efficiency.  When the 
Government implements the Future Homes Standard it will 
strengthen  (or replace) the GNLP policy approach by providing 
further measures. The NPPF also requires a positive app roach to 
large scale renewable energy generation except for onshore wind 
energy development.  No suitable sites for onshore wind energy 
development have been submitted to the GNLP. The best ways to 
display local support, as required by the NPPF, for onshor e wind 
energy are through a neighbourhood plan which requires a local 
referendum or through any other future local plan documents 
which may consider suitable sites71;  
• The LEP strategy 72 identifies energy as one of five high impact 
sectors with the potential for growth;  
• Policy 2 makes necessary updates to existing development 
management policies to address the above.  
 
Policy 2 therefore establishes standards for energy efficiency in new housing 
and non -housing development. If required, f urther detail on how this will be 
achieved will be set out in a future Energy Policy Implementation Note or SPD. 
This approach is deliberately flexible as:  
• The defined standards are not prescriptive. They allow for either a 
“fabric first” approach to reducing energy use, which on many 
types of site tends to be cheaper, or the use of on -site sustainable 
energy, or a mixture of both;  
• Implementation notes or SPDs can be amended to reflect rapid 
changes techno logies and other changes of circumstance such as 
changes to national policy, such as Government’s indication 
through a ministerial statement that national policy will change in 
2025 to prevent the use of fossil fuels to heat new homes.  
 
Evidence shows the  policy is viable73.  Investment in energy efficiency in new 
development will have the significant additional benefits of reducing energy 
costs for the users of new development, as well as carbon savings.  
  
The policy also requires larger developments (10 0 dwellings plus or 10,000 
square metres plus for non -residential development) to maximise opportunities 
 
70 The Greater Norwich Energy Infrastructure Study  (March 2019)  
71 Neighbourhood Plans proposing wind turbine development in South Norfolk should take accou nt of its Wind Turbine 
Landscape Sensitivity Study  
72 New Anglia Local Enterprise Partnership’s Norfolk and Suffolk Economic Strategy  
73 GNLP Viability Assessment  (NPS, September 2019) – updates will inform the cabinet version of the plan in January 
2021  62 
 for the use of sustainable local energy networks. This requirement is also set in 
line with the recommendations of the Greater Norwich Energy Infrastru cture 
Study.  
 
The study sets out that there are likely to be constraints on the electricity grid 
and recommends ways to avoid or reduce the costs of improved network 
connection which are relevant to all larger sites, and to those sites affected by 
grid co nstraints named in appendix 1. Measures to implement point 6 of the 
policy, to be evidenced on a site by site basis through the Sustainability 
Statement, could include:  
 
• Semi -islanded approaches including high levels of on -site, renewable or 
low carbon generation and batteries;  
• Demand side responses, where on -site generation could be turned up or 
load reduced in response to network signals;  
• Investment in infrastructure delivered through an Energy Services 
Company, which can then provide a steady r evenue stream for those 
involved.  
 
 
Implementation  
 
200. The policy will be implemented through:  
 
• Major developments74 being required to submit a Sustainability Statement. This 
will be  supported by supplementary planning guidance. The purpose of the statement  is 
to show, on a site by site basis, how the varied aspects of the policy are addressed. The 
policy references use of the National Design Guide (and any subsequent related 
publications) to ensure good urban design and encourages, but does not require, the  
use of the Building for a Healthy Life 75 design tool, or any equivalents or future 
successors. This provides flexibility in how applicants produce their sustainability 
statements for housing developments. The policy also encourages master planning 
using a community engagement process on larger sites (200 dwellings plus or 20,000 
square metres for non -residential development) and requires it on sites of 500 dwellings 
plus or 50,000 square metres. The purpose of this is to promote effective community 
engage ment in the design of larger schemes. It also includes a requirement for Health 
Impact Assessments for specific types of development to show how health care needs 
will be provided for.  
• Housing developments of 100 dwellings or more being required to submit a 
Delivery Statement.  This statement is aimed at supporting timely delivery of 
development, a priority for this plan. It requires developers to set out the timing of the 
delivery of developments in their statements accompanying planning applications. 
Where  delivery does not happen, it enables the local authorities to consider the use of 
legal powers to promote delivery, including compulsory purchase.  
• All minor developments also being subject to the policy’s requirements . This will 
be assessed on a case by case basis, taking account of site characteristics and 
proposed uses .  Minor developments are not required to submit a Sustainability 
Statement. This is in line with the threshold for national requirements for Design and 
Access statem ents for major developments only and ensures that planning application 
submission requirements are proportionate;  
 
74 Major developments are 10 dwellings or more, 1,000 square metres of floor space or 1 hectare or more of land.  
75 The Homes England and NHS England approved Building for a Healthy Life urban design tool is available here . 63 
 • Existing development management policies , which detail some policy aspects such 
as the locations of areas protected from inappropriate development under landscape 
policies.  
• Supplementary Planning Documents and guidance (see table above).  
  64 
 POLICY 2 – SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES  
POLICY 2 – SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES  
 
Development must be high quality, contributing to delivering in clusive growth in mixed, 
resilient and sustainable communities, to enhancing the environment, and to mitigating and 
adapting to climate change, assisting in  meeting national greenhouse gas emissions 
targets76. To achieve this, development proposals are required, as appropriate, to:  
 
1. Ensure safe, convenient and sustainable access to on site and local services and 
facilities including schools, health care, shops, recreation/ leisure/community/faith 
facilities and libraries;  
2. Make provision fo r delivery of new and changing technologies (including broadband, 
fibre optic networks, telecommunications , construction methods  and electric vehicles);   
3. Contribute to multi -functional green infrastructure links, i ncluding through 
landscaping, to make bes t use of site characteristics and integrate into the 
surroundings, having regard to relevant green infrastructure strategies and delivery 
plans;  
4. Make efficient use of land with densities dependent on site characteristics, with higher 
densities and car free  housing in the most sustainably accessible locations in Norwich. 
Indicative minimum net densities are 25 dwellings per hectare across the plan  area and 
40 in Norwich77.  
5. Respect, protect and enhance local character and aesthetic quality (including 
landsca pe, townscape, and the historic environment), taking account of landscape or 
historic character assessments, design guides and codes, and maintain strategic gaps 
and landscape settings, including river valleys, undeveloped approaches and the 
character and setting of the Broads;  
6. Provide safe and suitable access for all users, manage travel demand and promote 
public transport and active travel within a clearly legible public realm including public 
art where appropriate, with layouts that encourage walking and  cycling, whilst also 
integrating parking in a manner that does not dominate the streetscape and providing a 
high standard of amenity through planting and the careful choice of materials;  
7. Create inclusive,  resilient and safe communities in which people of all ages have good 
access to services and local job opportunities, can interact socially, be independent 
and have the opportunity for healthy and active lifestyles;  
8. Be resource efficient, support sustainable waste management, reduce overheating, 
protect ai r quality, minimise pollution and take account of ground conditions;  
9. Support efficient water management.   Flood risk should be minimised, including 
avoiding  inappropriate  develop ment  in areas at significant risk of flooding, reducing 
the causes and impact s of flooding, supporting a catchment approach to water 
management and using sustainable drainage. Development must protect water quality, 
both surface and groundwater, and be water efficient. To achieve the latter:  
o Housing development will meet the Buildi ng Regulations part G (amended 2016) 
water efficiency higher optional standard;  
o Non-housing development will meet the BREEAM “Very Good” water efficiency 
standard, or any equivalent successor;  
 
76 The 2019 national target is to bring all greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050  
77 The indicative densities are inter -related with local des ign issues (see policy 3). Higher densities are encouraged in 
and close to defined district and town centres, and in particular in the city centre.   
 11 Health Impact Assessments are required for allocated sites of 500 dwellings plus, for non -allocated ho using sites 
of 100 dwellings plus and for any housing proposal with a significant amount of housing for the elderly to show how 
the health care infrastructure needs of the new development are provided for.  
 65 
 If the potential to set more demanding standards locally is established by the 
Government, the highest potential standard will be applied in Greater Norwich.   
10. Minimise energy demand through the design and orientation of development and 
maximise the use of  sustainable energy, local energy networks and battery storage to 
assist growth delivery. This will include:  
o All new development will provide a 19% reduction against Part L of the 2013 
Building Regulations (amended 2016);  
o Appropriate non -housing developmen t of 500 square metres or above will meet 
the BREEAM “Very Good” energy efficiency standard, or any equivalent 
successor;  
except where a lower provision is justified because the requirement would make the 
development unviable.  
 
Proposals for free standing decentralised, renewable and/or low carbon energy 
networks, except for wind energy schemes, will be supported subject the acceptability 
of wider impacts.  
Wind energy schemes will be supported where the proposal is in a suitable area as 
identified in a neig hbourhood plan or other local plan documents  or has been 
demonstrated to have the support of the local community.  
 
To assist this broad -based approach:  
 
i. Planning applications for major developments will be required to be accompanied by a 
Sustainability St atement (including Health Impact Assessments as appropriate)78 
showing how development will support the above requirements, with housing 
development taking account of the National Design Guide (and any subsequent related 
publications) and optionally making use of tools such as Building for a Healthy Life (or 
any successor). Other developments will meet the policy requirements as appropriate 
dependent on site characteristics and proposed uses . Flood risk assessments will be 
provided separate ly as required by Government guidance.   
ii. Master -planning using a recognised community engagement process will be 
encouraged on larger sites and particularly for proposed developments of 200 
dwellings or 20,000 square metres plus.  
iii. Delivery plans are required with planning applications for 100 dwe llings plus to set out 
the timing of the delivery of developments. Where delivery cannot be demonstrated to 
be in accordance with agreed delivery plans for individual sites, the authorities may 
make use, where necessary, of their legal powers to bring abou t strategically 
significant development, including compulsory purchase.  In considering the use of 
such powers regard will be had to any change of circumstances that might affect 
delivery, particularly economic factors.  
iv. Potential applicants for planning pe rmission for major developments are advised to 
contact Anglian Water Services in the early stages of producing a development 
scheme in order to ensure that there is adequate capacity, or capacity can be made 
available, in the wastewater network. The provis ion of capacity could affect the timing 
of development.  In locations where there are known to be capacity issues the local 
authority will expect this engagement to have taken place and for it to be demonstrated 
that adequate capacity will be available to serve the development (see Appendix 1 
Infrastructure Requirements for currently known locations with capacity issues).   
 
 
78 Health Impact Assessments are required for all ocated sites of 500 dwellings plus, for non -allocated housing sites of 
100 dwellings plus and for any housing proposal with a significant amount of housing for the elderly to show how the 
health care infrastructure needs of the new development are provided  for.  66 
 POLICY 3 – ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT  
 
The Built and Historic Environment  
 
201. The National Planning Policy Framework state s that plans should set out a positive strategy 
for the conservation and enjoyment of the historic environment, including heritage assets 
most at risk through neglect, decay or other threats.   
 
202. The Greater Norwich area has numerous heritage assets. Consequently, the historic 
environment is central to the character and quality of life of the Greater Norwich area and is a 
significant factor in its economic success through encouraging tourism and inward 
investment. Conserving and enhancing the historic environment will continue to reinforce 
what makes Greater Norwich an attractive place to live in, work and visit.  
 
203. As well as the historic assets that are easily visible, there are also those that are hidden 
below ground.  As a long settled and productive area, Greater Norwich  has a significant 
archaeological heritage which development can help to reveal.  
 
204. As such, it is important to recognise that the historic character of the area is made up of a 
multitude of heritage assets. Individually, some may be m ore important than others, but even 
the lesser ones are important in contributing to overall character and quality.  All the different 
elements of the historic environment need to be taken into consideration and conserved and 
enhanced where possible as par t of the development of the area.  Guidance for this can be 
obtained through a wide range of existing resources, such as landscape character 
assessments, conservation area appraisals, listed building and scheduled ancient 
monuments information and archaeol ogical records; but it  is usually necessary to undertake 
a heritage impact assessment in accordance with guidelines produced by Historic England 
and local validation requirements to understand the impact of a proposal on the significance 
of a heritage ass et. This would include the impact of development on the setting of a heritage 
asset, which can contribute to its significance, and can be undermined by proposals that 
have substantial mass or height that contrasts with neighbouring historic buildings and t he 
wider area.   
 
205. The strategic approach to heritage is first to consider the potential location of development, 
for example does the location itself “fit” well in relation to adjoining settlements, and does it 
avoid intruding in important views of histori c assets?  This is addressed through the growth 
strategy set out in policy 1.  
 
206. Following from this, the design of the development needs to respect the historic 
environment, be appropriate to its setting, seek to enhance the locality and provide measures 
to further the understanding of local heritage issues. Development should therefore draw 
upon existing historic character to lead to more positive change in the built and historic 
environment.  
 
207. In certain cases, an element of harm to the historic environme nt resulting from development  
may be unavoidable: but this will only be justified if the benefits of the development outweigh 
the harm, and the harm is kept to a minimum, taking into account the relative importance of 
the heritage assets in accordance wit h national policy.  
 67 
 208. The policy also includes a flexible approach to the use of historic assets to achieve their 
retention whilst retaining their historic significance, and in this respect particular 
encouragement will be given to proposals for restoring t hose assets that are at risk of being 
lost. Historic significance potentially covers a broad range of issues such as artistic, 
aesthetic,  architectural, cultural and social considerations.   
 
209. The Greater Norwich Green Infrastructure Study provides information on designated 
Historic Environment assets in relation to green infrastructure provision (see paragraph 22 3 
below).  
 
The Natural Environment  
 
210. Reflecting the Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan, the NPPF places great weight on 
protecting and en hancing Greater Norwich’s rich natural environment. It seeks to ensure that 
development not only avoids harm to natural environmental assets, but also encourages a 
local plan policy approach which actively protects, promotes and enhances biodiversity, so 
that development results in biodiversity net gain.   
 
211. A key means of achieving biodiversity net gain is through the NPPF requirement that local 
plans take a strategic approach to maintaining and enhancing networks of habitats and green 
infrastructure. The d evelopment of a multi -functional green infrastructure network was 
formalised locally through the Joint Core Strategy in 2011. It is essential that the network 
continues to be protected and developed further into the long  term as green infrastructure 
aims t o link fragmented habitats, allowing the movement of species and supporting 
biodiversity gain. It also has other benefits such as reducing flood risk and promoting active 
travel.  
 
212.  Tools such as the Defra biodiversity metric should be used to demonstrate the expected 
biodiversity net gain that will be achieved through development. A holistic approach to 
biodiversity gain should provide a range of biodiversity improvements .  
 
213. Securing measurable gains for biodiversity is a national policy requirement and this is 
reflected in this policy. Any such gain needs to be significant in order to be credible which is 
why the policy requires a gain of at least 10% greater than the existing situation .  
 
214. A Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) has been produced for the plan . It identifies in 
detail how internationally designated ecological habitats and wildlife sites in the wider area, 
including areas in the Broads and on the Norfolk coast, would potentially be impacted by 
recreational pressures likely t o be generated by growth in Greater Norwich. The policy 
therefore sets a requirement that development mitigates impact on sites protected under the 
Habitats Regulations Directive.  
 
215. The HRA identifies a range of mitigation measures to alleviate additional r ecreational 
pressure from additional growth planned in the Greater Norwich Local Plan. These include 
interventions at the sites themselves, providing suitable alternative natural green space 
(known as SANGS) and the implementation of a wider programme of g reen infrastructure 
improvements.  
 68 
 216. The HRA provides further information on SANGS, stating that this could take the form of a 
new country park containing woodland and waterbodies. This would be in addition to the new 
country park facilities which are alrea dy planned for the Growth Triangle.  
 
217. The Joint Core Strategy identified the potential to create a new country park at Bawburgh 
Lakes to the west of Norwich. It would complement the existing country park to the east of 
the city at Whitlingham, with the par ks linked by the Yare Valley green corridor. Its 
establishment remains desirable. However, the policy is not site specific as other 
opportunities may be identified either through local green infrastructure strategies or through 
other means. For example, th ere are proposals being brought forward to the north -west of 
Horsford and new small -scale country parks, such as at Ladybelt Country Park in East 
Carleton, can provide valuable additional green infrastructure.  
 
218. A Norfolk -wide study, the Green infrastructu re and Recreational Impact Avoidance and 
Mitigation Strategy79, has been undertaken and has informed this Plan, including the 
approach to avoiding and mitigating the potential impacts on the most important protected 
wildlife sites (identified under the HRA Directive) that might arise from visitor pressure related 
to new housing developments.  This sets out a two -pronged approach to avoidance and 
mitigation of impacts.   
 
219. Firstly, it seeks  to avoid impacts on the protected sites through the provision of sufficient 
and suitable informal recreational greenspace elsewhere  to reduce the number of visits to the 
protected sites.  The Greater Norwich authorities currently have different informal 
recreational requirements on development set out in their Development Management policies 
local plans.  These will continue to apply.   The suitability of such greenspace will depend on 
a number of factors, including the size of the area, its accessibility and its quality, which 
together provide its attractiveness to users.  However, as a guide and in order to ensure that 
adequate provis ion is made to reduce the impacts on the protected sites , this policy requires 
a minimum of 2 hectares per 1,000 population of suitable informal recreational greenspace to 
be provided by a residential development.  This figure has regard to the existing lo cal 
standards, Natural England’s Accessible Natural Greenspace standard and the Fields in 
Trust informal recreational space standard. In addition, the provision of the greenspace 
should reflect the standards set out in Natural England’s Accessible Natural Greenspace 
standard.   
 
220. Secondly, a contribution of around £205  (plus allowance for inflation) from each new home  
is to be made towards direct mitigation measures on the protected sites.  
 
221. The Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework includes county -wide policy  objectives on 
environmental protection, landscape protection and biodiversity. Work supporting the  NSPF 
includes a county -wide green infrastructure network map which provides the basis for more 
detailed mapping to support and inform local plans, includin g the GNLP. The updated green 
corridors map for Greater Norwich, including links to neighbouring areas, is in map s 8 A and 
B below.  
 
222. The Greater Norwich Green Infrastructure Study80 outlines the existing green infrastructure, 
biodiversity and designated H istoric Environment assets for housing allocations within the 
area. It gives general comments about opportunities for potential enhancements of green 
 
79 Available here 
80 Available here  69 
 infrastructure related to the allocations . Whilst this not intended to replace detailed site 
survey and design work , it is intended to  assist the Development Management process . 
 
223. The policy therefore builds on the success of the JCS to ensure both continued long -term 
development of the green infrastructure network and that visitor pressure issues are 
address ed.  
  70 
 Map 8A Green Infrastructure (GI) Corridors in Greater Norwich  
  
71 
 Map 8B GI Corridors in the Norwich Urban Area  
   
72 
 POLICY 3 – ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT  
POLICY 3 – ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT  
 
The Built and Historic Environment  
 
The development strategy of the plan and the sites proposed for development reflect the 
area’s settlement structure of the city, towns and villages, retaining the separate 
identi ties of individual settlements.  
 
Development proposals will be required to conserve and enhance the built and historic 
environment through:  
• being designed to create a distinct sense of place and enhance local character 
taking account of local design and o ther guidance, undertaking a heritage 
impact assessment if significant impacts might arise, and providing measures 
such as heritage interpretation to further the understanding of local heritage 
issues;  
• avoiding harm to designated and non -designated herita ge assets and historic 
character, unless there are overriding benefits from the development that 
outweigh that harm or loss and the harm has been minimised;  
• providing a continued or new use for heritage assets whilst retaining their 
historic significance.  
 
In applying the above, regard will be given to the level of importance of the heritage 
asset.  
 
The Natural Environment  
 
Development proposals will be required to conserve and enhance the natural 
environment (including valued landscapes, biodiversity inclu ding priority habitats, 
networks and species, ancient trees and woodlands, geodiversity, high quality 
agricultural land and soils) through:  
• being designed to respect and retain, and add to, natural assets; taking account of 
local design and other guidance,  and undertaking landscape, biodiversity or other 
appropriate assessments if significant impacts might arise;  
• avoiding harm to designated and non -designated assets of the natural 
environment unless there are overriding benefits from the development and the  
harm has been minimised.  
 
In applying the above, regard will be given to the level of importance of the natural 
element.  
 
In addition, development will deliver net biodiversity gain through the provision of on -site 
or off -site natural features, creating n ew or enhancing existing green infrastructure 
networks that have regard to and help to achieve the local green infrastructure strategies.  
It will need to be demonstrated that the gain to biodiversity is a significant enhancement 
(at least a 10% gain) on t he existing situation.  
 
All residential development will address the potential visitor pressure, caused by 
residents of the development, that would detrimentally impact on sites protected under 
the Habitats Regulations Directive through:   
• the payment of a contribution towards the cost of mitigation measures at the 
protected sites (as determined under the Norfolk Green infrastructure and 73 
 Recreational Impact Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy plus an allowance for 
inflation) ;  and  
the provisi on or enhancement of adequate green infrastructure, either on the 
development site or nearby, to provide for the informal recreational needs of the 
residents as an alternative to visiting the protected sites.  This will equate to a minimum 
of 2 hectares pe r 1,000 population and will reflect Natural England’s Accessible Natural 
Greenspace Standard.  
 74 
  
POLICY 4 – STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
Introduction  
 
224. The National Planning Policy Framework states that strategic policies should make 
provision for infrastructure for transport, water, energy, health, education and green 
infrastructure. This plan is supported by evidence in the Greater Norwich Local Plan 
Infrastructure Report (GNLPIR)81.  
 
225. As set out in the vision and objectives and  the Delivery Statement, delivery of new 
infrastructure is a priority for the plan . It provides benefits for new and existing communities 
and is essential to ensure growth is sustainable.  
 
226.  This policy focusses primarily on the timely delivery of strategic  infrastructure to support 
growth. The infrastructure will be provided by a range of organisations and through a variety 
of funding sources as detailed in appendix 1. The appendix sets out infrastructure currently 
identified to support growth from organisa tions such as utilities companies and health care 
providers. Since these may be subject to change over time, the Greater Norwich 
Infrastructure Plan, which supports implementation of the GNLP, will update the information 
in appendix 1 of this plan annually  to take account of any changes.  
 
227. As needs may change over time, particularly because of technological changes, the 
delivery of development will not necessarily be dependent on the specific infrastructure 
identified in the appendix.   
 
228. To promote good local access to facilities, the policy  also sets a requirement for 
development to provide or support local infrastructure, services and facilities. This can be 
directly through providing infrastructure or land, or indirectly through financial contributions 
which can include providing good acce ss to existing services and facilities.   
 
229. The policy therefore covers strategic transport, energy, water, health and education needs, 
with a cross reference to other policies in the plan  which cover strategic green infrastructure 
and more local needs.   
 
Transport  
 
230. A well -functioning transport system and access to jobs, services and information is vital to 
the economy of the area and the well -being and quality of life for residents. Making the most 
of existing transport infrastructure and providing the add itional infrastructure required to 
support growth will help support delivery of the GNLP. To support emissions reductions, it is 
also important to promote modal shift to active travel and clean public transport, and to 
support electric vehicle use in a tim e of rapid technological change.   
 
231. Section 9 of the NPPF covers transport issues. It states that transport should be considered 
from the earliest stages of plan making, to address the potential impacts of development, 
take advantage of existing and propos ed infrastructure and new technology and promote 
 
81 The GNLPIR  covers: transport; utilities; education; health care; police; fire and rescue; community facilities (libraries 
and community centres); sport and leisure facilities; green infrastructure and waste management.  75 
 public transport, walking and cycling.  Significant development should be focused on 
locations which are or can be made sustainable, through limiting the need to travel and 
offering a genuine choice of trans port modes. This can help to reduce congestion and 
emissions and improve air quality and public health. It also recognises that opportunities to 
maximise sustainable transport solutions will vary between urban and rural areas.   
 
232. National, regional and loc al (county) proposals for transport measures include consideration 
of the growth needs identified by local plans, integrating development with transport 
infrastructure needs. Central g overnment plans for major roads and there are regional 
strategies for ra ilways. County led strategies provide for locally significant transport 
infrastructure. The recognition of and support for transport improvements in the GNLP can be 
of considerable assistance in applying for funding. The policy consequently identifies and 
supports strategic and local transport improvements.  
 
233. Trunk road (the A11 and A47) improvements are planned by Highways England.  In 
October 2017 it announced a timetable for £300 million of A47 improvements82 which will 
dual parts of the road between Peterborough and Great Yarmouth. Contracts were awarded 
in September 2019 for the three schemes In Greater Norwich:  
• Blofield to North Burlingham83 planned start date 2022 -23, planned end date 
2024/25;  
• Thickthorn junction planned start date 2022 -23, planned end date 202584; 
• East Tuddenham to Easton improvement planned start date 2022/23, planned end 
date 2024 -2585. 
 
234. The Government has also announced a Major Road Network (MRN).  The MRN comprises 
local non -trunk roads of national importance and the announcement comes with a fund for 
improvement.  Within the Greater Norwich area, this includes the A140 north and south of 
Norwich (including the A1270 Broadland Northway) and the A146 connecting Norwich to 
Lowestoft.  Improvements to the A140 include the new roundabout to replace the Hempnall 
crossroads which was completed in late 2019. The A140 Long Stratton bypass has been 
given conditional approval by Government. The current programme completion date is the 
end of 2024.  
 
235. Significant improvements to rail services have been delivered with more services , new 
trains  and faster journeys across the network . This includes 90-minute  journey times on 
some trains between Norwich and London  and regular Norwich to Stansted Airport  services 
via Cambridge . Long-term development of a direct rail link to Milton Keynes, Oxford and the 
West remains a priority.  
 
236. Two new railway stations are pla nned for the area. The Growth Triangle Area Action Plan 
identifies the potential for new station sites on the Norwich to Sheringham line at Rackheath 
and Dussindale to serve these major employment and housing growth areas. Dussindale 
station has outline pl anning consent.     
 
237.  Local transport strategy for the Norwich area is shaped by Norfolk County Council’s third 
local transport plan (2011) and the Norwich Area Transportation Strategy (2013) (NATS). A 
 
82 https://www.gov.uk/government/news/timetable -outlined -for-300-million -a47-improvements  
83 https://highwaysengland.co.uk/projects/a47 -blofield -to-north -burlingham/   
84 https://highw aysengland.co.uk/projects/a47 -thickthorn -junction/   
85 https://highwaysengland.co.uk/projects/a47 -north -tuddenham -to-easton -improvement -scheme/   76 
 fourth local transport plan (LTP4) is being progressed  and a draft consulted on.  The plan  will 
then be reviewed and approved by full council in Spring 2021with a full Implementation 
Action Plan to be developed and approved later in 2021.  Work is also underway to review 
NATS, known as the Transport for Norwi ch Strategy (TfN).  A preferred strategy will be 
consulted on in 2021. LTP4 and TfN are being prepared alongside the GNLP.  
 
238. TfN will include measures to improve walking, cycling and public transport facilities to 
support significant modal shift in the urb an area during the plan  period. This will be required 
to assist in meeting national targets to achieve zero carbon development by 2050. The 
measures are likely to feature improvements to sustainable transport networks and 
interchanges, including Park and R ide enhancements, and a cross valley bus link between 
UEA and the remainder of Norwich Research Park. Road improvements to enable the other 
measures are also being considered.  
 
239. The Norwich area was successful in securing a place in Government‘s Transformin g Cities 
Fund (TCF) programme, which is bringing in significant investment to the transport networks 
in the city and surrounding area.  Just over £6m was secured through Tranche 1 of the TCF 
programme, with improvement schemes delivered during 2019/20.  A further £32  million has 
been secured from government through Tranche 2, as well as £18m investment from First 
Eastern Counties, which will be used to deliver improvements to the transport network, public 
transport services and buses in the period to 2022/2 3.  The TfN review is being developed 
alongside the TCF programme.    
 
240. Norfolk County Council has identified the Norwich Western Link (NWL) as one of its 
infrastructure priorities. A Preferred Route Announcement for the route of the NWL was 
made in July 20 19 and that route is shown on the Key Diagram. In May 2020 the Department 
for Transport (DfT) approved the Strategic Outline Business Case (SOBC) for the NWL which 
gives the scheme conditional entry to the DfT’s Large Local Majors project funding 
programme . Work continues to develop the scheme in readiness to submit a planning 
application in 2021. As it develops the GNLP will reflect progress towards delivery of the 
NWL    
 
241. Transport improvements outside the Transport for Norwich area are dealt with on a loc al 
basis. The county council has completed  a programme of Market Town Network 
Improvement Strategies (NIS). These strategies identify short, medium and long -term actions 
including the issues associated with long -term growth.  Four strategies are in the GN LP area, 
these are Diss,   Wroxham/Hoveton, Aylsham and Wymondham.   
 
242. Policy 4 recognises that Greater Norwich is a mixed urban and rural area in which travel 
and access issues vary, with the use of the private car being particularly important to the 
rural economy. It is anticipated that the shift to electric and possibly hydrogen vehicles will 
assist in reducing emissions in rural areas.  
 
243. Strategic transport improvements in policy 4 include rail and airport improvements, along 
with road improvements including dualling of the A47, the Long Stratton bypass and the 
Norwich Western Link Road.  
 
244. The policy also supports the TfN strategy and identifies this as the detailed means by which 
transport improvements across the urban area of Norwich will be developed and delivered, 
including encouraging walking and cycling, and improving public transport.   77 
  
245. The GNLP authorities will support the transport infrastructure improvements provided that 
their promoters and the relevant competent authority are able to demonstrate that they would 
not conflict with other policies of the plan and where there would be no adverse effect on the 
integrity of sites protected under the Habitats Regulations Directive.  
 
Other strategic infrastructure  
 
Energy  
 
246. The Greater Norwich Energy Infrastructure Study (March 2019) concludes that failure to 
address local energy constraint s through local plan policy could threaten the delivery of 
growth in this plan. These result partly from regulatory barriers to network operators investing 
in new energy supply infrastructure. Reflecting the requirements of the NPPF, the study 
highlights t he importance of having both positive energy efficiency polices and policies to 
promote sustainable energy development. This will help both to address climate change and 
to overcome network constraints.  
 
247. The policy reflects the recommendations of the stud y in relation to improving network 
supply capacity. Policy 2 reflects its recommendations through policies which aim to reduce 
the carbon emissions, promote local energy networks and minimise energy demand in new 
developments.  
 
248. Therefore, the policy commi ts the Greater Norwich authorities to lobbying for improvements 
to the capacity of the energy supply network by the service provider, UK Power Networks to 
ensure improvements are delivered to serve growth needs and/or to innovative approaches 
which could o ff-set the need for capacity improvements. It particularly highlights the 
substations at which the study identifies capacity concerns. These are at Sprowston, 
Peachman Way (Broadland Business Park), Earlham and Cringleford.  
 
Water  
 
249. Water supply and dispos al infrastructure in Greater Norwich is provided by Anglian Water 
(AW). Strategic plans, which take account of planned growth and climate change and are 
subject to Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA), are in place and are being updated for 
both water supp ly and disposal.  
 
250. Water supply in Greater Norwich is from groundwater sources and from a river intake from 
the Wensum. There has been significant recent investment in the river intake to protect water 
quality in this internationally designated chalk river  habitat.   
 
251. The Water Resources Management Plan86 (WRMP) does not require additional spending 
on water supply infrastructure to serve growth in Greater Norwich.  However, the WRMP 
includes new potable water transfers to be funded by Anglian Water through customer bills. 
Anglian Water would also expect dev elopers to pay appropriate charges for the required 
connections to the water supply network. Investment is planned to transfer water from the 
Norwich and the Broads water resource zone (WRZ) to the neighbouring Happisburgh and 
Norfolk Rural North WRZs. As a result, the policy does not cover water supply infrastructure 
as investment is not required to support the growth promoted in this plan. The WRMP is 
reviewed on a continuous basis and a new plan will be prepared for 2024. AW are also 
 
86 AW Water Resources Management Plan  December 2019  78 
 preparing a Drainage  and Wastewater Management Plan in partnership with stakeholders to 
inform the next 2024 business plan.  
 
252. The strategic focus for water supplies throughout the Anglian Water area, which covers 
much of eastern England, is to promote demand management and lea kage reduction, along 
with a strategic grid to serve other parts of East Anglia and Lincolnshire. This is in line with 
the pioneering long -term approach taken in Greater Norwich. Water efficiency is now 
required by the Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework for local plans across the county (see 
policy 2 of this plan). Water Resources East has recently been formed to co -ordinate 
between water companies and others involved with water resources.   
 
253. To address growth needs in Greater Norwich, AW87 identifies the Yare Valley Sewer as one 
of the two strategic sewer investment requirements in its whole area. Increasing capacity at 
Whitlingham Water Recycling Centre (WRC) is also a strategic priority in AW’s plan.   
 
254. In line with the long -term approach  taken in Greater Norwich, and as required by the NSPF 
and policy 2 of this plan, AW also promotes the use of sustainable drainage (SuDS) which 
have benefits to the environment and communities.  
 
255. Smaller scale measures to address growth needs for Acle, Ayl sham, Belaugh and 
Wymondham WRCs are planned through AW’s water recycling plan. These are to improve 
capacity and protect water quality and are referenced in appendix 1. Improved monitoring  of 
foul flows within the network is also planned.  
 
256.  Funding for w ater infrastructure improvements is provided through developer charges 
directly for connections to water supply network and foul sewerage networks.  Taking 
account of the above evidence, the policy therefore commits the Greater Norwich authorities 
to lobby ing for the timely delivery of improvements to the waste -water network by AW.  
 
257. To ensure that development does not have a detrimental impact on the water environment, 
particularly in relation to water quality and the potential for impacts on the water -based sites 
protected under the Habitats Regulations Directive, major development will be dependent on 
the water infrastructure being capable of accommodating the development or being able to 
be made so.  
 
258. The Greater Norwich Water Cycle Study88 provide s further information on these issues.  
 
Education  
 
259. Norfolk County Council is responsible for planning for education infrastructure. Evidence in 
the GNLPIR shows that school capacity to serve growth will be met both by improvements to 
existing schools and through new schools being provided.  
 
260. As a rule, if a new development is likely to generate enough children to fill a new school, 
Norfolk County Council asks developers for the full cost of building that school.  A pro rata 
contribution of the full cost is requested if numbers of children are calculated to be less than 
420, a two -form entry primary school. With the current CIL approach locally, only land can be 
secured through a S106 agreement and the build cost of the new school is claimed through 
CIL. 
 
 
87 Through the AW Water Recycling Long Term Plan (2019) which is available here 
88 Available here  79 
 261. Appendix 1 provides details of new schools to serve gr owth.  Sites in this plan and other 
local plan documents include locations for new schools. The requirement for a new high 
school in the North East growth area is specifically identified in policy 4 due to its strategic 
significance.  
 
262. The policy provides flexibility for the provision of new schools to take account of changing 
circumstances and allow for the timely delivery of schools when and where they are required. 
The information in appendix 1 will be updated annually through the Greater Norwich 
Infrast ructure Plan (GNIP), or any successor, to ensure that it is up  to date.  
 
Health Care  
 
263. Forward planning for healthcare services is a high priority. The Greater Norwich Local Plan 
Infrastructure Report includes the need for health care infrastructure establ ished through the 
Health Infrastructure Delivery Plan (HIDP) drawn up by the Sustainab ility and Transformation 
Partnership  (STP). The HIDP has been produced in collaboration with the local Clinical 
Commissioning Groups (Norwich, North Norfolk and South Nor folk) and NHS Foundation 
Trusts (Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norfolk Community Health and Care and the 
Norfolk and Suffolk trusts).  
 
264. The HIDP aims to promote the allocation of land for healthcare uses, securing land by 
planning obligations fr om developers, or negotiating contributions to expand existing 
buildings and facilities. The HIDP also identifies a range of potential funding sources to 
provide for growth requirements, including loans, disposals and partnerships.  
 
265. A full estate strategy  is being developed which will impact on the infrastructure 
requirements from the HIDP included in this plan. Therefore, only currently identified issues 
are included this strategy. Updated information will be provided in the trust’s completed 
strategy. Th is will be included in the GNLP.  
 
266. The needs resulting from growth in Greater Norwich identified in the study are set out in 
appendix 1.  
  80 
 POLICY 4 - STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE  
POLICY 4 - STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
Strategic infrastructure improvements will b e undertaken to support timely delivery of the 
Greater Norwich Local Plan and the wider growth needs of the area. Key elements will be:  
 
Transport  
 
Transport improvements will support and embrace new technologies and develop the role 
of Norwich as the regional capital, support strategic growth in the Cambridge Norwich Tech 
Corridor, improve access to market towns and rural areas and promote sustainabl e and 
active transport.  
 
Transport infrastructure will be brought forward to support the development aims of this 
plan. A considerable shift towards non -car modes will be promoted in the Norwich urban 
area over the plan  period. High density growth will be  focussed in locations with good 
access to improved sustainable transport networks and interchanges in Norwich, creating a 
virtuous cycle where clean transport is prioritised, less use is made of cars and space is 
used more efficiently and attractively.  
 
This will be achieved by:  
• Implementation of the Transport for Norwich Strategy including:  
o significant improvements to the bus, cycling and walking networks to promote 
modal shift;  
o developing the role of the park and ride system;  
o changing attitudes to travel;  
o delivery of the Norwich Western Link road.  
• Enhancement of the Major Road Network including provision of the A140 Long 
Stratton bypass.  
• Protection of the function of strategic transport routes (corridors of movement).  
• Supporting improvements to the A47, including delivery of the Blofield to North 
Burlingham, Thickthorn and Easton to East Tuddenham improvements being 
progressed by Highways England.  
• Promoting enhancement of rail services, including improved journey times and 
reliability to London and Cambridge, supporting the East -West Rail link and 
innovative use of the local rail network.  
• Continued investigation of and support for rail freight opportunities.  
• Supporting the growth and regional significance of Norwich Airport for both leisure 
and busi ness travel to destinations across the UK and beyond.  
• Continuing to improve public transport accessibility to and between main towns and 
key service centres, taking account of Norfolk County Council’s market towns 
network improvement strategies.  
 
Other S trategic Infrastructure  
 
The Greater Norwich local authorities and partners  including utility companies will work 
together in relation to the timely delivery of improvements to infrastructure, including that 
set out in appendix 1 and to:  
• The energy supply network including increased capacity at primary substations at 
Cringleford, Peachman Way, Sprowston and Earlham Grid Local and/or innovative 
smart solutions to off -set the need for reinforcement;  81 
 • Water supply and sewerage network improvements includ ing the waste -water 
network at Whitlingham water recycling centre , the Yare Valley sewer  and elsewhere  
to protect water quality and designated habitats;  
• health care infrastructure.  
 
School capacity will be increased to provide for growth by improvements to  existing 
schools and the provision of new schools as required, including primary schools on 
strategic development sites and a new high school in the North East growth area as 
identified in appendix 1.  
 
In line with other policies in this plan, a multi -functional strategic green infrastructure 
network will be further developed as set out in map s 8A and B .  
 
On-site and local infrastructure, services and facilities  
 
Development proposals will provide on -site services and facilities and support local 
infrastructure capacity improvements through on -site provision, providing land and 
developer contributions.  
 
  82 
 POLICY 5 – HOMES  
 
267. The NPPF states that the Government’s objective is to significantly boost the supply of 
homes. The GNLP addresses this through the housing strategy in policies 1 and 7 and the 
housing allocations in the Sites document.  
 
268. The NPPF also states that major hou sing developments should meet the need for 
affordable housing on -site, with at least 10% of the affordable homes available for affordable 
home ownership. The NPPF puts the emphasis on local plans to identify the amount of 
affordable housing needed. It also  requires local plans to provide a mix of property types and 
sizes and a variety of affordable housing tenures, as well as meeting the needs of all groups 
in the community.  
 
269. To achieve the above and based on local evidence89,  the policy encourages the pro vision 
of a full range of type, tenure and cost of housing, to meet the varied housing needs of our 
community. It also included minimum space standards and requirements for adaptable 
homes to provide an improved quality of life and meet the needs of an age ing population.  
 
270. The policy is flexible in relation to affordable housing sizes, types and tenures to allow 
differing needs to be met in the three districts on a site by site basis based on the most up -to-
date evidence. Paragraph 43 covers the housing mix  requirement based on the most recent 
housing market assessment. Current evidence shows a higher social rented requirement in 
the city with a wider range of tenure options suitable in Broadland and South Norfolk. This 
evidence will be revisited before subm ission . The policy is pragmatic and adaptable, enabling 
the most up -to-date evidence on housing need to be used.   
 
271. The policy sets a general requirement for on -site affordable housing provision of 33% on 
sites that show better viability based on local evi dence, with a lower requirement in Norwich 
City Centre. This is based on:  
 
o The Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2017 which identifies a need for 11,030 
affordable homes in Greater Norwich from 2015 to 2038, 28% of the total housing 
need identified at th at point;  
o Under national policy, small sites under 10 dwellings are not required to provide 
affordable housing. Larger sites will therefore have to ensure that overall affordable 
housing need is delivered;  
o The most recent viability study findings which c onclude that centrally located 
brownfield sites which have higher development costs which affect viability are 
generally able to provide 28% affordable housing . As national planning guidance 
makes it clear that where applicants can demonstrate particular c ircumstances that 
justify the need for a viability assessment at the plan ning application stage90, the 
policy provides some flexibility on this point for brownfield sites where exceptional 
costs are more likely . In addition, the introduction by the Government of Vacant 
Building Credit enables existing vacant floorspace on a site to be discounted in order 
to lower the affordable housing requirement, with aim of incentivising development 
on brownfield sites ; 
o Some specific sites have very high costs associated with development. These are 
allocated with lower affordable housing requirements.  
 
 
89 Local housing evidence  is in the Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2017) and in the Greater Norwich Viability 
Study (2019).  
90 Planning Practice Guidance  – Viability an d Decision Taking  83 
 272. The successful approach of preventing subdivision of sites currently in use in Norwich is 
applied to the whole area through t he policy.  
 
273. Development proposals should consider the need for wheelchair adapted homes which 
meet the Building Regulation M4 (3) standard or any successor. This is not set as a policy 
requirement but is encouraged within Greater Norwich where viable.  
 
274. Based on local evidence of need, viability and timing91 and to ensure that new housing 
provides for a good quality of life, the policy requires housing development across Greater 
Norwich to meet nationally defined minimum space standards92 for different types of homes.  
 
275. An increasing proportion of the populat ion is over 65 or disabled, increasing the demand for 
supported accommodation such as sheltered housing, extra care housing and care homes, 
residential care and supported living. The local plan seeks to assist Norfolk County Council’s 
aim to reduce residen tial care home and nursing home dependency and support people to 
remain more independent in their own homes or in supported housing.  
 
276. The policy therefore supports the provision of housing to meet the needs of older people 
and others with support needs, i ncluding sheltered housing, residential/nursing care 
accommodation and extra care housing93.  Norfolk County Council’s strategy94 identifies the 
need for 2,842 additional extra care units by 2028 . County wide evidence has identified the 
need for 3,857 spec ialist retirement units  (sheltered , age restricted or extra care housing)  in 
Greater Norwich between 2020 and 203895.  
 
277. To help to provide for this need, the plan  contains a specific allocation for a specialised 
development for active ageing at Colney Hall and site allocations with an element of 
specialist housing in the policy (Taverham, Aylsham, Harleston and Barrack Street, Norwich). 
In addition, policy 5 suppor ts delivery of older peoples’ and supported accommodation on 
housing sites with good access to local services including on sites allocated for residential 
use. The aim of this is to integrate older people and others with supported housing needs 
with the wi der community , assisting active retirement and community cohesion . Development 
Management officers will ensure that the need for specialist housing for the elderly and other 
needs is considered on all housing schemes and advise applicants on the most up -to-date 
evidence of need.  
 
278. The policy includes a local requirement to adhere to the national optional Building 
Regulation standard for adaptable homes. To achieve this 20% of homes on major 
developments must be designed to be adaptable to meet changing need s over time, 
enabling people to stay in their homes for longer.  
 
 
91 Evidenced through the Greater Norwich Local Plan Nationally Described Space Standards Study (August 2019) 
within the Viability Study  
92 The Nationally Described Space Standard is available here 
93 Extra care housing is a self -contained residential accommodation (where units are rented or owned by the individual 
or couples who occupy them) with communal facilities designed to meet the needs and aspirations of older people and 
have care staff on site 24/7.  
94 Living Well – Homes for Norfolk  (2018)  
95 Three Dragons – Demand for Specialist Older Persons Housing 2020 to 2041 (insert link when available) . 84 
 279. The policy provides for the needs of Gypsies and Travellers. Evidence96 shows planned 
expansion of the Swanton Road site in Norwich meets Greater Norwich’s need for 15 
additional pitches to 2022. A further 51 pitches will be required between 2022 and 2038. The 
criteria -based policy allows for additional delivery to meet need throughout the plan  period 
and allows for the expansion of well -located existing sites. Since no sites have been 
submit ted for consideration through the local plan , the intention is to bring additional sites 
forward through the Development Management process  as well as having this criteria -based 
policy to allow further sites to come forward.  
 
280. The policy also allows for Travelling Show People and Residential Caravan needs to be 
met through market led solutions through the criteria -based policy. This will allow  sites to 
come forward if there is demand for them. The Broads Authority plans for the needs for 
residents of houseboats in the area.  
 
281. The policy also aims to ensure that purpose -built student accommodation is provided to 
meet growing needs at the UEA and  in other locations with good access to the educational 
facilities they will serve, including Norwich University of the Arts. The policy content and the 
sites allocated for student accommodation are informed by the UEA Development 
Framework Strategy97. Pur pose -built student accommodation development is required to 
make provision for affordable housing that would be expected on the specific site if it were to 
be developed for housing, potentially through a commuted sum. This is required as without 
doing so, the delivery of sites for student accommodation would reduce the ability to address 
affordable housing needs.  
 
282. Local authorities are required to keep a register of those seeking to acquire serviced plots 
in the area for their own self -build and custom -build housing. In 2018/19, there were 113 
people on the registers in Greater Norwich.  
 
283. In line with the Right to Build and the NPPF, self and custom -build housing delivery is 
promoted through the GNLP on a range of sites. This policy sets a requirement for l arger 
sites to provide  self and custom -build plots. The thresholds have been set to ensure that 
plots are provided across Greater Norwich. Policies 7.4 and 7.5 also promote self and 
custom -build on smaller scale windfall sites. Overall, this comprehensive approach will both 
increase the supply of housing in urban and rural areas and provide opportunities for small 
and medium enterprises to build houses, as well as for self and custom -build .  
 
284. Other potential means of helping to provide for local housing needs is through the provision 
of live -work units and through community led housing initiatives, such as might be provided 
by a Community Land Trust. Such initiatives will need to be in appropriate locations.  
  
 
96 Norfolk Caravans and Houseboats Accommodation Needs Assessment (ANA) including for Gyps ies, Travellers and 
Travelling Show people  October 2017  
97 UEA Development Framework Strategy: Available here  85 
 POLICY 5 – HOMES  
POLICY 5 – HOMES  
 
Residential proposals should address the need for homes for all sectors of the community 
having regard to the latest housing evidence, including a variety of homes in terms of 
tenure and cost. New homes should provide for a good quality of life in mixed and 
inclusive communities and major development proposals should provide adaptable homes 
to meet varied and changing needs.  
 
This will be achieved as follows:  
 
Affordable Housing  
 
Major residential development proposals98 and purpose -built student accommodation will 
provide:  
 
• at least 33% affordable housing on -site across the plan  area, except in Norwich City 
Centre where the requirement is at least 28%, or where  
a) the site is allocated in a  Neighbourhood Plan for a diff erent percentage of 
affordable housing, or  
b) for brownfield sites where the applicant can demonstrate that particular 
circumstances justify the need for a viability assessment at decision -making 
stage;  
• affordable housing on -site except where exceptional circumstances justify off -site 
provision;  
• a mix of affordable housing sizes, types, and tenures in agreement with the local 
authority, taking account of the most up -to-date local evidence of housing need . 
This will include 10% of the affordable homes being available for affordable home 
ownership where this meets local needs;  
• affordable housing of at least equivalent quality to the market homes on -site. 
 
The sub -division of a site to avoid affordable housi ng provision will not be permitted.  
 
Space Standards  
 
All housing development proposals must meet the Government’s Nationally Described 
Space Standard for  internal space or any successor.   
 
Accessible and Specialist Housing  
 
Development proposals providing specialist housing options for older people’s 
accommodation and others with support needs, including sheltered housing, supported 
housing, extra care housing and residential/nursing care homes will be supported on sites 
with good access to local services including on sites allocated for residential use. 
Irrespective of C2 or C3 use class classification, specialist older people’s housing will 
provide 33% affordable housing  or 28% in the city centre . 
 
Proposals are particularly  encouraged where Norfolk County Council identifies a strategic 
need for extra care housing.  
 
 
98 10 dwellings or more  86 
 To meet changing needs by providing accessible and adaptable homes, proposals for 
major housing development are required to provide at least 20% of homes to the Building 
Regulation M4(2)[1] standard or any successor.  
 
Gypsies and Travellers, Travelling Show People and Residential Caravans  
 
Development for Gypsy and Traveller sites, Travelling Show People sites and residential 
caravans will be acceptable where prop osals:  
• have safe and sustainable access to schools and facilities;  
• have suitable vehicular access;  
• provide for ancillary uses and landscaping;  
• are of a scale which is in keeping with its surroundings, including small -scale 
extensions to existing sites.  
 
For transit pitches the following additional criteria apply:  
• the site is conveniently accessible to the main ‘A’ and ‘B’ class road network; and,  
• an agreement is in place for satisfactory site management, including the maximum 
period and frequency of stay.  
 
Purpose -built Student Accommodation  
 
Development proposals for purpose -built student accommodation will be supported at the 
UEA campus where they are in accordance with the UEA Development Framework 
Strategy (DFS).  
 
Away from UEA campus, proposa ls for purpose -built student accommodation will be 
supported where the need for the development is justified by the current or proposed size 
of Norwich’s higher educational institutions and the proposal will:  
 
• be in a location otherwise suitable for residential development with sustainable 
access to the institutions served;  
• be of a scale large enough to provide for high standards of student welfare;  
• contribute to a mixed and inclusive neighbourhood, not dominating existing 
residential comm unities;  
• provide a mix of accommodation types for a wide range of students; and  
• make provision for a policy compliant proportion of affordable housing that would 
be expected if the site were developed for general needs housing. Such provision 
may be made off -site th rough  a commuted sum as set out in supplementary 
planning documents.  
 
All consents will be restricted so the use of the accommodation is secured for students 
only.  
 
Self/Custom -Build  
 
Except for flats, at least 5% of plots on residential proposals of 40 dwellings or more 
should provide serviced self/custom -build plots unless:  
 
• a lack of need for such plots can be demonstrated;  
• plots have been marketed for 12 months and have not been so ld. 
 
 87 
 POLICY 6 – THE ECONOMY  (INCLUDING RETAIL)   
 
285. This local plan aims to deliver inclusive economic growth. It supports and delivers the 
ambitions of the New Anglia LEP’s Norfolk and Suffolk Economic Strategy and Local 
Industrial Strategy, the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor initiative, and the enhanced growth 
outlined in the Greater Norwich City Deal. In a time of significant economic uncertainty and 
change, the policies aim to provide an appropriate balance between certainty and flexibility to  
inform investment decisions and encourage economic development.  
 
286. The Norfolk and Suffolk Economic Strategy (NSES) recognise Norwich and Greater 
Norwich as one of six “priority places”. Greater Norwich is also a key location within two other 
priority places; the A47 corridor and the Cambridge -Norwich corridor.  The NSES identifies 
nine key economic sectors of:  
• energy;  
•  life sciences and biotech;  
• ICT, tech and digital creative;  
• advanced agriculture, food and drink;  
• visitor economy,  tourism and culture;  
• financial services and insurance;  
• transport, freight and logistics;  
• construction and development;  
• advanced manufacturing and engineering;   
 
287. The promotion of Norfolk and Suffolk as the “UK’s clean growth region” sits at th e heart of 
New Anglia’s Local Industrial Strategy (LIS). It focusses on three high growth sectors: clean 
energy, agri -food and ICT/digital. All the NSES and LIS sectors are represented in Greater 
Norwich and relevant businesses are found throughout the are a. In addition, there are 
important concentrations of the LIS priority sectors in strategic employment locations: 
Norwich Airport plays a key role in servicing the off -shore energy industry; Norwich Research 
Park and the Food Enterprise Park are crucial to  the success of the agri -food sector; and, the 
city centre is home to a growing ICT/digital cluster. The high environmental standards 
promoted through this local plan will support the recognition of the area as the UK’s Clean 
Growth region.  
 
288. The Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor is an extension of both the Oxford Cambridge Arc 
and the London Stansted Cambridge corridor. The A11 coupled with Cambridge to Norwich 
train services provide the linking transport infrastructure. Greater Norwich includes key 
economic assets supporting the CNTC – notably Norwich and its city centre, the Norwich 
Research Park (including UEA and the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital (NNUH)), the 
Food Enterprise Park, Norwich Airport and Hethel Engineering Centre.  
 
289. Evidence in the Em ployment, Town Centre and Retail study (GVA 2017)99 , updated in the 
Greater Norwich Employment Land addendum: Avison Young : 2020, investigated both 
“business as usual” and the potential for enhanced economic growth. It demonstrates that 
committed employm ent land is more than sufficient in quantity and quality to meet the 
potential for enhanced growth. The  Avison Young addendum forecasts growth of around 
33,000 jobs in the period 2020 to 2038. While the plan  provides for significantly more 
 
99 Available here 88 
 employment land  than is required for this scale of jobs growth, there are a range of justifying 
factors:  
 
a. Over 280 hectares of our supply is on key strategic sites, with several targeted at 
particular sectors such as NRP, Hethel and the airport area. These sites are not 
suitable for reallocation to other uses.  
b. The remainder is dispersed across the area providing important local opportunities. 
The evidence focusses on B -class uses (as defined pre -2020) and employment land 
will also be used for non -B-class employment such as gyms, waste recycling 
centres, vehicle sales and fuel forecourts; or supporting uses such as cafés and 
restaurants.  
c. The scale and range of our employment allocations facilitates choice and flexibility, 
provides for growth in the longer term and support s more ambitious levels of jobs 
growth if demand can be stimulated.  
 
290. The enhanced growth scenario forecasts around 45,000 jobs in the period 2015 to 2036. In 
the period 2015 to 2018 the East of England Forecasting Model (EEFM) suggests that 
around 15,000 jobs were delivered. This leaves the enhanced growth potential for around 
30,000 jobs in the period 2018 to 2036. This is an uplift of around 8,000 on the EEFM 
business as usual forecast and is consistent with City Deal ambitions. Since the evidence  
was produced the Local Plan period has been extended to 2038 and, based on the EEFM, 
the target is extended to 33,000 jobs 2018 to 2038.  
 
291. The policies of this plan seek to grow the local economy in a sustainable way to support 
jobs and inclusive economic growth in both urban and rural locations. This will:  
• provide jobs and services for a rising population and develop Greater Norwich’s 
role as an engine of the regional economy;  
• facilitate enhanced growth potential with a target of at least 33,000 addition al jobs 
in the period 20 20-2038;  
• support the key sectors identified in the NSES and LIS and help increase the 
proportion of higher value, knowledge economy jobs; while ensuring that 
opportunities are available for development that can support all types an d levels 
of jobs in all sectors of the economy and for all the workforce  
• be supported by investment strategies that focus on overcoming constraints to 
the release and development of key employment sites  
 
292. Policy 2 promotes the provision of enhanced broadb and throughout the area and this will 
support businesses directly and support home working. Implementation of the policy will also 
see employment development contribute to the green infrastructure network as appropriate.  
 
293. The Norwich urban area and in part icular the city centre has a key role to play in providing 
the employment needed to support the housing growth proposed across the Greater Norwich 
area, through significant employment generation in the city centre. Evidence shows that 
Norwich’s economic dy namism underpins the regional economy; if Norwich’s economy 
flourishes, it will benefit the adjoining rural settlements in the county and beyond. A key part 
of retaining and growing employment in the city centre will be to reverse the loss of office 
accomm odation in the city centre, as required by policy 1 of this plan, which has experienced 
a 29% reduction since the start of the Joint Core Strategy plan period in 2008100.   
 
 
100 Source: Greater Norwich annual monitoring re ports  89 
 294. Although the Employment Town Centre and Retail study (GVA 2017) and the Avison Youn g 
2020 addendum conclude that Greater Norwich has enough employment land overall, most 
of this is out -of-centre and is neither the preferred location for some growth sectors nor the 
most sustainable place for high intensity employment / office growth. The report highlights 
key trends in employment activity including a re -urbanisation of business activity back to 
locations that can offer a broader range of services to employees, and the rise in new start -
ups in the creative and media sector which is fuelling  demand for space in specific locations 
allowing for greater interactions, including Norwich city centre. Given that the report also 
identifies an underlying demand for good quality office and employment space there is a risk 
that this may lead to new such  development going to less sustainable locations with serious 
impacts on the vitality of the city centre and undermining policies to encourage modal shift. 
Therefore, it is essential that this plan ensures that high density employment uses are 
concentrated  in highly accessible locations in particular the city centre, and that loss of 
existing floorspace in the city centre is resisted (see policy 7.1).  
 
295. The Employment Town Centre and Retail study reviewed existing employment sites and 
allocations and did no t conclude that any should be reallocated for other uses. While the 
study also concluded that there is no overall quantitative need for additional employment 
sites, 4 6.5ha of land at Norwich Airport is newly allocated  for aviation related uses . The site 
has the benefit of planning permission and was included as a commitment in the study. Two 
small sites are also allocated as they are logical extensions to existing strategic sites and 
provide additional flexibility.  Extensions to other small sites will also be considered where this 
can be justified, for example where the site is well located to serve local needs and has 
insufficient capacity to serve ongoing demand.  
 
296. Retailing and town centres are currently in a state of flux. Covid -19 has strengthened the 
growth of internet shopping. This uncertainty reinforces the need to protect and promote 
town centres to allow them to recover and evolve. There is some evidence that the Covid -19 
epidemic has encouraged people to shop locally and boosted the opportunities f or smaller 
businesses and in market towns, and smaller centres.   
 
297. The policy identifies the hierarchy of centres across the area to guide the operation of the 
“sequential approach” . It encourages development in all centres and, outside defined 
centres, sm all scale businesses to serve local areas.  New local centres are promoted in the 
site-specific policies for all strategic housing developments. Within town centres a flexible 
approach will be required to allow centres to diversify while retaining their ongoing role as 
economic and community hubs. Owing  to the need to update policy for Norwi ch city centre, 
further detail is set out in Policy 7.1.   
 
298. Retail, offices and some leisure uses are currently the same use -class and this helps 
provide flexibility within town centres. The policy’s definition of the local retail hierarchy 
enables the individual councils to consider whether, dependent on national permitted 
development rights, Article 4 Directions may be appropriate locally. This approach would 
allow protection of all or parts of retail centres, potentially ranging from local to town centres 
and the city centre as defined in Development Management p olicies, from conversion to 
residential uses. In addition, large scale out of centre office, retail or leisure development will 
have significant implications, for example for traffic generation, and it will be important to 
ensure through conditions that th e development that takes place is consistent with the 
evidence provided with the planning application.  
 90 
 299. Tourism, and related developments, are an important part of the local economy and reflect 
the attractiveness of the environmental and cultural offer in  the area.  However, it is important 
that this attraction does not itself lead to damage of the very things that people come here 
for.  In particular, consideration under the Habitat Regulations will be needed for such 
developments.  The requirements set o ut under Policy 3 for new residential development will 
apply to tourist accommodation development; and a Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) 
will be required for significant tourism, leisure, cultural or environmental development which 
would impact on a H abitats Regulations protected site.  91 
 POLICY 6 - THE ECONOMY  
POLICY 6 - THE ECONOMY  
 
1. Sufficient employment land is allocated in accessible locations to meet identified need 
and provide for choice. Opportunities for sustainable access to sites should be 
maximised through development proposals and infrastructure investment.  
 
2. The needs of small, medium and start -up businesses are addressed through:  
• the allocation and retention of smaller scale employment sites across the area, 
with limited expansion where this  can be justified;  
• encouraging the provision of small -scale business opportunities in all significant 
residential and commercial developments and through the appropriate use of 
rural buildings;  
• Encouraging flexible building design and innovative approach es in new and 
existing residential developments to encourage local working and business 
opportunities.  
 
3. Larger scale needs are addressed through the allocation of sufficient land to provide a 
choice and range of sites, including key 101strategic sites targeted at specific sectors. 
Investment strategies will ensure that a readily available supply of land is maintained 
throughout the plan  period.  
 
4. Land identified for employment uses in this local plan will only be considered for other 
uses that are ancillary to and supportive of its employment role.  
 
5. Tourism, leisure, environmental and cultural industries will be promoted and assisted 
by:  
• the general emphasis in this local plan on achieving high quality design, resource 
efficiency, environmental enhancement and retention of local distinctiveness;  
• protection, enhancement and expansion  of the green infrastructure network;  
• encouragement for sustainable tourism initiatives and development that supports 
cultural industries;  
• promotion of the creative industries cluster focussed on the city centre.  
 
6. Opportunities for innovation, skills and training will be expanded through facilitating 
the expan sion of, and access to, vocational, further and higher education provision.  
 
Key strategic employment areas  
 
Key strategic employment areas and their main uses are:  
 
Strategic Employment area and their primary 
uses  Existing 
undeveloped 
land 
available 
(hectares, 
April 2018)  New 
allocations  
(hectares)  Total 
employment 
allocations  
(hectares)  
 
101 Key strategic employment areas are Identified as “Tier 1” and of particular significance to economic growth in the 
Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework  92 
 Norwich city centre  with a focus on expansion 
of office, digital and creative industries, retail 
and leisure provision  30.8 (all part 
of mixed -use 
sites)  0 30.8 
The Norwich Airport area and in particular:  
• a new site on the northern edge of the 
airport accessed directly from the 
Broadland Northway of 46.5ha and 
focussed on aviation  related activities; 
and 
• a site of around 3 5ha at the 
A140/Broadland Northway junction and 
focussed on uses benefiting from an 
airport location    35 46.5 81.5 
Browick Interchange, Wymondham (for 
general employment uses)    22 0 22 
Longwater - consolidation of activity through 
intensification of employment uses and 
completion of the existing allocation            12 0 12 
Rackheath (for general employment uses)    25.6 0 25.6 
The complex of general business parks at 
Thorpe St Andrew (Broadland Business Park, 
St Andrews Business Park and Broadland 
Gate);          33.1 0 33.1 
Norwich Research Park including the Norfolk 
and Norwich University Hospital and the 
University of East Anglia; providing for 
significant expansion of health, higher 
education and science park activity          32.7 6.9 39.6 
Hethel  including a technology park of around 
20ha managed to focus on advanced 
engineering and the growth of technology 
capabilities              20 0.8 20.8 
The Food Enterprise Park at 
Easton/Honingham  supporting the agri -food 
sector                 18.7 0 18.7 
Total  229.9  54.2 284.1  
 
 
Town Centres  
 
The development of new retailing, leisure, offices and other main town centre uses will be 
subject to the sequential approach  and out -of-centre impact assessment , as defined by 
Government policy and guidance, and will be encouraged at a scale appropriate to the 
form and functions of the following hierarchy of defined centres:  
 
1. Norwich city centre ;  93 
 2. The town centres of Aylsham, Diss, Harleston and Wymondham, and w ithin 
the Norwich urban area, the large district centres at Anglia 
Square/Magdalen Street and Riverside;  
3. The large village and district centres of: Acle, Coltishall, Hethersett, 
Hingham, Loddon, Long Stratton, Poringland and Reepham, and within the 
Norwich  urban area at Aylsham Road, Drayton Road, Bowthorpe, Dereham 
Road, Eaton centre, Earlham House, Harford Place (Hall Road/Sandy Lane), 
Larkman centre, Plumstead Road, Sprowston Road, Old Catton and 
Dussindale (Thorpe St Andrew). New district centres to be established in 
accordance with the Growth Triangle Area Action Plan;  
4. Local centres, including new and enhanced local centres serving major 
growth locations .  
 
Development and investment  consistent in scale with the function of the centre 
are  encouraged at all levels of the hierarchy to enhance the range of businesses 
and facilities available locally. Development should seek to enhance the 
environment and economy of centres, and of villa ges with more dispersed 
services, to protect their function and avoid the loss of commercial premises or 
local services.  
 
Small scale retail and leisure developments serving local needs are encouraged 
to serve new residential developments and, subject to impact on local amenity, in 
existing residential areas and to support village life  and promote active travel . 
 
 
 
  94 
 POLICY 7 – STRATEGY FOR THE AREAS OF GROWTH  
 
Introduction  
 
300. Policies 7.1 to 7.4 provide details of the distribution of growth set out in poli cy 1, along with 
location specific strategic policies for the different areas of growth within Greater Norwich. 
The policies for these areas follow the settlement hierarchy:  
 
7.1 The Norwich urban area including the fringe parishes;  
7.2 The Main towns;  
7.3  The Key service centres;  
7.4  Village clusters.  
 
301. Policy 7.5 provides for small scale windfall development of up to 3 to 5 dwellings per parish 
during the plan  period.   
 
302. Policy 7.6 prepares the way for a new settlement or settlements. These will provide an 
important element of the next local plan and will start to deliver high quality homes and jobs 
before the end of this plan’s timescales.  
  
303. The GNLP Sites Plan provides individual allocations to implement the strategy with the 
exception of allocations in village clusters in South Norfolk which will be in a separate plan.  
 
Policy 7.1 – The Norwich urban area including the fringe parishes102 
 
304. The policy for the Norwich urba n area is divided into three sections:  
1. The City centre;  
2. East Norwich;  
3. Elsewhere in the urban area including the fringe parishes.  
 
305. This division reflects:  
i. the importance of the city centre to Greater Norwich as a whole, the rapid 
change in the role of city centres (particularly in relation to retailing and office 
employment), and the need to promote brownfield regeneration (particularly in 
the northern city centre), which together create the necessity for a distinctive, 
detailed and updated planning fra mework;  
ii. the potential for brownfield regeneration to create a new urban quarter in the 
long-term in East Norwich;  
iii. the essential role that of the other parts of the urban area and the fringe 
parishes will play in meeting housing needs through the growth of strategic 
and smaller scale extensions and small -scale brownfield redevelopment to 
support neighbourhood renewal.  The area will also play a key role on 
meeting employment growth needs, providing sites for the growth of both 
strategic and local employment uses.    
 
102 The Norwich fringe is the built -up parts of the fringe parishes of Colney, Costessey, Cringlef ord, Drayton, Easton, 
Hellesdon, Old Catton, Sprowston, Taverham, Thorpe St. Andrew, Trowse and the remainder of the Growth Triangle  95 
  
306. Housing growth of 32,691 in the area will provide around 6 6% of the total growth in the 
GNLP (see policy 1). The Sites document provides policies for each site allocated to deliver 
these homes.   
The City Centre  
307. The NPPF requires local planning a uthorities to plan positively to ensure that town centres 
remain vibrant, diverse and viable and recognise the role that they will play at the heart of 
communities by taking a positive approach to their growth.  
 
308. Norwich city centre is defined in this plan as the area within the city walls, with the addition 
of Riverside, and areas around the railway station, Norwich City Football Club, and south of 
the bus station. This is illustrated in map 9 below.  
 
309. Norwich city centre is the pre -eminent regional centre i n the East of England, focused on a 
historic city centre with a wealth of heritage assets and an unrivalled historic and natural 
environment. It accommodates the majority of jobs, key services and economic, leisure and 
cultural facilities serving much of N orfolk and north Suffolk. It is within the top 15 retail 
destinations in the UK103. The established approach to planning for Norwich city centre has 
been cited as an example of best practice by Government.  
 
310. To date, Norwich city centre has proved remarkably  resilient in adapting to the 
unprecedented challenges arising from wider societal changes in employment patterns, 
shopping habits and leisure activities.  
 
311. Policy 7.1 details how development will help to shape the city centre to 2038. The centre 
must continue to be planned in a way which enhances, protects and makes the best use of 
its distinctive assets and ensures that it remains the focus for the high -value jobs, services 
and facilities. A strong, vibrant, attractive and thriving city centre is critical to attracting 
investment in Greater Norwich as the key driver of the area’s economy and to supporting the 
delivery of housing and other development across the plan  area.  
 
312. As changes will inevitably continue, policy 7.1 takes a flexible long -term approach to 
continuing to promote a vibrant city centre in the context of the decline of high street 
shopping and the growth of online retailing  which is further imp acted by Covid -19 and its 
economic consequences . This flexible approach allows for:  
 
• the expansion and diversification of city centre uses, with retail combining with other 
uses to foster an attractive and distinctive living and working environment;  
• conser ving and enhancing the historic and natural environment  
• encouraging housing on all suitable city centre sites as part of mixed -use 
development;  
• actively promoting and integrating new retail and other town centre uses in the city 
centre and resisting out of  centre developments;  
 
103 Venuescore 2017, ‘UK Shopping Venue Rankings (2017)’  96 
 • attracting and retaining employment in the city centre and resisting loss of office 
floorspace;  
• managing shopping frontages to effectively adapt to change and protect their 
vibrancy, diversity and attractiveness;  
• mitigating the impac t of traffic and improving accessibility and connectivity for 
pedestrians, cyclists and public transport.  
 
313. The city centre has the potential to consolidate existing economic sectors as set out in 
policy 6 and detailed in this policy, such as finance, insur ance and retailing, and support 
significant further growth in key economic sectors, including, ICT/digital culture industries, 
leisure and tourism. Evidence shows that the character of the city core and property typology 
are well suited to tech firms and k nowledge intensive businesses that function well within city 
locations that support face to face working.  £25 million secured in late 2020 from the  
Government’s Towns Fund will assist in the development of a digital hub, as part of wider 
investment in the city on transport, infrastructure and skills.  
 
314. The city centre also offers considerable potential for brownfield development to promote 
physical and  economic regeneration in areas where there has been long -term decline.  
 
315. The ongoing revitalisation of the King Street and Mountergate area has been a notable 
success, with more sites allocated in this area though this plan to secure further 
regeneration.  
 
The Northern City Centre  
 
316. Anglia Square, a 1960s neighbourhood shopping precinct, forming the main part of the 
large district centre in the north of the city centre, is also major regeneration priority.  The 
capacity of Anglia Square to deliver a signifi cant element of the plan ’s housing need on a 
highly accessible brownfield site means that it has strategic significance for Greater Norwich.  
The Employment, Town Centre and Retail Study (GVA, 2017) acknowledges the 
considerable potential of Anglia Square to accommodate a much -enhanced retail and leisure 
offer including extensive public realm improvements.  
 
317. The policy therefore promotes high density, housing -led mixed -use redevelopment of Anglia 
Square and surrounding vacant land. Redevelopment proposals should also include retailing, 
employment, community and leisure facilities.  
 
318. Regeneration of Anglia Squa re is also intended to be the catalyst for substantial investment 
in, and further regeneration of, the wider northern city centre. As a result, the whole of the 
northern city centre area as defined in map 9 is identified on the Key Diagram as a Strategic 
regeneration area.  
 
319. The northern city centre has been declared a neighbourhood area for planning purposes. 
This policy provides the strategic context for any more detailed plans for the area.  
 97 
 320. Anglia Square has been  subject to comprehensive mixed -use rege neration proposals which 
Norwich City Council resolved to approve in December 2018. The Secretary of State “called -
in” the application for determination  and refused it notwithstanding a recommendation to 
approve it. The decision gives considerable comfort that medium to high density residential 
led mixed -use development in this location is appropriate and should be part of this plan. The 
previous scheme required support to be viable for delivery.   It is likely that any future scheme 
will also require public  support to ensure implementation.  
 
321. To provide strategy on the wide range of planning issues affecting the city centre, the 
remainder of the city centre element of the policy is divided into six sections on: the 
economy; retail and main town centre uses; leisure, culture, entertainment and the visitor 
economy; housing; the natural and built environment and access and transportation.  
 
322. The policy seeks to attract and retain employment in the city centre by boosting 
employment sectors identified by evidence in the GVA study as having most growth potential, 
in particular knowledge based and digital creative industries, providing for a suitable range 
and choice of employment premises particularly in locations which are well related to 
transport hubs, offer good  linkages with existing and expanding business networks and 
provide high value employment opportunities as part of the regeneration of key sites and 
areas. A key part of retaining employment in the city centre will be to reverse the significant 
loss of off ice employment.  To this end the city centre policy provides the basis for the 
subsequent introduction of an Article 4 direction or directions to manage the loss of office 
floorspace104 and ensure a supply of suitable sites and premises for the of key city cent 
employment growth sectors, most particularly digital and creative industries.  
 
323. Retail and other main town centre uses policy set out in policy 7.1 provides flexibility and 
recognises the trend for changing uses and functions in city centres. The aim i s to ensure the 
centre provides an attractive location in which people can experience a complementary 
range of different uses, services and activities, including retailing. The Norwich City Centre 
Retail Strategy105 prepared by the Norwich Business Improvem ent District endorses this 
approach. It acknowledges that a vibrant, diverse and accessible offer providing a range of 
different experiences for the visitor, alongside promotion of a strong and distinctive sense of 
place and identity, will be key to the lo ng-term economic success of Norwich city centre.    
 
324. Policy 6 places the city centre retail area at the top of the retail hierarchy, with the large 
district centres at Riverside and at Anglia Square, Magdalen Street and St. Augustines 
providing a complemen tary role and meeting more day to day needs. The extent of, and 
more detailed policies for, the city centre retail area, and the primary and secondary retail 
areas within it, along with the large district centres, are set out in existing development 
manage ment policies.  
 
325. The GVA study floorspace calculates that 11,000 -15,000 square metres of additional 
comparison retail floorspace will be required in the Norwich urban area by 2027. However, in 
the light of potentially rapid further changes in comparison re tailing it is premature to allocate 
any new retail sites. This will be revisited in the review of the plan  when the future of retailing 
 
104 Current Use Class E(g (i)) (Previously falling under B1(a) prior t o 1st September 2020)  
105 Norwich City Centre Future Retail Strategy,  The Retail Group on behalf of Norwich BID, June 2019   98 
 becomes clearer. The study forecasts no significant need for additional convenience retail 
floorspace by 2027.  
 
326. In view of the rapidly changing retail picture and, based on recent trends, the possibility of 
further losses in retail representation, the reservation of a specific site for retail development 
is inappropriate. Any additional comparison retail floorspace will primarily be accommodated 
through the intensification of retail use on existing sites.  
 
327. Development to support speciality, independent and small -scale retailing is encouraged by 
the policy. This allows for additional convenience goods floorspace to b e provided for 
through smaller food store development to support new mixed -use development and 
regeneration.   
 
328. The policy also prioritises vibrancy, activity and diversity of uses in defined retail areas 
outside of the defined primary retail area, permitt ing the use of redundant floorspace for other 
uses, including the re -use of upper floors.  
 
329. The policy supports the delivery of more high -quality housing on suitable sites, generally as 
part of mixed -use development, except where including housing in redev elopment could 
affect the commercial vitality and viability of the centre.  It also supports the expansion of 
further and higher education facilities and promotes development to augment the supply of 
purpose -built accommodation for students in the city cen tre.  
 
330. The policy encourages the development of new leisure and cultural facilities, hotels and 
other visitor accommodation to support the delivery of a broader range of activities in the city 
centre and strengthen Norwich City Centre’s role as a visitor a nd cultural destination.  
 
331.  To supplement policy 3 for the built and natural environment, policy 7.1 promotes 
innovative design with reference to the National design guide106 and the City Centre 
Conservation Area Appraisal, particularly at gateways, and sup ports further delivery of the 
riverside walk and the River Wensum Strategy.  
 
332. To support the above, development is required to assist in implementing accessibility, 
legibility and permeability measures within the city centre. These are likely to comprise 
improvements to the public transport, walking and cycling networks to enhance connectivity, 
including public realm works. This will be led by the Transport for Norwich strategy.   
  
 
106 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national -design -guide  99 
 East Norwich  
333. East Norwich, which consists of brownfield regeneration sites by the rivers Wensum and 
Yare at Carrow Works, the Deal Ground and the Utilities Site, and land in front of ATB 
Laurence Scott fronting the Wensum, linking to allocation CC16 (Land adjoining Norwich City 
Football Club north and east of Geoffrey Watling Way ), is defined in map 9 below. It has the 
potential in the long -term to create a new sustainable urban quarter for Norwich, to act as a 
catalyst for additional regeneration in neighbouring urban areas and to contribute significantly 
to growth of the Greater Norwich economy. As a result, it is identified as a strategic 
regeneration area on the Key Diagram.  
 
334. To ensure growth is co -ordinated, overcomes local constraints and is well -designed in a 
sensitive location in and adjacent to the Broads Authority area, the policy requires 
regeneration to be guided by an area -wide masterplan supplementary planning document. 
The masterplan will be produced by consultants, with procurement being well 
advanced.   Funding is being provided from the site landowners and ot her partners in the 
East Norwich Partnership (a new public sector led partnership led by the city council) 
including Homes England and Network Rail. Significant additional funding has recently been 
secured from the Towns Fund to progress the masterplan and  acquire land in order to 
maximise the chances of successful delivery.   It is expected that the masterplan’s findings 
will inform implementation of this strategy and ensure that possible blockages to delivery can 
be overcome.  
 
335. The masterplan will promote development of a high density sustainable mixed -use 
community, co -ordinate delivery of new transport infrastructure and services, enhance green 
links, provide for a local energy network, enhance heritage assets, protect Carrow A bbey 
County Wildlife Site and address local issues including the active railway, the protected 
minerals railhead and flood risk issues.   
 
  100 
 Map 9 - Norwich City Centre, the Northern City Centre Strategic Growth Area and the East No rwich Strategic Regeneration Area  
101 
  Elsewhere in the urban area, including the fringe parishes  
336. Reflecting the settlement hierarchy set out in policy 1, development elsewhere in the urban 
area and in the fringe parishes within Bro adland and South Norfolk areas will support 
sustainable housing and employment growth on sites with good access to services.  
 
337.  The area contains substantial communities located in residential areas with the benefits of 
being accessible to the services, fac ilities and employment that are located here and in the 
city centre.  It also has the advantage of being located near to the countryside which adds to 
its attraction. This proximity makes the area attractive both as a place to live and for the 
location of employment.   
 
338. The importance of this area to the strategy for Greater Norwich is illustrated by the fact that 
it will provide almost half of the housing growth and the majority of the strategic employment 
areas.  
 
339. Housing growth in the area will consist o f limited numbers of brownfield developments in 
existing built up areas, along with significant growth in both strategic and smaller scale 
extensions to the urban area.  
 
340. As set out in policy 6, strategic employment growth will be in accessible locations a t 
Norwich Research Park, Easton/Honingham, Longwater and the Growth Triangle. Growth at 
these employment locations will provide sites for both knowledge intensive industries, 
particularly on existing and newly allocated sites at Norwich Research Park, and for building 
a broad -based economy.  Development at Norwich Research Park and Easton and 
Honingham will address transport and infrastructure impacts to mitigate constraints of the 
proposed developments on the existing highway infrastructure.  
 
341. Further growt h is planned at UEA through intensification of uses within the campus and its 
limited expansion. This is in line with evidence supporting growth as part of wider expansion 
of the education sector and of Norwich Research Park, both of which are key to econo mic 
growth in Greater Norwich.    
 
342. In line with its adopted Area Action Plan, and with the addition of a site for over 1,200 new 
homes at White House Farm in Sprowston allocated through this plan, the Growth Triangle 
provides for approximately  13,500 new h omes to 2038, along with the growth strategic 
employment areas close to Norwich Airport, at Rackheath and in Thorpe St. Andrew.  
 
343. Other strategic housing growth locations of over 1,000 homes will provide well located new 
communities in the west of the area. These consist of new and expanded communities in 
Cringleford, Easton, Costessey and Hellesdon and the completion of the long -term urban 
extension at Three Score, Bowthorpe. Development at Costessey will address transport and 
infrastructure impacts to  mitigate constraints of the proposed developments on the existing 
highway infrastructure particularly relating to the A47 Longwater Junction.  
 102 
 344. This and other policies in the development plan ensure that such growth will be positive, 
adding to the choices in terms of location and quality in the area in an appropriate manner.  
In particular, major development should be integrated with existing communities both 
physically, through connecting roads, footways, cycleways, bridleways (where appropriate) 
and green  infrastructure, and socially for example through recreational provision on new 
developments or improvements to existing provision.  
POLICY 7.1 – The Norwich Urban Area including the fringe parishes  
POLICY 7.1 – The Norwich Urban Area including the fringe  parishes  
 
Norwich and the fringe parishes107 will be the area’s major focus for jobs, homes and 
service development to enhance its regional centre role and to promote major regeneration, 
the growth of strategic and smaller scale extensions and redevelopment to support 
neighbourhood renewal. The area  will provide 30,500 additional homes and sites for a 
significant increase in jobs, including around 257 hectares of undeveloped land allocated 
for employment use.  
 
To achieve this, development sites will be focussed in the city centre, in strategic 
regen eration areas in East Norwich and the Northern City Centre and at strategic urban 
extensions108 in the north -east and west as well as other locations across the urban area as 
follows:  
 
Housing  
 
Part of Norwich Urban area  Existing 
deliverable 
commitment 
(including 
uplift + 
delivery 
2018/19)  New 
allocations  Total deliverable 
housing 
commitment  
2018 - 2038  
City centre  
Northern City Centre Strategic 
Regeneration Area  1,533 25 
1,558 
Other city centre sites  2,724 200  
2,924 
City centre total   4,257 225  
 4,482 
East Norwich  
East Norwich Strategic Regeneration 
Area  770  3,230 
 4,000  
Elsewhere in the urban area (* denotes strategic urban extensions)  
Colney  4 200  
204 
 
107 The Norwich fringe is the built -up parts of the fringe parishes of Colney, Costessey, Cringleford, Drayton, Easton, 
Hellesdon, Old Catton, Sprowston, Taverham, Thorpe St. Andrew, Trowse and the remainder of the Growth Triangle  
108 Strategic urban extensions /strategic housing growth locations will each provide over 1,000 new homes from 2018 
to 2038  103 
 Costessey   529  0109 
 
 529 
Cringleford*  1,771 0   
1,771 
Drayton   404 0 
 404 
Easton*   1,046 0 
 1,046 
Hellesdon*   1,351  0 
 1,351  
Other sites in Norwich   2,160 180 
 2,340 
Three Score, Bowthorpe*   908 0 
 908 
Taverham*   121  1,417  1,538 
 
The Growth Triangle*   12,087  1,420   13,507 
 
Thorpe St. Andrew   386 0  386 
 
Trowse   181 0  181 
Other sites in urban area  
(Old Catton, Keswick, Sprowston)   44 0  44 
Elsewhere in urban area total   20,992  3,217  24,209 
Norwich Urban Area Total   26,019  6,672 
  32,691 
 
Employment  
 
Part of Norwich Urban Area  Existing 
undeveloped 
employment 
allocations 
(hectares, April 
2018)  New 
allocations  
(hectares)  Total 
undeveloped 
employment 
allocations  
(hectares)  
See policies 1 and 6 for the strategic 
sites in the Norwich Urban Area  187.9  46.9 245.8  
Hellesdon  1.4 0 1.4 
Taverham  5.6 0 5.6 
Harford Bridge  4 0 4 
Norwich urban area total  198.9  46.9 256.8  
 
 
109 An 800 -home contingency site at Costessey will be brought forward if delivery of housing in the GNLP area does 
not meet local plan targets. It is not included in these figures (see also the Site allocations plan).  104 
 Other small -scale housing and employment development will be acceptable in principle 
elsewhere in the Norwich urban area subject to meeting other policies in the development 
plan.  
 
The City Centre  
 
Norwich city centre’s strategic role as key driver for the Greater Norwich economy will be 
strengthened. Development in the city centre will provide a high density mix of employment, 
housing, leisure and other uses. Intensification of uses within the city centre to strengthen 
its role as a main regional employment, retail, cultural and visitor centre, providing a vibrant 
and diverse experience for all, will be supported.  
 
Comprehensive redevelopment of the large district centre at Anglia Square and surrounding 
vacant land will provide a viable, high density, housing -led mixed -use development 
including retailing, employment, community and leisure facilities. The redevelopment of 
Anglia Square will be the catalyst for change in the wider Northern City Centre strategic 
regeneration area identified on the Key Diagram and defined in map 9.  
 
1. Economy  
 
To ensure a strong employment base, development should provide a range of floorspace, 
land and premises as part of mixed -use developments. Development should p romote more 
intensive use of land to meet identified needs for start -up and grow -on space for small and 
medium sized enterprises including the digital creative industries, technology, financial and 
cultural and leisure services clusters. To support this, l oss of existing office floorspace will 
be resisted.  
 
Development of buildings for further and higher education, training and lifelong learning will 
be supported in the city centre. The development of purpose -built student accommodation 
will be accepted wh ere it accords with the criteria in policy 5.               
  
2. Retail and main town centre uses  
 
The centre’s retail function will be supported as part of a complementary range of uses. 
Provision for any additional comparison retail floorspace will primaril y be met through the 
intensification of retail use on existing sites.  
 
Proposals for new development and change of use in primary and secondary retail areas 
and large district centres (as defined in policy 6) will be accepted where they:  
 
• contribute to m eeting identified needs for new retail floorspace and other main town 
centre uses, including speciality and independent shopping and small -scale retailing; 
or 
• promote diversification of services and facilities to ensure that vitality and vibrancy 
can be ma intained throughout the day and evening; or  
• provide mixed -use development including housing, high quality employment, flexible 
working, education, leisure, culture and entertainment, where this supports and 
complements the function of the centre; or  
• secure the beneficial redevelopment and adaptation of disused and underused land 
and premises including redundant retail floorspace.  
 105 
 3. Leisure, culture and entertainment and the visitor economy  
 
The city centre’s leisure cultural and entertainment offer wil l be supported and expanded. 
Development of new leisure and cultural facilities, hotels and other visitor accommodation 
to strengthen the city centre’s role as a visitor and cultural destination will be accepted in 
accessible locations well related to cent res of activity and transport hubs. Leisure uses, 
including uses supporting the early evening economy, will be accepted within the defined 
city centre leisure area where noise and disturbance issues can be mitigated and where 
they do not have detrimental e ffect on the retail offering, especially in the primary retail 
area.  A sequential approach will be used to determine applications for leisure uses outside 
the defined leisure area.  Late -night uses will only be accepted in the designated Late -Night 
Activi ty Zone.  
 
4. Housing  
 
To maximise the potential of the city centre to deliver new homes, housing will be required 
on the specific allocated sites detailed in the Sites document.  
 
5. The Built, Natural and Historic Environment  
 
To protect and enhance the distinc tive natural and built environment and heritage assets of 
the city centre:  
• A programme of improvements to public spaces, as illustrated in a public realm 
infrastructure plan, will be implemented through a combination of public investment 
on the highway / p ublicly owned land and private investment in association with 
development proposals;  
• New development proposals will respect the character of the city centre conservation 
area and address the principles set out in the City Centre Conservation Area 
Appraisal  (or any successor), providing innovative and sustainable design; in 
particular in relation to scale, mass, height, layout and materials  
• Riverside development will assist in delivering the policies/ priorities of the River 
Wensum Strategy (or any successor ), including provision of a riverside walk. 
Riverside development should support and enable achievement of the strategy’s 
longer -term plans.  
 
6. Access and Transportation  
 
Development will be required to contribute to measures promoted by Transport for Norwich 
to improve accessibility, connectivity, legibility and permeability within the city centre.   
 
 
East Norwich  
 
Development of sites allocated in the East Norwich strategic regeneration area identified on 
the Key Diagram and defined on map 9 including Carrow Works, the Deal Ground and the 
Utilities Site will create a highly sustainable mixed -use gateway quarter acco mmodating 
substantial housing growth and optimising economic benefits  Development across the 
sites  will provide in the region of 4,000 additional homes in the plan  period and significant 
new employment opportunities for around 6,000 jobs. East Norwich al so has the potential to 
act as a long -term catalyst for regeneration of the wider area, potentially including the 
following sites if they become available:  
 106 
  
o Redevelopment of land adjoining the railway between the Deal Ground and 
Carrow Works as part of th e wider East Norwich strategic growth area 
masterplan supplementary planning document;  
o Land east of Norwich City F.C.;  
o Land owned by Network Rail on Lower Clarence Road and Koblenz Avenue  
o Intensification of uses at Riverside and  
o Regeneration in the Rouen R oad area.  
 
Site proposals within the East Norwich strategic regeneration area will meet the 
requirements of an area -wide masterplan to ensure co -ordinated development. This will 
include:  
 
• an exemplar design approach, building at high densities and  maximising the 
riverside regeneration potential to create a distinct, highly sustainable mixed -use 
community and new gateway quarter for the city, taking account of its setting 
adjacent to the Broads;  .  
• creating an inclusive, resilient and safe community in which people of all ages have 
good access to high quality homes that meet housing needs the provision of area -
wide economic and social infrastructure and services, including (but not limited to) 
the creation of new  employment opportunities, a new local  centre, and a new primary 
school should need be established;  
• establishing an integrated access and transportation strategy which emphasises 
sustainable accessibility and traffic restraint, and allows for connectivity and 
permeability within and between th e sites in the strategic regeneration area and 
beyond, including north -south links between Trowse and Bracondale and the north 
bank of the Wensum and Thorpe Road / Yarmouth Road, and east -west between the 
city centre, the railway station  and Whitlingham C ountry Park and the Broads 
including an extended riverside walk on the north and south banks of the Wensum. 
Proposals should be designed for ease of access to, and by, public transport, with 
appropriate bridge provision to ensure the sites are fully permea ble by sustainable 
transport modes;  
• planning development effectively to manage and mitigate the impact of vehicular 
traffic from the site/s on the local highway network including the Martineau Lane 
roundabout, Bracondale and King Street;  
• protecting and enh ancing green infrastructure assets, corridors and open spaces 
within the area, including enhancing linkages from the city centre to the Broads, 
Carrow Abbey County Wildife Site the wider rural area and elsewhere in Norwich, to 
include pedestrian/cycle link s between Whitlingham Country Park and the city centre;  
• providing for sustainable energy generation, including a local energy network serving 
the area as a whole;  
• protecting and enhancing the sites’ and wider city’s rich heritage assets and their 
settings ; 
• achieving high quality, locally distinctive, energy efficient and flood resilient design 
which addresses identified risks from river and surface water flooding and mitigates 
against potential sources of noise and air pollution and establishes strong buil t 
frontages along the River Wensum and the defining network of streets and spaces 
with the sites;  
• addressing and remediating site contamination; and  
• planning to allow scope for greater use of the Rivers Wensum and Yare for water -
based recreation, leisure a nd tourism including the potential inclusion of marinas and 
riverside moorings and access for waterborne freight subject to not impeding 
navigation of either river.  107 
  
Elsewhere in the urban area including the fringe parishes  
 
The remainder of the urban area including the fringe parishes will provide for a significant 
proportion of the total growth in Greater Norwich. Development will provide a range of sites 
for different types of housing, employment and community uses that are accessible and 
integrate w ell with the existing communities. It will provide necessary infrastructure, with a 
focus on public transport, walking and cycling, as well as social and green infrastructure.   
 
Growth will include:  
 
• Development of strategic and smaller scale urban extensions at existing locations 
committed for housing and employment uses as set out in the tables above (including 
that within the adopted Old Catton, Sprowston, Rackheath and Thorpe St Andrew 
Growth Triangle Area Action Plan), with uplift on existing al located sites in 
Cringleford, Easton and Three Score (Bowthorpe);  
• Significant new development proposals (including the expansion of the Norwich 
Research Park, and a large new allocation for homes in the Growth Triangle in 
Sprowston);  
• Development at the Un iversity of East Anglia to cater for up to 5,000 additional 
students by 2038 through intensification of uses within the campus and its limited 
expansion;  
• Development sites in the Sites document which will support neighbourhood -based 
renewal on brownfield s ites, with densities highest in the most accessible locations 
and  
• Enhancements to the green infrastructure network which will include links to and 
within the Wensum, Yare, Tud and Tas Valleys, Marriott’s Way and from Mousehold 
through the north -east growt h triangle as set out in map s 8A and B , along with local 
networks.  
 
In addition, a large contingency site is identified in Costessey to be brought forward if 
delivery of housing in the GNLP area does not meet local plan targets.  
 
 108 
 Policy 7.2 The Main Tow ns 
345. In line with the settlement hierarchy, the main towns of Aylsham, Diss (with part of Roydon), 
Harleston, Long Stratton and Wymondham collectively provide just over 6,800 homes, 
around 14% of the proposed housing growth planned to 2038.   
 
346. The towns play a vital role in the rural economy, providing employment opportunities and 
services for wider hinterlands. As such, they are engines of rural growth and it is important 
that they are enabled to grow at appropriate scales, having regard to inf rastructure and 
environmental issues, to enable them to thrive. Growth in these towns will have good access 
to services.   
 
347. Some development is already identified for the towns through existing local plans.  In 
particular, major development proposals are s et out in the Long Stratton and Wymondham 
Area Action Plans (AAPs), which are not superseded by the GNLP and continue to operate.  
 
348. Since allocations meet growth needs, in line with other policies in this plan, windfall sites 
will be limited to locations w ithin and, for very small developments limited to 5 homes, 
adjacent to settlement boundaries.  
 
349. Retail evidence110 suggests that there will not be the need for major additional retail 
expansion in the main towns, with the possible exception of Diss. Since re tailing is 
experiencing significant changes, no land allocations are made through the plan . This policy 
and policy 6 allow for such development, prioritising town centre locations, if new evidence 
justifies it.        
 
Aylsham  
 
350. Aylsham has a good range of shops and services in and around its attractive and historic 
centre and local employment opportunities. Transport links to and from the town via the A140 
are good, including regular bus services to Norwich and North Norfolk. Delivery of housing 
has been good in recent years and 2 29 homes remain to be delivered from 2018 
commitments.  
 
351. The Bure Valley and the Marriott’s Way form the core of a well -developed local and 
strategic green infrastructure network and development could support further improv ements.  
 
352. To support the continued vitality of Aylsham and to locate an appropriate amount of growth 
in this main town, 300 additional homes are allocated on a site to the south -east of the town 
centre through the GNLP  and 250 homes off the Norwich Road to the south, the latter 
including specialist retirement homes . Both sites have good access to the A140 and public 
transport.  A new primary school required to serve growth in the town is included in the 
south -eastern allocation.   
 
353. Anglian Water plans to in crease capacity at the local water recycling centres at Aylsham 
and Belaugh to serve growth.  
 
110 Greater Norwich Employment, Town Centre  and Retail Study ( The GVA Study ) 109 
  
Diss (with part of Roydon adjacent to Diss)  
 
354. Diss is strategically located on the Norwich to London railway line and the A140 and A143 
provide road links to Norw ich, Ipswich, east coast ports and Bury St. Edmunds. Diss is also a 
hub for local bus links.  
 
355. Diss has the widest range of shops and services of the main towns, as well as a broad 
range of employment opportunities mainly located to the east of the town centre close to the 
railway. The shops and services are mainly within the attractive town centre of Diss, which 
has significant pedestrian priority areas, along with supermarkets on Victoria Road. Diss 
Mere and its surrounding green space provide a distinctive focal point for the town centre.  
 
356. These locational attributes and connectivity provide the potential for economic growth as an 
enhanced centre serving a large rural hinterland in South Norfolk and northern Suffolk.  
 
357. Diss and Roydon are in the Waveney Valley. The valley provides an attractive setting for 
the settlements and is the hub of an exten sive green infrastructure network including the 
Angles and Boudicca Ways.  
 
358. While delivery of housing has been good in recent years, associated environmental 
constraints place limits on the potential for housing expansion. Local evidence111 shows that 
traffic constraints, particularly on Victoria Road, also reduce the potential for significant 
additional expansion.  
 
359. The existing commitment of just over 300 dwellings in April 2018 is complemented by a 
strategic requirement for an additional 400 homes  set by this plan . 150 of these homes are 
allocated through this plan on a site neighbouring the railway station. Making use of 
consultation on potential sites undertaken through the GNLP, t he Diss and District 
Neighbourhood Plan will allocate land  for the remaining 2 50 homes.  
 
360. Evidence112 suggests that Diss has the best potential of the main towns for retail growth, 
which could be accompanied by further improvements to the public realm and a strengthened 
food and beverage offer in the town centre.  
 
361. The GVA Study also shows that Diss has the potential for jobs growth on existing 
undeveloped allocated employment land, particularly for manufacturing, including high value 
activities. The sites are close to the railway line and have good access to a larg e 
neighbouring employment area at Eye Airfield, allowing for complementary activities.   
Harleston  
 
362. Harleston has a smaller range of more specialist retail facilities and services which provide 
for a more local catchment in South Norfolk and northern Suffo lk. These have the potential 
for expansion. It has good road links to the east and west via the A143 and access to 
 
111 In the Diss Network Improvement Strategy  
112 Greater Norwich Employment, Town Centre and Retail Study ( The GVA Study ) 110 
 Norwich via the A140 will be improved by delivery of the Long Stratton bypass.  A local bus 
network is focussed on the town.  
 
363. Harleston is c lose to the River Waveney and the Angles Way along the valley forms part of 
the strategic green infrastructure network.  
 
364.  Housing delivery has been good in Harleston in recent years. The plan  allocates two sites 
to the south -east of the town centre within  the A143 bypass and close to employment areas. 
The sites provide for 550 new homes including specialist retirement accommodation, in 
addition to the April 2018 commitment of around 170 dwellings. Growth of just under 800 
new homes in Harleston to 2038 wil l support the retention and expansion of services and 
jobs in this attractive market town , as well as providing accommodation for older residents .  
Long Stratton  
 
365. Owing  to the scale of the existing commitment in Long Stratton, which will both provide a 
bypass  (see paragraph 230) and the growth of services supporting its classification as a main 
town, this plan does not make further allocations in addition to Long Stratto n’s Area Action 
Plan (AAP).  Evidence113 shows that the scale of the commitment means that parts of the site 
allocated in the AAP will not be delivered until after 2038.  There may be further potential 
capacity for development within the existing allocation,  beyond the 1,875 homes that are the 
subject of current planning applications; however, these would be unlikely to be delivered 
until late in the plan  period, or beyond.   
 
366. The AAP identifies some infrastructure capacity constraints, particularly in relati on to Long 
Stratton Water Recycling Centre, although Anglian Water plans to increase capacity to serve 
growth.   The GNLP is not intended to replace the AAP, which may therefore be reviewed 
separately later to address the delivery of additional housing in L ong Stratton,  if required.   
 
Wymondham  
 
367. The plan  allocates two sites in Wymondham for a total of 150 additional dwellings to 2038. 
With the major housing commitment and employment expansion set out in Wymondham’s 
Area Action Plan, this means that the town  will grow by around 2,600 homes, along with 
strategic employment growth at Browick Road. This will both support Wymondham’s role as 
a main town serving the south -west of Greater Norwich and contribute to the development of 
the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corri dor. 
 
368. Anglian Water plans to increase capacity at the local water recycling centre at Wymondham 
to serve growth.  
 
369. Transforming Cities funding has been awarded to improve access to Wymondham rai lway 
station.  
 
 
113 Analysis of Commitments  111 
 370. The strategic gaps identified through this plan and other policies in the development plan 
aim to prevent coalescence of Wymondham and Hethersett. The gap between the two 
settlements is focussed on Kett’s Oak.  
POLICY 7.2 – THE MAIN TOWNS  
POLICY 7.2 – THE MAIN TOWNS  
 
The Main Towns of Aylsham, Diss (with part of Roydon), Harleston, Long Stratton and 
Wymondham will continue to be developed to enhance their function as attractive places to 
live and providers of employment and services to serve the towns and  their hinterlands, 
with substantial levels of development expected to take place. This will provide for around 
6,850 additional homes and sites for employment and commercial land and related 
infrastructure.   
 
The identified levels of development, including growth committed in the Long Stratton and 
Wymondham Area Action Plans, are:  
 
Housing  
 
Main  
Town  Existing deliverable 
commitment 
(including uplift + 
delivery 2018/19  and 
2019/20 ) New 
allocations  Total deliverable housing 
commitment  
2018 - 2038  
Aylsham  229 550 779 
Diss (with 
part of 
Roydon)   363 400 763 
Harleston  172 555 727 
Long 
Stratton   1,922  0 1,922 
Wymondham  2,465  150 2,615 
Total  5,151 1,655 6,806 
 
Other residential development will be acceptable elsewhere within settlement boundaries 
subject to meeting the criteria of other policies in the development plan.   
  
Employment  
 
Main  
Town  Existing 
undeveloped 
employment 
allocations 
(hectares, April 
2018)  New 
employment 
allocations  
(hectares)  Total employment 
allocations 
(hectares)  
  
See polices 1 and 6 for the 
strategic site in 
Wymondham  22 0 22 
Aylsham  4 0 4 112 
 Diss (with part of Roydon)   10.8 0 10.8 
Harleston  6.8 0 6.8 
Long Stratton   12.5 0 12.5 
Wymondham  2.1 0 2.1 
Total  58.2 0 58.2 
 
Other small -scale employment development will be acceptable in principle elsewhere in the 
towns subject to meeting other policies in the development plan.  
 
Retail and other town centre type uses should be located in or adjoining the town centres. 
Proposals  which support speciality and independent shopping, small -scale retailing and 
diversification of services and facilities will be encouraged.  
 
Enhancements to the multi -functional green infrastructure network will be provided by 
development to contribute t o the strategic network as set out in map s 8A and B  and to 
linking local networks.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
 
 
  113 
 Policy 7.3 The Key Service Centres  
 
371. The Key Service Centres of Acle, Blofield, Brundall, Hethersett, Hingham, Loddon / 
Chedgrave, Poringland / Framingham Earl, Reepham and Wroxham  provide 3, 679 homes, 
around 7% of the proposed housing growth.  This reflects the settlement hierarchy and is 
made up of significant existing commitments, with additional sites allocated through this plan 
in the locations with the best opportunities for further growth and the fewest c onstraints.  
 
372. The Key Service Centres have a relatively good range of services, access to public 
transport and employment opportunities and play a vital role in serving the rural areas .  This 
role is intended to continue with development taking place at ap propriate levels.  
 
373. High amounts of existing commitments and environmental and infrastructure constraints 
limit the potential for additional housing growth through this plan at Blofield, Brundall, 
Poringland / Framingham Earl and Reepham. Traffic constrain ts and proximity to the Broads 
at Wroxham restrict growth.  
 
374. The focus of additional housing growth identified through this plan is therefore at Acle, 
Hethersett, Hingham and Loddon / Chedgrave.  
 
375. Acle has been identified for additional growth on well -located sites which will provide a link 
road to the west of the village. The village has a good range of services including a 
secondary school. It also has good bus and rail services and is strategically located between 
Norwich and Great Yarmouth to benefit fr om employment growth, including in the offshore 
energy sector.  
 
376. Hethersett is close to Norwich and within the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor. It has a 
range of services including a secondary school and good access to other services, with good 
public tran sport links to Norwich and Wymondham. It also has good access to employment 
opportunities at a range of strategic and more local sites. As a result, major development is 
committed to the north and west of the village and additional growth identified throug h this 
plan will be delivered through uplift within the existing allocation. Strategic gaps identified 
through this plan and detailed in development management policies between Wymondham 
and Hethersett , focussed on Kett’s Oak,  and Hethersett and Cringlefor d, aim to prevent the 
settlements joining up.   
 
377. Hingham has limited existing commitment, a range of services and employment, good 
public transport links and is well located to benefit from additional employment opportunities 
in the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor. The two additional allocations to the e ast and west 
of the village, which provide for 100 homes, both have good access to services and public 
transport.  
 
378. Loddon / Chedgrave has a good range of services, good public transport links and is well 
located between Norwich and Lowestoft to benefit fr om employment growth, including in the 
offshore energy sector.  Additional growth is allocated on one site to the north of Chedgrave 
and on another to the south -east of Loddon.   114 
  
379. In line with other policies in this plan, windfall sites will be limited to locations within and, for 
very small developments limited to 3 to 5 homes, adjacent to settlement boundaries.  
 
POLICY 7.3 – THE KEY SERVICE CENTRES  
POLICY 7.3 – THE KEY SERVICE CENTRES  
 
The Key Service Centres of Acle, Blofield, Brundall, Hethersett, Hin gham, Loddon / 
Chedgrave, Poringland / Framingham Earl, Reepham and Wroxham will continue to be 
developed to enhance their function as places to live and providers of employment and 
services to serve the settlement and its hinterland,  with significant leve ls of development 
expected to take place in the majority of centres.   This will provide for a minimum of 3, 679 
additional homes and sites for 11.8 hectares of employment / commercial land and related 
infrastructure.  
 
The main areas for development are:  
 
Housing    
 
Key Service Centre  Existing deliverable 
commitment 
(including uplift + 
delivery 2018/19)  New 
allocations  Total deliverable 
housing 
commitment  
2018 - 2038  
Acle  200 340 540 
Blofield  301 15 316 
Brundall   175 0 175 
Hethersett  1,375 0    1,375 
Hingham  20 100 120 
Loddon / Chedgrave      206 240 446 
Poringland / Framingham 
Earl      547 0 547 
Reepham  155 0 155 
Wroxham  5 0 5 
Total  2,984  695 3,679  
 
The sites to meet the above targets are in the GNLP Sites document.  
 
Other residential development will be acceptable elsewhere within settlement boundaries 
subject to meeting the criteria of other policies in the development plan.  
 
Employment  
 
Key Servic e Centre  Existing 
undeveloped 
employment 
allocations New 
allocations  
(hectares)  Total 
employment 
allocations  
(hectares)  
 115 
 (hectares, April 
2018)  
Acle  0.7 0 0.7 
Hingham  2.2 0 2.2 
Loddon / Chedgrave      1.8 0 1.8 
Poringland / Framingham Earl      4.3 0 4.3 
Reepham  2.8 0 2.8 
Total  11.8 0 11.8 
 
Other small -scale employment development will be acceptable in principle elsewhere in the 
key service centres subject to meeting other policies in the development plan.  
 
Enhancements to the multi -functional green infrastructure network will be provided by 
development to contribute to the strategic network as set out in map s 8A and B  and to 
linking local networks.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
 
 
  116 
 Policy 7.4 Village clusters  
380. The remaining permitted and allocated housing growth, 4, 220 homes, around 9% of the 
total for Greater Norwich in the plan  period, is on sites in village clusters. Village clusters are 
based on primary school catchments, which provide a proxy for social sustainability.  
 
381. Locating this level of growth in village clusters aims to promote social sustainability by 
supporting rura l life and services. The provision of several relatively small allocation sites as 
required by the National Planning Policy Framework means this approach also has the 
benefit of supporting small -scale builders, providing choice for the market and helping t o 
ensure the delivery of housing in popular village locations. The policy also aims to provide a 
range of sizes and tenures of new homes to meet needs in village clusters.  
 
382. A separate South Norfolk Village Clusters Housing Site Allocations Local Plan is being 
produced. This plan will include sites for a minimum of 1,200 homes in addition to the 1,39 2 
already committed in the village clusters to be identified in South Norfolk.  
 
383. The village clusters in Broadland and the indicative amount of growth planned fo r each 
cluster are set out in appendix 5 of this strategy. The GNLP Sites Plan allocates sites to meet 
the strategic requirement for up to 48 2 more homes in addition to the 1, 146 homes already 
committed in the village clusters in Broadland.  
 
384. The village c lusters cover the remaining areas of Broadland outside the Norwich fringe, 
main towns and key service centres. Some smaller settlements are clustered with towns and 
villages higher in the settlement hierarchy, such as the villages around Aylsham. This appl ies 
where the larger settlement provides the local primary school.  
 
385. The scale of growth in any cluster in Broadland as shown appendix 5 reflects school 
capacity or ability to grow and the availability of other accessible services, the “social 
capacity” of a cluster. The identification of sites with the fewest constraints has also helped to 
provide the indicative view on the potential amount of growth in specific clusters.  
  
386. To reduce additional car journeys and encourage healthy and active life styles, new housing 
allocations have been preferred on sites within village clusters with good access to a primary 
school and a safe route to school.  
 
387. Policies 1 and 7.4 also support windfall development for affordable housing in the village 
clusters in b oth Broadland and South Norfolk, with some market housing permitted where it 
supports viability, including self/custom -build. The policies allow for infill and small extensions 
in those parts of village clusters which have a settlement boundary.  
 
388. This appr oach will provide for appropriate levels of growth in accessible locations in village 
clusters as required by policy 1.  
 117 
 POLICY 7.4 – VILLAGE CLUSTERS  
POLICY 7.4 – VILLAGE CLUSTERS  
 
Housing  
 
To provide a minimum of 4, 220 homes as set out in policy 1 an d to support village 
services, provide choice for the market and promote delivery of a variety of housing types 
and tenures, housing development will be supported in principle on a range of sites within 
the village clusters.  
 
To achieve this:  
 
1. New sites in village clusters to provide a minimum of 1,200 homes will be 
allocated through a South Norfolk Village Clusters Housing Allocations Local 
Plan;  
 
2. New sites in village clusters in Broadland to provide 482 homes are allocated in 
the Greater Norwich Local Plan Sites Plan.  
Additional sites may be provided in village clusters by:  
 
1. Infill development within settlement boundaries;  
 
2. Affordable housing led development, which may include an element of market 
hous ing (including self/custom build) if necessary, for viability, up to a maximum 
of 15 dwellings in total. These sites should be adjacent or well related to 
settlement boundaries with good access to services, including safe routes to 
schools, subject to othe r policies of the local plan.  
 
The cumulative amount of windfall development permitted during the plan  period should 
not have a negative impact on the character and scale of settlements in any village cluster.  
 
Employment  
 
The allocated Employment Areas are:  
 
Location  Existing 
undeveloped 
employment 
allocations (hectares, 
April 2018)  New 
allocations  
(hectares)  Total 
employment 
allocations  
(hectares)  
See policies 1 and 6 for 
the strategic site at 
Hethel  20 0.8 20.8 
Brooke  4.8 0 4.8 
Foulsham  1.1 0 1.1 
Horsham St. Faith  2.9 1.5 4.4 
Lenwade  2.4 0 2.4 
Lingwood  2.3 0 2.3 
Total  33.5 2.3 35.9 118 
  
Other small -scale employment development will be acceptable in principle elsewhere 
within village development boundaries,  through the re-use of rural buildings or through the 
potential expansion of existing small and medium sized employment sites, subject to 
meeting other policies in the development plan.  
 
Enhancements to the multi -functional green infrastructure network provided by 
deve lopment will contribute to the strategic network as set out in map s 8A and B  and to 
linking local networks.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  119 
 Policy 7.5 Small Scale Windfall Housing Development  
389. This policy applies to all parishes. Its purpose is to allow for a limited number of additional 
dwellings in each parish beyond those allocated or allowed for as larger scale windfall sites 
through other policies in this plan. The policy limits the number of homes on small scale 
windfall sites to three in each smaller parish and five in each larger parish (as defined in 
appendix 7) to prevent over development in rural areas.   For the purposes of this policy , the 
number of dwellings allowed relates to permis sions granted after adoption of the plan .  
 
390. Policy 7.5 promotes small scale housing development, including self/custom build. This 
complements policies 5 and 7.4 which also support self/custom build.   
 
391. To achieve this, the policy provides limited additional opportunities for the development of 
home s: 
 
a. adjacent to settlements with development boundaries;  
b. or on sites within or adjacent to a recognisable group of dwellings which do not have 
a development boundary.  
 
392. The policy also requires such developments to respect the character of the settlement and 
landscape.  
 
393. Additional requirements applying to all sites such as providing safe highways access set in 
policy 2 will be applied to these sites, though with greater flexibility in relation to access to 
services due to the very limited scale of develop ment supported by the policy.  
 
394. It is anticipated that this policy will lead to the delivery of around 800 homes during the plan  
period. These homes form part of the housing supply in table 6 and policy 1 of this plan.   
 
POLICY 7.5 – SMALL SCALE WINDFALL HOUSING DEVELOPMENT  
POLICY 7.5 – SMALL SCALE WINDFALL HOUSING DEVELOPMENT  
 
Small scale residential development will be permitted adjacent to a developmen t boundary 
or on sites within or adjacent to a recognisable group of dwellings where:  
• Cumulative development permitted under this policy will be no more than 3 
dwellings in small parishes or 5 dwellings in larger parishes (as defined in appendix 
7) during the lifetime of the plan ; and  
• The proposal respects the form and character of the sett lement; and  
• The proposal would result in no adverse impact on the landscape and natural 
environment; and  
• The proposal accords with other relevant Local Plan policies  
 
Positive consideration will be given to self and custom build.  
 
 
  120 
 Policy 7.6 Preparing for New Settlements  
395. This local plan identifies enough sustainable sites and locations within and on the edge of 
existing settlements to meet current needs. Consequently,  no new settlement is proposed for 
allocation in this Local Plan. However, with sustainable options for settlement extensions 
diminishing, the authorities are convinced that one or more new settlements will be required 
in the longer term, particularly if housing needs rise as signalled by government.  
 
396. Ensuring a new set tlement and its supporting infrastructure is properly planned, designed 
and resourced takes time. Site promoters also need the confidence to invest in evidence and 
master -planning. The authorities therefore conclude that it is vital to commit in this Local  Plan 
cycle to delivering new settlements in the next plan cycle.  
 
397. While the intention is to allocate new settlement development through the next plan, 
delivery will commence prior to the end date of this local plan. Consequently, new settlement 
development will provide additional flexibility to ensure delivery of current housing targets.  
 
398. The location and design of any new settlement or settlements for Greater Norwich will need 
to ensure that they are excellent places to live, built to Garden City principles, and provide 
housing across all types of need. They will need to be well -connected and deliverable, with 
sustainable access to a range of jobs a nd services. They will need to promote our local 
economic strengths, enhance the environment and promote healthy and active lifestyles.   
 
399. To achieve all of this, proposals for any new settlement will need to ensure that a significant 
proportion of any upl ift in land value from current use is captured to fund the infrastructure to 
support the new community. It will be essential that the legal framework for this is agreed 
with councils at an early stage in the promotion of any new settlement.  
 
400.  Three new set tlement sites have been proposed through the GNLP (at Honingham Thorpe, 
Hethel and Silfield). These will be investigated along with other potential locations in the next 
plan, taking account of selected criteria. In order to shorten the lead in time for de livery and 
provide the level of certainty for investment that would allow one or more schemes to be 
incorporated in the new plan, comprehensive analysis of options will begin in 2021.  
 
401. The timetable for this work , which provides a broad indication of the a uthorities’ intentions 
and may be varied to take account of changes to the plan ning system,  is: 
 
• 2021 developing success criteria, site options assessment including technical 
consultation;  
• 2022 following adoption of the GNLP, public consultation on site op tions;  
• 2022 -24 development of new Local Plan incorporating preferred site(s);  
• 2026 onwards – delivery.  121 
 POLICY 7.6 – PREPARING FOR NEW SETTLEMENTS  
POLICY 7.6 – PREPARING FOR NEW SETTL EMENTS  
 
Subject to the outcome of evidence, assessment and appraisal, one or more new 
settlements will be brought forward in the next Local Plan.  
 
  122 
  
APPENDICES  
 
Appendix 1 Infrastructure requirements  
 
This appendix provides additional detail to support policy 4 of this plan. It sets out infrastructure 
requirements to serve growth as identified in the Greater Norwich Local Plan Infrastructure Needs 
Report (GNLPINR). The GNLPINR and this appendix will be updated to inform the Publication 
(Regulation 19) version of the Greater Norwich Local Plan.  
The infrastructure will be provided by a variety of organisations and funding sources. The 
requirements have been identified through ongoing and completed topic a nd organisation -based 
studies and strategies which inform both the GNLPINR and this plan.  
Pedestrian and Cycling  
Awaiting the findings of the Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure plan (LCWIP), which is 
currently being developed.   
 
Rail  
Awaiting find ings of the Norfolk Rail Prospectus, which is currently being reviewed.  
 
Road  
In addition to the schemes Highways England have committed to, further trunk road junction 
improvements may be required for future growth. The A47 Longwater Interchange and the 
following junctions will require further investigation:  
 
• A47/A140 Ipswich Road  
• A47/A146 Loddon Road  
• Spinks Lane, Wymondham  
• New Road, Acle  
 
Water  
Anglian Water’s Water Recycling Long Term Plan plans for growth to 2045 through increased 
capacity at the following water recycling centres:  
Acle; Aylsham; Belaugh; Long Stratton; Rackheath Springs – Wroxham; Sisland; Woodton; 
Whitlingham and Wymondham.  
 
The Water Cycle Study undertaken for the GNLP identified locations where there may be futur e 
capacity issues to be addressed for the growth proposed in the GNLP within the wastewater 
catchments of Aylsham, Foulsham, Long Stratton, Reepham, Rackheath, Diss, Ditchingham, 
Saxlingham, Whitlingham Trowse and Woodton.  These issues should, at least in -part, be 
addressed by Anglian Water’s current Long Term Plan, but revisions may be necessary to this to 
fully address the GNLP proposals when finalised.   
 
Energy  
Substations requiring upgrades and/or the use of measures to off -set the need for reinfor cement 
(such as demand side responses and energy storage (batteries):  
 
Substation (132/33kV)  Affected development sites  
Sprowston Primary  Beeston Park  
Home Farm Sprowston  
Land off Salhouse Road  
Land south of Green Lane East  123 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Broadband  
A guide to Broadband for Norfolk Local Planning Authorities produced for the Norfolk Strategic 
Planning Framework sets out that superfast broadband coverage is rapidly improving, 92% of 
Norfolk’s homes and businesses can now access superfast broadband, up from 42% in 2012 and 
initiatives, led by the County Council aim to make high -speed broadband available to more than 
95% of Norfo lk’s premises , with further work planned . The report recommends that all residential 
developments over 10 dwellings and all employment developments will enable Fibre to the 
Premises (FTTP).  
 
For schemes under these thresholds the Council’s expectation is t hat provision for FTTP will be 
achieved, where practical.  
 
Education  
Norfolk County Council have six schools (three primary, one free school and two primary 
relocation and expansion) either in the process of being built or plans are in place for building o ver 
the next 2 -3 years.  
 
Other new schools are planned across the Greater Norwich area once housing and pupil numbers 
suggest that existing schools in the area are no longer able to accommodate local children. These 
currently include 10 new primary school s and one secondary school:  
 
• Wymondham Silfield – 420 place primary school.  
• Poringland – new school in response to considerable housing in the area – site search 
investigation being commissioned.  
• Salhouse Road, Sprowston – site safeguarded for new 4 20 place school within new 
housing development.  
• Hellesdon – new 420 place primary school within new development on former golf club 
grounds.  
• Beeston Park – sites for 2 x 420 place schools within proposed new housing development.  
• White House Farm Spro wston or North Rackheath – the potential locations for a new 
secondary school required to support housing growth in the Growth Triangle.  
• Rackheath – 2 x 420 new primary phase schools.  
• Land north and south of Smee Lane, Norwich – planned new 420 place p rimary school in 
response to growth.  
• Long Stratton – new 420 place primary school building in response to strategic growth in 
the village.  
 Land south of Green Lane West  
Land south of Salhouse Road  
Rackheath  
White House Farm  
Peachman Way Primary  Broadland Gate  
Brook Farm  
Land east of Broadland Business Park  
Land north of Broadland Business Park  
Earlham Grid Local A/B  Costessey  
GN Food Enterprise Park  
Longwater / Easton  
Norwich Research Park  
Three Score  
Cringleford Primary  Cringleford  
Hethersett  124 
 There will be additional new schools and school expansions to provide for the new allocations 
made through this plan. For larger sites, these have been considered as part of site allocations 
e.g. the preferred option site for 1,400 homes at Taverham includ es a primary school site.  
 
Health Care Requirements  
 
Type of 
need  Existing Services  Additional need resulting from growth  
Primary 
Care  GPs (currently 68 surgeries, 43 of 
which are main surgeries and 25 
branch surgeries), community 
pharmacists and optometrists.  There are currently 2 potential options to increase 
capacity as required around the north and north -
west of Norwich:  
1. New build at Broadland Hub within or 
close to planned developments at 
Rackheath and Beeston Park.  
2. No new build, increased numbers spread 
amongst existing practices.  
 
The selected option(s) will be confirmed 
throughout 2021 -22, following demand and 
capacity reviews and Primary Care estate 
strategy development.  
 
Hospital  There is one acute hospital, the 
Norfolk and N orwich University 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust 
(NNUH). Other services are 
delivered from several other 
locations throughout the Greater 
Norwich area.  The NHS Long Term Plan and the STP Operating 
Plan will identify and address building capacity, 
infrastruc ture investment requirements, various 
facilities and all other constraints faced by the 
STP/ICS.  
 
The NNUH estates strategy will be updated 
throughout 2021, in line with STP/ICS plans.  
 
Mental 
Health  Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation 
Trust (NSFT) provide s a broad range 
of services across Greater Norwich, 
with Hellesdon Hospital and the 
Julian Hospital in Norwich the largest 
sites.  In line with the shift to care in the community, the 
mental health trust is expected to shift services to 
wrap around primary care networks. Existing 
clinical and administrative provision at Hellesdon 
is not fit for purpose. This area of the site is going 
through a disposal process for housing. The 
NSFT’s remaining accommodation in Norwich 
has constraints, including parking at th e Julian 
Hospital. There is no spare capacity in primary 
care for mental health services in Diss and this 
may need to be reviewed. The above is included 
in the NSFT estates strategy review to be 
addressed as by the GNLP as and when 
appropriate.  
 
Community 
Services  These are provided by Norfolk 
Community Health and Care NHS 
Trust at community hospital sites 
and health centres across the 
Greater Norwich area and include:  
•Inpatient specialist rehabilitation 
services;  
•Clinic services for outpatients ; 
•Community nursing in patients’ 
homes.  
 The NHS Long Term Plan and the STP Operating 
Plan will identify and address building capacity, 
infrastructure investment requirements, various 
facilities and all other constraints faced by the 
STP/ICS.  
 
In line wit h the shift to care in the community, the 
community health trust is expected to shift 
services to wrap around primary care networks. 
The Community Trust estate strategy will be 
refreshed throughout 2021, in line with STP/ICS 
plans.  125 
  
 
Police  
Awaiting find ings of the infrastructure work Norfolk Constabulary have commissioned NPS to 
produce.  
 
Libraries  
The Greater Norwich housing growth locations show an impact to the north east of the Norwich 
city boundary centred around Rackheath with an estimate of some  13,000+ dwellings. This has 
previously been identified as an area that will require additional library facilities due to the scale 
and size of the development. Therefore, based on an anticipated growth of 13,000 dwellings and 
an increased population of c2 6,000 people this would equate to 780 square metres of library 
space. We would anticipate, however, that this is over provision bearing in mind the location of 
other facilities in the locality and we suggest this is reduced to 390 square metres with an 
anticipated building cost of c £1millon.  
 
Sports and Leisure  
Awaiting findings of the Greater Norwich Sports Facilities Strategy, which is currently being 
reviewed.  
 
Waste Management  
Norfolk County Council has approved a capital programme for recycling centre improvements, 
including:  
• Replacing the current Mile Cross Recycling Centre and relocating the site at Ketteringham 
to South Norwich;  
• Replacing the Wymondham recycling centre and expanding the site at Morningthorpe;  
• Extending the Strumpsha w Recycling Centre.   
 
The capacity of new and extended sites will be designed to accommodate forecast growth. 
Funding for recycling centre improvements has been allocated by the County Council for the 
replacement sites for Mile Cross, Ketteringham and Wym ondham and the extension of 
Strumpshaw and Morningthorpe.  If required, contributions may be sought to deal with the 
cumulative impact of a series of both small and large developments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 126 
  
 
  127 
 Appendix 2 Glossary  
 
Accessible  
In the case of community facilities and services (such as healthcare), easy to travel to or use. With 
reference to buildings or public transport, easy to enter and use by all.  
Active travel  
Making journeys by physically active means, like walking or cycling. Active trave l is promoted by 
Public Health England  and by the National Planning Policy Framework  through its focus on design 
which promotes health and well -being (paragraph 12 7 e)).  
Affordable housing  
Housing provided for sale or rent at prices below the current market rate, which people in housing 
need can afford.  Affordable housing tenures are defined in Government guidance, as set out in 
Annex 2 of the National Planning Po licy Framework.  
Air Quality Management Area (AQMA)  
A place where the National Air Quality Objectives are not being met.  Once an AQMA has been 
declared the authority has to carry out further work to monitor the air quality in the area and 
identify what act ions can be taken to improve it.  
Allocated  
Land which has been identified for a specific use in the current development plan.  
Appropriate Assessment  
Analysis of the impact of plans and strategies on areas of designated European environmental 
importance suc h as Special Protection Areas, Special Areas of Conservation and Ramsar sites.  
Area Action Plan (AAP)  
A development plan document within the local plan that establishes a set of development 
proposals and policies for a specific area. In Greater Norwich the re are current adopted area 
actions plans for the North East Growth Triangle, Long Stratton, and Wymondham.  
Biodiversity  
The variety of different types of plant and animal life in a region.  
Biodiversity net gain  
Refers to development having a positive impa ct on biodiversity, leaving it in a better state than 
before development occurred.  
Brownfield land, brownfield site  
Land or site that has been subject to previous development.  
Brownfield Register  
Brownfield land registers provide up -to-date information a bout sites that local authorities consider 
to be appropriate for residential development having regard to the relevant legislation.  
Building for a Healthy Life 
A government -endorsed industry standard for well -designed homes and neighbourhoods. Local 
commun ities, local authorities and developers are encouraged to use it to guide discussions about 
creating good places to live. The National Planning Policy Framework encourages its use in local 
plans.  128 
 Built environment  
The man -made surroundings that provide the setting for human activity, ranging in scale from 
personal shelter to neighbourhoods to large -scale civic surroundings.  
Business use  
Land use class covering light industry, offices, research and development.  
Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor  
A public-private partnership spanning Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire set up to deliver high -
value economic and societal growth in clusters between Cambridge and Norwich within the 
technology/science sector.  
City centre  
The main commercial area of Norwich that is predominantly within the Inner Ring Road (A147). 
The exact boundary is shown on map 9 of the local plan.  
Clean Growth  
Clean growth means growing our income while cutting greenhouse gas emissions. It is promoted 
nationally by the Government’s Clean  Growth Strategy and locally in the emerging Local Industrial 
Strategy.  
Climate Change Mitigation  
Actions taken to limit the magnitude or rate of global warming and its associated effects, usually 
involving a reduction in human emissions of greenhouse gas es. 
Commitments  
Development proposals which already have planning permission or are allocated in adopted 
development plans.  
Community facilities  
Services that meet the day -to-day needs of a community such as village halls, post offices, 
doctors’ and dentis ts’ surgeries, play areas, recycling facilities, libraries and places of worship.  
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  
A financial charge on new development introduced by the Planning Act 2008 as a tool for local 
authorities to help deliver infrastructure t o support growth and development in their area.   
Conservation area  
Area of special historic and/or architectural interest which is designated by the local planning 
authority as being important to conserve and enhance. Special planning controls apply withi n 
these areas.  
Core Bus Routes  
A network of main bus routes where service frequency and bus priority will be enhanced.  
County Wildlife Site (CWS)  
Wildlife habitat identified and designated as being of local interest or importance by Norfolk County 
Council and the Norfolk Wildlife Trust, but which is not of enough national merit to be declared as 
a Site of Special Scientific Interest. A CWS does not benefit from statutory protection but does 
have some protection in the plan ning system.  
Custom -build housing ( see also self -build housing)  
A form of self -build home that is, in some form, supported by a developer through a more hands -
off approach than traditional self -build would entail.  129 
 Decentralised and renewable or low -carbon energy sources  
Sources of energy that are renewable or low -carbon (or a combination of these) and locally based 
(on-site or near -site, but not remote off -site), usually on a relatively small scale. Decentralised 
energy is a broad term used to denote a diverse range of technologies,  including micro -
renewables, which can locally serve an individual building, development or wider community and 
includes heating and cooling energy.  
Development  
Defined in planning law as ‘the carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other operatio ns in, 
on, over, or under land, or the making of a material change of use of any building or land’.  
Development Plan  
A set of plans guiding future development in the area. The development plan consists of the locally 
prepared development plan documents, including Neighbourhood Plans approved at referendum.  
Development Plan Document  
Locally prepared document on a specifi c topic which forms part of the development plan and 
which subject to independent examination before adoption, also commonly referred to as DPDs.  
District centre  
A group of shops separate from the town centre containing at least one supermarket or supersto re 
as well as other services.  District centres provide for a catchment extending beyond the 
immediate locality.  
Economic Strategy for Norfolk and Suffolk (ESNS)  
A shared strategy between businesses, education providers, local councils and voluntary and 
community sector, which is led by New Anglia LEP outlining future growth across the region.  
Employment use  
Use primarily for industrial, warehousing, office or other business uses falling within classes B1, 
B2 and B8 of the use classes order.  
Five-year housi ng land supply  
A requirement by Government for local planning authorities to ensure that there is enough land 
available that is suitable, available and deliverable for housing development.  The amount of land 
available should be enough to fulfil the housin g requirement for the next five years.  
Food Enterprise Park  
46 acres of commercial development land with planning available for food related businesses near 
Easton and Honingham. A Local Development Order (LDO) is in place for part of the site.  
Geodiversit y 
The variety of different types of geology, landforms, soils and physical processes in a region.  
Greater Norwich City Deal  
An agreement between Government and Greater Norwich, which provides the city and 
surrounding areas certain powers and freedoms to ta ke responsibility for decisions that affect 
Greater Norwich. It is implemented by the Greater Norwich Growth Board (GNGB).  
Greater Norwich Growth Board (GNGB)  
A partnership between Broadland District Council, Norwich City Council, South Norfolk Council, 
Norfolk County Council and New Anglia Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) to provide homes, jobs 
and infrastructure. It also provides strategic direction, monitoring and co -ordination of the Greater 
Norwich City Deal.  130 
 Greater Norwich Local Plan Infrastructure  Report (GNLPIR)  
A supporting document to the GNLP focusing on transport, utilities, education, health care, fire and 
rescue, community facilities, sport and leisure facilities, green infrastructure and waste 
management.  
Green infrastructure  
A network of m ulti-functional green space which delivers benefits to both the environment and the 
local community.  Green infrastructure includes natural green spaces colonised by plants and 
animals and man -made managed green spaces such as areas used for outdoor sport and 
recreation including public and private open space.  These spaces may include allotments, urban 
parks and designed historic landscapes as well as their many interconnections such as footpaths, 
cycleways, green corridors and waterways.  
Greenfield land (or site)  
Land which has not previously been built on, including land in use for agriculture or forestry. 
Greenfield land does not include residential garden land.  
Growth Triangle  
An area to the north -east of Norwich identified for major gr owth.  
Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA)  
An HRA identifies any aspect of the emerging Local Plan that would have the potential to cause a 
likely significant effect on Natura 2000 sites or sites protected by European designations (Special 
Areas of Conse rvation, Special Protection Areas, Ramsar sites) either in isolation or cumulatively, 
and to identify appropriate avoidance and mitigation strategies where impacts are identified.  
Health Impact Assessment  
An assessment required for large sites and for any housing proposal with a significant amount of 
housing for the elderly to show how the health care infrastructure needs of the new development 
are provided for.  
Heritage Asset  
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape with historic interest that  provides a material 
record of history or meaning for a community.  Heritage assets may be either ‘designated’ or ‘non -
designated’ and have a degree of significance that merits consideration in planning decisions.  
Historic environment  
Aspects of the enviro nment which result from the interactions between people and places through 
time.   
Inclusive Growth  
Economic growth that is distributed fairly across society and creates opportunities for all.  
Index of Multiple Deprivation  
A ward -level index made up from s ix indicators (income; employment; health deprivation and 
disability; education; skills and training; housing; and geographical access to services)  
Infill development  
Small -scale development filling a gap within an otherwise built up area.  
Infrastructure  
The network of services to which it is usual for most buildings or activities to be connected. 
Infrastructure includes physical services serving the development (e.g. gas, electricity and water 
supply; telephones, sewerage) and includes networks of roads, p ublic transport routes, footpaths 
etc as well as community facilities and green infrastructure.  131 
 Joint Core Strategy (JCS)  
A key planning policy document for the Greater Norwich Area produced in partnership between 
Broadland, Norwich and South Norfolk that sets out the long -term vision for the area up until 2026. 
The JCS has a considerable impact on the Greater Norwich Local Plan (GNLP) which in turn 
determines growth up until 2038 and will supersede the JCS when adopted.  
Key Service Centres   
Key service cen tres are the third tier in the settlement hierarchy. The Key service centres are Acle, 
Blofield, Brundall, Hethersett, Hingh am, Loddon/Chedgrave, Poringland/Framingham Earl, 
Reepham and Wroxham. They have a good range of services, t ypically: a primary school; a 
secondary school either in or accessible from the settlement; a range of shops and services 
(including convenience shopping but more limited than in main towns); a village hall; primary 
health care and a library.  
Knowledge economy  
The pr oduction, distribution, and use of knowledge as the main driver of growth, wealth creation, 
and employment across all industries. It does not rely solely on a few advanced technology 
industries but is applicable to traditional industries, such as manufactu ring and agriculture.  
Knowledge -intensive jobs  
A knowledge -intensive job is one where the workers need a lot of education, skills and experience 
to work effectively. In Greater Norwich these mainly include jobs in: research in the food, health 
and life sciences sectors; agri -tech; advanced manufacturin g and engineering; IT and 
communications and digital creative industries.  
Local Nature Reserve (LNR)  
Area of botanical or wildlife interest where access and use by local people is encouraged through 
designation by the local authority.  
Local centre  
A group  of shops or services forming a centre of purely local significance. See city centre and 
district centre.  
Local housing need  
An assessment of the need for housing at a local level over a period of time using the standard 
methodology set out by the Governme nt.  
Local Transport Plan  
A five -year integrated transport strategy, prepared by local authorities in partnership with the 
community, seeking funding to help provide local transport projects. The plan  sets out the 
resources predicted for delivery of the ta rgets identified in the strategy.  
London -Stansted -Cambridge Corridor and the Cambridge -Milton Keynes -Oxford Arc 
(CaMkOx)  
These are two different growth corridors of vital economic importance to the UK that host a highly 
skilled labour force, cutting edge r esearch facilities and technology clusters that can compete on a 
global scale which are supported by two world -class universities.  
Low carbon  
Minimisation of carbon dioxide emissions from a human activity.  132 
 Main Towns  
Main towns are the second tier in the s ettlement hierarchy. The main towns are Aylsham, Diss 
(with part of Roydon), Harleston, Long Stratton and Wymondham. They are engines of rural 
growth, providing employment and services for wider hinterlands.  
Major development  
For housing, development wher e 10 or more dwellings are to be provided or the site has an area 
of 0.5 hectares or more.  For non -residential development, it means additional floorspace of 
1,000m 2 or more or a site of 1 hectare or more.  
Major Road Network  
A classification of major loc al authority roads in England to help reduce congestion, support 
economic growth and rebalancing, support housing delivery, support all road users and support 
the Strategic Road Network (SRN). In Greater Norwich these are the A140 (including the A1270) 
and the A146.   
Market Housing  
Housing that is for sale on the open market without restrictions on pricing or tenure.  
Market Town Network Improvement Strategies  
A Norfolk County Council initiative to implement studies into the transport impacts of growth in 
market towns that help to identify and plan interventions ahead of any planned growth.  
Masterplan  
A long -term planning document that provides a conceptual framework to guide future growth and 
development, usually on large sites.  
Modal shift  
An increase in t he proportion of people travelling by different forms of transport. It is usually used 
in relation to measures to encourage public transport use and cycling and walking.  
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)  
A document which sets out the Government’s economic, environmental and social planning 
policies for England and how they should be applied. It provides a baseline structure from which 
locally  prepared plans (such as the GNLP) can be produced and it is a material consideration in 
planni ng decisions.  
National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG)  
A web -based resource which brings together planning guidance on various topics into one easily 
accessible place.  The guidance supports the NPPF but is not Government policy.   
Natural Capital  
The e lements of nature that directly or indirectly produce value to people, including ecosystems, 
species, fresh water, land, minerals, the air and oceans, as well as natural processes and 
functions. Natural capital includes many different components of the liv ing and non -living natural 
environment, as well as the processes and functions that link these components and sustain life. 
Natural capital is often referred to in terms of Natural Assets.  
Natural Asset  
A distinctive component of natural capital as determined by the functions it performs, e.g. soils, 
fresh water and species. Assets are not mutually exclusive and there is overlap between 
categories (for example, soils include species, minerals, and water).  133 
 Neighbourhood Plan  
A plan prepared by a paris h/town council or neighbourhood forum for a designated neighbourhood 
area.  Once made by the local planning authority it becomes part of the development plan for the 
area.  
New Anglia Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP)  
An organisation of private and public -sector representatives working with businesses, local 
authority partners and education institutions to drive growth and enterprise in Norfolk and Suffolk.  
Non-strategic policies  
Policies contained in a Neighbourhood Plan, or those policies in a local plan  that are identified as 
non-strategic policies.  
Norfolk and Suffolk Local Industrial Strategy  
An emerging strategy building upon the Economic Strategy for Norfolk and Suffolk which will 
consider in greater detail the competitive strengths of the regions a nd focus on the clean energy, 
agri-food and ICT/ digital sectors.  
Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework (NSPF)  
A policy document which brings together Norfolk’s Local Planning Authorities to create a 
framework that all local authorities formally use to meet  shared objectives on a range of strategic 
cross -boundary planning issues.  
Northern Distributor Road (NDR)  
A dual -carriageway road (also known as the A1270 Broadland Northway) completed in 2019 to the 
north of Norwich, linking the A47 to the south -east of  the city with the A1067 in the north -west.  
Norwich Area Transportation Strategy (NATS)  
Statement of strategic transportation policy for Norwich and surrounding area, most recently 
adopted in 2004.  
Norwich fringe  
The a rea next to the city of Norwich but ly ing in Broadland and South Norfolk districts which is 
predominantly developed, including open spaces encompassed within the developed area. The 
Norwich fringe is the built -up parts of the fringe parishes of Colney, Costessey, Cringleford, 
Drayton, Easton, Hellesdon, Old Catton, Sprowston, Taverham, Thorpe St. Andrew, Trowse and 
the remainder of the Growth Triangle including Rackheath.  
Norwich Research Park  
A major research park that is a leading centre for science and technology as well as food and 
health.  
Norwich urban area  
The City of Norwich and the Norwich fringe (see above). This is the first tier in the settlement 
hierarchy. It has both high level and a broad range of employment and services providing for 
Greater Norwich.  
Open Space  
Areas of land that usually come forward as part of a development site which remain undeveloped 
but can generally be used for either formal or informal recreation purposes.  
Park and Ride  
Parking areas at the edge of the built -up area and linked by frequent  bus (or other public transport) 
services to the city centre.  134 
 Planning conditions  
A condition imposed on a planning permission which can either require additional details to be 
agreed or restrict the use of the site.  
Planning obligations  
Legal agreements between a planning authority and a developer, or undertakings offered 
unilaterally by a developer to ensure that specific works are carried out, payments made, or other 
actions undertaken which would otherwise be outside the scope of the plan ning permissio n. Often 
called Section 106 obligations. The term legal agreements may embrace S106.  
Post -carbon Economy  
An economy in which greenhouse gas emissions are low and falling. In Greater Norwich the focus 
will be on three low carbon, high growth economic sector s: clean energy, agri -food and ICT/digital.   
Previously developed land  
See Brownfield land.  
Primary Shopping Area  
A defined area in which retail development is concentrated . 
Protected species  
Any species which, because of its rarity or threatened status, is protected by statutory legislation 
(The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and the Conservation (Natural Habitats etc) 
Regulations 1994).  
Ramsar site  
A European designation that protects areas of wetland.  
Recreational Impact Avoidance and Mi tigation Strategy (RAMS)  
A strategy facilitating residential development, whilst at the same time adequately protecting 
wildlife sites from harm that comes with growth in rural areas from increased recreation pressure.  
Renewable energy  
Energy generated fro m sources which are non -finite or can be replenished. Includes solar power, 
wind energy, power generated from waste, biomass , hydrogen  etc. 
Scheduled Ancient Monument  
Ancient structure, usually unoccupied, above or below the ground, which is preserved by o rder of 
the Secretary of State. Works affecting an ancient monument must be approved by the Secretary 
of State.  
Section 106 Agreement (S106)  
See planning obligations  
Self-build housing and custom -build housing  
Housing built by an individual, a group of individuals, or persons working with or for them, to be 
occupied by that individual. Such housing can be either market or affordable housing.  
Semi -islanded (energy supply)  
A semi -islanded development site is connected to the wider electricity network but uses on -site 
generation or storage to reduce the site’s reliance on imported electricity and reduce peak 
demands.  
Settlement Hierarchy  
A way of arranging settlements into a hierarchy based upon several criteria, such as population 
and services offered.  135 
 Settlement limit, settlement boundary  
These are areas within which development appropriate to the settlement in question will usually be 
permitted. Sometimes called village envelopes or development boundaries.  They are set out in 
Development Management plans.   
Site Allocation DPD  
A document used to identify sites to accommodate the range of land uses necessary to implement 
the objectives of the local plan. Broadland adopted a site allocations document in 2016, Norwich in 
2014, and South Norfolk in 2015. The GNLP will carry forward deliverable undeveloped allocations 
from these plans.  
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
Site or area designated as being of national importance because of its wildlife, plants or flower 
species and/or unusual or typical geological features. SSSIs  are identified by Natural England and 
have protected status under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.  
Social Sustainability  
The ability of a community to not only meet the needs of its current members but also support the 
ability of future generations to maintain a healthy and liveable community, including supporting 
local services and providing affordable homes (as highlighted in the Taylor Review “ Living Working 
Countryside, 2008 ”). 
Spatial profile  
A section in the local plan that provides context about the local area from social, economic and 
environmental perspectives. It describes the area, how it functions and highlights the key issues to 
be add ressed.  
Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  
Special Areas of Conservation are defined in the European Union’s Habitats Directive 
(92/43/EEC), also known as the Directive on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild 
Fauna and Flora. They are defined t o protect the 220 habitats and approximately 1,000 species 
listed in Annex I and II of the Directive which are of European interest following criteria given in the 
Directive.  
Special Protection Areas (SPAs)  
Special Protection Areas are strictly protected s ites classified in accordance with Article 4 of the 
EC Birds Directive, which was amended in 2009 (Directive 2009/147/EC). They are classified for 
rare and vulnerable birds (as listed on Annex I of the Directive), and for regularly occurring 
migratory spec ies. 
Strategic policies  
Policies and site allocations which address strategic priorities in line with Section 19 of the 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.  
Strategic urban extensions / strategic housing growth locations  
These locations will each pr ovide over 1,000 new homes from 2018 to 2038  
Suitable Alternative Natural Green Space (SANGS)  
A name given to green space that is of a quality and type suitable to be used as mitigation in 
relation to the protection of important natural spaces when residen tial development or growth is 
proposed.  136 
 Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)  
Guidance published by the local planning authorities to provide further detailed information on how 
local plan policies are to be applied or interpreted. SPDs may be prepared jointly, particularly 
where a consistent policy approach is required over an area covered by more than one local 
planning authority. SPDs may be concerned with an issue or may provide more detailed guidance 
of the development of a specific site, c overing a whole range of issues. This is frequently referred 
to as a development brief.  
Sustainability Appraisal (SA)  
An appraisal of the economic, environmental and social effects of a plan from the outset of the 
preparation process to allow decisions to be made that accord with sustainable development.  
Sustainable development  
A term mostly derived from the 1987 Brundtland Report. Interpretation varies but typically the term 
means meeting economic and social goals without undermining the environment, as we ll as 
meeting needs of the present without compromising the environment for future generations. In 
2015 the United Nations agreed 17 Sustainable Development Goals to be reached by 2030. The 
UK is amongst the countries leading the delivery of the Sustainabl e Development Goals.  
Sustainable drainage system (SuDS)  
Efficient drainage system which seeks to minimise wastage of water, including the use of 
appropriate groundcover to enable maximum penetration of clean water run -off into the ground 
and, where appropr iate, recycling grey water within the development. Designed to minimise the 
impact of development on the natural water environment.  
Transforming Cities  
A term used to denote the aim of Government policy to improve productivity and spread prosperity 
through  investment in public and sustainable transport.  
Transport for Norwich  
A programme of work to improve accessibility by all forms of transport around Norwich and the 
surrounding area. It aims to encourage the use of more sustainable modes of transport, whil e also 
improving the capacity of the road network and stabilise traffic levels. Transport for Norwich was 
formerly known as the Norwich Area Transport Strategy.  
Travel to work public transport  
Typically, this will be a regular bus service operating betwee n 07:00 and 19:00 with a thirty -minute 
frequency of service and a journey time of not more than 30 -40 minutes to Norwich or another 
recognised employment location.  
Uplift  
Increased density of housing, most commonly on a previously allocated site.  
Village c luster  
This is the fourth level in the settlement hierarchy. Clusters consist of a  group of villages that share 
services and facilities, for example a primary school.  
Water stress  
Water stress occurs when the demand for water exceeds the available amount o f water, or when 
poor water quality restricts its use. Greater Norwich and the wider region are defined by the 
Environment Agency as a water stressed area.  137 
 Western Link  
The proposed development of a road to connect the Broadland Northway or Northern Distributor 
Road (NDR) from the A1067 to the A47 west of Norwich.  
Windfall site  
Site on which planning permission for housing development is granted during the plan  period, but 
which has not previously been identified in a plan for housing develop ment.  
 
 
 
 138 
 Appendix 3 Monitoring Framework  
 
An essential part of the local plan is monitoring its implementation through the collection of relevant information. The most  valuable data source for 
how well the local plan is being implemented comes from planning application decisions. Other pertinent data about whether the local plan’s over -
arching vision and objectives are being achieved comes from data collected by central Government and other public sector agen cies. 
 
Indica tor 
Code  Theme  Indicator  
 
GNLP Communities objective – To grow vibrant, healthy communities giving people a high quality of life in well -designed developments with 
good access to jobs, services and facilities, helping to close the gap between life chances  in disadvantaged and other communities.  
GNLP1  Population and 
communities  To improve the district authority ranking of the least deprived communities in England, taken from the 
seven domains of the English Indices of Multiple Deprivation.  
 
GNLP2  Education  
 To improve the district authority ranking for access to education, skills and training, taken from the English 
Indices of Multiple Deprivation.  
 
GNLP3  Education  To minimise the number of planning approvals granted contrary to the advice of Norf olk County Council 
Education department, based upon the proximity to or capacity of local school provision.  
 
GNLP4  Health  To improve the district authority raking for Improving health and wellbeing by measuring the risk of 
premature death and the impairment of quality of life through poor physical or mental health, taken from 
the English Indices of Multiple Deprivation.  
 
GNLP5  Health  
 To minimise the number of planning approvals granted contrary to the advice of NHS organisations or 
Public Health Norfolk, based upon the capacity of healthcare provision or incompatibility with public health 
objectives.  
 
GNLP6  Health  To improve the percentage of physically active adults, taken from Public Health England data.  
 
GNLP7  Crime  
 To improve the district a uthority ranking for reducing the risk of crime, both risk of personal and material 
victimisation, taken from the English Indices of Multiple Deprivation.  
 
GNLP Economy objective – To support and promote clean growth and progress towards a post -carbon eco nomy through the expansion of 
internationally important knowledge -based industries in the Cambridge Norwich Tech Corridor as part of an entrepreneurial, enterprising, 
creative and broad -based economy with high productivity and a skilled workforce.  
 
GNLP8  Jobs  
 To increase the annual count of jobs, taken from the Business Register and Employment Survey (BRES) 
across the local plan area.  
 
GNLP9  Employment  
 To increase the employment rate of the economically active population, taken from the official l abour 
market statistics, Nomis).  
 
GNLP10  Earnings  
 To increase median earnings:  
a) hourly  
b) weekly  
c) annual pay for full -time employees, taken from the Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE) 
by the Office of National Statistics.  
 
GNLP11  Skills  To increase the percentage of workforce employed in higher occupations (official labour market statistics, 
Nomis).  
 
GNLP12  City centre retailing 
floorspace  
 To monitor the net change in retail floorspace in Norwich City Centre.  
 
GNLP13  Business floorspace  
 To increase total business floorspace (sqm) in:  
a) Norwich  
b) Broadland  
c) South Norfolk, taken from Valuation Office Agency (VOA) data.  
 
GNLP14  New employment sites  
 To monitor office (B1), industrial (B2), and storage / distribution (B8) floorspace  implemented on allocated 
sites.  
 
GNLP15  New employment sites  
 To monitor office (B1), industrial (B2), and storage / distribution (B8) floorspace implemented on non -
allocated sites.  
 
GNLP Environment objective – To protect and enhance the built, natural and historic environments, make best use of natural resources, and 
to significantly reduce emissions to ensure that Greater Norwich is adapted to climate change and plays a full part in  meeting national 
commitments to achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.   
 
GNLP16  Climate change  
 To minimise carbon dioxide equivalent emissions per capita to contribute to meeting the national target to 
bring all greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050, taken from the Department for Business, Energy 
and Industrial Strategy data. The GNLP will support achievement of any objectives or targets identified in 
adopted local strategies.  
 
GNLP17  Air quality  
 To minimise nitrogen dioxide and ai rborne particulates measured at:  
a) Castle Meadow  
b) Lakenfields (proxy close to city centre)  
 
GNLP18  Biodiversity  
 
 To increase the percentage of SSSIs in ‘favourable condition’ or ‘unfavourable recovering condition’, by 
district area, taken from Natural England data.  
 
GNLP19  Biodiversity  
 
 To increase the percentage of local conservation sites in “positive conservation management”, taken from 
Norfolk Wildlife Trust.  
 139 
 Indica tor 
Code  Theme  Indicator  
 
GNLP20  Biodiversity  
 To minimise the number of planning approvals granted contr ary to the advice of Natural England or Norfolk 
Wildlife Trust (on behalf of the County Wildlife Partnership) or the Broads Authority on the basis of adverse 
impact on a site of acknowledged biodiversity importance.  
 
GNLP21  Green infrastructure  
 To increase the percentage of allocated residential sites, or sites permitted for development of 10 or more 
homes, that have access to a semi -natural green space of at least 2 ha within 400m.  
 
GNLP22  Green infrastructure  
 To increase the total hectares of accessible public open space (cumulative) provided as a consequence of 
a planning condition, section 106 obligation or CIL investment within the plan  period.  
 
GNLP23  Green infrastructure  
 To increase the length of new gre enway (defined as a shared use, car -free off -road route for a range of 
users and journey purposes) provided as a consequence of a planning condition, section 106 obligation or 
CIL investment.  
 
GNLP24  Landscape  
 To minimise the number of planning approvals  granted contrary to the advice of the Broads Authority 
based on adverse impact on the Broads landscape.  
 
GNLP25  Condition of heritage assets  
 To reduce the number (and percentage) of buildings at risk:  
a) listed buildings  
b) scheduled ancient monuments on the Buildings at Risk Register, taken from Historic England data.  
 
GNLP26  Renewable energy  
 To increase sustainable and renewable energy capacity permitted by type (where not ancillary to other 
types of development).  
 
GNLP27  Renewable energy  
 To achieve 100% against the renewable energy policy:   
a) for housing to achieve a 19% reduction against Part L of the 2013 Building Regulations;  
b) for appropriate non -residential uses over 500 sqm in floorspace to achieve the BREEAM “Very 
Good” energy efficiency standard or its equivalent successor.  
 
GNLP28  Use of previously 
developed land  
 To maximise the percentage of new and converted dwellings on previously developed land  
 
GNLP29  Use of greenfield land  
 To minimise the number of planning permissio ns granted on non -allocated sites on class 1, 2 or 3a 
agricultural land.  
 
GNLP30  Flood risk  
 To minimise the number of planning permissions granted contrary to the advice of the Environment Agency 
on either flood defence or water quality grounds.  
 
GNLP31  Water  
 To achieve 100% against the water efficiency policy for new homes of 110 litres per person per day.  
 
GNLP Homes objective – To enable delivery of high -quality homes of the right density, size, mix and tenure to meet people’s needs 
throughout  their lives and to make efficient use of land.  
 
GNLP32  Housing  
 The total number of new dwellings (all tenures) completed.  
 
GNLP33  Housing  
 The total number of new affordable tenure dwellings completed.  
 
GNLP34  Housing  
 To monitor dwelling completions by size (bedroom number) and to aim to be within a 10% tolerance of the 
most recent sub -regional housing market assessment.  
 
 
GNLP35  Gypsy and Traveller sites  
 To monitor the number of Gypsy and Traveller pitches granted planning permission ag ainst the 
requirements of the accommodation needs assessment.  
 
GNLP36  Affordable housing  
 To monitor the percentage of sites of 10 or more homes that achieve 33% affordable housing.  
 
GNLP37  Adaptable housing  
 Percentage of sites of 10 or more homes where 20% are accessible and adaptable, as defined by Building 
Regulation M4(2).  
 
GNLP38  Housing space standards  
 For 100% of new dwellings to meet the Government’s Nationally Described Space Standards (NDSS).  
 
GNLP39  Custom build   
 Percentages of sites  of 40 dwellings or more (excluding flats) where 5% of plots are provided for custom 
build.  
 
GNLP Infrastructure objective – To promote the timely delivery of infrastructure to support existing communities, growth and modal shift in 
transport use; and to improve connectivity to allow access to economic and social opportunities.  
 
GNLP40  
 Highways  
 To minimise the number of planning approvals granted contrary to the advice of Norfolk County Council 
Highways department, based upon access or surrounding road network constraints.  
 
GNLP41  Transport and access to 
services  
 To improve the district authority ranking for reducing the barriers to housing and services, taken from the 
English Indices of Multiple Deprivation.  
 
GNLP42  Sustainable trans port 
 To monitor the percentage of major planning permissions with a planning obligation towards the provision 
of new footways, cycleways or public transport provision (excluding CIL).  
 
GNLP Delivery objective – To promote the delivery of housing, jobs and infrastructure to meet identified needs, supported by intervention 
mechanisms where the market is unable to deliver.   
GNLP43  Growth delivery and 5 -year 
land supply of housing  
 To moni tor the number of site allocations provided with pre -application advice.  
 
GNLP44  Growth delivery and 5 -year 
land supply of housing  
 To monitor the number of site allocations with outline consent given.  
 140 
 Indica tor 
Code  Theme  Indicator  
 
GNLP45  Growth delivery and 5 -year 
land supply of ho using  
 To monitor the number of site allocations with full/reserved matters consents given.  
 
GNLP46  Growth delivery and 5 -year 
land supply of housing  
 To monitor the number of site allocations where development has commenced (with percentage of homes 
and/or floorspace completed).  
 
GNLP47  Growth delivery and 5 -year 
land supply of housing  
 To monitor the non -allocated sites with outline consent given.  
 
GNLP48  Growth delivery and 5 -year 
land supply of housing  
 To monitor the non -allocated sites with ful l/reserved matters consents given.  
 
GNLP49  Growth delivery and 5 -year 
land supply of housing  
 To monitor the non -allocated sites where development has commenced (with percentage of homes and/or 
floorspace completed).  
 
 
 
 
  141 
 Appendix 4: Plans to be superseded and plans to be carried forward  
 
Plans to be superseded by the Greater Norwich Local Plan:  
• The Joint Core Strategy for Broadland, Norwich and South Norfolk (2011 and subsequently readopted 2014)  
• Broadland Site Allocations Development Plan Docume nt (2016)  
• Norwich Site Allocations and Site -Specific Policies Local Plan Document (2014)  
• South Norfolk Local Plan Site Specific Allocations and Policies Document (2015)  
 
Plans to be carried forward and used in conjunction with the Greater Norwich Local Plan:  
• Old Catton, Sprowston, Rackheath & Thorpe St Andrew Growth Triangle Area Action Plan (2016)  
• Long Stratton Area Action Plan (2016)  
• Wymondham Area Action Plan (2015)  
• Broadland Development Management Policies Document (2015)  
• Norwich Development Ma nagement Policies Document (2015)  
• South Norfolk Development Management Policies Document (2015)  
 
GNLP a llocations that amend parts of Area Action Plans (AAPs) : 
 
GNLP Reference  
in Sites 
Document  Site name  Explanation  
GNLP0172  Land to the west of Green Lan e West 
Rackheath  This housing site was not allocated w ithin the Growth Triangle 
AAP.  
GNLP0351  Land at Heathwood Gospel Hall, 
Rackheath  A small part of a Strategic employment site in the Growth 
Triangle AAP is allocated for housing development through the 
GNLP.  
GNLP0132  Land off Blue Board Lane/Salhouse 
Road, White House Farm, Sprowston  This strategic scale site was not previously allocated through 
the Growth Triangle AAP.  
GNLP0354R  Land at Johnsons Farm , Wymondham  Additional housing sites in Wymondham which were not 
allocated in the AAP.  GNLP3013  Land north of Tuttles Lane , 
Wymondham  
 
Neighbourhood plans to be used in conjunction with the Greater Norwich Local Plan:  
 
Parish  Authority  Date Made  End Date  
Acle BDC  February 2015  2026  
Aylsham  BDC  July 2019  2038  
Blofield  BDC  July 2016  2036  
Brundall  BDC  May 2016  2026  
Drayton  BDC  July 2016  2026  
Gt & Lt Plumstead  BDC  July 2015  2034  
Hellesdon  BDC  December 2017  2026  
Horsford  BDC  July 2018  2038  
Old Catton  BDC  July 2016  2035  
Rackheath  BDC  July 2017  2037  
Salhouse  BDC  July 2017  2026  
Sprowston  BDC  May 2014  2026  
Strumpshaw  BDC  July 2014  2026  
Wroxham  BDC  March 2019  2039  
Cringleford  SNC  January 2014  2026  
Easton  SNC  December 2017  2042  
Mulbarton  SNC  February 2016  2030  
 
 
In addition, there are 7 qualifying bodies in Broadland which have designated their neighbourhood area and 11 in South Norfolk. This means they 
have committed to developing a neighbourhood plan. There is also one neighbourhood area designated within Norwich. Of the pla ces preparing 
neighbourhood plans , two in Broadland have been approved by the local authority to proceed to a referendum. These are in Spixworth and 
Taverham  scheduled for May 2021. However, these plans do currently have significant weight in the plan ning process. At least two further 
Neighbourhood Plans are well -advanced, those in Long Stratton and Poringland. Subject to their being approved following an examination and 
referendum, it is anticipated these could be made by mid -2021.  
 
  142 
 Appendix 5 Village Clusters in Broadland  
 
In addition to the existing commitment of 1,143 homes in the village clusters in Broadland, new site allocations are made in the GNLP 
Sites Plan for the following number of homes in village clusters in Broadland through this plan. Please note that some par ishes cluster 
with settlements higher in the settlement hierarchy e.g. Blickling, Burgh & Tuttington and Oulton cluster with Aylsham as it provides the 
local primary school. The table only shows the housing numbers for the village clusters, with housing nu mbers for the higher order 
settlements set out in policies 7.1 to 7.3 of the plan .  
 
Total 
Dwellings  Village Cluster  
0 Aylsham, Blickling, Burgh 
& Tuttington and Oulton  
Main Town  Aylsham  
0 Blickling  
0 Burgh & Tuttington  
0 Oulton  
20 Blofield Heath and 
Hemblington  
20 Blofield Heath  
0 Hemblington  
0 Brundall and Postwick 
with Witton  
Key 
Service 
Centre  Brundall  
0 Postwick with Witton  
40 Buxton with Lamas and 
Brampton  
40 Buxton with Lamas  
0 Brampton  
0 Cantley  
40 Cawston with Brandiston 
and Swannington  
40 Cawston  
0 Brandiston  
0 Swannington  
20 Coltishall with Horstead 
Belaugh  
20 Coltishall  
0 Horstead  
0 Belaugh  
15 Foulsham and 
Themelthorpe  
15 Foulsham  
0 Themelthorpe  
40 Freethorpe, Halvergate 
and Wickhampton  40 Freethorpe and 
Wickhampton  
0 Halvergate  
0 Frettenham  
0 Great and Little Plumstead  
20 Great Witchingham, 
Lenwade, Weston 
Longville, Alderford, 
Attlebridge, Little 
Witchingham and Morton 
on the hill  
20 Great Witchingham and 
Lenwade  
0 Weston Longville  
0 Alderford  
0 Attlebridge  
0 Little Witchingham  
0 Morton on the hill  
0 Hainford and Stratton 
Strawless  
0 Hainford  
0 Stratton Strawless  
0 Hevingham  
0 Honingham (clustered 
with Easton in South 
Norfolk)  
Norwich 
Urban 
Area  Easton   
0 Honingham  
45 Horsford, Felthorpe and 
Haveringland  
45 Horsford  
0 Felthorpe  
0 Haveringland  
50 Horsham and Newton St 
Faiths  
60 Lingwood & Burlingham, 
Strumpshaw and Beighton  60 Lingwood & Burlingham  
0 Strumpshaw  
0 Beighton  
35 Marsham  
60 Reedham  
0 Reepham, Booton, 
Guestwick, Heydon, Salle 
and Wood Dalling  
Key 
Service 
Centre  Reepham  
0 Botton  
0 Guestwick  
0 Heydon  
0 Salle  
0 Wood Dalling  
12 Salhouse, Woodbastwick 
and Ranworth  
12 Salhouse  
0 Woodbastwick  
0 Ranworth  
25 South Walsham and 
Upton with Fishley  
25 South Walsham  
0 Upton with Fishley  
0 Spixworth and Crostwick  
0 Spixworth  
0 Crostwick  
0 Taverham and Ringland  
Norwich 
Urban 
Area  Taverham  
0 Ringland  
 
482 Total dwellings  
 143 
 Appendix 6 Housing delivery trajector y 
 
The purpose of the trajectory  
As required by NPPF paragraph 73, the housing delivery trajectory below sets out 
the  potential rate of housing delivery in Greater Norwich during the plan  period from 
2018 to 2038. Using the number of homes shown in table 6 of this plan, the total 
housing  figure of 49,492 includes a 22% buffer on the local housing need figure. It is 
important to note that the figure of 49,492 is potential housing delivery  during the 
plan period, not the housing need . As stated in table 6, the need is 40,541 . The 
latter wil l be used to calculate 5 -year housing land supply.  
Overall housing delivery 2018 to 2038  
Reflecting table 6 of this plan, the components of the housing trajectory for the 
49,492 homes are:  
• housing completions during the first two years of the plan , 2018/9  and 
2019/20   (5,240  homes ); 
• the existing commitment of development sites as at April 2020 (31,452) ; 
• new allocat ions resulting from  this plan  (10,704);  
• delivery of small -scale sites of 3 or 5 homes enabled by Policy 7.5 of the 
GNLP (800);  
• the expected supply of homes by windfall sites  (1,296).  
Annual delivery figures  
To establish the annual delivery of housing in the vertical bars of the trajectory grap h 
below:  
• The most up to date evidence, the current five -year land supply figures, are 
used for delivery from 2020/2021 to 2024/2025;  
• Beyond 2024/5, the undelivered commitment of 18,735 homes is spread 
evenly across the plan  period at the rate of 1,441 dwe llings per annum. Using 
an average delivery rate for the medium to longer -term of the plan  period 
acknowledges the uncertainties about precise completion rates over the next 
6 to 18 years;  
• The next element of the housing trajectory anticipates when new all ocations 
made by the GNLP are likely to be completed. Assuming adoption of the 
GNLP in 2022, a suitably cautious approach is to expect the first sites to begin 
building out in 2023/2024. The trajectory then incrementally accelerates the 
delivery of homes a s sites come on stream until reaching an average rate of 
792 homes per annum over the remainder of the plan  period;    
• The remaining smaller components of the housing trajectory are homes 
delivered through Policy 7.5 and the windfall allowance. In both inst ances the 
delivery of anticipated homes is averaged across the plan  period. The 
difference between these two sources of supply is the likely start dates for 
delivery . 
 
 144 
  
Annual target s 
The horizontal lines on the graph show:  
1.   The whole plan average tar get per annum of 2,027.  This does not take 
account of housing delivery in the first two years of the plan  period, which was 
significantly above target.  
2.   The residual annual target  of 1,961 per annum . This is the target for the 
remaining 18 years of the plan  period, taking account of delivery between 2018 
and 2020. This is the target which will be used to calculate 5 -year land supply.  
Trajectory Findings  
The housing trajectory is considered a robust projection, especially in the short -term, 
for the submission of the plan . As time moves on and new evidence emerges, it will 
be possible to update average delivery rates with more precise projections through 
the examination of the plan . Updates will be informed by the plan ’s monitoring 
framewor k, the annual five -year land supply and further engagement with 
development industry representatives.  
Feedback from site promoters to date has shown that the majority are confident that 
their sites can start early and would therefore deliver more quickly t han shown in the 
trajectory. However, given the uncertainty over the medium and longer term , an 
average is a better illustration of the potential to deliver.  
The trajectory illustrates that potential delivery exceeds local housing need in every 
year.  
 145 
 Housing Trajectory  
 
Summary Table  Total 
Allocated 
Homes  18/19  19/20  20/21  21/22  22/23  23/24  24/25  25/26  26/27  27/28  28/29  29/30  30/31  31/32  32/33  33/34  34/35  35/36  36/37  37/38  Total 
Delivery  Homes 
Post 
2038  
Delivery 2018/2019 and 
2019/20  5,240  2,936  2,304                                      5,240  0 
Existing commitment  31,452      1,987  2,609  3,349  2,621  2,161  1,442  1,442  1,441  1,440  1,440  1,440  1,440  1,440  1,440  1,440  1,440  1,440  1,440  31,452  0 
New allocations  10,704            200 400 600 792 792 792 792 792 792 792 792 792 792 792 792 10,704  0 
Policy 7.5 delivery  800           54 54 54 54 54 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 800 0 
Windfall allowance  1,296                100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 99 99 99 99 1,296  0 
                      49,492   
 
 
 
 05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,000
18/19 19/20 20/21 21/22 22/23 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 27/28 28/29 29/30 30/31 31/32 32/33 33/34 34/35 35/36 36/37 37/38Homes
YearHousing Trajectory 
Delivery 2018/2019 and 2019/20 Existing commitment New allocations Policy 7.5 delivery Windfall allowanceResidual target per annum 1,961 homesWhole Plan average target per annum 2,027146 
 Appendix 7  Implementation of policy 7.5   
 
This appendix relates to policy 7.5. It lists the parishes in Greater Norwich as either 
smaller parishes (with fewer than 140 dwellings base d on council tax records in 
2020), or larger parishes.  Under policy 7.5, the maximum number of additional 
dwellings from small scale additional windfall from the adoption of the plan  will be 
three in the smaller parishes and five in larger parishes  as def ined below .    
 
Three dwellings maximum  Five dwellings maximum  
Broadland parishes:  
 
Alderford, Attlebridge, Beeston, 
Belaugh, Blickling, Booton, Brampton, 
Brandiston, Burgh & Tuttington, 
Crostwick, Guestwick, Haveringland, 
Heydon, Little Witchingham,  
Morton on the Hill, Oulton, Reepham 
Whitwell, Ringland, Salle, 
Swannington,  
Themelthorp e and Wood Dalling.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Broadland parishes:  
 
Acle, Aylsham, Beighton, Blofield, 
Brundall, Buxton with Lamas, Cantley, 
Cawston, Coltishall, Drayton, Felthorpe, 
Foulsham, Freethorpe, Frettenham, Great 
& Little Plumstead, Great Witchingham, 
Hainford,  
Halver gate, Hellesdon, Hemblington, 
Hevingham, Honingham, Horsford, 
Horsham & Newton St Faith, Horstead 
with Stanninghall, Lingwood & 
Burlingham,  
Marsham, Old Catton, Postwick with 
Witton,  
Rackheath, Reedham, Reepham,   
Reepham Hackford, Salhouse, South 
Walsha m, Spixworth, Sprowston, Stratton 
Strawless, Strumpshaw, Taverham, 
Thorpe St Andrew, Upton with Fishley, 
Weston Longville, Woodbastwick and 
Wroxham  
South Norfolk parishes:  
 
Ashby St Mary, Bedingham,  
Burgh St Peter, Carleton St Peter,  
Claxton, Colney, East Carleton,  
Flordon, Framingham Pigot,  
Gissing, Great Melton, Heckingham,  
Hedenham, Hellington, Heywood,   
Holverston, Howe, Ketteringham  
Kimberley & Carleton Forehoe, Kirby 
Bedon, Kirstead, Morni ngthorpe & 
Fritton,  
Mundham, Norton Subcourse,   
Raveningham, Shelton & Hardwick,  
Sisland, Stockton, Thwaite, Topcroft,   
Wheatacre, Wramplingham and   
Yelverton.  South Norfolk parishes:  
 
Alburgh, Aldeby, Alpington,   
Ashwellthorpe & Fundenhall, Aslacton ,  
Barford, Barnham Broom, Bawburgh,  
Bergh Apton, Bracon Ash & Hethel,   
Bramerton,   
Brandon Parva Coston Runhall & 
Welborne,  
Bressingham & Fersfield, Brockdish,  
Brooke, Broome, Bunwell, Burston & 
Shimpling, Caistor & Bixley, Carleton 
Rode,  
Chedgrave,  Costessey, Cringleford, 
Denton,  
Deopham & Hackford, Dickleburgh & 
Rushall,  
Diss, Ditchingham, Earsham, Easton, 
Ellingham, Forncett, Framingham Earl,   147 
 Geldeston, Gillingham, Great Moulton,   
Haddiscoe, Hales, Hempnall, Hethersett,   
Hingham, Keswick & I ntwood, Kirby 
Cane,  
Langley with Hardley, Little Melton, 
Loddon,  
Long Stratton, Marlingford & Colton,  
Morley, Mulbarton, Needham,  
Newton Flotman, Poringland, Pulham 
Market, Pulham St Mary,   
Redenhall with Harleston, Rockland St 
Mary,  
Roydon, Saxlingham Nethergate, Scole,   
Seething, Shelfanger, Shotesham, 
Spooner Row, Starston, Stoke Holy 
Cross, Surlingham,   
Swainsthorpe, Swardeston, Tacolneston,   
Tasburgh, Tharston & Hapton, Thurlton,   
Thurton, Tibenham, Tivetshalls, Toft 
Monks,  
Trowse with Newton, Wacton, 
Wicklewood,  
Winfarthing, Woodton, Wortwell,    
Wreningham and Wymondham.  
 
 
  148 
 Additional Appendi x for submission version of the plan  in summer 2021  
Appendix 8 Amendments to Policies M aps 