1
Contents
Introduction 2
Bromsgrove District: An Overview 3
Why do we need to review the District Plan? 4
How will the Review affect the current District Plan policies?  4
National Planning Policy Framework 4
Strategic Planning and the Duty to Cooperate 5
The Plan Review Process 5
Evidence Base 7
 Draft Green Belt Purposes Assessment Methodology 7
 Draft Site Selection Methodology 7
Scoping and Sustainability Appraisal  9
About this consultation and how to respond 9
Next steps 10
Vision and Objectives of the District Plan 11
Vision 12
Objectives 12
Issues and Options 14
Strategic Issues for Bromsgrove District 16
Housing 26Employment 34Transport 41
Town Centre and Local Centres 48
Social Infrastructure 53
Natural and Historic Environments  58
Climate Change and Water Resources 63
Glossary 66Introduction
2
In 2016 Bromsgrove
was home to about
96,800
peopleThe District covers
217km290%
of the District isdesignated GreenBelt31. Introduction
Bromsgrove District:
An Overview
1.1 Bromsgrove District is situated in north Worcestershire 
and covers approximately 21,714 hectares. Although the 
town is located only 22km (14 miles) from the centre of 
Birmingham, the District is predominantly rural with approximately 90% of the land designated as Green Belt.
Figure 1: Bromsgrove District in context1.2 The area is well served by motorways, with the M5 running north/south (J4, J4a and J5) and the M42 east/west 
(J1, J2 and J3). The M5 and M42 connect with the M6 to the 
north of Birmingham and M40 to the east. The District also benefits from train and bus connections into Birmingham 
City Centre and the wider region, and Bromsgrove Town 
is only 34km (21 miles) from Birmingham International Airport.
1.3 The main centre of population in Bromsgrove District 
is Bromsgrove Town with other larger centres being Alvechurch, Barnt Green, Catshill, Hagley, Rubery, and 
Wythall. A series of smaller rural villages and hamlets are 
spread throughout the District.  
4
Why do we need to review the
District Plan?
1.4 The current        Bromsgrove District Plan (BDP) (2011-
2030), was adopted in January 2017 and contained a policy 
which required a plan review to be undertaken by 2023 
(Policy BDP3) as the BDP did not allocate enough housing land in locations not covered by Green Belt designation. The 
Plan Review is needed to ensure at the very least that the full 
housing requirement for Bromsgrove District up to 2030 can be delivered and that safeguarded land for the longer term can be identified. Furthermore, Bromsgrove District Council 
has a duty to consider whether there are any realistic options 
to assist the West Midlands conurbation in meeting its current housing shortfall. As Green Belt boundaries should 
only be altered as part of plan preparation or review, and 
only in exceptional circumstances, the Council is taking this opportunity to review the District Plan in its entirety and to 
extend its longevity. We’ll address all of these issues 
throughout this document.
How will the Plan Review affect 
the current District Plan policies?
1.5 When adopted, the reviewed District Plan will replace 
the current BDP . It is possible that some of the existing BDP 
policies will be carried forward in much the same way as they 
exist now, but we will check their appropriateness as we progress through the Plan Review process. As the reviewed 
Plan is expected to go beyond the 2030 time period of the 
current BDP , we will need to plan for additional housing and other supporting infrastructure and facilities at an appropriate level for the new Plan period, which means 
that some existing policies will become out of date.
National Planning Policy 
Framework
1.6 The Revised        National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF) was published in July 2018. It sets out the 
Government’s planning policies for England and how they 
should be applied. It provides a framework which sets out how development plans should be produced and what mustbe taken into account during plan preparation. Specifically, the District Plan Review will need to:
 Reflect the policies set out in the NPPF and associated  
        planning practice guidance;
 Contribute towards achieving        sustainable 
 development and be supported by appropriate 
       Sustainability Appraisal (SA) and        Habitat 
 Regulations Assessment;
 Meet the development and infrastructure requirements  
 of the District;
 Pay due regard to other Bromsgrove District Council
 strategies and those of its partners;
 Consider the unmet development needs of 
 neighbouring authorities and demonstrate that the  
 Duty to Cooperate has been met;
 Take account of evidence relating to environmental  
 constraints on development and the need to conserve  
 the built and natural heritage;
 Be deliverable within the Plan period taking account  
 of identified constraints, infrastructure requirements  
 and viability considerations.
1.7 Many of the changes in the Revised NPPF reflect the proposals contained in the        Housing White Paper 
Consultation and the 2017 autumn budget. The future operation of the        Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) 
is also under review. The Plan Review will address this 
matter at a later date when there is clear guidance. The following is a brief summary of the significant changes 
that the Plan Review will need to take account of:
 A clear distinction is drawn between strategic policies,  
 (which can be prepared by individual authorities as part  
 of their Local Plans or jointly with other combined  
 authorities with plan making powers) and more local  
 policies which can be prepared in either Local or 
 Neighbourhood Development Plans;
 Strategic policies should be informed by a new standard  
 local housing need assessment methodology and as  
 a minimum should allocate sufficient sites to meet 
 these needs; G
GG
GG
G G
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G5 Planning authorities will need to prepare and maintain  
 a       Statement of Common Ground (SOCG) as 
 evidence of the       Duty to Cooperate; to meet the         
        tests of soundness, thus strengthening the 
 emphasis of effective joint working;
 Indicative housing need figures should be provided for  
 designated neighbourhood areas;
 An increased emphasis on economic productivity and  
 the inclusion of local policies for economic development  
 and regeneration.
Strategic Planning and the Duty 
to Cooperate
1.8 The District Plan Review must be prepared in accordance 
with the Duty to Cooperate, which sets a legal duty for the 
Council and other public bodies to engage constructively, 
actively and on an ongoing basis on planning issues which affect more than one local planning authority area. Following 
the publication of the Revised NPPF this will now need to be 
evidenced through a Statement of Common Ground. To meet the Duty to Cooperate, the Council will need to work with Worcestershire County Council, neighbouring local 
authorities, statutory advisory bodies (Environment Agency, 
Natural England, Historic England and Highways England) and other infrastructure providers to ensure that the District 
Plan addresses cross-boundary issues and reflects wider 
strategic priorities, including consideration of any needs that cannot be met in adjoining areas. The Council will also 
consult with parish councils, residents and businesses, and 
those within the District who have chosen to prepare a neighbourhood plan.
The Plan Review Process
1.9 The Council’s timetable for the District Plan Review has been developed in accordance with the requirements for plan 
production set out in       The Town and Country Planning 
(Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012).         Adoption of the new District Plan is hoped to take place 
in 2021; however any additional work that arises which 
needs to be carried out to inform the preparation of the Plan may mean that this timeframe will alter. The Plan Review process is set out in Figure 2 on page 6. 
We have indicated where in the process you can get involved 
and following each consultation period, the comments we receive will inform the next draft of the Plan as it progresses.
1.10 Evidence gathering and production of the 
       Sustainability Appraisal (SA) Scoping Report has 
informed the Issues and Options in this document and you can access and comment on the Scoping Report as part of this consultation process. 
1.11 Issues and Options consultation is an early opportunity
to check that we are thinking about the right issues to 
address through the Plan Review. It doesn’t present new 
planning policies or allocate sites for development; that will 
come at later stages. Therefore, to accompany the Issues and Options consultation and to inform the Plan Review process, 
we have also produced two draft Methodology documents 
on the Green Belt Purposes Assessment and Site Selection. These documents set out how we intend to carry out the 
work required to inform the Plan Review as it progresses 
towards Preferred Options and beyond. Details of these methodologies can be found in the ‘Evidence Base’ section 
of this document. We also welcome comments on these 
Methodology documents as part of this consultation process, to see whether you agree with the approach we want to adopt to carry out the additional work. Details of how to 
make comments can be found overleaf under the heading 
‘About this consultation and how to respond’ .G
G
GG
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G
G6
Figure 2: The Plan Review Process
Consult on draft SA Scoping Report with  
appropriate consultation bodies
Preparation of Issues and Options document
Issues and Options Consultatio nStage of Plan Preparation
Call for Site s
Preferred Options Consultatio n
Preparation of Pre-Submission BD PPreparation of Preferred Options BDP
Pre-Submission Representations
Commencement of Examination of BDP
Receipt of Inspector’s Repor t
Adoption of BDPSubmission of BDP to Planning InspectoratePUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT
OPPORTUNITY7Evidence Base
1.12  The preparation of a local plan needs to be 
underpinned by an evidence base, comprising robust and 
up-to-date information and studies, which inform the 
planning policies as they are being drafted. For example: Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, Transport Modelling, 
Housing Needs Assessment, Employment Needs Assessment, 
Ecological studies, are likely to be required, to name but a few. The SA Scoping Report provides the very first level of evidence gathering, which has helped in the preparation of 
this Issues and Options document. The evidence base will 
continue to grow and inform us throughout the preparation of the Plan.
1.13 A key part of the evidence base will centre on how we 
justify taking land out of the Green Belt for development 
purposes. Our evidence base will need to include 
assessments of the Green Belt in Bromsgrove District and analysis of which parts of the Green Belt may be more 
appropriate to meet development needs. Therefore, as 
part of this consultation, we have produced two draft methodologies on which you can comment, to make sure we are approaching this work in an appropriate manner. 
The two draft methodologies we are consulting on are:
 Draft Green Belt Purposes Assessment Methodology
 Draft Site Selection Methodology
Details on where you can find these draft methodology 
documents and how to comment on them is detailed below.
1.14 In order to set the need for this work in context, 
national policy is clear that Green Belt boundaries should 
only be altered in exceptional circumstances through the preparation or review of the Local Plan (NPPF paragraph 83). 
The BDP 2011-2030 requirements for housing and 
employment mean that the Green Belt as identified in the current BDP has to be reviewed. The BDP requirements alone are considered to constitute the exceptional circumstance 
for the Green Belt to be reviewed. Because Bromsgrove town 
and the large settlements are tightly bounded by the Green Belt, there is nowhere else for future development to go. Policy BDP4 commits the Council to a full review of the Green Belt and this approach was found to be sound at the examination into the BDP .  The release of land from the 
Green Belt is therefore necessary to meet the requirements 
of the current BDP period, before consideration has even been given to the needs of this Plan Review which will look even further ahead.  
Draft Green Belt Purposes 
Assessment Methodology
1.15 In line with the adopted BDP , and as part of this 
Plan Review, the Council has committed to undertake a 
full review of the District’s Green Belt. There is no national 
guidance on exactly how a Green Belt Assessment or Review should be undertaken. Green Belt Review and Assessment 
Methodologies from other Local Planning Authorities have 
been considered when devising our methodology for the Green Belt Purposes Assessment for Bromsgrove District.
1.16 This draft methodology is the first step in this process, 
setting out how the Council thinks the review should be undertaken and the purpose of this consultation is to seek 
views on the proposed approach, refine the methodology 
and gain endorsement of the process as this is a hugely important piece of work. The Green Belt Purposes 
Assessment work will not be undertaken until we have 
considered all consultation responses and refined the methodology if/where appropriate. The finalised 
methodology will be published accordingly and the Green
Belt Purposes Assessment will then be undertaken. This willprovide us with important evidence to support our approachto the Preferred Options stage of the Plan Review.
1.17 You can find the full version of the draft Green Belt 
Purposes Assessment Methodology on our website at: 
www.bromsgrove.gov.uk/districtplan 
which contains the questions on which we would like your views. 8
Draft Site Selection Methodology
1.18  In order to identify land for development, the Council 
will need to consider a large variety of sites for potential 
allocation. It will be necessary to rigorously scrutinise these 
sites to ensure the most suitable, sustainable and deliverable sites are taken forward through the Plan Review process. 
As it is a given that land will need to be released from the 
Green Belt, the review of the existing Green Belt against the five purposes will form one element of the assessment of land for allocation. Other assessments will include:
 Flood risk
 Historic or Environmental designations
 Sustainability - distance to local facilities and public  
 transport links
 Highways - ability to access existing highway network/ 
 serve new growth
 Deliverability - whether there is a reasonable prospect  
 the site could come forward for development in the  
 desired timeframe, considering availability and 
 achievability
1.19 The Scoping Report identifies the following key 
sustainability issues which relate to the consideration of 
future site allocations:
 The need to identify additional previously developed  
 land that could be redeveloped and to encourage 
 development on        previously developed 
 (brownfield) land (PDL);
 The need to protect the best and most versatile 
 agricultural land in the District;
 The need to locate new development away from areas of
 flood risk, taking into account the effects of climate  
 change;
 The need to protect and enhance the Green Belt and the  
 openness of the Green Belt.1.20 The Site Selection work will have a close relationship 
with the Green Belt Purposes Assessment, as approximately 90% of the District is Green Belt, meaning it will be highly 
likely that the majority of sites needed to meet future 
development needs will fall within the current Green Belt. When finalised, the two resulting documents will form key components of the evidence base for the Plan Review.
1.21 This draft methodology is the first step in this process, 
setting out how the Council thinks the site selection process 
should be undertaken. The purpose of this consultation is 
to seek views on the proposed approach, refine the methodology and gain endorsement of the process as 
this is a hugely important piece of work. The Site Selection 
process will not be undertaken straight away after the methodology is finalised as this work needs to be informed 
by the Green Belt Purposes Assessment. It will also be 
informed by potential development sites submitted to us through a ‘Call for Sites’ exercise. We will update our website when we get to an appropriate point in time to issue the ‘Call 
for Sites’ request. At this moment in time, our focus needs to 
be on refining the methodology rather than on the merits of individual sites, so please do not submit site information as 
part of this consultation period.
1.22 It is anticipated that the Council will receive a high 
volume of sites for consideration, some of which may not 
represent sustainable locations or be consistent with the spatial strategy for the District, which will emerge as the 
Plan Review progresses. Therefore an agreed methodology 
will aid the consistent and objective assessment of these sites in a timely manner as we approach the Preferred Options stage of the Plan Review.
1.23 You can find the full version of the draft Site Selection 
Methodology on our website at: 
www.bromsgrove.gov.uk/districtplan 
and we welcome your comments on any aspect of the document.
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G9Scoping and Sustainability 
Appraisal 
1.24 Sustainability Appraisal (SA) is a key element in 
developing the Plan Review strategy and policies; and 
Scoping is the first stage of the SA process. The Council is 
legally required to carry out an appraisal of the sustainability of all proposals in order to help assess how the Plan 
Review will contribute to the achievement of sustainable 
development, by contributing to relevant economic, social and environmental objectives. SA is carried out at each stage of the Plan Review process.
The Council has prepared a SA Scoping Report which includes 
a SA Framework for the Plan Review. In addition, we have 
undertaken some initial SA of the Options in this document. 
The results of this analysis are set out in the Bromsgrove District Plan Review Issues and Options Sustainability 
Appraisal, which has been published for consultation 
alongside this document. 
About this consultation and how to respond
1.25 We have produced a Statement of Community 
Involvement (SCI), which sets out the ways in which the 
community can be effectively involved in the planning 
system. By involving the community, the Council will gain a greater understanding of the needs of the community and 
we can develop documents which better suit the needs of the 
people of Bromsgrove District. This consultation conforms to the standards set out in the SCI, which you can find on our website at: http://www.bromsgrove.gov.uk/sci
1.26 Issues and Options is the first consultation opportunity 
for you to get involved in the District Plan Review, and we are 
asking for your comments on whether the Issues and Options 
we have identified across Bromsgrove District are appropriate and whether there is anything we may have overlooked that 
you think we might need to consider. 1.27 We have produced the following documents for the Issues and Options consultation, which are open to 
comment:
 Bromsgrove District Plan Review Issues and Options  
 (this document)
 Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Report
 Bromsgrove District Plan Review Issues and Options  
 Sustainability Appraisal 
 Draft Green Belt Purposes Assessment Methodology
 Draft Site Selection Methodology
You can comment on any aspect of this Issues and Options 
document or any of the accompanying documents that have been produced for this stage of the Plan Review process. 
We have also produced the following background document 
to provide you with more information for the Issues and Options consultation:
 Revised NPPF - Policy Review Table
In all cases, please make it very clear which part(s) of this 
document (or accompanying documents) you are commenting on.
1.28 The Issues and Options consultation period will run for 
a ten week period starting on 24th September 2018. The deadline for responses is 19th November 2018.  
You can respond in the following ways:
Online form: www.bromsgrove.gov.uk/districtplan
Email:  strategicplanning@bromsgroveandredditch.gov.uk 
Post:  Strategic Planning, Bromsgrove District Council, 
  Parkside, Market Street, Bromsgrove, 
  Worcestershire, B61 8DA
Please note that by responding to this consultation period, 
we will automatically notify you of future District Plan Review consultation periods as detailed in Figure 2 on 
page 6.10
The Issues and Options consultation documents can be 
viewed at the following locations during normal opening 
hours:
 Bromsgrove District Council (Customer Service Centre),  
 Parkside, Market St, Bromsgrove B61 8DA 
 Alvechurch Library, Birmingham Road, Alvechurch,   
 Birmingham, B48 7TA
 Bromsgrove Library, Parkside, Market St, 
 Bromsgrove B61 8DA 
 Barnt Green Parish Council, 80 Hewell Road, 
 Barnt Green B45 8NF
 Catshill Community Library, The Community Room,  
 Catshill Middle School, Meadow Road, Catshill,   
 Bromsgrove B61 0JW
 Hagley Library, Worcester Road, Hagley, Stourbridge,  
 West Midlands, DY9 0NW
 Rubery Library, 7 Library Way, Rubery, 
 Birmingham B45 9JS
 Wythall Library, May Lane, Hollywood, 
 Birmingham B47 5PD 
Next steps
1.29 All representations received in response to this 
consultation will be considered by the Council and published 
on the website for information at: 
www.bromsgrove.gov.uk/districtplan  Further information and regular updates about the District 
Plan Review will also be provided here.
1.30 The timetable for the District Plan Review is set out in 
the Council’s        Local Development Scheme (LDS) which 
can be viewed on the Councils website. It’s unlikely we will be able to keep to the current timetable, 
therefore the LDS needs to be updated and re-published, explaining any alterations. However, we have decided 
to wait until after the close of this consultation so we 
can gauge the extent of the responses we receive. This is especially critical in relation to responses relating to the 
evidence base methodologies. Until the methodologies have 
been refined and endorsed, we can’t undertake the actual assessment work, therefore it’s difficult to update the LDS timeframe at this point in time.
1.31 If you have any queries regarding any aspect of this 
consultation, please contact a member of the Strategic 
Planning Team on: (01527), 587010, 881663, 881328, 
881603 or 881325 
or email 
strategicplanning@bromsgroveandredditch.gov.uk 
G
GRefer to Glossary on page 6611
Vision andObjectives of theDistrict Plan
122. Vision and Objectives
of the District Plan
Vision
2.1 The Vision for Bromsgrove District which will underpin 
the Plan Review needs to contribute towards the delivery 
of the Council’s Strategic Purposes. Delivering a Bromsgrove 
District that we all want is something that the Plan cannot achieve alone, but it will provide a significant tool to guide 
the way towards building a District where people want to live 
and work and are proud of the level of services on offer. 
2.2 The Council’s Strategic Purposes are:
 Help me to find somewhere to live in my locality
 Help me to run a successful business
 Keep my place safe and looking good
 Provide good things for me to see, do and visit
 Help me to be financially independent 
 Help me to live my life independently2.3 The District Plan will play a leading role in delivering 
some of the Strategic Purposes, whilst offering a supporting and guiding role for others. Taking the Strategic Purposes into 
account, the following Vision for the Bromsgrove District Plan 
Review has been derived:
By the end of the Plan period Bromsgrove District and 
its communities will have become more sustainable, 
prosperous, safe, healthy and vibrant. People from all sections of society will have been provided with 
better access to homes, jobs and services. 
The attractiveness of the District in terms of its natural environment, built form and settlements 
will continue to be preserved and enhanced.
Strategic Objectives
2.4 A set of Strategic Objectives has been defined that aims 
to deliver the Plan’s Vision, as detailed above. They build 
upon national policy and address key local challenges. 
The Strategic Objectives provide the basis for developing the spatial strategy and policies for the District, which are 
necessary to secure the delivery of the Vision.
132.5 The proposed Strategic Objectives, which are not in any 
specific order of preference, are outlined below:
SO1 Encourage the continued regeneration of Bromsgrove 
Town Centre to create a thriving, accessible and vibrant 
centre providing facilities to meet the needs of Bromsgrove 
District’s residents
SO2 Focus new development in sustainable locations in the 
District 
SO3 Support the vitality and viability of local centres and 
villages across the District
SO4 Provide a range of housing types and tenures to meet 
the needs of the local population, including the special needs 
of the elderly and the provision of affordable housing
SO5 Provide support, encouragement and connectivity for 
economic growth of existing and new businesses, whilst also supporting farming and rural diversification and investing in lifelong education and learning skills
SO6 Encourage more sustainable modes of travel and a 
modal shift in transport, for example, encouraging walking 
and cycling and promoting a more integrated, sustainable 
and reliable public transport network across the District
SO7 Improve quality of life, sense of well-being, reduce 
fear of crime, promote community safety and enable active, healthy lifestyles, for example, by providing safe and 
accessible services and facilities to meet the needs of 
Bromsgrove District’s residents
SO8 Protect and enhance the unique character, quality 
and appearance of the historic and natural environment, 
biodiversity and Green Infrastructure throughout the District
SO9 Safeguard and enhance the District’s natural resources 
such as soil, water and air quality; minimise waste and increase recycling including re-use of land, buildings and 
building materialsSO10 Ensure the District is equipped to mitigate and 
adapt to the impacts of climate change, for example, by 
managing and reducing flood risk, by ensuring water and 
energy efficiency and by encouraging new developments to be low or zero carbon
SO11 Promote high quality design of new developments 
and use of sustainable building materials and techniques
SO12 Foster local community pride, cohesion and
involvement in the plan making process
?
Q. VO 1:  Do you think the Vision 
adequately captures what we want to 
achieve for Bromsgrove District and the 
kind of place we want it to be by the end of the Plan period? 
If not, what do you think we’ve missed?
Q. VO 2:  Do you think the Strategic 
Objectives are appropriate to deliver the Plan’s Vision? 
If not, what changes do you think we 
need to make?Issues andOptions
14
153. Issues and Options
3.1 The SA Scoping Report identified some Issues within 
the District that are particularly pertinent for the Council to 
address. The following Sections contain a series of topics, 
under which we have set out the Issues we think the Plan Review needs to address and where possible, the Options we 
think need to be considered at this stage of Plan preparation.
The topics are:
  Strategic Issues for Bromsgrove District
  Housing
  Employment
  Transport 
  Town Centre
  Social Infrastructure
  Natural and Historic Environments
  Climate Change and Water Resources?
Q. IO 1:  Do you think we have 
identified all appropriate topics? 
If not, what have we missed?
Strategic Issuesfor BromsgroveDistrict
16
17
4. Strategic Issues for
Bromsgrove District
4.1 This section identifies those strategic issues that will be 
at the heart of the BDP Review.  
4.2 The Revised NPPF requires a sharper focus on strategic 
planning policies within Local Plans. Paragraph 21 states that 
Local Plans should make explicit which policies are strategic 
policies and these should be limited to those necessary to address the strategic priorities of the area (and any relevant cross boundary issues) to produce a clear starting point for 
any local policies that may be needed. 
4.3 The Council considers the relevant strategic issues to be 
as follows:
 Strategic Issue 1: Scale and timeframe of the new Plan.
 Strategic Issue 2: Growing the economy and provision  
 of strategic infrastructure.
 Strategic Issue 3: Re-balancing the housing market  
 through housing growth.
 Strategic Issue 4: Broad options for development 
 distribution and allocating land uses.
 Strategic Issue 5: Co-operating with the West Midlands  
 Conurbation to address wider development needs. Strategic Issue 1:  
Scale and timeframe 
of the new Plan
What should the scale of the 
Plan be?
4.4 The Revised NPPF introduces flexibility to the way areas 
can plan for their development needs. Plans can be produced 
at different spatial scales. The minimum requirement is for 
strategic policies to be in place, which can either be prepared by individual Local Planning Authorities or jointly by a mayor 
or combined authorities with plan making powers. Local 
policies which set out more detailed policies for specific areas, neighbourhoods or types of development can be set out in a Local Plan or        Neighbourhood Plan. 
4.5 The current Bromsgrove District Plan has been prepared 
by the Council as a Local Plan to meet the District’s own 
development needs. Cross boundary co-operation took 
place with Redditch Borough Council to allocate some land within Bromsgrove District on Redditch’s boundary to meet 
Redditch’s housing needs. For the purposes of this Plan 
Review consultation, it is important that the spatial scale of its coverage is established at an early stage. The Council 
is keen to hear views on whether the Plan should be 
prepared jointly with other authorities, or take the form of a District-only Plan. Prior to receiving these views, we have prepared this initial consultation paper under the 
assumption that the Plan will be taken forward as a 
District-only Plan. Bromsgrove District Council is not a member of the        West Midlands Combined Authority 
(WMCA) and the WMCA/Mayor does not have planning 
powers so the option of allowing the strategic policies to be set at that level is not open to the Council.
?
Q. SI 1:  Are there other strategic 
issues we need the Plan Review to 
address? 
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G
G184.6 The Revised NPPF makes it clear that Neighbourhood 
Plans can be used to set out more detailed local policies such 
as design standards and that they should allocate sites to 
meet local housing needs. It advises that Councils should set out housing requirements for Designated Neighbourhood 
Areas as part of their strategic policies. The Government is 
keen to provide the opportunity for neighbourhoods to shape new development in the area to help meet housing, employment and community needs.4.7 Bromsgrove District has six Designated Neighbourhood Areas which are progressing Neighbourhood Plans. 
These areas are: Alvechurch, Barnt Green, Belbroughton 
and Fairfield, Catshill and North Marlbrook, Hagley, Lickey & Blackwell and Cofton Hackett. The six Designated 
Neighbourhood Areas plus any further areas designated 
could play an important role in the District’s future development strategy.
A456
A38
A38A491
A38
A448A441
A441A435
A435A448Hagley
Clen t
Belbr oughtonRomsle y
Ruber y
Dodf ordBournheath
BromsgroveAlvechurchBarnt GreenCofton Hackett
Hopw oodHollyw ood
Wythal l
BeoleyRowney GreenBlackw ell
Finstal l
Tardebigg e
Stoke Works
Lowe r BentleyUpper BentleyCharf ordSidemoor
Stoke Heat hBurcotCatshillMarlbrookBell HeathHoly Cros sHunningto n
Frankl ey
Headley Heat hMajo r’s Green
Forhill
Holt End
Woodgat eM42M5
M5
© Crown copyright and database rights 2018
Ordnance Survey 100023519Figure 1: Designated Neighbourhood Plan Areas in Bromsgrove District19
?
Q. SI 2:  Do you think the Plan should 
cover the Bromsgrove District only and 
continue to take the form of a District 
Plan (like the current one) or are there wider geographical areas that the Plan 
should also take account of? 
Q. SI 3:  What role do you think 
Neighbourhood Planning and 
communities could play in delivering new development within the District? How long should we be 
planning for?
4.8 The District Plan will set out a long term vision for 
Bromsgrove District looking at least 15 years ahead. 
National policy advises that we need to plan for a minimum 
of 15 years from adoption of the Plan. We’re hoping to adopt the new District Plan in 2021, which would mean a plan 
timescale until at least 2036. However, it may be more 
sustainable for the Plan period to be longer to ensure long term commitment to deliver key infrastructure projects to support growth. In other words, a plan which seeks to deliver 
strategic infrastructure such as new roads and schools which  
will require longer lead-in times, would need to cover a longer time frame to help achieve this. 
1) 2018 - 2036 
2) 2018 - 2041 
3) 2018 - 2046 
?
Q. SI 4:  What timescale do you think 
the Plan period should cover and why? 
20?
Q. SI 5:  Do you think the Council 
should plan for significant employment
growth above previous levels within 
the District or do you think Bromsgrove’s residents should continue the trend of 
out commuting to access jobs? 
Q. SI 6:  Are there infrastructure 
improvements that will specifically 
help to encourage employment growth within the District?4.12 Providing the right sites to enable business growth in 
the District, whether by attracting new inward investment 
from businesses located outside the District or allowing 
existing Bromsgrove District businesses to expand, will be crucial to rebalancing the local economy in the District. 
Inevitably this is likely to involve some difficult decisions 
around the suitability and availability of land to accommodate employment development in the District, particularly in the context of existing Green Belt coverage.
4.13 The M42 is an economic advantage which could be 
better used to attract high value industrial firms. Within 
Bromsgrove District, M42 J2 (Hopwood) and J3 (A435) are 
reasonably unconstrained and undeveloped. Land at these junctions could offer a distinct competitive advantage where 
there is a regional shortage of similar accessible sites. 
Two high level questions have been posed below; further more detailed questions can be found in Sections 6 
(Employment) and 7 (Transport) of this document.Strategic Issue 2:  
Growing the economy 
and the provision 
of strategic 
infrastructure 
4.9 Bromsgrove District is a successful economy, but not 
for everyone. Growth has been lagging behind others and 
future growth potential is limited due to employment land 
availability. Wage growth at Bromsgrove District firms has been very low over the last ten years. Higher residents’ wages 
are a product of out-commuting to higher wage economies. 
Those residents who are unable or unwilling to commute receive lower wages and also continue to be exposed to high housing costs within the District. 
4.10 Whilst Bromsgrove District is unlikely to compete
with Birmingham for large offices and very highly paid 
employment, existing employment stock is well used and 
there is evidence of investment and renewal on most of the employment sites. There is very little vacant property for 
firms to expand into, or move to from outside of the District. 
4.11 Bromsgrove District is currently a net out-commuter 
of jobs. This presents challenges for the District, in particular 
concerning issues such as traffic congestion at peak times (‘rush hour’) through a high demand for travel between Bromsgrove District and surrounding destinations,
particularly to the West Midlands conurbation to the north. 
More detail on transport infrastructure is provided in Section 7 of this document.     21
Strategic Issue 3:  
Re-balancing the 
housing market 
through housing 
growth
4.14 At the national level, the Government is seeking to 
significantly increase new house building and is giving high 
priority to increasing housing delivery. The Government is 
taking steps to implement this initiative through a number of planning tools such as: revisions to the NPPF , a standardised 
methodology to calculate housing need, a housing delivery 
test, changes to the Duty to Cooperate with neighbouringlocal authorities, promoting custom and self-build housing, and addressing the affordability gap, amongst others.
Like every area, Bromsgrove District is expected to address 
these issues and take its share of new development.
4.15 The NPPF (paragraph 67) is clear that local authorities 
should significantly boost the supply of housing through the plan making process and we should be identifying housing 
land for 10-15 years. 
4.16 The UK will always need to build more homes as 
the needs of the population changes. The pace of 
housebuilding has not kept pace with population rises; people are living longer, internal and international migration plays a more contributory factor and the model 
family unit with 2.4 children is no longer the norm. 
As a result the Bromsgrove housing market offers little choice and has high affordability ratios. 22?
Q. SI 7:  Do you think we have 
interpreted the standard methodology 
correctly?
Q. SI 8:  Which of the following options 
do you consider is most appropriate and 
why?
Option 1:  Allocate land for about 
6,500 dwellings up to 2036
Option 2:  Allocate land for about 
8,350 dwellings up to 2041
Option 3:  Allocate land for about 
10,200 dwellings up to 2046
Option 4:  Irrespective of the length 
of the Plan period, allocate land for more homes than recommended by the 
standard methodology
Q. SI 9:  Do you have any other 
comments on the above options?4.17 The way local authorities have historically calculated 
their housing requirement was often a complex and time 
consuming process, which could be subject to challenge 
from many different parties. Therefore, the Government has introduced a standard methodology for calculating        Local
Housing Need. The new method sets out a prescribed way
to calculate the amount of housing needed, based on              household projections and an adjustment for        local affordability ratios. This means that the method will be 
consistent across all planning authorities and should not be 
subject to challenge, thus, speeding up the plan-making process so homes can be built quicker. 
4.18 We need to plan for a minimum of 15 years from 
adoption of the Plan. We’re hoping to adopt the new District 
Plan in 2021, which means planning until at least 2036.
4.19 We have based our housing need calculation on the 
standard methodology for the purposes of this Issues and 
Options Consultation. 
4.20 Depending on how long our Plan period is (please 
refer to Q.S14, page 19), and by using the standard 
methodology, we will need to plan for about the following number of dwellings purely to meet Bromsgrove District’s 
local housing needs (excluding any cross boundary growth 
and any housing associated with higher economic growth):
1) 2018 - 2036 = about 6,500 dwellings
2) 2018 - 2041 = about 8,350 dwellings
3) 2018 - 2046 = about 10,200 dwellings
Land for about 2,500 dwellings is already allocated in the 
current District Plan and will count towards the above 
figures.
4.21 The Government’s standard methodology for 
calculating local housing need makes it clear that providing 
fewer homes than this isn’t an option.G
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G G23
Strategic Issue 4:  
Broad options for 
development 
distribution and 
allocating land uses
4.22 The District Plan Review will need to test a number of 
development distribution options before progressing with 
the most appropriate sustainable development strategy for 
the District. Given the scale of development needed and the timescale covered, it is highly likely that a combination of 
options will be needed. Broad options to test could include 
the following:
Option 1: Focus development on Bromsgrove town - this 
could take the form of an urban extension or extensions to 
the built up area and would include homes and possibly community infrastructure and employment depending on 
the scale of the housing development;
Option 2: Focus development on transport corridors and/
or locations with good transport links - this could focus on 
good accessibility to the primary road network, rail and other sustainable modes of transport in a bid to ease road traffic 
congestion within the District;
Option 3: Focus development on the Large Settlements, 
as identified in the existing BDP - this could take the form 
of infilling and urban extensions to the Settlements but likely 
to be on a smaller scale than Option 1 above. The amount of development which could be attributed to the Settlements 
would need to take account of current Settlement size, 
existing facilities and whether there is an opportunity to increase services and facilities, meaning that the levels of 
distribution may not be the same for all Settlements;Option 4: Disperse development around the District, 
allocating some new growth to a variety of settlements 
to allow them to grow - this could distribute development 
throughout the District according to local assessments of capacity (particularly existing facilities). Distribution would 
be of different scales and/or infilling taking account of 
the size of the existing developed area;
Option 5: Focus development on the edge of the West 
Midlands conurbation, along our border with Solihull/Birmingham/Dudley - this could  take the form of an urban 
extension to the built up area and would include homes and 
possibly community infrastructure and employment depending on the scale of the housing development;
Option 6: Focus development on the edge of Redditch - 
this could take the form of an urban extension to the built up area and would include homes and possibly community 
infrastructure and employment depending on the scale of 
the housing development;
Option 7: A new settlement - development of a significant 
scale which would also be able to support new community infrastructure and employment development;
Option 8: Reconsideration of existing unconsented 
allocations on the boundary with Redditch Borough - reassess existing site allocations in Bromsgrove District that 
have not been developed to meet Redditch’s needs. 
This follows the publication of the Revised NPPF which has brought in the standardised local housing need methodology 
which calculates a lower level of housing need for Redditch 
than is included within the Adopted Local Plan. Consider their availability, deliverability and appropriateness as site 
allocations to meet the needs of either Bromsgrove District 
or Redditch Borough;
Option 9: Urban intensification - development in 
existing urban areas and the potential to increase densities on allocated sites in the current BDP . Varying scales of development according to opportunities, however this 
option is highly unlikely to deliver the housing numbers 
needed on its own.24?
Q. SI 12:  Do you think the Plan Review 
should remove land from the Green Belt 
to be designated as ‘safeguarded land’ , 
to meet longer-term development needs beyond this Plan Review period? 
If so, how far ahead should we look?Safeguarded land
4.24 National planning policy emphasises the permanence 
of Green Belt boundaries (NPPF paragraph 136). In order to 
establish boundaries which endure beyond the Plan period, 
it is necessary to consider not only the development needs of the current plan, but also the longer-term development 
needs stretching well beyond the Plan period. National policy 
states that land should be safeguarded        (Safeguarded Land) for these longer term needs, making clear that it is not allocated for development at the present time.  
4.25 However, there are downsides to this approach. 
Removing land from the Green Belt in sustainable locations 
where development has been earmarked for the future, 
increases their profile and the potential for speculative planning applications in the short to medium term. If some 
allocated sites are more difficult to deliver, such sites risk 
being overlooked in favour of safeguarded land which may present fewer obstacles to delivery. Recent pressures on 
housing land supply in Bromsgrove District meant that this 
was the case for land that was previously safeguarded for longer term use. With the new regulations now stipulating that Local Plans should be assessed at least every five years 
to ensure they are still up to date, it may prove difficult for 
safeguarded land to have the longevity desired in national policy.?
Q. SI 10:  Which combination of the 
above options do you feel are the most 
appropriate and sustainable to meet the 
District’s future needs and why?
Q. SI 11:  Are there any other options 
for development that haven’t been identified above? 4.23 All of the options above will require changes to the 
Green Belt boundaries, details on the Green Belt Purposes 
Assessment and Site Selection methodologies can be found
on pages 7 and 8 of this document. When assessing these options the Council will be considering a wide range of 
factors which are highlighted in these methodologies. At this 
stage we are not looking for site specific responses, we are looking to ensure that sufficient options have been identified, and the correct criteria established for robust decisions to be 
made on the spatial distribution of growth across the District. 
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G25
Strategic Issue 5:  
Co-operating with 
the West Midlands conurbation to address wider development needs 
4.26 Bromsgrove District forms part of the Birmingham 
and Black Country        Housing Market Area (HMA). The 
Birmingham and Black Country HMA covers the following Local Authority areas: Bromsgrove, Birmingham, Cannock Chase, Dudley, Lichfield, North Warwickshire, Redditch, Sandwell, Solihull, South Staffordshire, Tamworth, Stratford-on-Avon District, Walsall and Wolverhampton. Some of the HMA authorities in the West Midlands conurbation have been unable to identify enough land to meet their housing needs within their own administrative boundaries and under the Duty to Cooperate, neighbouring authorities in the HMA will need to see if the housing shortfall can be accommodated elsewhere. Identifying where (beyond the conurbation) the housing shortfall should go has so far proved difficult due to the lack of established strategic planning mechanisms. 
4.27 Across the West Midlands it has been accepted, and as 
a result, is reflected in a number of recently adopted Local Plans, that land which is currently Green Belt will need to be reallocated for the wider development needs of the region. Whilst every effort is made to ensure that as much brownfield land as possible is built on, the fact remains that there is not enough deliverable brownfield land to meet these housing needs, even if new houses were built at high densities. 
4.28 The Greater Birmingham Housing Market Area Strategic 
Growth Study (SGS) has revisited the overall housing need and the ability of urban areas and brownfield land to accommodate this need. Once again, it has been established that land is going to be required beyond the West Midlands conurbation, which will mean looking within currently designated Green Belt land to meet the shortfall.4.29 The Revised NPPF provides a clear indication of the Government’s desire for joint working to address housing need and that it intends to close the loop whereby difficult matters are deferred to future plan reviews. The BDP includes a commitment at Policy BDP3 (Future Housing and Employment Growth) to undertake a review of the Local Plan by 2023 at the latest which will address the District’s role in accommodating some of the Greater Birmingham HMA’s housing needs. 
4.30 The SGS recommends a number of Areas of Search 
for strategic development, which should be taken forward for further assessment through the plan making process as having potential to contribute to meeting the housing needs shortfall. 
4.31 It must be stressed that the SGS is an independent 
study and it is not the work of the District Council. Therefore its findings do not represent the Council’s views. The SGS is available to view and download from: http://www.bromsgrove.gov.uk/council/policy-and-strategy/planning-policies/greater-birmingham-housing-market-area-strategic-growth-study.aspx  The questions below ask for your views on its approach and content.  
?
Q. SI 13:  What are your views on the 
approach taken in Greater Birmingham 
Housing Market Area Strategic Growth 
Study (SGS)? 
Q. SI 14:  Do you have any comments 
on its outcomes or any views on the further work that needs to be 
undertaken to fully test the options 
presented in the SGS?
GRefer to Glossary on page 66GHousing
26
In 2016 there were about 
40,600
dwellingsDuring 2016/17 
of houses were built on previously developed land 29% In December 2017the average houseprice was nearly
£277,000
Over 1,600 
homes have been built since 2011
Since 2011 470  
aﬀordable homes havebeen built,which is of all completions29%
There are
2,174
households on the Council’s housing waiting list27%
of pensionerslive alone
Since 2011 39%  
of all homes built weredetached89.5%  
of homes are privatelyownedSince 2011 nearly 49%  
of new homes were either 1 or 2bedroom properties
24 
existing gypsy and traveller pitches in the District275. Housing
5.1 Providing sufficient homes in the right places has always 
been a key issue in planning terms across the country, and 
this Plan Review for Bromsgrove District is no different. 
We now find ourselves in a time where people are living longer and modern families don’t necessarily all live under 
one roof. Furthermore, the affordability gap is widening, 
which is also compounding the access to housing issue, forcing grown-up children to remain in parental homes for longer in a bid to save enough money to take that first step 
onto the property ladder. Bromsgrove District Council needs 
to play its part in addressing these, amongst many other housing issues.Implications of SA Scoping 
information
5.2 The SA Scoping Report identifies the following key  
sustainability issues:
 The UK population will continue to grow;
 The aging population is set to increase;
 There is a need to create places to live in sustainable  
 locations; There is a need to enable housing growth and plan for 
 a mix of housing types and tenures to meet the 
 requirements of all households.
285.3 Based on the information we have gathered in the 
Scoping Report and our understanding of the broad housing 
issues facing the country as a whole, we think we need to 
focus on the following issues in a local context, to explore how they may impact on our District and how the Plan 
Review could address them:
 Housing Density
 Affordable Housing
 Housing Mix
 Homes for the Elderly
 Self-build & Custom Housebuilding and Innovative  
 Design Standards
 Accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling  
 Showpeople
Housing Density
5.4 The NPPF advises local authorities to set their own 
approach to housing density to reflect local circumstances. 
Although no specific densities are required in the adopted 
District Plan, Policy BDP7 states that the density of new housing will make the most efficient use of land whilst 
maintaining character and local distinctiveness. Bromsgrove 
District is known for a considerable number of large properties, which is clearly a locally distinctive feature of the District. However, this isn’t making best use of such a finite 
resource. The Revised NPPF is steering more strongly towards 
the use of minimum density standards, which should optimise land in town centres and other locations which 
are well served by public transport. 
5.5 Based on the housing requirement figures detailed 
above, we will need to identify additional land for about: 
(1) 4,000 dwellings (2018-2036), (2) 5,850 dwellings (2018-2041), or (3) 7,700 dwellings (2018-2046) as land for about 
2,500 dwellings has already been allocated through the BDP 
and will count towards the housing requirement. 
?
Q. H 1:  Which of the following options 
do you consider is most appropriate and 
why?
Option 1:  Set a specific minimum 
density requirement for the District as a 
whole 
Option 2:  Set different minimum 
density requirements for different parts of the District
Option 3:  Rely on local distinctiveness 
and character within the District so that 
new housing fits in with its surroundings
Option 4:  Influence site density 
through good design
Q. H 2:  Do you have any other 
comments on the above options?5.6 Of the homes completed between 2011 and 2017:
 61% were built at less than 30 dwellings per hectare  
 (dph);
 21% were built at 30-50 dph; 
 18% were built at more than 50 dph. 
5.7 The lower the build-density, the higher the land-take. 
We need to strike a balance between preserving the differing characteristics of Bromsgrove District’s built environment whilst being mindful of the amount of land we will need to 
build on. 295.10 As the housing affordability gap continues to rise, 
the term ‘affordable housing’ is now being extended as it is 
also expressed in relation to those people who don’t qualify 
to be on housing waiting lists. These are people who need to buy or privately rent through the open market and includes 
those classed as        essential local workers. Therefore, as 
well as provision for those people on housing waiting lists, the Government is committed to improving the accessibility of home ownership for first time buyers. For aspiring home 
owners who are struggling to obtain mortgages for the full 
market price of a home, the Government wants to ensure that there is a range of affordable homes to support their 
aspiration to buy. They aim to do this through the        Starter 
Home Initiative. 
5.11 Affordable home ownership (Starter Homes) is 
likely to form at least 10% of all dwellings on site as part of our overall affordable housing contribution (up to 40% 
of all dwellings on site). Whilst the Starter Home Initiative 
positively addresses a previously overlooked housing sector, this means that the number of social rented/shared ownership dwellings available to meet the needs of those 
people on our housing waiting list will be reduced. 
5.12 Furthermore, the Government is committed to 
increasing the private rental market through the        Build to
Rent Initiative. It should make the rental market more service-focused, which will mean that living standards are 
generally higher. The private rental sector is relatively small 
in Bromsgrove; however we’re unsure whether that is due to limited demand or limited supply. 
5.13 The NPPF (paragraph 77) supports housing 
development in rural areas, such as the small settlements in Bromsgrove District’s Green Belt, where they offer affordable 
housing for those with a genuine link to a particular 
settlement (rural exception housing). As the housing affordability gap widens, there may be younger generations 
of families who are being forced out of generational family 
locations into more affordable locations, placing a strain on the accessibility of their family support network for things 
such as childcare needs.Affordable Housing
5.8 In December 2017, the Land Registry published figures 
which illustrated that the average house price in England was 
£243,582 compared with £276,713 in Bromsgrove District. 
Delivering a wide choice of high quality homes extends to the provision of        affordable housing. These homes are 
for people in housing need (on our housing waiting list) who 
cannot afford to buy their own home or privately rent. 
5.9 On housing developments of 11 dwellings or more in 
the District, we aim to secure up to 40% affordable housing 
units on site. Of the affordable housing provision secured, we generally specify 70% social rented and 30% 
intermediate properties. Since the start of the BDP period 
(2011), 470 affordable housing units have been built, which is currently 28.9% of all        housing completions. 
Affordable housing units tend to be clustered together within 
our larger development schemes. However, another approach is ‘pepper-potting’ where private market and affordable 
housing tenures are located side-by-side and are 
indistinguishable from the each other. This is often referred to as ‘tenure blindness’ .
G
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G
G
G
G30
?
Q. H 3:  Do you think that we should 
continue to try to secure up to 40% 
affordable housing on development 
sites?
Q. H 4:  Do you think the social 
rented/ intermediate housing split is appropriate? If not, why not?
Q. H 5:  Do you think we should 
continue to have small ‘clusters’ of 
affordable housing properties or 
‘pepper-pot’ them within development schemes? What is the reason for your 
response?
Q. H 6:  Do you think we should allocate 
a proportion of the affordable housing 
for essential workers?
Q. H 7:  What level of Starter Home 
provision do you think we need in the District?
Q. H 8:  Do you think that sites should 
be allocated specifically for Starter Home 
provision in the District? If so, where?
Q. H 9:  Do you think that more homes 
should be built specifically for private 
rent in the District?
Q. H 10:  Are you aware of any of 
Bromsgrove District’s rural settlements that have a specific shortage of 
affordable homes for local, newly 
forming households? If so, where?Housing Mix
5.14 The NPPF (paragraph 61) steers local authorities 
towards delivering a wide choice of high quality homes by 
planning for a mix of housing based on current and future 
demographic trends and addressing the needs of different groups in their communities to reflect local demand. 
5.15 Background studies for the current BDP indicated that 
the District was lacking in smaller properties (including those for our aging population) but there would still be a 
sustained demand for 3 and 4 bedroomed properties. 
The 2011 Census revealed that the dwelling composition in the District was: 1 bedroom (8%), 2 bedrooms (19%), 
3 bedrooms (45%) and 4+ bedrooms (28%). Since the 
start of the BDP period, we have been trying to redress this imbalance, and on sites which have been completed so far, 
the following proportions of dwellings have been built: 
1 bedroom (18.6%), 2 bedrooms (30%), 3 bedrooms (22.7%) and 4+ bedrooms (28.7%). This gives a clear indication 
that we are working towards addressing the imbalance and 
providing more choice within the housing market. However, we may see a continued need for larger homes if there are increases in home-based working or a desire for multi-
generational family living. 
5.16 The 2011 Census also revealed the following 
proportions of housing types, indicating that Bromsgrove 
District has a higher than average stock of detached properties, whilst all other house types are lower than 
average stock levels.  
Type England West Midlands Bromsgrove
Detached 28% 29% 39%
Semi Detached 38% 44% 37%
Terraced 29% 27% 15%
Flats 18% 11% 9%315.17 Whilst Bromsgrove District is predominantly rural with 
a prosperous history, we need to ensure that the District’s 
vibrancy continues in the future. In both our rural and urban 
settlements, newly forming households may want to live in close proximity to their parental home to take advantage 
of the support network it offers. Also, our aging residents 
may want to downsize whilst remaining part of a familiar community. Addressing these issues will ensure that we have a vibrant housing stock which meets the needs of 
Bromsgrove District’s population as it changes over time, 
in order that the District continues to thrive.  
?
Q. H 11:  Which of the following 
options do you consider is most 
appropriate and why?
Option 1:  Be guided by market signals 
to determine the size and type of homes 
the District needs
Option 2:  Set size and type guidance 
for different parts of the District including Homes for Life
Q. H 12:  Do you have any other 
comments on the above options?
Q. H 13:  Should we be encouraging 
a wider range of homes in our rural 
settlements to ensure their long term 
vibrancy?Homes for the Elderly
5.18 People are living longer and would benefit from a 
wider range of housing options to suit their changing needs. 
Since the start of the current Plan period we have made 
provision for more homes specifically for the elderly, such as the care home and independent living facilities on Recreation 
Road in Bromsgrove Town Centre which was completed in 
2018, and extra care provision on allocated sites for future development. This shows that we are already responding to the needs of our aging population. 
5.19 However, there may be members of our aging 
population that want to downsize independently but don’t 
want apartment living, perhaps preferring a small bungalow, 
which offers future options for live-in carers with a smaller garden or communal outdoor space or even a ‘retirement 
village’ type of development. Equally there are people who 
need greater levels of care than those on offer in independent living complexes. 
?
Q. H 14:  What would encourage you to 
downsize if your current home is bigger 
than you need?
Q. H 15:  What type of home would you 
want or need as you get older?32
Self-build & Custom 
Housebuilding and Innovative Design Standards
5.20 The Government introduced the Self-build and Custom 
Housebuilding Initiative to help boost the supply of homes 
and provide diversity in the market. Councils are required to 
grant sufficient planning permissions to meet the demand for        self-build plots. However, this doesn’t necessarily
mean that those people with self-build aspirations can 
acquire those plots with planning permission. 
5.21 Some Councils are proactively requiring serviced plots 
on larger housing sites specifically for the self-build market. 
There are currently 19 entries on the Council’s Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Register, requiring serviced plots 
within the District. 
5.22 Furthermore, the Government wants to encourage 
custom built homes which tend to be built to a higher 
quality than some other homes. Builders are more likely to use modern construction techniques alongside innovative 
design and energy efficient measures to build themselves 
life-long homes that can adapt to their changing needs whilst being cost effective to run and maintain.
5.23 There are also people who may like a life-long home 
that adapts to their changing needs without having to build it themselves. Whilst the building industry has minimum 
build standards to meet, there are beneficial additions that 
could be provided, such as wheelchair adaptable/accessible dwellings, which includes specifications for minimum door 
widths and space standards, for example. Also, there are 
optional requirements to reduce daily water consumption. 
5.24 As we try to meet the demand for new homes, 
developments are often perceived to be ‘crammed in’ . One tool for assessing and improving the design of development is       ‘Building for Life’,which aims to ensure 
that the design of new homes and their neighbourhood 
are as attractive, functional and sustainable as possible. ?
Q. H 16:  Which of the following 
options do you consider is most 
appropriate and why?
Option 1: Allocate sites purely to meet 
the provisions of the self-build market
Option 2:  Ask developers to provide a 
number of plots for the self-build market 
on larger housing sites
Q. H 17:  Do you have any other 
comments on the above options?
Q. H 18:  Do you think we should be 
aspiring to achieve higher than minimum design standards? 
If so, should this be 100% of all new 
homes built or just a proportion to make 
future adaptations easier?
Q. H 19:  Are there any specific design 
standards or innovative building 
techniques that you think we need to address or encourage? 
If so, what are they?G
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G33?
Q. H 22:  Do you think there are any 
Housing Issues that we have missed? 
If so, please tell us what they are.Accommodation for Gypsies, 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
5.25 When we are considering the housing needs of the 
District, we also need to take into consideration the housing 
needs of different groups in the community, which includes 
gypsies, travellers and travelling showpeople (NPPF paragraph 61). Alongside the NPPF , the Government 
published ‘Planning policy for traveller sites’ (August 2015) 
which gives us a better understanding of how we should approach their differing housing needs, whilst  ensuring they have access to education, health, welfare and employment 
infrastructure. 
5.26 We currently have 24 permanent gypsy and traveller 
pitches in the District. The Worcestershire Gypsy and 
Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) (November 2014), recommends that Bromsgrove District needs to 
identify land for up to 9 permanent pitches between 
2019/20 and 2033/34 (p.96). No additional need has been identified for Showperson yards or transit plots during 
this same period, however anecdotal evidence seems to 
suggest that there is a need. ?
Q. H 20:  Which of the following 
options do you consider is most 
appropriate and why?
Option 1: Extend existing facilities 
within the District 
Option 2:  Allocate a new site for 
permanent pitches within the District
Option 3:  Allocate land for a transit 
site for families passing through the 
District
Q. H 21:  Do you have any other 
comments on the above options?Employment
34
Service related industries
account for over 55%  
of jobs in the District
82%  
of working age residents are economically active
The District has a working
age population of
58,000 39 
schools£Average annual income ofBromsgrove residents is 
£34,500
Average annual income ofBromsgrove employees is 
£25,800     The average     distance      commuted      to work is
16.6km
Nearly 14%
of economically activeresidents are self-employed
7,185
enterprises in 2017356. Employment
6.1 Bromsgrove District is home to a successful labour force, 
with employment levels being amongst the highest in the 
West Midlands. However whilst the average earnings of 
residents is very high in comparison to national and regional data, local wages earnt within the District are amongst some 
of the lowest in the West Midlands region. This disparity 
is largely due to the desirability of many places within the District to live which are within commuting distance of larger urban areas offering more employment opportunities, such 
as Birmingham.  
6.2 Bromsgrove District has an ageing population which 
has implications for the local labour force. The economic 
activity rate and employment rate for the District have both fallen in recent years, primarily due to people leaving the 
labour force through retirement. This is supported by the 
fact that the unemployment rate has not increased during this time. However a shrinking labour force has implications 
for the productivity of the local economy, with a real risk 
that without attracting younger people to live and work in Bromsgrove District, trends will continue and local businesses will find it difficult to access a sufficiently skilled pool of local 
employees. 6.3 The local business base is very stable with a high number 
of successful start-ups and expanding businesses within the small and medium enterprise (SME) bracket. However, 
it is apparent from consultation with local businesses that 
within the District there is a lack of space for expansion, often termed as ‘grow-on’ space, meaning companies may be forced to leave the District for premises in adjacent local 
authorities in order to expand their businesses. Only 1.25% 
of firms employ over 50 workers in the District. 
6.4 Within the District there is a large supply of small office 
units, including many on existing industrial estates and business parks. The vacancy rate for offices is around 5.5%, 
whereas a vacancy rate of 7.5% is considered to be healthy. 
By contrast there is a much smaller supply of larger employment units in sectors connected to manufacturing 
industries or storage and distribution. A recent survey of local 
businesses highlighted the need for a wider range of units, freehold property, serviced plots and office property that is in accessible locations. Crucially for attracting investment
and job creation into the District is the fact that it is 
advantageously located for businesses, being connected to major motorway junctions. However, infrastructure capacity 
is a concern for local businesses. The District is also home 
to a number of railway lines and train stations with direct services to Birmingham, Worcester, and Kidderminster 
and connections beyond.   
6.5 The NPPF makes sustainable economic growth a key 
issue for plan making, stating that “significant weight” should 
be placed on the need to support economic growth through the planning system. Site allocations for employment uses should be reviewed regularly to ensure the most appropriate 
sites are protected for employment uses to meet Bromsgrove 
District’s business needs.
6.6 In April 2017, the District Council adopted corporate 
economic priorities to ensure a commitment to addressing current barriers and capitalising on opportunities for 
growing the local economy in the coming years. There are 
nine economic priorities with cross-cutting themes connected to issues such as transport and connectivity, 
the local housing market, and improving centres within 
the District.
366.7 The District Plan Review process needs to identify 
and plan for how Bromsgrove District’s economy should 
grow in the future, including the relationship between 
Bromsgrove District’s local economy and the wider West Midlands regional economy. 
Implications of SA Scoping 
information
6.8 The SA Scoping Report identifies the following key 
sustainability issues:
 Average weekly employee earnings for people working  
 in Bromsgrove District are significantly lower in 
 comparison to West Midlands and national averages;
 There is a need to attract higher paid jobs to the District  
 to encourage more people to live and work in the District  
 and reduce out-commuting;
 The District’s existing employment land supply is limited  
 to a small number of historical sites with low levels of  
 completions in recent years;
 There is a need to improve and retain skills in the local  
 labour force;
 Retention and expansion of the manufacturing sector  
 in the District, particularly higher value, skilled 
 manufacturing, could have a positive impact on other  
 supply-chain industries and small, local businesses;
 The need to improve coverage of broadband in rural  
 parts of the District, enabling more access to services and  
 potential for home working.
6.9 Based on the information we have gathered in the 
Scoping Report and our understanding of the wider employment issues, we think we need to focus on the 
following issues in a local context, to explore how they may 
impact on our District and how the Plan Review could address them:
 Growing the Local Economy 
 Type and Location of Employment Land 
 Employment Opportunities in Rural Bromsgrove
 TelecommunicationsGrowing the Local Economy 
6.10 As stated in paragraph 4.11 on page 20, Bromsgrove 
District is currently a net out-commuter of jobs; there are a 
higher number of people who live in the District but choose 
to commute to jobs elsewhere, than there are people who live in other areas but commute into Bromsgrove District 
to work. 
6.11 In order to address this situation there are a number 
of issues for the Plan Review to investigate around where 
and how much employment land should be provided in the 
District, how many jobs are being created and sustained by local businesses, and what type of jobs these are or should 
be in the future. 
6.12 Providing the right sites to enable business growth 
in the District and to provide a wider range of local 
employment opportunities for those who don’t wish to commute, whether by attracting new inward investment 
from businesses located outside the District or allowing 
existing resident businesses to expand, will be crucial to reducing the discrepancy between        average weekly employee earnings and        average weekly resident 
earnings. The local economy lacks a whole tier of medium 
and larger sized firms and the District lacks property and land for such firms to grow into. For Bromsgrove the M42 is an 
economic advantage which could be better used to supply 
chains feeding the West Midlands manufacturing economy. However rebalancing the local economy in Bromsgrove 
District may also involve some difficult decisions around 
the suitability and availability of land to accommodate employment development in the District, particularly in 
the context of existing Green Belt coverage.   
6.13 More up-to-date evidence on employment needs for 
the District is required to inform the Plan Review. Evidence 
will need to consider how the existing local economy 
functions, what future jobs growth forecasts over a given time period will look like, the available supply of labour force 
in the District to take up new employment opportunities, 
and how historical rates of take-up of employment land in the District relates to future projections of need. 
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G
G376.14 Considering these factors will ensure the Plan Review 
and supporting evidence base provides a robust basis to 
allocate the appropriate amount of land for employment 
development to ensure sustainable economic growth in the District. The Revised NPPF states that “planning policies 
and decisions should help create the conditions in which 
businesses can invest, expand and adapt” . Therefore, it is not reasonable for the Plan Review to ignore options for economic growth.   
?
Q. E 1:  Which of the following options 
do you consider is most appropriate and 
why?
Option 1:  Plan for a minimum level 
of employment development across the 
Plan period, relating to assessed needs
Option 2:  Plan for a small uplift in 
jobs and land requirement, in the region of 10% above minimum evidence 
requirements 
Option 3:  Plan for a large uplift in 
jobs and land requirement, in the region 
of 25% above minimum evidence requirements 
Option 4:  Plan for a level of 
employment development that aligns 
with levels of housing growth in the 
District over the course of the Plan period, including consideration of any 
housing or employment shortfall arising 
from neighbouring local authorities 
Q. E 2:  Do you have any other 
comments on the above options?Type and Location of 
Employment Land
6.15 The        employment land requirement in the BDP 
is 28 hectares of land allocated to meet the employment 
needs of the District up to 2030. The most recent 
employment land availability study for Bromsgrove District (2016), shows an        employment land supply for the 
District of approximately 35 hectares. However as this land 
is built out for employment purposes, it is likely that new locations for employment development will be required to meet needs beyond the current BDP period. Equally, if some 
employment land fails to be built out, we will need to 
review whether it is still appropriately allocated for future employment growth.
6.16 Being situated adjacent to the West Midlands 
conurbation, it is important for Bromsgrove District to 
create a resilient and sustainable local economy. 
Competition with surrounding local authorities to attract investment in the District may be appropriate for certain 
employment sectors. However it may also be necessary to 
plan for the local economy in such a way that avoids the risk of market saturation for other employment sectors that are already well established within the wider region. 
6.17 It is important that the Plan Review is based on an 
understanding of business needs operating within the 
District and wider region, in order for land allocations to 
be identified based on qualitative needs as well as solely quantitative evidence. The North Worcestershire Economic 
Development and Regeneration (NWedR) team and the 
well-established Bromsgrove Economic Development Theme Group are important forums to provide information about 
local business needs across the District. G
G
GRefer to Glossary on page 66
386.18 Reference to the ‘employment land supply’ for the 
District in this section is related to        B use development 
only. There are however other uses in planning terms that 
provide job opportunities across the District and it is appropriate for the Plan Review to consider the pros and cons 
of planning for these types of employment generating uses 
alongside traditional B use employment development. Examples would include car repair garages, food and drink outlets or leisure uses such as gyms, which despite having a 
much lower density of employees than many B use 
development, still provide local employment opportunities and thus make a contribution to the local economy.  
6.19 The Bromsgrove economy is constrained by a lack 
of labour and a lack of commercial floorspace and land. 
In growing the employment base, the Council could look at 
how it can support the continued improvement in the West Midlands manufacturing economy by providing new sites 
to meet footloose demand. The provision of sites around 
25 hectares would help to meet this demand and also meet the needs of local firms who are seeking to expand. There is an opportunity for land in Bromsgrove to 
complement the West Midlands Combined Authority 
Strategy, but also to directly compete with the core of the Combined Authority if the District offers land supply that 
is commercially more attractive.
6.20 The future challenge for the District’s Office market is 
to encourage SMEs to mature in the area. Helping them grow from small to medium firms and providing a wider range of 
local employment opportunities across the whole spectrum 
of skills. A focus on smaller and medium sized flexible workshop property which could be used for both offices and 
light industrial uses could help address the strongest local 
demand for industrial workspace which is between 150 and 350 sq.m.?
Q. E 3:  Which of the following options 
do you consider is most appropriate and 
why?
Option 1:  Meet as much employment 
need as possible on existing designated 
sites where intensification opportunities exist (these opportunities may only meet 
a small proportion of need) 
Option 2:  Expand existing 
employment sites around currently 
designated employment land, to increase land supply beyond that offered 
by Option 1
Option 3:  Allocate new freestanding 
employment sites in sustainable 
locations, including transport corridors and motorway junctions
Option 4:  Allocate new employment 
land for approximately 25 hectare sites 
to meet the needs of medium and larger 
sized firms as part of mixed use strategic allocations, where large scale housing 
allocations are proposed in the Plan 
review. This could include wider employment generating uses as well 
as more traditional B use employment 
development
Q. E 4:  Do you have any other 
comments on the above options? G
GRefer to Glossary on page 66
396.23 It will be important for the Plan Review to support 
the proportionate expansion of rural businesses, including 
proposals for conversion, taking into account the impact 
on the inherent nature of rural areas, including Green Belt considerations. Furthermore, supporting the growth of the 
rural economy and local employment opportunities in more 
rural locations may be a consideration for local communities engaged in the neighbourhood planning process. 
6.24  In the context of the Plan Review and setting an overall 
target for strategic employment land, it may be necessary to review whether the current amount and distribution of 
employment development is the most appropriate for the 
future. If evidence finds that existing sites in supply provide a suitable level of jobs for the Plan period, or suitable sites are 
available within or on the edge of existing urban areas, then 
it is unlikely that the identification of potential employment sites in the more rural parts of the District would be 
necessary. 
6.25 However, should evidence suggest that more 
employment sites are required to support other forms of 
development in the Plan period, particularly new housing, it may be the case that further (Green Belt) land across the District will have to be considered as potential development 
locations.?
Q. E 5:  Do you think we should 
pursue a flexible approach to allowing 
alternative business uses on land 
designated for traditional employment use? If so, how do we ensure that we 
retain sufficient land allocations for 
traditional B use employment? 
Employment Opportunities in 
Rural Bromsgrove
6.21 The sites within the District’s employment land 
supply designated for protection as B use employment land 
are those considered to be sites of strategic importance. 
These are located nearer to the more built up areas of Bromsgrove District’s main urban area, the southern edge 
of Birmingham, and the edge of Redditch (with some sites 
within Bromsgrove District serving the employment needs of Redditch Borough).  
6.22 Other sites are located in the District which provide for 
smaller scale employment development and include both B use employment uses and wider employment generating 
uses. These sites are in Green Belt locations and are located in 
both open countryside and within or adjacent to smaller rural settlements and therefore may not always be in the most 
sustainable locations and may only meet a small proportion 
of the District’s employment need. However, they are still likely to make a contribution to the local employment offer 
and are important in supporting a prosperous rural economy. 
40?
Q. E 6:  Which of the following options 
do you consider is most appropriate and 
why?
Option 1:  Encourage rural enterprise, 
through supporting diversification, 
conversion and infill opportunities 
Option 2:  Allocate larger parcels of 
land in rural areas for employment development, where proven to be a 
sustainable location and attractive to 
the market 
Option 3:  Provide a mix of both of the 
above options 
Q. E 7:  Do you have any other 
comments on the above options?Telecommunications
6.26 Advanced, high quality and reliable 
telecommunications infrastructure is essential for economic 
growth and, subsequently brings improvements to 
residential networks. We need to support the expansion of electronic communications networks, including next 
generation mobile technology and high speed broadband 
connections, especially if we want to encourage growth within the District’s economy. 
?
Q. E 8:  Is there anywhere in the District 
that would particularly benefit from 
upgraded telecommunications 
infrastructure? If so, where?
?
Q. E 9:  Do you think there are any Employment Issues that we have missed? 
If so, please tell us what they are
Transport
41
There is close access to the
M5 and M42Over 73%  
of residents travel
to work by car
4%  
of residents 
travel to workby train
12.5% 
of households do
not own a car, whilst50% have
two or more cars  
Almost 63% of carbon
emissions are generated by transport3  Air Quality
Management AreasThere are 5  railway
stations42
7. Transport
7.1 Bromsgrove District’s location in the centre of the 
country means the District has excellent connectivity to 
major transport networks. Significant motorway junctions 
are located within the District, as a result of both the M5 and M42 motorways passing close to Bromsgrove town. This can 
cause issues across the District in the event of disruption on 
the Strategic Road Network. Major A-roads that cross the District and link Bromsgrove District’s settlements to large settlements in adjacent local authority areas include the A38, 
A456, A448, A491, A441 and A435. 7.2 A number of railway lines run through the District, 
including the cross-city line. Train stations are found at the larger village settlements of Alvechurch, Barnt Green, Hagley 
and Wythall in addition to Bromsgrove Town train station. 
Work is already underway to extend the cross-city line to Bromsgrove Town train station from its current route through 
Barnt Green, with completion expected later in 2018. 
Therefore connectivity with the conurbation is very good, although it is poorer to the south towards Worcester, 
Cheltenham, Gloucester, Bristol and London and requires 
investment in both infrastructure and rolling stock.  Bus services link Bromsgrove Town with Birmingham to the 
north, Redditch to the east, Droitwich (and connections to 
Worcester) to the south and Kidderminster to the west.   
437.3  Whilst Bromsgrove District’s location in relation to the 
transport network is advantageous in terms of accessibility 
and choice of travel modes, it also creates challenges for how 
the network continues to operate smoothly, in particular where demand is growing. 
7.4 Transport infrastructure is often complex to plan for and 
expensive to install and maintain. Growth in the economy offers the opportunity for significant financial contributions 
to be secured from new development as a means of funding 
additional infrastructure. In the context of the future growth of Bromsgrove District, as well as the wider sub-region, 
transport infrastructure is a crucial component of delivering 
economic growth plans and enabling new development to be delivered.  
7.5 Opportunities also exist through other funding 
sources to improve transport infrastructure, including where 
greater provision of walking and cycling options offer more 
sustainable alternatives to other transport modes. Investing in this type of transport infrastructure has a number of benefits. It seeks to address the challenge of reducing 
demand on congested sections of road with the aim of 
reducing journey times. It also has the potential to provide recreational opportunities for local communities, for 
example new cycle routes/paths, and to contribute to 
schemes attempting to address areas of poorer air quality      (Air Quality Management Areas) within the District.  
7.6 It is important for local authorities to undertake an 
assessment of the transport implications in developing or 
reviewing their Local Plan. As a minimum, the transport 
evidence supporting the Plan Review should identify the opportunities for encouraging a shift to more sustainable transport usage, and should include future transport 
infrastructure requirements within infrastructure 
spending plans, linked to financial contributions from new development as well as other funding sources.  7.7 Worcestershire County Council Local Transport Plan 4 
(LTP4) states that within the County, there is “significant 
strategic demand to travel, particularly on key interurban 
road and rail networks which provide direct connections between major economies including Greater Birmingham, 
Greater Bristol, Cardiff and South Wales, Oxford, London 
and the South East and further afield. ” 
7.8 The District Council has a set of key priorities and 
strategic purposes for the period 2017-2020. Transport is a 
key element of these corporate aims, with specific reference made to reducing congestion, particularly along the A38 
corridor. The Council also has a set of adopted economic 
priorities for the District, which acknowledges the importance of  ‘connectivity’ to enabling continued economic 
growth in future years by making it easier and quicker for 
people to move between homes, jobs, essential services and leisure uses around the District.
Implications of SA Scoping 
information
7.9 The SA Scoping Report identifies the following key 
sustainability issues:
 The need to address issues with the capacity of the road  
 network and improve congestion hotspots; 
 The need to ensure interconnection between public  
 transport services, e.g. connections from the Town  
 Centre to Bromsgrove Town train station or between  
 rural bus routes;
 The need to address the location of key public 
 transport nodes, e.g. Bromsgrove Town train station,  
 and where development is located in relation to 
 sustainable transport options;
 The need to encourage more walking and cycling, 
 including provision of safe and interconnected routes;
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G44
7.10 Based on the information we have gathered in the 
Scoping Report and our understanding of wider transport 
issues, we think we need to focus on the following issues in a 
local context, to explore how they may impact on our District and how the Plan Review could address them:
 Car journeys and Impact on the Road Network
 Accessibility to Public Transport Services
 Walking and Cycling Opportunities
Car Journeys and Impact on the 
Road Network
7.11 Bromsgrove District is relatively affluent in comparison 
to both national and regional averages and perhaps as a 
result of this, has high levels of car ownership per household. 
When combined with the fact that the District sits adjacent to the West Midlands conurbation and there is a high level 
of out-commuting of Bromsgrove District residents to jobs in 
the conurbation, this means demand for road travel is high, particularly during peak hours. Of all Bromsgrove District residents who travel to work by car, the largest proportion 
travel in the range of 10-20km (6-13 miles) to their places 
of employment. In addition to the commuting patterns of Bromsgrove District residents, the road network is important 
for economic growth and the success of local businesses, 
as well as how services and leisure uses are accessed by both the local population and visitors to Bromsgrove District. 
7.12 Congestion occurs at key junctions on the network such 
as M42 J1, the ‘Oakalls/ Slideslow roundabout’ (A448/A38), 
A38 - Charford Road, and A38 - Austin Road, all of which 
connect with the A38 running through the centre of Bromsgrove District’s urban area. Significant investment is already being made on the A38 route in the form of a Major 
Scheme bid with funding from a number of different sources 
already secured, and other funding options being considered. 
7.13 Other parts of the District also suffer from congestion 
hotspots, such as stretches of the A456 through Hagley and sections of the A441 and A435 around motorway junctions. 
This congestion principally occurs for two main reasons: 
the volume of vehicles using a particular route, and the overall capacity of that route.7.14  We think that transport planning for the Plan Review 
needs to consider both travel demand and network capacity. 
Factors that are likely to affect travel demand and the issues 
inherent within these are:
 Scale and location of new development - where will  
 people be living, where will they travel for work or to  
 access other services such as retail, how many trips  
 will take place by car, what times of the day will these  
 trips mostly take place?
 Availability and attractiveness of other modes of  
 transport - what public transport services run locally,  
 how frequent and reliable are these services, how much  
 does the service cost, do they link to significant services  
 or employment opportunities? 
 Behavioural change - would people be happy to walk  
 or cycle locally to access jobs or services, would people  
 consider sharing car journeys, can people work from  
 home if it means a reduction in commuting? 
 Ease of access to and cost of car parking - 
 the availability of low cost car parking is a significant  
 factor in influencing decisions to take alternative forms  
 of transport. 
45Factors that are likely to affect network capacity and the 
issues inherent within these are:
 Suitability of existing road network - is existing 
 infrastructure in need of investment due to age, 
 condition, size or location? Can existing infrastructure  
 be updated or maintained or is new development 
 necessary to incorporate new infrastructure? 
 Will a part of the network operate differently with new 
 development nearby than it does currently? 
 Importance of the network - will a part of the 
 network enable important housing, employment or  
 other development to take place, does a particular part  
 of the network link to large and/or important places 
 for services, jobs, or housing?
 Infrastructure constraints - can schemes be delivered  
 based on physical or technical feasibility such as land  
 availability, who is responsible for a junction or link on  
 the road network, what funding sources are available to  
 contribute to the cost of new or improved transport  
 infrastructure? 
7.15 In addition to addressing congestion, the Plan Review 
will need to address other road network issues in relation 
to new development within the District. Issues such as road 
safety for drivers and how the pedestrian environment interacts with the road network are also important 
considerations for the Plan.  
7.16 To enable the effective operation of an entire transport 
network, rather than one small part of the network in 
isolation, it is important that planning for infrastructure provision is done strategically by considering the operation 
of the transport network within a larger part of the District 
or even across the sub-region. 
7.17 Working together with Worcestershire County Council 
(as the responsible Highways Authority for Bromsgrove 
District) and other relevant organisations such as Highways England, the District Council will ensure the issue of transport 
is a key consideration when determining how and where 
growth is planned for, and what supporting infrastructure is required to support it. ?
Q. T 1:  Are there any parts of the 
District’s road network you think are a 
priority for addressing in terms of 
congestion issues? 
If so, where are these located?
Q. T 2:  Are there any parts of the 
District’s road network you think are a 
priority for addressing in terms of road safety (including pedestrian and cycling 
safety), air quality and pollution, or 
enabling development sites? 
If so, where are these located?
Q. T 3:  Do have any ideas or solutions 
for addressing the parts of the road 
network you have identified as requiring action or investment?
Q. T 4:  Should existing transport issues 
and future infrastructure requirements 
be a key factor in where new 
development is located in the future?
Q. T 5:  Do you think more radical 
transport infrastructure solutions should be considered for increasing capacity on 
the road network? 
What do you think these could be?46
Accessibility to Public Transport 
Services
7.18 Key to a choice in travel modes is cost effective and 
efficient public transport options within the District. 
The convenience of private car travel means this mode of 
transport will remain the most popular, by some margin, for commuting as well as general travel. However, the more 
cost effective and efficient the local public transport options 
are in and around Bromsgrove District, the more likelihood of attracting people to use other forms of transport such as rail or bus services.  
7.19 Travel to work data from the 2011 Census shows that 
approximately 4% of work journeys by Bromsgrove District 
residents are by train. Whilst this figure is low compared to 
car journeys, it is actually a higher proportion than many surrounding areas in Worcestershire and the West Midlands. 
Bromsgrove Town train station was recently rebuilt to enable 
the station platforms to accommodate larger passenger carrying capacity and also provide a revamped station 
building and car parking facilities. The new station opened 
in July 2016. 
7.20 The extension of the West Midlands conurbation 
cross-city line later in 2018 will provide more services per 
hour between Bromsgrove Town and central Birmingham, including stations in between such as Longbridge, Selly Oak, 
and University. This is a significant event and will offer far 
more opportunities for travel by train from Bromsgrove Town, in particular to access job opportunities, larger retail and 
leisure services, and higher education opportunities. Recent research by ‘Zoopla’ found that Bromsgrove Town was 
one of the most cost effective places to commute by train to a nearby conurbation (West Midlands) in the entire country, 
based on house value uplift in comparison with rail fare 
season ticket costs.    
7.21 In terms of bus transport in Bromsgrove District, there 
are a number of established services which offer regular links between Bromsgrove Town and surrounding centres in all 
directions. Bus travel to access onward rail services is also 
important in reducing car demand, particularly bearing in mind that Bromsgrove Town’s train station sits just over a mile away from the Town Centre. Whilst both rail and bus 
services are privately owned and operated and therefore 
beyond the scope of the planning system, the extent and location of new development proposed through the Plan 
Review will be an important factor in determining the 
current and future viability of public transport provision, including the potential for expansion plans in the future.   
?
Q. T 6:  Which areas of the District do 
you consider to be most sustainable in 
terms of public transport accessibility?
Q. T 7:  At what size and scale of 
development do you think it is necessary 
to directly provide for public transport provision?
Q. T 8:  Is there anything specific that 
would encourage you to use public 
transport services more as opposed to 
travelling by car?
47Walking and Cycling 
Opportunities
7.22 In addition to the issues discussed above, sustainable
transport modes include the ability of people to travel 
between homes, places of employment and services 
by walking or cycling. Clearly this form of travel is more relevant to shorter, local trips although in recent years the 
increasing popularity of cycling in the UK has meant longer 
commuting distances may well be undertaken by bicycle for some people. 
7.23 These forms of travel have clear advantages over other 
forms, being much cheaper and also generally beneficial to health as a source of regular exercise. However, many people 
have concerns over safety when considering longer distance 
walking and cycling, as well as the inconvenience of poor weather or not being able to carry larger or heavier items 
while travelling. 
7.24 Issues such as lighting, maintenance of surfaces, 
quality of the environment and severance of routes (and how 
these are crossed) are all important considerations to address when deciding whether to make a journey on foot or bicycle as opposed to the car, bus or train. In particular where 
severance is concerned, it is important that planning for this 
type of movement takes a strategic approach to determining scheme locations and the extent of infrastructure required, 
to ensure full journeys can be made between important 
destinations rather than people being ‘cut-off’ partway through a journey.      
7.25 Funding has been secured by Worcestershire County 
Council through the National Productivity Investment Fund 
(NPIF), announced in October 2017, to implement a number 
of new sustainable transport infrastructure improvements to provide a better walking and cycling experience in and around Bromsgrove District’s urban area. The proposed 
schemes are still in the early stages of planning, however 
they will include proposals for new stretches of infrastructure as well as improvements to existing stretches such as along 
National Cycle Route 5 which runs through the centre of 
Bromsgrove Town. ?
Q. T 9:  What would encourage you to 
walk or cycle more as opposed to 
travelling by car, especially for shorter 
journeys in and around Bromsgrove Town and the District’s larger villages?
Q. T 10:  Are there any areas of the 
District you think would benefit most 
from potential funding sources to deliver 
new walking and cycling routes?
Q. T 11:  Are there any areas of the 
District where funding sources could help fund the improvement of any existing 
walking or cycling routes?
?
Q. T 12:  Do you think there are any 
Transport Issues that we have missed? 
If so, please tell us what they are.Town Centre andLocal Centres
48
£Bromsgrove Town Centre
is bene/f_itting from a
£1,600,000
heritage-led regenerationschemeVacant retail units inBromsgrove Town Centrehas fallen to
10.3%49
8. Town Centre and
Local Centres
8.1 Once a medieval market town, Bromsgrove Town Centre 
lies at the heart of the District and is a thriving centre with 
shops, employment, leisure and tourism, cultural and social 
facilities. Whilst the Council aims to maintain and enhance the vitality and viability of the Town Centre through an 
increase in the retail and social facilities on offer, modern 
consumer behaviour in the UK has become far more complex over recent years. We are increasingly shopping in different ways, buying from a variety of different channels and 
locations dependent on where we are in the day and 
what we are doing. Buying patterns are also driven by convenience; there is now a diverse range of shopping 
opportunities, whether it is locally, town centres, out-of-
town, service stations, online, TV shopping, mobile shopping, travel locations or many more places, and the choices are 
increasing all the time. 
8.2 The NPPF advocates that local authorities should plan 
positively, to support town centres to generate local 
employment, promote beneficial competition within and between town centres, and create attractive, diverse places where people want to live, visit and work. They should 
recognise town centres as the heart of their communities 
and pursue policies to support their viability and vitality. 
8.3 The NPPF is clear that there should be a ‘town centre 
first’ policy giving preference to sites which are well connected to the town centre, as opposed to edge of 
centre and out of centre proposals. We also need to consider 
the individuality of town centres in terms of competition, consumer choice and diversity and where town centres are 
in decline, future economic activity should be encouraged. 
Residential developments and bringing vacant floor space above shops back into use could make a significant contribution to the enhancement of town centre locations 
and offer opportunities for supporting regeneration and 
increasing footfall at different times of the day.Implications of SA Scoping 
information
8.4 The Scoping Report identifies the following key 
sustainability issues:
 The need to ensure appropriate services and facilities are  
 available and accessible to meet the needs arising from  
 new residential development, whether through new  
 provision or expansion of existing services and facilities;
 The need to support and enhance the existing local  
 centres;
 The need to ensure interconnection between public  
 transport services, e.g. connections from the Town  
 Centre to Bromsgrove Town train station or between  
 rural bus routes;
 The need to encourage more walking and cycling, 
 provision of safe and interconnected routes.
8.5 Based on the information we have gathered in the 
Scoping Report and our understanding of the broad issues facing town centres generally, we think we need to focus on the following issues in a local context, to explore how they 
may impact on our District and how the Plan Review could 
address them:
 Bromsgrove Town Centre
 Town Centre Movement and Connectivity
 Local Centres 
50Bromsgrove Town Centre
8.6 As part of the        Bromsgrove Town Centre 
Regeneration programme, Bromsgrove Town Centre has 
had major investment and seen a number of improvements 
to the public realm and additions of high quality retail such as Waitrose at the old Market Hall site. There has also been 
major investment in its health services with the opening 
of the new multi-million pound Town Centre Health Centre (Churchfields) and the new Bromsgrove Leisure Centre (completed in November 2017). There are also a number of 
other developments within the Town Centre currently under 
construction, including the refurbished Bromsgrove Retail Park on the Birmingham Road and a new Aldi store opposite. 
Along with the addition of new retail and health facilities, 
there has also been an increase in the number of independent bars and restaurants on offer, which has 
supported the growth of the Town Centre’s evening economy. 
8.7 Whilst the growth of the Town Centre’s evening economy 
is a positive enhancement, we need to be mindful of the 
wider structural shift that is underway, which might affect the future use of town centres. There is an increase in online shopping and banking, which might impact on our Town 
Centre’s daytime economy. Bromsgrove Town Centre currently 
lacks a worker economy, which could add vibrancy to the daytime economy, especially during the lunchtime period. 
8.8 The vibrant market days attract a number of visitors and 
has helped increase footfall to the primary shopping area of 
the Town. The High Street also contains a number of historic 
buildings of which some are listed and/or are protected by Conservation Area status and a number of historic buildings 
in the Town Centre have benefitted from being part of the
      Townscape Heritage Initiative (THI) programme which has funded improvements to historic shopfronts in the town and will run until December 2018. The Town Centre is 
also home to the Artrix Arts Centre which hosts events and 
offers the creative sector opportunities to be involved in creating distinct spaces that develop links and synergy across 
the Town Centre.?
Q. TC 1:  Do you feel positive about 
what Bromsgrove Town Centre has to 
offer? If not, why not?
Q. TC 2:  Do you think Bromsgrove 
Town Centre should be promoted for 
more retail, commercial and leisure, office/employment generating uses or 
residential led development?
Q. TC 3:  Do you think that the current 
policies in the Bromsgrove Development 
Plan are promoting effective change and flexible enough to respond to rapid 
change in retailing trends? 8.9 The District Council in partnership with NWedR has 
adopted a Centres Strategy: 
http://moderngovwebpublic.bromsgrove.gov.uk/
documents/s34520/BromTownCentreStrategyFINAL.pdf with a key focus on identifying and co-ordinating 
opportunities which will inject new vibrancy into 
Bromsgrove Centres, strengthen communication and support local businesses. This Strategy along with the BDP identifies key issues and improvements needed for the Town Centre 
whilst creating a town where people want to live, work and 
socialise. Enhancing connectivity in Bromsgrove Town Centre to existing leisure facilities and the Bromsgrove Town train 
station will help promote a positive image for the Town 
helping it to continually grow, increase dwell times and encourage inward investment.
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G
G51
Town Centre Movement and 
Connectivity
8.10 Bromsgrove Town’s train station is located 
approximately one mile from the Town Centre and has 
undergone recent refurbishment. The Town Centre is home 
to the bus interchange, which provides Bromsgrove Town with regular links between the surrounding residential areas 
and the wider region. There is however still an increased 
reliability on car use in and around the Town Centre and there are poor pedestrian, cycle and bus linkages between the Town Centre and Bromsgrove Town train station. 
There is a need to plan for and encourage better connectivity 
and increase ‘walkability’ and cycle routes in and around the Town from the surrounding residential areas. Some public 
realm improvements have been made recently, but there is 
still some improvement needed in some of the connecting streets and spaces and also in relating to signage and way 
marking.
8.11 The previous section touched on the diverse variety 
of uses on offer in Bromsgrove Town Centre, but how many 
of our visitors treat our Town Centre as a go-to destination and stay long enough to enjoy it and make new discoveries? Hectic lifestyles see visitors ‘popping in’ for food shopping 
or a medical appointment, for example, but visitors may be 
missing opportunities to stop and discover more of what’s around them. For example, it’s only typically an 8 minute 
walk to Sanders Park from Asda via the St. John’s 
Conservation Area and it only takes typically 20 minutes to walk from one end of the Town Centre retail zone to the 
other. If the future of town centres in general relies on 
diversifying how and why they are used, we need to ensure that people can easily navigate around Bromsgrove Town 
Centre once they have arrived. We need to encourage people 
to visit our Town Centre as a longer-stay destination rather than as a short-term convenience. ?
Q. TC 4:  Do you think pedestrian 
priority, linkages and mobility within 
and across the Town Centre could be 
improved and also to the Town Centre from housing developments? If so, how?
Q. TC 5:  Do you feel that the Town 
Centre is safe and accessible to all? 
Where do you feel improvements should 
be made?
Q. TC 6:  Do you think we need to 
improve the general  connectivity between Bromsgrove Town train station 
and the Town Centre? If so, how?
52 GRefer to Glossary on page 66Local Centres
8.12 The        Local Centres in the District are important 
and provide essential local services to residents, as well as 
connecting more rural areas of the District. There is a 
hierarchy of smaller local centres, catering largely for the day to day needs of residents. These shopping locations are 
in Alvechurch, Aston Fields, Barnt Green, Catshill, Hagley, 
Rubery, Sidemoor and Wythall.
8.13 Some of the District’s Local Centres have seen a rise 
in vacancy rates in recent years, so it is important that they 
are safeguarded for retail use into the future in order to ensure the long term sustainability of the Centres. The NPPF 
promotes town and other centres as important places for 
communities and the Government wants new economic growth and development for main town centre uses to 
be focused in existing centres to ensure their vitality and 
viability. G ?
Q. TC 7:  Do you think your Local Centre 
provides everything you need? If not, can 
you identify your Local Centre and tell us 
what you think it needs?
?
Q. TC 8:  Do you think there are any Town Centre & Local Centre Issues that 
we have missed? If so, please tell us what 
they are.
SocialInfrastructure
53
The Council
manages 8  
allotment sites
Life expectancy is almost
80  
years for men and 
84
years for womenOver  44%
of household waste isrecycled or composted Nearly 
 68%
 of adults are classed as overweightor obese
21 
GP practices/Health Centres24 
outdoor facilitiesfor young people(including MUGAsand skate parks)32
equipped children’s play areas
Only  4.8%
of residents considertheir health to be bad/very bad
549. Social Infrastructure
9.1 Bromsgrove District, being rural, makes it a much sought 
after and desirable place to live, which  makes it more of a 
challenge when it comes to ensuring communities have 
access to supporting social infrastructure, facilities and services. This can be a particular issue in the District’s 
smaller settlements, some of which are relatively isolated. 
Settlements work by providing services for a wider area; the bigger the settlement, the more services it tends to have. Over time a settlement hierarchy has been established in 
the District, with Bromsgrove Town providing most of the 
services, whilst the smaller settlements have been limited to providing local services. As car ownership has increased, 
service provision in the smaller settlements has tended to 
decline as people choose to go further afield for services and facilities. 
9.2 The NPPF highlights the important role that the 
planning system has in creating a high quality built 
environment, with accessible local services that reflect the 
community’s needs and support its health, social and cultural well-being. As part of its economic role, the planning system should be identifying and coordinating development 
requirements, including the provision of infrastructure.
9.3 New development inevitably creates additional demands 
on existing social infrastructure; therefore it is important to 
plan for the delivery of these supporting services to ensure our communities continue to function successfully.Implications of SA Scoping 
information
9.4 The Scoping Report identifies the following key 
sustainability issues:
 The need to ensure provision of suitable and accessible  
 health care services;
 The need to address the following Health Priority Area  
 Projects for Bromsgrove District:
  Improve mental wellbeing;
  Increase physical activity;
  Reduce harm from alcohol; and
  Ageing well.
 The need to address the following Indices of Multiple  
 Deprivation issues in the District’s most deprived areas:  
 low incomes, high unemployment, low educational 
 attainment and skills and poor health;
 The need to create safe and secure living environments  
 by reducing the level of crime in the District;
 The need to ensure that good design principles are  
 implemented for new development to reduce crime and  
 improve safety;
 The need to improve connectivity and accessibility in the  
 District to reduce the chance of crime related incidents;
 The need to ensure appropriate services and facilities are  
 available and accessible to meet the needs arising from  
 new residential development, whether through new  
 provision or expansion of existing services and facilities;
 The need to protect and enhance open space provision  
 across the District.
9.5 Based on the information we have gathered in the 
Scoping Report and our understanding of social 
infrastructure issues, we think we need to focus on the following issues in a local context, to explore how they 
may impact on our District and how the Plan Review 
could address them:
 Community Facilities
 Health and Education Facilities
 Open Space, Sports and Recreation
55?
Q. SOI 1:  What types of community 
facilities do you think are important for 
the District? Do you think Bromsgrove 
District has enough of them? Are they in the right locations and are they 
sufficiently well equipped and fit for 
purpose?
Q. SOI 2:  Are there any community 
and leisure facilities that you don’t currently have easy access to that you 
feel would improve your quality of life 
or benefit your local community? If so, please specify what and where you think 
it should be provided.
Q. SOI 3:  Do you feel that there are 
enough things to do for different age 
groups? ? Are there any age groups that you feel aren’t provided for?Community Facilities
9.6 Community facilities can play an important role in our 
health and well-being and offer opportunities for social 
integration, which in turn can tackle the feeling of isolation. 
This may be particularly important in some of our more rural and remote small settlements. Some growth can therefore 
have a positive impact on a settlement’s ability to support 
new and existing community facilities.
9.7 The settlement hierarchy in Bromsgrove District means 
that most community facilities are currently focussed in and 
around the Town Centre and larger settlements, therefore more localised access to community facilities varies 
significantly across the District.
9.8 One of the challenges for the District in terms of the 
provision of community facilities is ensuring existing and 
new residents have access to the facilities they require, but also ensuring that these facilities can be sustained, 
particularly in some of the smaller settlements. 
While some of the smaller settlements have local accessto some facilities, they can be limited.  
56?
Q. SOI 4:  Do you think there is a 
good range of health facilities in the 
District? Do you think there are the right 
types of facilities/services in the right locations and are they easy to access? 
(e.g. locating healthcare facilities close 
to homes for the elderly). Please explain your response.
Q. SOI 5:  What educational 
facilities do you think are needed in the 
District to support existing and new 
communities and to help address skills shortages within the local economy?Health and Education Facilities
9.9 Ensuring the District’s communities have good health 
and well-being is important to the Council, and making sure 
we have the right health facilities in the right locations is key 
to achieving this. Health facilities include hospitals, medical centres and specialist units and outpatient care centres. 
As Bromsgrove District’s population grows and lives longer, 
it is inevitable that there will be a higher demand for healthcare facilities.
9.10 The general health of people living in Bromsgrove 
District varies. While Bromsgrove District performs better than the national average for many health outcome 
indicators, there are some areas of concern where 
Bromsgrove District is much worse than the national average. This includes an increasing numbers of adults being classified 
as overweight or obese, high levels of diabetes, high levels 
of alcohol related liver disease, and injuries due to falls in some of the District’s older residents. In order to ensure that 
we plan for the health of the District we need to look at the 
existing healthcare provision, find out what works well, and look at whether we should be allocating new sites or expanding existing facilities to meet future demands.
9.11 The Government attaches great importance to ensuring 
that a sufficient choice of school places is available to meet 
the needs of existing and new communities. Worcestershire 
County Council is the responsible Local Education Authority and commissioner of school places for Bromsgrove District, 
and advises on the current educational capacity and future 
needs within the District. The District’s schools are currently very close to capacity and forecasts indicate that pupil 
numbers are set to increase, which could result in a shortage 
of school places, if the issue is not tackled directly. Forecasted pupil numbers and future growth in the District will require additional provision through new schools, or the expansion 
of existing schools.
57?
Q. SOI 8:  Do you think the Plan could 
do more to protect important open 
space areas in the District? If so, which 
particular areas are you concerned about and what do you think the Plan could do?
Q. SOI 9:  Do you think there need to 
be more allotment facilities within the 
District? If so, where?
Q. SOI 10:  Should we be thinking 
about the provision of multifunctional 
community ‘hubs’ , (in existing settlements and new developments) 
which could provide all or some of the 
above services and facilities in one location? Might this be a solution to 
ensure their longevity and viability? 
What types of functions do you think a community ‘hub’ should  provide?Open Space, Sports and 
Recreation
9.12 Planning can assist in encouraging people to lead 
more active lifestyles, through the provision of open space 
and facilities for sports and recreation. We currently support 
proposals and activities that protect, retain or enhance existing sport, recreational and amenity assets, lead to the 
provision of additional assets, or improve access to facilities.
9.13 Whilst physical activity levels in the District are slightly 
above the national average, good access to natural open 
spaces can positively impact on our mental well-being and 
social inclusion as well. In order to plan for a more physically and mentally healthier population, we need to understand 
the needs for, and uses of, our open space, sports and 
recreation facilities and look at opportunities for new and improved provision. For example, encouraging ‘countryside 
walks’ through our natural open spaces and taking 
advantage of available allotment facilities. 
?
Q. SOI 6:  Are there any existing parks 
or areas of open space within the District 
that you think could have a multi-use? 
e.g. for recreation uses alongside green infrastructure
Q. SOI 7:  The Council has been 
focussing on creating fewer, higher 
quality open spaces and play spaces 
where more play equipment is provided in concentrated areas, rather than 
providing lots of smaller play areas.
Do you agree with this approach? If not what other approach would you suggest??
Q. SOI 11:  Do you think there are any Social Infrastructure Issues that we 
have missed? If so, please tell us what 
they are.Natural and HistoricEnvironments
58
13  SSSIs 90  Local Wildlife
Sites 12
Conservation
Areas
13
Scheduled Monuments 469 listed buildings
3 
Country Parks2 
Registered Parksand Gardens59
10. Natural and Historic
Environments
Natural Environment
10.1 Bromsgrove District is fortunate to benefit from an 
attractive setting within the Worcestershire countryside, 
which contains a diverse range of biological and geological 
assets. Our natural environment contains statutorily protected        Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), 
species and habitats, which are supplemented by locally 
protected assets such as local wildlife sites. 10.2 This statutory protection means that in general terms our natural environment is afforded a reasonable level of 
consideration, protection, mitigation and enhancement 
throughout the        plan-making and decision-taking processes. It is essential for us to ensure that our natural 
environment is protected and enhanced as much as possible, 
and mitigation measures are seen as a last resort if there are no reasonable alternatives. 
G
GRefer to Glossary on page 66
G60?
Q. NE 1:  Which of the following 
approaches do you think we should 
adopt as we review the District Plan?
Option 1:  Leave the policies as they 
are if they are fit for purpose and only 
consider amending them when national legislation and planning policy renders 
them out of date
Option 2:  Rewrite the policies
Q. NE 2:  Do you think our current 
policies (detailed above) are ineffective 
in any way? If so, how?
Q. NE 3:  How do you think the 
policies in the Plan could help to develop 
a nature recovery network and deliver net gains for biodiversity in the District? 
?
Q. NE 4:  Do you think there are any Natural Environment Issues that we 
have missed? If so, please tell us what 
they are.Implications of SA Scoping 
information
10.3 The Scoping Report identifies the following key 
sustainability issues:
 The need to conserve and enhance biodiversity including  
 sites designated for their nature conservation value;
 The need to maintain, restore and expand the District’s  
 priority habitats;
 The need to protect and enhance sites designated for  
 their geological interest;
 The need to safeguard and enhance the green 
        infrastructure network, helping to meet 
 the priorities of the Worcestershire Green Infrastructure  
 Strategy; The need to conserve and enhance the District’s 
 landscape character.
10.4 Whilst we are mindful of the need to allocate land 
for development in the District, we think that the NPPF coupled with the Natural Environment policies in the BDP , are 
serving our assets well and addressing the key sustainability 
issues identified above. However, the Government’s 25 year Environment Plan (2018) seeks to expand net gain 
approaches used for biodiversity and advocates a natural 
capital approach to help inform planning choices. The Plan encourages Local Planning Authorities to develop locally 
tailored approaches that recognise the relationship between 
the quality of the environment and development. The policies we have in the BDP are:
 BDP21: Natural Environment
 BDP24: Green Infrastructure
10.5 Worcestershire County Council has undertaken a 
comprehensive Landscape Character Assessment across the County which can be used to help inform future design 
guidance for new development in different areas of the 
District. 
GRefer to Glossary on page 66G61
Historic Environment
10.6 Bromsgrove District’s attractive setting within the 
Worcestershire countryside contains an extensive historic 
environment, which offers a variety of unique and distinctive 
characteristics throughout our District.
10.7 The historic nature of Bromsgrove District means that 
we have a significant number of statutorily protected assets such as listed buildings, conservation areas and scheduled monuments, amongst others.10.8 This statutory protection means that in general terms our historic environment is afforded a reasonable level of consideration, protection, mitigation and enhancement 
throughout the plan-making and decision-taking processes.
62?
Q. HE 1:  Which of the following 
approaches do you think we should 
adopt as we review the District Plan?
Option 1:  Leave the policy as it is if 
it is fit for purpose and only consider 
amending it when national legislation and planning policy renders it out of date
Option 2:  Rewrite the policy
Q. HE 2:  Do you think our current 
policy (detailed above) is ineffective in any way? If so, how?
?
Q. HE 3:  Do you think there are any Historic Environment Issues that we 
have missed? If so, please tell us what 
they are.Implications of SA Scoping 
information
10.9 The Scoping Report identifies the following key 
sustainability issues:
 The need to avoid harm to both designated and 
 non-designated heritage assets including with respect to  
 impact via their setting;
 The need to recognise the contribution made by the  
 historic environment to the character of landscapes and  
 townscapes;
 The need to promote high quality design that respects  
 local character;
 The need to protect and enhance the District’s 
 townscapes;
 The need to protect and enhance the District’s cultural  
 heritage assets and their settings;
 The need to tackle heritage at risk, particularly those 
 assets on the heritage at risk register classed as at 
 highest risk.10.10 Whilst we are mindful of the need to allocate land for 
development in the District, we think that the NPPF coupled 
with the Historic Environment policy in the BDP , are serving 
our assets well and addressing the key sustainability issues identified above. At this stage of the Plan Review, we don’t 
think we need to consider altering it. The policy we have in 
the BDP is:
 BDP20: Managing the Historic Environment
Climate Change andWater Resources
63
There are 3  Air Quality
Management Areas
in the DistrictA
B
C
D
E
F
G
The average energy performance 
of buildings in Bromsgrove is  D with 
88% 
of homes rated E or belowClimate projections indicate that the
average daily summer temperature
could increase by7.5%
by the 2050’s
There is potential for summer
rainfall to increase by up to 33%
by the 2050’sThe District has
key /f_looding issuesThe District’s main
aquifers have poor
qualitative status64
11. Climate Change and 
Water Resources
11.1 As we review the BDP and plan for future development, 
we also need to be sensitive to the effects development can 
have on our climate. We need to encourage measures to 
reduce and mitigate against the impacts of        climate change and promote        climate resilience. There is a 
history of over extraction of our water resources and a 
continued need for aquifer protection within the District. 
11.2 Meeting the challenges of climate change and flood 
risk is enshrined in national and international legislation. 
These statutory requirements mean that in general terms we are playing our part in helping to address  climate 
change.G
GRefer to Glossary on page 66Implications of SA Scoping 
information
11.3 The Scoping Report identifies the following key 
sustainability issues:
 The need to ensure that new development is adaptable  
 to the effects of climate change;
 The need to mitigate climate change including through  
 increased renewable energy provision;
 The need to protect and enhance the quality of the  
 District’s water sources;
 The need to promote the efficient use of water resources;
 The need to ensure the timely provision of new water  
 services infrastructure to meet demand arising from new  
 development;
 The need to ensure the timely provision of flood defence/ 
 management infrastructure.G
65?
Q. CC 1:  Which of the following 
approaches do you think we should 
adopt as we review the District Plan?
Option 1:  Leave the policies as they 
are if they are fit for purpose and only 
consider amending them when national legislation and planning policy renders 
them out of date.
Option 2:  Rewrite the policies
Q. CC 2:  Do you think our current 
policies (detailed above) are ineffective 
in any way? If so, how??
Q. CC 4:  Do you think there are any 
Climate Change & Water Resource Issues 
that we have missed? If so, please tell us 
what they are.11.4 The policies we have in the BDP add a local context 
and supplement the higher statute. We think that this 
combination is serving our District well and at this stage 
of the Plan Review, we don’t think we need to consider altering our policies. The policies we have in the BDP are:
 BDP22: Climate Change
 BDP23: Water Management
11.5 In terms of air quality, within the District, we have 
three AQMAs (M42, Lickey End; Redditch Road, Stoke Heath; Worcester Road, Bromsgrove), which have been declared 
based on poor air quality in relation to road traffic emissions. 
There is a strong emphasis in the BDP High Quality Design policy in mitigating air quality effects from traffic 
emissions. However, there are other contributing factors 
to poor air quality such as Nitrogen compounds from fertilisers and animal waste in relation to farming 
activities, which aren’t addressed in the BDP .  
?
Q. CC 3:  Do you think we have any 
air quality issues from other pollutants 
within the District? If so, how should we 
address them?
Glossary
66
G67Glossary
G
GIssues and Options Glossary
Page Para ref.  Terminology
 4  1.4 Bromsgrove District Plan/Local Plan 
    This terminology is largely interchangeable. A plan for the future development of a local area,  
    drawn up by the local planning authority in consultation with the community. In law this is   
    described as the development plan documents adopted under the Planning and Compulsory
    Purchase Act 2004. The local plan can consist of both strategic and local policies
 4  1.6 National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)
    The NPPF was first published in March 2012, replacing past Planning Policy Statements/Guidance
    (PPSs/PPGs), and was revised and republished in July 2018. It sets out the Government’s 
    planning policies for England, how these are expected to be applied and the Government’s   
    requirements for the planning system only to the extent that it is relevant, proportionate and  
    necessary to do so. It provides a framework within which local people and their accountable  
    councils can produce their own distinctive local and neighbourhood plans, which reflect the  
    needs and priorities of their communities
 4  1.6 Planning Practice Guidance 
    The National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG) is a web-based resource which brings together  
    planning guidance on various topics into one place. It was launched in March 2014 and coincided  
    with the cancelling of the majority of Government Circulars which had previously given guidance  
    on many aspects of planning
 4  1.6 Sustainable Development 
    A widely used definition drawn up by the World Commission on Environment and Development  
    in 1987: “Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of  
    future generations to meet their own needs” . The Government’s four aims, to be achieved 
    simultaneously are: 
     Social progress which recognises the needs of everyone
     Effective protection of the environment
     Prudent use of natural resources
     Maintenance of high and stable levels of economic growth and employment
 4  1.6 Sustainability Appraisal (SA)
    Appraisal of the economic, environmental and social effects of a plan from the outset of the  
    preparation process to allow decisions to be made that accord with sustainable developmentG
68GIssues and Options Glossary continued
Page Para ref.  Terminology
 4  1.6 Habitat Regulations Assessment 
    The purpose of the Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) is to identify any aspects of the 
    emerging Local Plan that would have the potential to cause a likely significant effect on Natura  
    2000 or European sites (Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), Special Protection Areas (SPAs) and
    Ramsar sites), (either in isolation or in combination with other plans and projects), and to 
    identify appropriate avoidance and mitigation strategies where such effects were identified.  
    There is a legal requirement for all Local Plans to be subject to a HRA. The need for HRA is set out  
    within Article 6 of the EC Habitats Directive 1992, and interpreted into British law by the 
    Conservation of Habitats & Species Regulations 2010
 4  1.7 Housing White Paper
    ‘Fixing our broken housing market’ is the housing white paper which sets out the Government’s  
    plans to reform the housing market and boost the supply of new homes in England
 4  1.7 Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
    Community Infrastructure Levy is a levy that local authorities can choose to charge on new 
    developments in their area. The money should be used to support development by funding   
    infrastructure that the council, local community and neighbourhoods want
 5  1.7 Tests of Soundness
    Soundness means founded on a robust and credible evidence base and the most appropriate  
    strategy when considered against the reasonable alternatives. For something to be sound is must  
    also be positively prepared, justified, effective and consistent with national policy
 5  1.9 The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012)
    These Regulations set out the legislative procedures that need to be followed throughout the  
    plan-making process
 5  1.9 Adoption
    The final confirmation of a Local Plan as a statutory document by the Local Planning Authority
 5  1.10 SA Scoping Report 
    The first stage of the Sustainability Appraisal (SA) process, which appraises baseline data, plans,  
    policies and programmes and sets out the approach to undertaking SA 
 8  1.19 Brownfield Land or previously developed land (PDL) 
    Land that contains permanent buildings (excluding agriculture or forestry buildings) and 
    associated fixed-surface infrastructure. The definition covers the curtilage of the development69
G
GIssues and Options Glossary continued
Page Para ref.  Terminology
 10  1.30 Local Development Scheme (LDS) 
    Sets out the programme for developing the Local Plan and other Local Development Documents
 17  4.4 Neighbourhood Plan
    A plan prepared by a parish council or neighbourhood forum for a designated neighbourhood  
    area. Neighbourhood planning gives communities direct power to develop a shared vision for  
    their neighbourhood and shape the development and growth of their local area. They are able to  
    choose where they want new homes, shops and offices to be built, have their say on what those  
    new buildings should look like and what infrastructure should be provided, and grant planning  
    permission for the new buildings they want to see go ahead
 17  4.5 West Midlands Combined Authority
    18 local authorities and four Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) working together to move 
    powers from Whitehall to the West Midlands and its locally elected politicians. 
    Leadership of the WMCA comes from the Mayor and the leaders of the seven constituent local  
    authorities, which have full voting rights. Non-constituent authorities, which include the LEPs  
    and ten local councils from across the wider West Midlands region, have reduced voting rights  
    but play a crucial role at board level, helping to inform policy and drive forward the WMCA   
    agenda
 22  4.17 Local Housing Need
    The number of homes identified as being needed through the application of the standard   
    method set out in national planning guidance, or a justified alternative approach 
    https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ 
    data/file/728247/How_is_a_minimum_annual_local_housing_need_figure_calculated_
    using_the_standard_method.pdf 
 
22  4.17  Household projections
    Household projections are trend-based and indicate the number of additional households that  
    would form if recent demographic trends continue
 22  4.17 Local affordability ratios
    Housing affordability is calculated by dividing house prices by annual work place-based earnings.  
    With respect to Bromsgrove District, the affordability ratio is 10.24, which is higher than the  
    England average of 7.7G
70GIssues and Options Glossary continued
Page Para ref.  Terminology
 24  4.24 Safeguarded Land
    Formerly referred to as Areas of Development Restraint (ADRs). Areas of land taken out of the  
    Green Belt in the District Plan/ Local Plan which have been identified as possible land for new  
    development when required in the future
 25  4.26 Housing Market Area
    A geographical area defined by household demand and preferences for all types of housing,  
    reflecting the key functional linkages between places where people live and work. It might be  
    the case that housing market areas overlap.
    The extent of the housing market areas identified will vary, and many will in practice cut across  
    various local planning authority administrative boundaries. Local planning authorities should  
    work with all the other constituent authorities under the duty to cooperate
 29  5.8 Affordable Housing 
    Housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the market (including housing  
    that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or is for essential local workers); and  
    which complies with one or more of the following: Affordable housing for rent, Starter homes,  
    Discounted market sales housing, Other affordable routes to home ownership 
 29  5.9 Housing completions
    The number of new homes built in a 12 month period (1 April to 31 March), which includes   
    private market and affordable housing completions. Affordable housing is only secured on sites  
    of 11 or more dwellings. The housing completions figure includes sites of less than 11 dwellings  
    where no affordable housing contribution has been secured. Therefore the number of completed  
    affordable housing units will always be less than (up to) 40% of all housing completions
 29  5.10 Essential local workers 
    Public sector employees who provide frontline services in areas including health, education and  
    community safety and can include NHS staff, teachers, police, firefighters and military personnel,  
    social care and childcare workers
 29  5.10 Starter Homes
    Intended for purchase by first-time buyers who fall within the 23 to 40 age range, and have a  
    combined annual income of less than £80,000; as this age group has seen the most significant  
    drop in home ownership over the last 20 years71
G
GIssues and Options Glossary continued
Page Para ref.  Terminology
 29  5.12 Build to Rent 
    Purpose built housing that is typically 100% rented out. It can form part of a wider multi-tenure  
    development scheme comprising either flats or houses, but should be on the same site and/or  
    contiguous with the main development. Schemes will usually offer longer tenancy agreements  
    of three years or more, and will typically be professionally managed stock in single ownership  
    and management control
 
 32  5.20 Self-build plots
    Must have access to a public highway and have connections for electricity, water and waste water
    at the plot boundary
 32  5.24 Building for Life 12 
    A government-endorsed industry standard for well-designed homes and neighbourhoods. 
    It comprises 12 easy to understand questions that are designed to be used as a way of structuring
    discussions about a proposed development. There are four questions in each of the three 
    chapters:
     Integrating into the neighbourhood
     Creating a place
     Street and home
 36  6.12 Average weekly employee earnings
    An estimate of average earnings based on the wages of people who work in Bromsgrove District 
 36  6.12 Average weekly resident earnings
    An estimate of average earnings based on the wages of people who live in Bromsgrove District,  
    but may work elsewhere in the Region
 37  6.15 Employment land requirement
    Employment demand forecasting which includes forecasts of employment demand by linking  
    property and economic analysis and identifying the priority sectors of the local economy. 
    Includes forecasting of future floorspace needs and their uses
 37  6.15 Employment land supply 
    The land identified to meet the employment land requirement within the DistrictG
72GIssues and Options Glossary continued
Page Para ref.  Terminology
 38  6.18 B use development
    Defined by the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order (1987) and is made up of B1a  
    Offices, B1b Research & Development, B1c Light Industrial, B2 General Industrial, and B8 Storage  
    and Distribution
 
 43  7.5 Air Quality Management Areas
    Areas designated by local authorities because they are not likely to achieve national air quality  
    objectives by the relevant deadlines
 50  8.6 Bromsgrove Town Centre Regeneration programme
    Private and public investment (around £100 million) to stimulate rejuvenation of the historic  
    town. Investment has provided a new Public Realm for the High Street and major new retail  
    developments along its length. A new Health Centre, a new Library and a new Police and Fire  
    Station have also been developed as part of the Bromsgrove Regeneration Programme
 50  8.8 Townscape Heritage Initiative (THI) programme
    A £1.6 million heritage-led regeneration grant scheme jointly funded by the Heritage Lottery  
    Fund, Worcestershire County Council and Bromsgrove District Council. It aims to contribute to the
    regeneration of the town centre by working in partnership with local businesses and partners  
    to repair and enhance historic properties in a specific area of High Street and Worcester Road,  
    using traditional techniques, methods of construction and high quality natural or traditional  
    materials
 52  8.12 Local Centres
    Local Centres include a range of small shops of a local nature, serving a small catchment. 
    Typically, local centres might include, amongst other shops, a small supermarket, a newsagent, 
    a sub-post office and a pharmacy. Other facilities could include a hot-food takeaway and 
    launderette. Local centres may also provide the focus for other community social facilities 
    including health or education
 59  10.1 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)
    Relates to specifically defined areas where protection is afforded to sites of national wildlife or  
    geological interest. Natural England is responsible for identifying and protecting these sites73
G
GIssues and Options Glossary continued
Page Para ref.  Terminology
 59  10.2 Plan-making and Decision-taking Processes
    Plan-making is the process of preparing and producing a District Plan/ Local Plan. Decision-  
    taking is the process of determining planning applications, which should be done in accordance  
    with the District Plan/Local Plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise
 60  10.3 Green Infrastructure
    The network of green spaces and natural elements that intersperse and connect our cities, 
    towns and villages. It is the open spaces, waterways, gardens, woodlands, green corridors,   
    wildlife habitats, street trees, natural heritage and open countryside. Green Infrastructure
    provides multiple benefits for the economy, the environment and people
 64  11.1 Climate Change
    An increase in the mean annual surface temperature of the earth’s atmosphere, due to increases  
    in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as Carbon Dioxide (CO 2), 
    Methane (CH 4) and Nitrous Oxide (N2 O)
 
 64  11.1 Climate Resilience
    To ensure development fully mitigates against the effects of climate change and minimises the  
    potential impacts of climate change now and in the futureIf you need this information
in another language or format,
please contact us to discuss how we
can best meet your needs.
Phone: 01527 548284
Email:
equalities@bromsgroveandredditch.gov.uk
Issues and Options
Bromsgrove District Council 
Planning and Regeneration      Parkside       Market Street       Bromsgrove
Worcestershire B61 8DA