Cambridge Local Plan 
2018  
October 2018  
 CONTENTS
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
i Contents  
Index of policies  ii 
Foreword  1 
Section One: About Cambridge  3 
Section Two: The Spatial Strategy  8 
Section Three: City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas 
and site specific proposals  44 
Section Four: Responding to climate change and managing resources  108 
Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge economy  141 
Section Six: Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  156 
Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  180 
Section Eight: Services and local facilities  209 
Section Nine: Providing the infrastructure to support development  229 
Appendix A: The development plan for Cambridge  245 
Appendix B: Proposals schedule  247 
Appendix C: Designations schedule  270 
Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  297 
Appendix E: Roof extensions design guide  322 
Appendix F: Tall buildings and the skyline  328 
Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  346 
Appendix H: Shopfront design guide  361 
Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  376 
Appendix J: Biodiversity  391 
Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  398 
Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  407 
Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  425 
Appendix N: Five Year Housing Land Supply  486 
Glossary  496 
Bibliography  521 
Acknowledgements  532 
  INDEX OF POLICIES
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
ii Index of policies  
Section Two: The Spatial Strategy  
Policy 1: The presumption in favour of sustainable development  14 
Policy 2: Spatial strategy for the location of employment development  23 
Policy 3: Spatial strategy for the location of residential development  24 
Policy 4: The Cambridge Green Belt  28 
Policy 5: S ustainable  transport  and infrastructure  31 
Policy 6: Hierarchy of centres and retail capacity  32 
Policy 7: The River Cam  36 
Policy 8: Setting of the city  37 
Policy 9: Review of the Local Plan  41 
  
Section Three: City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity 
Areas and site specific proposals   
Policy 10: The City Centre  44 
Policy 11: Development in the City Centre Primary Shopping Area  46 
Policy 12: Fitzroy/Burleigh Street/Grafton Area of Major Change  46 
Policy 13: Cambridge East  49 
Policy 14: Areas of Major Change and Opportunity Areas – general 
principles  57 
Policy 15: Cambridge Northern Fringe East and new railway Station Area 
of Major Change  60 
Policy 16: South of Coldham’s Lane Area of Major Change  64 
Policy 17: Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s 
Hospital) Area of Major Change  67 
Policy 18: Southern Fringe Areas of Major Change  71 
Policy 19: West Cambridge Area of Major Change  73 
Policy 20: Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road Area of Major 
Change  79 
Policy 21: Station Areas West and Clifton Road Area of Major Change  81 INDEX OF POLICIES
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
iii Policy 22: Mitcham’s Corner Opportunity Area  85 
Policy 23: Eastern Gate Opportunity Area  89 
Policy 24: Mill Road Opportunity Area  93 
Policy 25: Cambridge Railway Station, Hills Road Corridor to the City 
Centre Opportunity Area  96 
Policy 26: Old Press/Mill Lane Opportunity Area  99 
Policy 27: Site specific development opportunities  101 
  
Section Four: Responding to climate change and managing 
resources   
Policy 28: Carbon reduction, community energy networks, sustainable 
design and construction, and water use  108 
Policy 29: Renewable and low carbon energy generation  119 
Policy 30: Energy -efficiency improvements in existing dwellings  120 
Policy 31: Integrated water management and the water cycle  121 
Policy 32: Flood risk  125 
Policy 33: Contaminated land  128 
Policy 34: Light pollution control  130 
Policy 35: Protection of human health and quality of life from noise and 
vibration  131 
Policy 36: Air quality, odour and dust  134 
Policy 37: Cambridge Airport Public Safety Zone and Air Safeguarding 
Zones  135 
Policy 38: Hazardous installations  138 
Policy 39: Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory, Lord’s Bridge  138 
  
Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge economy   
Policy 40: Development and expansion of business space  142 
Policy 41: Protection of business space  147 
Policy 42: Connecting new developments to digital infrastructure  150 
Policy 43: University development  150 
Policy 44: Specialist colleges and language schools  153 INDEX OF POLICIES
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
iv   
Section Six: Maintaining a balanced supply of housing   
Policy 45: Affordable housing and dwelling mix  156 
Policy 46: Development of student housing  160 
Policy 47: Specialist housing  163 
Policy 48: Housing in multiple occupation  164 
Policy 49: Provision for Gypsies and Travellers  165 
Policy 50: Residential space standards  166 
Policy 51: Accessible homes  169 
Policy 52: Protecting garden land and the subdivision of existing dwelling 
plots  174 
Policy 53: Flat conversions  175 
Policy 54: Residential moorings  177 
  
Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of 
Cambridge   
Policy 55: Responding to context  180 
Policy 56: Creating successful places  181 
Policy 57: Designing new buildings  182 
Policy 58: Altering and extending existing buildings  183 
Policy 59: Designing landscape and the public realm  184 
Policy 60: Tall buildings and the skyline in Cambridge  186 
Policy 61: Conservation and enhancement of Cambridge’s historic 
environment  188 
Policy 62: Local heritage assets  191 
Policy 63: Works to a heritage asset to address climate change  192 
Policy 64: Shopfronts, signage and shop security measures  194 
Policy 65: Visual pollution  194 
Policy 66: Paving over front gardens  196 
Policy 67: Protection of open space  196 
Policy 68: Open space and recreation provision through new development  198 
Policy 69: Protection of sites of biodiversity and geodiversity importance  201 INDEX OF POLICIES
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
v Policy 70: Protection of priority species and habitats  203 
Policy 71: Trees  205 
  
Section Eight: Services and local facilities   
Policy 72: Development and change of use in district, local and 
neighbour hood centr es 209 
Policy 73: Community, sports and leisure facilities  212 
Policy 74: Education facilities  218 
Policy 75: Healthcare facilities  221 
Policy 76: Protection of public houses  222 
Policy 77: Development and expansion of visitor accommodation  224 
Policy 78: Redevelopment or loss of visitor accommodation  226 
Policy 79: Visitor attractions  226 
  
Section Nine: Providing the infrastructure to support 
development   
Policy 80: Supporting sustainable access to development  229 
Policy 81: Mitigating the transport impact of development  234 
Policy 82: Parking management  236 
Policy 83: Aviation development  238 
Policy 84: Telecommunications  239 
Policy 85: Infrastructure delivery, planning obligations and the Community 
Infrastructure Levy  240 
  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
1 Foreword  
 
This local plan sets out the way we will meet the development needs of 
Cambridge to 2031. Over that time the city has plans to grow significantly; supporting the nationally important economic contribution the city makes and the factors that are inseparable from that success, seen in the exceptional quality of life and place that Cambridge benefits from.  
 
This local plan will manage change in a positive and sympathetic way. It delivers a vision for growth that will secure the priorities for Cambridge. The policies of the plan set out how we will meet the important development needs that must be accommodated, but also how we intend to protect this special city’s outstanding heritage and environmental assets.  
 The plan will deliver new homes and jobs in a sustainable way, providing affordable housing and an accessible, compact city form where people can have sustainable choices about how they access work, study, leisure and other services. 
  
 Acknowledgement  
 
 The preparation of this plan has only been possible through the extensive 
engagement and dialogue with the wide range of individuals, organisations and interest groups that has taken place. The amount of feedback received and the way this has shaped the plan has reflected how much people care about this city and its future. We are grateful for that contribution to the development of this plan.SECTION ONE: ABOUT CAMBRIDGE  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
2  
  
SECTION ONE: ABOUT CAMBRIDGE  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
3 Section One: About Cambridge  
 
The Cambridge Local Plan  
 
1.1 This is the new plan for Cambridge. This plan replaces the Cambridge 
Local Plan 2006 and sets out policies and proposals for future development and spatial planning requirements to 2031.  
 
1.2 Built around the banks of the River Cam, Cambridge is a successful city with a world -class reputation for education, research and knowledge-
based industries and its historic environment. It is a place that people want to visit, live, work and study in. This plan aims to maintain and enhance that success.  
 1.3 Cambridge already demonstrates the success that can be achieved with well-planned growth. The Council adopts a positive and proactive 
approach; but this success also brings challenges. The challenges facing the city are complex and often have no easy resolution, requiring partnership working and consensus among many stakeholders to achieve positive solutions. Delivery of infrastructure to support growth, reducing per capita carbon emissions and managing change to heritage assets of international importance – all within a compact, tightly -bounded 
city – are particular challenges.  
 1.4 Working closely with South Cambridgeshire District Council, which wraps around the city, this plan is based on finding solutions to these challenges, with a high- level vision that meets the aspirations of 
residents, and civic, academic and business communities. The plan follows thes e through with specific cross -cutting themes and objectives 
to tackle the challenges, and then sets out a spatial strategy to deliver the strategic priorities of the plan (some of these reflect national priorities, but they also include priorities for Cambridge and Cambridgeshire). There are area- specific spatial frameworks for the Areas of Major 
Change (AOMCs) and Opportunity Areas within and on the edge of the city as well as the city centre. These include allocations of land for development and more detailed delivery policies to achieve the strategic priorities through day -to-day decision- making on planning applications.  
 1.5 This plan is essentially a pragmatic continuation of the 2006 growth strategy, adjusted to reflect the experience of delivering that st rategy and 
the current context for planning. It focuses on delivery and meeting Cambridge’s needs. The plan reflects how the current growth is changing the city and the new challenges this creates. In the light of experience, the plan has an increased emphasis on mitigating transport impacts and SECTION ONE: ABOUT CAMBRIDGE  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
4 securing further progress on sustainable development, area 
improvement and place making.  
 1.6 This plan sets out what is important for Cambridge to achieve. The plan should be read as a whole, with cross -references kept  to a minimum. A 
more detailed explanation of how each policy area has developed and the reason for the choices made is published alongside this plan.  
 
Cambridge and its context  
 
1.7 Although Cambridge is a small city in size, its international stature and the extent of the facilities it offers are much greater than one would 
expect. The population of Cambridge was 123,900 in 2011.
1 It is 
predicted that by 2031 the population will reach 150,000. Cambridge also has to consider the needs of its academic populati on. The city hosts a 
large student population from the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin University. In 2012, the student population of the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin University was estimated at 29,087.
2 
 1.8 It is also estimated that over 4.5 million people visit Cambridge each year. The city boasts 743.59 hectares of Protected Open Space (POS), including large parks and gardens such as the Cambridge University Botanic Gardens, Parker’s Piece and the other pieces, greens and commons. Overall, this equates to approximately 6.2 hectares of protected open space per 1,000 residents, of which 2.9 hectares per 1,000 residents is publicly accessible. Cambridge has an internationally renowned legacy of designated and undesignated heritage assets  and 
seeks to enhance this legacy by encouraging innovative buildings of the highest quality. An essential part of the character of the city stems from the spaces and grounds around buildings and the important role of trees and other landscape features.  
 1.9 C ambridge is a demonstrably successful place, where economic 
success, high quality of life, sustainable living and quality of place are inextricably linked. Cambridge’s modern- day accomplishments include a 
thriving hi -tech and biotech industry, which has developed since the 
1960s and is known as the Cambridge Phenomenon. Although the hi -
tech and biotech clusters in Cambridge remain successful, the city has seen some negative impacts from this success. Management and mitigation of the impacts of growth is therefore a key challenge. Average wages in the city have not risen in line with the city’s average house prices. This has made it increasingly difficult for people to purchase property in the city, and this has associated impacts on the number of people commuting in from the surrounding villages and market towns.  
 
1 Census 2011  
2 Cambridge City Council Annual Monitoring Report 2012  SECTION ONE: ABOUT CAMBRIDGE  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
5  
1.10 Cambridge is a busy city with a wide influence on its surrounding area. The M11 and A14 are the main trunk roads that connect Cambridge to the strategic road network. The M11 bounds Cambridge to the south and 
west, and provides a direct link to London. The A14 bounds the north of the city, and creates a link from the east coast and the Port of Felixstowe through to the M1 and M6 motorways. Cambridge is on the London to King’s Lynn railway line, with London accessible within 45 minutes. As well as being a hub of road and rail connections, Cambridge is the centre of a wider travel to work and housing market area (the area in which people live to get to work at a settlement that offers major employment).  
The city’s area of influence, both as a sub- regional centre and a major 
focus for employment, includes most of Cambridgeshire, and parts of West Suffolk, Bedfordshire, Essex and North Hertfordshire.  
 1.11 More people in Cambridge than anywhere else in the Unit ed Kingdom 
are likely to use sustainable modes of transport to travel to work. According to the 2011 Census, 33 per cent of residents commute to work by bike, compared with 34 per cent by car. Given the level of commuting, the growth of the city and ongoing demand for its services and facilities, transport infrastructure in the city is under pressure. As a result, more needs to be done to support the use of sustainable modes of transport. Without an integrated approach to the planning of development and transport, the significant achievements in shifting towards sustainable 
transport – walking, public transport and cycling – in recent years will be 
undermined. On the positive side, major new public transport improvements have been delivered recently in the form of the Cambridgeshire Busway, which connects to Peterborough, St Ives and Huntingdon through and beyond the city. Nevertheless, infrastructure funding issues remain a challenge.  
 1.12 The need for new housing in Cambridge is high. Large- scale housing 
developments are underway on sites at Trumpington Meadows, Clay Farm, Glebe Farm, the National Institute of Agricultural Botany (NIAB), and the University of Cambridge’s North West Cambridge site and these are expected to provide over 7,000 new homes. Thes e sites, however, 
will not meet all future housing need to 2031, which is forecast to be around 14,000 new homes between 2011 and 2031. This plan addresses that shortfall.  
 
What comprises the development plan for Cambridge?  
 
1.13 In the past, strategic planning for Cambridge was undertaken at a ‘higher 
plan- making level’, through the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough 
Structure Plan 2003 and the regional spatial strategy (the East of 
England Plan 2008) and their predecessor documents. Both these documents have been  revoked and strategic planning is now undertaken SECTION ONE: ABOUT CAMBRIDGE  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
6 at a local level, coordinated by a statutory ‘duty to cooperate’. The 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Joint Strategic Planning Unit has been set up to help coordinate the development of strategy with South Cambridgeshire District Council, Cambridgeshire County Council and other local planning authorities and stakeholders in the area. However, the outputs of this strategic work are not statutory and therefore do not form part of the official development plan for Cambridge.  
 
1.14 Following the adoption of this plan, the official statutory development plan for Cambridge comprises:  
 
• Cambridge Local Plan 2018;  
• Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy (July 2011); and Site Specific Proposals Plan (February 
2012) Development Plan Documents;  
• Cambridge East Area Action Plan (excluding policies CE/3 and CE/35, which are replaced by Policy 13: Cambridge East); and  
• North West Cambridge Area Action Plan.  
 
The Cambridge Local Plan 2006 is deleted in its entirety and no longer forms part of the development plan.  
 
1.15 Supporting the development plan for Cambridge, there are a number of additional policy documents and guides. These are set out in more detail in Appendix A.  
 Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
7  
  
Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
8 Section Two : The Spatial Strategy  
 
The spatial vision for Cambridge  
 
2.1 This plan has a high- level vision developed from a range of existing 
strategies and through consultations and feedback from stakeholders. It 
is designed to help clarify the kind of city Cambridge wants to be in 2031. 
The vision takes account of the aspirations identified in the Cambridge Local Plan 2006 and through an iterative process has reviewed them against the experience of delivering that vision, and the issues relevant to Cambridge today.  
 2.2 Cambridge is a world- class city in terms of its academic reputation and 
the knowledge- focused economy that has sprung from this. The city has 
experienced strong economic growth even during most years of an  
economic downturn. This success, however, generates its own challenges. The key issues in Cambridge are balancing and managing the conflicts between two dynamics. Firstly, how to maintain the advantages of a compact city – in terms of sustainability and quality of 
life – against demands for knowledge sector led business and housing 
growth and the spatial implications of this dynamic. The planning challenge is to integrate both. It is recognised that the city must grow to maintain its competitiveness and address housing needs and affordability, but the factors that created and underpin this economic 
success and growth must also be carefully balanced. Growth must 
enhance the quality of life and secure sustainable development, supported by the delivery of new and improved infrastructure.  
 
2.3 Below this high -level vision are the strategic objectives, which set out 
what this will mean in spatial planning terms. The local plan is presented in a number of sections that explain the spatial strategy through to its delivery, including cross -cutting issues. The delivery and monitoring 
strategy explains how the outcomes set out in the strategic objectives will be achieved.  
 
The vision for Cambridge to 2031  
 
The vision for Cambridge is of a compact, dynamic city, located wit hin 
the high quality landscape setting of the Cambridge Green Belt. The city will draw inspiration from its iconic historic core, heritage assets, river and structural green corridors, achieving a sense of place in all its parts, with generous, accessible and biodiverse open spaces and well -Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
9 designed architecture. Building on the city’s reputation for design 
excellence, Cambridge’s new development will be innovative and will promote the use of sustainable modes of transport, helping to support the transition  to a more environmentally sustainable and successful low 
carbon economy. The city will continue to develop as a centre of excellence and world leader in the fields of higher education and research, and will foster the dynamism, prosperity and further expansion of the knowledge- based economy, while retaining the high quality of life 
and place that underpins that economic success. It will also grow in importance as a sub- regional centre for a wide range of services. 
Housing provision in the city will be of a high quality and will support the 
development and enhancement of balanced and mixed communities through provision of housing of a mix of sizes and types, including a high proportion of affordable housing. The Cambridge Local Plan 2018  seeks 
to guide and facilitate growth and the infrastructure required to support development, so that the city grows in a sensitive and sustainable manner. This will ensure that the high environmental quality of the city is protected and enhanced and that future developments offer a full range of opportunities to all.  
 
Strategic objectives  
 
The 15 strategic objectives for the implementation of this local plan require all new development in Cambridge to:   1. contribute to the vision of Cambridge as an environmentally sustainable city, where it is easy for people to make a transition to a low car bon lifestyle. This means making best use of energy (including 
community energy projects), water and other natural resources, securing radical reductions in carbon emissions, minimising environmental impact and being capable of adapting to the impacts of climate change;  
 
2. be highly water efficient, contribute to overall flood risk reduction 
through water sensitive urban design, and help to improve the quality of the River Cam and other water features in the city;  
 3. be of the highest quality, in terms of design excellence and innovation, addressing the development’s impact upon its surroundings and embracing the principles of sustainable design and construction;  
 4. contribute to the positive management of change in the historic environment, protecting, enhancing and maintaining the unique 
qualities and character of Cambridge, including the River Cam corridor, the city’s wider landscape and setting, and its designated and undesignated heritage assets for the future;  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
10  
5. protect and, where appropriate, enhance the character and quality of the Cambridge skyline;  
 
6. protect and enhance the landscape setting of the city, which comprises the Cambridge Green Belt, the green corridors penetrating the urban area, the established network of multi -
functional green spaces, and tree  canopy cover in the city;  
 7. protect and enhance the city’s biodiversity, network of habitats and geo-diversity; 
 8. meet the housing needs of the city within its sub- region, delivering an 
appropriate mix of housing types, sizes and tenures to meet existing and future needs, including affordable housing;  
 9. assist the creation and maintenance of inclusive, environmentally sustainable communities;  
 10. promote and support economic growth in environmentally sustainable and accessible locations, facilitating innovation and supporting Cambridge’s role as a world leader in higher education, research, and knowledge- based industries, while maintaining the 
quality of life and place that contribute to economic success;  
 
11. support Cambridge’s vibrant and thriving centres, with a varied range of shopping facilities in accessible locations that meet the needs of people living, working and studying in, or visiting, the city and its wider sub- region;  
 
12. promote social cohesion and sustainability and a high quality of life by maintaining and enhancing provision for open space, sports and 
recreation, community and leisure facilities, including arts and cultural venues that serve Cambridge and the sub- region;  
 
13. be located to help minimise the distance people need to travel, and be designed to make it easy for everyone to move around the city 
and access jobs and services by sustainable modes of transport;  
 
14. ensure appropriate and timely provision of environmentally sustainable forms of infrastructure to support the demands of the cit y, 
including digital and cultural infrastructure; and 
 
15. promote a safe and healthy environment, minimising the impacts of development and ensuring quality of life and place.  
  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
11  
Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
12 Overview  
 
2.4 The plan sets out a strategy for delivering the vision and strategic objectives. The plan has a number of sections, all of which contribute to the achievement of sustainable development.  
 2.5 This section on the spatial strategy for Cambridge sets out the city’s approach to planning for the compact city through focusing new development in accessible locations, reusing previously developed land and completing the delivery of planned new urban neighbourhoods, and small Green Belt releases where exceptional circumstances can be argued. Sufficient land for housing, jobs and education/research, and supporting land uses to meet objectively assessed needs, is allocated at locations and in amounts compatible with this compact city strategy. Emphasis is placed on the need to provide strategic transport infrastructure with a focus on sustainable modes. Continued protection is given to the Cambridge Green Belt, the River Cam corridor and the setting of the historic city. A network of centres is defined to meet appropriate retail and services, and to secure the diversity, vitality and viability of the city centre and district and local centres.  
 2.6 Section Three gives consideration to Cambridge’s city centre, Areas of Major Change and Opportunity Areas, and site specific policies. The city centre will be maintained and enhanced as the focus for retail and leisure, higher education and business, and also as the home to many residents and students. Areas of Major Change (AOMCs) and Opportunity Areas will continue to be carefully masterplanned to ensure that they deliver the quality of plac e expected in the city. Areas where 
considerable change may be expected during the life of the plan are considered, as well as smaller sites that are allocated for development to help meet the city’s needs.  
 2.7 Section Four sets out the need for new development to integrate the 
principles of sustainable design and construction in order to respond to 
our changing climate. Development will help make the best use of scarce resources, such as water, and will need to be capable of adapting to our changing climate, securing radical reductions in carbon emissions and minimising environmental impact.  
 2.8 Section Five addresses the need to support and facilitate Cambridge’s economy and the role of the Cambridge Cluster of knowledge- based 
industries and institutions. This will include a diverse range of employment, to maintain competitiveness and achieve sustainable economic growth. The growth of Cambridge’s world- class university, 
colleges, research and bio- medical facilities will be supported.  
 Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
13 2.9 Section Six seeks to maintai n a balanced supply of housing types and 
sizes to meet the needs of all sections of the community, including the 
maximum reasonable proportion of affordable housing.  
 2.10 Section Seven sets out the approach to protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridg e, maintaining and improving an enviable quality 
of life and place.  
 2.11 Section Eight on services and local facilities addresses the need to protect and increase the city’s community facilities. Infrastructure, including education, local retail and local heal th facilities, will be secured 
in a timely way to support development, in particular serving new communities. The loss of public houses that are viable and valued by the community will be resisted. Cambridge’s role as a national and international tourism destination is supported, while pressures arising from the visitor economy are managed.  
 2.12 Section Nine sets out the need to provide infrastructure to support development, including sustainable transport solutions. This section also establishes the approach to planning obligations requirements and the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL). Monitoring the successful implementation of the plan strategy is covered in Appendix M.  
 
The Spatial Strategy for Cambridge to 2031  
 
2.13 The spatial strategy provides for:  
 
• the presumption in favour of sustainable development and what that 
means in Cambridge;  
• the delivery of objectively assessed development needs, which will be met primarily within the urban area of Cambridge and in three additional locations, where release from the Cambridge Green Belt to deliver small -scale sites for homes and jobs is judged not to 
undermine the purposes of the Green Belt;  
• the delivery of necessary infrastructure to support the needs and mitigate the impacts of growth, and to support the deliver y of 
sustainable new communities; and  
• the need to maintain important characteristics of the city, including the Cambridge Green Belt, the River Cam corridor and the setting of the city.  
  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
14 Policy 1: The presumption in favour of sustainable development  
When considering development proposals, the Council will take a 
positive approach that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained within the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, 2012
5). It will always work proactively wit h applicants to jointly 
find solutions, so that proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the economic success and quality of life and place in Cambridge.  
 Planning applications that accord with the policies in this local plan will be approved without delay,  unless material considerations indicate 
otherwise.  
 Where there are no policies relevant to the application or the relevant policies are out of date at the time of making the decision, then the Council will gra nt planning permission unless material considerations 
indicate otherwise, taking into account whether:  
 a. any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, 2012)  as a whole; or  
b. specific policies in that framework indicate that development should be restricted.  
Supporting text:  
 2.14 The NPPF (2012) states that the purpose of planning is to help achieve sustainable development. For Cambridge, sustainable means supporting and enhancing an efficient, compact city form that is attractive, highly accessible and meets its needs now and in future: a city where the quality of life and place has underpinned economic success.  Development means managing new growth in a positive, caring way so that needs are met creatively and innovatively and they also enhance economic success, quality of life and place, and contribute to the well -being of the many diverse communities in Cambridge.  
 
5 The updated National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) (published in July 2018) states 
that the policies in the previous framework (i.e. NPPF 2012) apply where the Local Plan was 
submitted to the Secretary of State for examination before 24 January 2019 (NPPF 2018, paragraph 214). The Cambridge Local Plan was submitted in March 2014 and references to 
the NPPF in this Local Plan refer to the NPPF 2012 and not the NPPF 2018.  
 Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
15 Meeting Cambridge’s objectively assessed needs  
 
2.15 The NPPF (2012) states that local planning authorities must positively 
seek opportunities to meet the development needs of their areas. Strategies for housing, employment and other uses should be integrated and assessed against relevant market and economic signals. These 
include population change, migration and demographic changes. All of this will identify the type, scale, mix and range of tenure of housing likely to be required in the area over the period of the plan. Local plans should meet objectively assessed needs, with sufficient flexibility to adapt to rapid change, unless the disadvantages of doing so outweigh the benefits or other national policies indicate development should be restricted.  
 2.16 The NPPF (20 12) states that local authorities should aim to boost 
significantly the supply of housing by using their evidence base to ensure their plans meet the full objectively assessed needs for the market and affordable housing in the housing market area. Cambridge City and South Cambridgeshire District Councils are already pursuing a significant growth strategy, set out in their last round of plan making, which proposed a major expansion of Cambridge and the new town at Northstowe. The two Councils have already planned for and are demonstrably delivering considerable levels of growth.  
 2.17 The Councils in Cambridgeshire, along with Peterborough City Council have undertaken joint technical work and an update of the Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) for the Cambridge housing market area in order to identify objectively assessed needs for homes and jobs across the sub -region. The Councils undertook this work cooperatively 
and a memorandum of cooperation and joint spatial approach has been agreed. This was published in May 2013. This confirmed Cambridge’s need was for 14,000 additional homes and 22,100 jobs between 2011 and 2031. Additional independent technical evidence was prepared in 
2016 to further consider need for new housing taking account of national 
guidanc e published after the plan was prepared.  This has confirmed that 
the full Objectively Assessed Need for Cambridge is 14,000 homes. This need is being met in full in this new plan.  
 2.18 A Memorandum of Understanding was also agreed between Cambridge City Counc il and South Cambridgeshire District Council in September 
2014, which agrees that the housing trajectories for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire, as updated each year in the Annual Monitoring Report, will be considered together for the purposes of phasing of 
housing delivery, including for calculating 5 year housing land supply in development management decisions that concern housing development.  
  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
16 Other needs  
 
2.19 The local plan must identify other needs that have to be planned for in the period to 2031. The following land requirements do not necessarily mean specific land will need to be allocated for them. Additional floorspace/facilities will be provided primarily by intensification or extension of existing facilities/sites.  
 
Table 2.1: Summary of other needs during the plan period 
Land use 
need  Requirements identified by the evidence base  
Higher and 
further 
education  Anglia Ruskin University has identified a need for an 
additional 6,000 sq m of faculty space in or close to its East Road Campus  
 Both universities require land for student 
accommodation  
Other 
education and 
health  The Council will continue to work closely with 
Cambridgeshire County Council throughout the plan period to ensure that necessary provision for (0- 19) 
education places is appropriately secured in order to meet changing demand arising through new 
development or demographic changes  
 There is an identified shortfall (to 2021) of at least 
1,050 (7 forms of entry) secondary school places. 
This need will be met by a new secondary school to 
serve the eastern part of Cambridge, and the three 
Councils will continue to work together to find the 
most appropriate location  
Hotels  Up to 1,500 additional hotel bedrooms by 2031. 
Around 1,350 new hotel bedrooms are committed 
already and many are under construction  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
17  
  
 
 
 
 
Meeting the need – Cambridge’s constraints  
 
2.20 The NPPF (2012) states that projected need cannot be considered in 
isolation and the constraints of an area form an important part of coming to a decision on if and how to meet need. For Cambridge, key constraints are: 
• Cambridge’s outstanding historic environment, which is of 
international, national and local significance;  
• limited supply of available land, as well as conservation constraints;  
• transport (and other) infrastructure under pressure; and  
• the Cambridge Green Belt.  
 
The Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire  
 
2.21 The Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire (2013) focuses on the sustainable transport capacity and what needs to be provided in the sub- region between the key economic hubs in and 
around the city and where people live and access services. The strategy plans to further improve the sustainable transport network around the economic hubs and the hi -tech clusters in and around the city, by making 
movement between them straightforward and convenient. The tra nsport 
strategy has been prepared in parallel with the two new local plans and will set out the mitigation and infrastructure requirements necessary to promote sustainable travel as part of the development strategy of the two plans.  Strategic 
leisure facilities  Approximately 20,141 sq m of floorspace (of which 
18,260 sq m for A3, A4, A5 and sui generis uses by 
2031) excluding any sub- regional sports facilities  
Retail  The Council has identified  a capacity to support  
14,141 sq m net of comparison retail floorspace to 
2022  
Waste and 
energy  Need for an energy centre for the city centre district 
heating project of around 2,500 sq m  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
18 The joint spatial approach for Cambridge and its sub- region    
(Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council’s     
joint administrative areas)  
 
2.22 Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council have 
both prepared new development plans for the Cambridge area for the period to 2031. Both plans are underpinned by the new Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire 2013 an d set out 
policies and proposals to meet the objectively assessed development needs of the area and guide future development to 2031.  
 
2.23  For the review of their development plans, the Councils considered 
whether the 2006 strategy remains the most appropriate development strategy to 2031, or whether an alternative would be more suitable as a result  of current circumstances. The inter -relationship between 
Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire means that decisions cannot be taken in isolation and the future approach needs to remain joined up, as it has been in the past. This cooperation is now also a requirement introduced by the Localism Act 2011. On the whole, South Cambridgeshire looks towards Cambridge in functional terms, while Cambridge is affected by a tight administrative boundary and surrounding Green Belt. Therefore, any decision relating to the spatial strategy in South Cambridgeshire is likely to have an impact on Cambridge and vice versa.  
 2.24 The Councils have reviewed jointly how far the current sustaina ble 
development strategy has progressed, what evidence there is that it is achieving its original objectives and what a new sustainable development strategy looks like in view of changes in economic and other circumstances since the current strategy was ad opted. The 
strategy must balance the three strands of sustainability: economic, social and environmental.  
 
2.25 This sets a considerable challenge for the Cambridge area. There is a need for new homes to support the jobs. The aim is to provide as many of those new homes as close to the new jobs as possible to minimise commuting and to minimise and mitigate harmful effects for the environment, climate change and quality of life. The need for jobs and homes has to be considered within the context of a tightly -draw n Green 
Belt, which aims to protect the unique character of Cambridge as a compact, dynamic city with a thriving historic centre, maintain and enhance the quality of the city’s setting, and prevent the city merging with the ring of necklace villages. The Green Belt and its purposes help underpin the quality of life and place in Cambridge, which are fundamental to economic success. Achieving an appropriate balance between these competing arms of sustainable development is a key objective of the development strategy for the new local plans.  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
19  
2.26 The Councils have jointly considered a range of possible development strategy options and associated site options. These have been tested through the sustainability assessment process. They have also been tested through transport modelling and as the long list of site options has 
been narrowed down, key stakeholders such as the education authority have been asked again for their views on the emerging shortlist of sites to help further refine the preferred strategy  and package of sites.  
 2.27 The overarching development strategy for the administrative areas of both Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire for the period to 2031 follows a broadly similar sequence for the preferred location and distribution of new development as  the 2006 strategy. Put simply, the 
preferred sequential approach for new development can be described as: (first) being within the existing urban area of Cambridge; (second) being within the defined fringe sites on the edge of Cambridge; (third) within the six small- scale Green Belt sites proposed to be released from 
the inner Green Belt boundary, four of which are within the city; (fourth) within existing and newly identified new settlement locations at Cambourne, Northstowe, Bourn Airfield and Waterbeach; and lastly in identified villages.  
 2.28 This approach has been endorsed by the Joint Strategic Transport and Spatial Planning Group (JST&SPG), the member governance group set up to guide the collaborative preparation of development plans in Cambridge and Sou th Cambridgeshire and the associated transport 
strategy. This group has also considered the additional evidence prepared in 2015.  
 
2.29 In detail, the strategy options considered by the JST&SPG 6 demonstrate 
that focusing development on Cambridge remains the most sustainable location for additional development and the Cambridge Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), as updated with information for 2012/13 completions from the Annual Monitoring Report 2013, identifies 3,308 new homes through windfall sites or allocations within the urban area in the new local plan.  
 2.30 The edge of Cambridge is the next most sustainable location for growth in the development sequence. However, the joint sustainability appraisal of the overall strategy does identify the importance of balancing the accessibility aspects of sustainable development and the environmental and social benefits it brings. This includes consideration of the significant harm to the environmental sustainability of development on Green Belt land. Removing large sites from the Cambridge Green Belt could irreversibly and adversely impact on the special character of Cambridge as a compact historic city and risk jeopardising the economic success of the Cambridge area, which is in part built on its attractiveness as a place 
 
6 22 May 2013  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
20 to live and work. The detrimental impacts of further large- scale major 
development on the edge of Cambridge were demonstrated in the Inner 
Green Belt Study Review 2012. The assessment process identified six small- scale Green Belt sites  as potential options for development and 
this limited refinement of the Green Belt as proposed would mean that Cambridge is able to meet all its objectively assessed needs within its administrative area.  
 2.31 The conclusion of the consideration of reasonable site options for development on the edge of Cambridge is to require development away from the edge of Cambridge to meet the remaining development needs of the wider Cambridge area. The sustainability appraisal of broad locations undertaken as part of the joint work endorsed by the JST&SPG demonstrates clearly that new settlements are the next most sustainable location for growth and that development in villages should be limited for sustainability reasons. This appraisal was updated in 2015, to take account  of new evidence prepared in response to the Inspectors during 
the Local Plan Examination.  
 2.32 In response to issues raised by the Inspectors during the Local Plan Examination, the Councils commissioned a new independent Inner Green Belt Review in 2015.  This  also concluded that beyond those 
locations already identified in the submission local plans it is unlikely that any development could be accommodated without substantial harm to Green Belt purposes (in most locations around the edge of the City). Addition al work was carried to consider sites on the edge of Cambridge 
on an equal basis with other sites, through transport modelling and Sustainability Appraisal.  Work was also undertaken on an updated Infrastructure Delivery Study and Viability Report with a D evelopment 
Strategy document that drew together the findings of all the additional work. The Development Strategy Update and the Joint Sustainability Appraisal Addendum set out how the issue of Green Belt was considered through the plan making process, meeting the requirements of paragraphs 84 and 85 of the NPPF (2012) to consider the sustainability impacts of developing outside the Green Belt compared with removing land from the Green Belt for development. This work confirmed the approach to the development strategy. Further work was also undertaken to demonstrate that the transport measures necessary to support sustainable new settlements are capable of being delivered. The Greater Cambridge Partnership provided a position statement in March 2016 that confirms the City Deal partners are wholly committed to delivery of the infrastructure programme for the benefit of existing and future residents and businesses through the provision of an enhanced transport network that provides good quality connectivity betw een 
homes and jobs, including supporting and securing new development provided for in the local plans through the delivery of key infrastructure schemes. 
 Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
21 2.33 The Councils have followed an iterative process in developing the 
preferred strategy. For Cambridge, the level of objectively assessed need is such that all reasonable options have needed to be included in the local plan and Cambridge City Council does not consider that any reasonable alternatives exist for meeting the level of need. For South Cambridgeshire, the options available are the new settlements identified in the new local plan and the best available sites in the better -served 
villages.  
 2.34 Table 2.2 demonstrates the 2031 strategy approach set out in the new local plans to 2031 as a continuation of the strategy set in train by the structure plan in 2003.  
 
Table 2.2: 2031 strategy approach  
 
Structure 
Plan 1999 to 
2016  % New Local 
Plan 
Strategy 
2011 to 2031 
(both areas)  % 
Cambridge Urban Area  8,900 homes  27 6,828 homes  19 
Cambridge Fringe 
Sites  8,000 homes  25 12,670 
homes  35 
New settlements  6,000 homes  18 8,055 homes  23 
Villages  9,600 homes  30 8,220 homes  23 
TOTAL 1999 to 2016  32,500 homes  100 35,773 
homes  100 
 
  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
22 The Cambridge growth strategy  
 
2.35 The last round of local plan making saw a major shift to a sustainable 
development strategy based upon significant growth located on the edges of Cambridge and the delivery of new settlements in South Cambridgeshire.  This strategy is well underway and significant growth is taking place within both authorities’ areas, bucking the national trend.  
 2.36 As a part of the sustainable development strategy for the Cambridge sub-region, the Cambridge Local Plan 2006 introduced a step change in 
levels of planned growth, unmatched since the interwar years.  The 
Cambridge Local Plan 2006 released significant land from the Cambridge Green Belt and allocated a number of urban extensions to the city – ‘the Cambridge Fringe sites’ – as well as allowing for:  
 
• the continued protection and enhancement of a thriving and accessible historic core;  
• the regeneration of the station area as a mixed- use neighbourhood 
around an enhanced transport interchange;  
• distinctive residential communities, which have access to a wide range of local facilities and provide a high quality living environment; and  
• the enhancement of Cambridge’s landscape structure and the landscape setting of the city edge.  
 
2.37 The joint work with South Cambridgeshire referred to in paragraphs 2.22–2.34 describes the overall strategic approach to the development 
strategy for both local plans in the period to 2031. This work also considered the changes in availability of some sites identified in the 2006 plan strategy, specifically Cambridge East (Cambridge Airport). Most of the Cambridge East site is now unlikely to be made available during the period of the plan. The bulk of the site will be safeguarded as a strategic long- term reserve, but this has required consideration of alternative 
options for meeting housing and employment needs within and around  
Cambridge as described earlier. For this plan, the approach has been revised to reflect the differing sustainability characteristics now offered by locations within and on the edge of Cambridge and for other settlements.  
 2.38 The University of Cambridge’s North West Cambridge site was released from the Cambridge Green Belt to support the ongoing development of the University of Cambridge. This site is subject to the policies set out in the North West Cambridge Area Action Plan, which was jointly developed and adopted in 2009 by Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council.  
 2.39 Cambridge will meet its objectively assessed development needs within the administrative area of the city, by providing for homes and jobs Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
23 growth. The city will also continue to play its part in serving the needs of 
the wider sub- region in supporting Cambridge’s functions as a centre for 
employment, education and research, retail, leisure, entertainment and other services.  
 
 
 
Policy 2: Spatial strategy for the location of employment development  
 
The strategy will be to support Cambridge’s economy, offering a wide 
range of employment opportunities, with particular emphasis on growth of the Cambridge Cluster of knowledge- based industries and institutions 
and other  existing clusters in the city, building on existing strengths in 
'knowledge- based' activities. Proposals that help reinforce the existing 
high technology and research cluster of Cambridge will be supported. The Council will work closely with relevant partners, including the universities and The Business Board
7, to attract employment in such 
activities. Employment development will be focused on the urban area, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and the city centre.  
 The Council’s aim is to ensure sufficient land is available to allow the forecast of 22,100 new jobs in Cambridge by 2031, including some 8,800 in B-use class (offices and industry). Therefore, provision has been 
made for the development of at least 12 hectares of employment land (net) fro m April 2011 to March 2031. A range of locations, types and 
sizes of employment land has been allocated. This provision includes 3.7 hectares of land to be released from the Cambridge Green Belt at Fulbourn Road for employment purposes that support the Cam bridge 
Cluster.  
 A full schedule of sites allocated for development to meet the headline employment targets is set out in Appendix B and illustrated on the Policies Map.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
2.40 The cluster of high technology companies in and around Cambridge has driven the success of the local economy for the last 50 years. Over that time the Cambridge Cluster has emerged as a strong, dynamic local economy and a world leader in education and research. This economic growth has been predicated on the close links t hat have built up between 
businesses locating near similar businesses and close to the University 
 
7 Local Enterprise Partnership for the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
24 of Cambridge. The sharing of ideas, staff, equipment and data, and the 
collaborative working that has taken place has contributed to the dynamism, prosperity and further expansion of the local economy.  
 
2.41 The local plan will support the continued growth of the nationally significant Cambridge Cluster. The plan seeks to deliver new employment land at six key locations in Cambridge. These are: the area around Cambridge Station, West Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s), North West Cambridge (covered by the North West Cambridge Area Action Plan), Fulbourn Road and Cambridge Northern Fringe East. There are also likely to be a number of opportunities to redevelop and improve offices throughout Cambridge over the lifetime of the plan.  
 2.42 Further detail on the supply of employment land can be found in Section Five.  
 
 
Policy 3: Spatial strategy for the location of residential development  
 
The overall development strategy is to focus the majority of new 
development in and around the urban area of Cambridge, creating strong, sustainable, cohesive and inclusive mixed- use communities, 
making the most effective use of previously developed land, and enabling the maximum number of people to access services and facilities locally.  
 Provision will be made for the development of not less than 14,000 additional dwellings within Cambridge City Council’s administrative boundary over the period from April 2011 to March 2031 to meet the objectively assessed need for homes in Cambridge. This  will enable 
continuous delivery of housing for at least 15 years from the anticipated date of adoption of this local plan. Provision includes two small sites to 
be released from the Cambridge Green Belt at Worts’ Causeway, which 
will deliver up to 430 dwe llings. The housing trajectories for Cambridge 
and South Cambridgeshire, as updated each year in the Annual Monitoring Report, will be considered together for the purposes of phasing of housing delivery, including for calculating 5- year housing land 
supply  in development management decisions that concern housing 
development. The five year housing land supply will be calculated using 
the Liverpool methodology and a 20% buffer.  
 
In order to maintain housing provision, planning permission to change 
housing or land in housing use to other uses will only be supported in exceptional circumstances.  Other uses include the provision of student accommodation, where planning permission would usually be required for change of use.  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
25  
A full schedule of sites allocated for development in order to meet the headline housing targets is set out in Appendix B and illustrated on the Policies Map.  Permanent purpose built student accommodation will not be supported on sites allocated for housing or with either an extant planning permission for residential development or sites identified as potential housing sites within the Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
2.43 The local plan needs to make provision for 14,000 additional homes between 2011 and 2031 to meet the objectively assessed need for 
homes identified in the update to the strategic housing market assessment (SHMA) for the Cambridge housing market area. This need is being met in full in this new plan.  
 2.44 Over the period of the plan, this figure of 14,000 implies an average delivery rate of 700 dwellings per year. From 2001 to 2011, there was a net gain of 5,030 dwellings (at an average of 457 dwellings per year).  
 2.45 As of April 2015, there is planning permission for 7,036 new homes within the urban area and in the agreed urban extensions. There are a further 1,010 planned dwellings on existing allocated sites that do not have planning permission. Completions between 2011/12 and 2014/15 account for 2,860 dwellings. In addition, the Council’s strategic housing land availability assessment (SHLAA), together with findings of the Council’s annual housing trajectory which assesses the capacity for future housing within the existing urban area, indicates capacity for a further  3,777 dwellings in the urban area of Cambridge (including two small Green Belt releases). Taken together, these could provide 14,682 new homes for Cambridge over the local plan period (See Table 2.3 – Housing provision to 2031).  
 
  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
26 Table 2.3: Housing provision to 2031  
 
 
Existing 
Completions 
and 
Commitment
s (both areas)  New Sites 
Cambridge  New 
Sites 
South 
Cambs  TOTAL  % 
Cambridge 
Urban Area  5,358  1,470  0 6,828  19 
Edge of 
Cambridge  11,370  890 410 12,670  35 
New 
Settlements 
and 
Cambourne 
West  3,445  0 4,610  8,055  23 
Rural Area 
(including 
windfalls)  7,284  0 936 8,220  23 
TOTAL  27,457  2,360  5,956  35,773  100 
 
2.46 To meet the remaining requirement, new residential development will 
take place in the city centre: in eight identified Areas of Major Change (extensive areas of development comprising defined and known sites collectively shaping the spatial structure of Cambridge); at sites within the Cambridge East and North West Cambridge Area Action Plan areas; on two small Green Belt release sites (GB1 and GB2 Land north and Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
27 south of Worts’ Causeway); and on a number of site- specific non-
strategic sites with existing road access and clearly defined boundaries.  
 
Cambridge housing trajectory  
 
2.47 The Cambridge housing trajectory included and updated each year in 
the Annual Monitoring Report illustrates the expected rate of delivery of 
new dwellings. It demonstrates how the objectively assessed need for an additional 14,000 homes to 2031 could be achieved. To meet objectively assessed need, an average of 700 additio nal dwellings a year 
are required between 2011 and 2031. As outlined in paragraph 2.18, the Councils have agreed that the housing trajectories for both areas be considered together for the purposes of housing delivery, including calculation of 5 year housing land supply in development management decisions that concern housing development. This is consistent with the development sequence and spatial development strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire, and the phasing of housing delivery reflecting that strategy. As such, sites at the top of the development sequence in and on the edge of the urban area of Cambridge will deliver in the early and middle part of the plan period.  Delivery in South Cambridgeshire will be greater in the middle and latter parts of the plan period, in particular as the fringe sites build out from the edge of Cambridge and move across the administrative boundary into South Cambridgeshire and as the new settlements come forward. There will also be some housing in larger villages  early in the plan period.  
 
2.48 The Councils have a record of providing significant levels of housing and have a significant level of identified housing supply. The development strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire has been carried forward from previous plans, and includes two further new settlements. Under these circumstances the appropriate methodology for calculating five year housing land supply across the two authorities is the Liverpool methodology. In response to historic levels of delivery, the appropriate 
buffer is 20%.  
 
2.49 The trajectories rely on information about sites that have the potential to 
deliver dwellings over the next 15 years and beyond, taken from the strategic housing land availability assessment (SHLAA) and work on local plan allo cation sites.  
 
2.50 Appendix N sets out the methodology for establishing housing land supply using this approach. The appendix also includes details of the housing land supply position at November 2017. This shows that the Councils both individually and jointly demonstrate a five year housing land supply based on the housing requirement included in the local plans, and that this is anticipated to continue for the remainder of the Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
28 plan period. The housing supply data will be updated annual ly and 
published in the Annual Monitoring Report.  
 
Policy 4: The Cambridge Green Belt  
 
The extent of the Cambridge Green Belt within the administrative area 
of Cambridge City Council is set out on the Policies Map. New development in the Green Belt will only be approved in line with Green Belt policy in the National Planning Policy Framework (2012).  
 
Supporting text:  
 2.51 The Green Belt preserves the unique setting and special character of the city and includes green corridors that penetrate deep into the urban and historic heart of Cambridge. It is a key component in providing for active and passive sport and recreation, for amenity and biodiversity. A 
significant proportion of the Cambridge Green Belt within the city’s 
boundaries is in agricultural use.   The Green Belt is one of the key 
elements that contribute to the symbiotic relationship between high quality of life, place and economic success of Cambridge.  
  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
29 2.52 The purposes of the Cambridge Green Belt are set out in Table 2.4 
below:  
 
 Table 2.4: National and Cambridge Green Belt purposes  
 
National Green Belt purposes  Cambridge Green Belt purposes  
• to check the unrestricted 
sprawl of large built -up areas  
• to prevent neighbouring 
towns merging into one another  
• to assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment  
• to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns and  
• to assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the recycling of derelict and 
other urban land  • preserve the unique character 
of Cambridge as a compact, dynami c city with a thriving 
historic centre  
• maintain and enhance the quality of its setting  
• prevent communities in the environs of Cambridge from merging into one another and with the city  
 
 2.53 Significant land was taken out of the Cambridge Green Belt in the 2006 Local Plan following strategic reviews. This land was allocated as part of the growth strategy, which involved the delivery of urban extensions and enhancement of corridors and edges of the remaining Green Belt. Meeting the need for growth, these sites are now being delivered.  
 2.54 The changes to the Green Belt around the edge of Cambridge have necessitated new assessment to update our understanding of the value of the Cambridge Green Belt today. This work has shown that the remaining areas of Green Belt have increased in value as they are now closer to the city’s edge and less Green Belt land remains to perform the 
unique roles played by the Cambridge Green Belt. The Green Belt is a 
critical environmental asset for Cambridge in forming the important settin g for a compact, historic city and contributing to the high quality of 
life and place enjoyed here.  
 2.55 Both Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council are keen to see the Green Belt as a positive rather than a purely negative planning tool. Opportunities have been taken at Trumpington to shape a new Green Belt edge that enhances the landscape setting of the city, as well as enhancing opportunities for recreational access. Growth should be targeted towards sustainable and less landscape sensitive locations as a part of the overall strategy, which should be seen as a whole across both Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire.  
 Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
30 2.56 The NPPF (2012) provides for Green Belts to be revised by local plans. 
The current boundary was established in 2002 and was expected to endure until 2016 and beyond. However, circumstances change and major development at Cambridge East will no longer be deliverable for the foreseeable future. The latest Green Belt work has examined the Green Belt in detail and has found a number of small areas not 
considered of long- term importance to Green Belt purposes. Given the 
level of need for homes and jobs, it is considered that exceptional circumstances exist to justify their release. One of these sites is needed immediatel y to meet Cambridge- specific employment requirements (site 
GB4), and two sites are required to provide small -scale housing 
developments (sites GB1 and GB2).  
 2.57 Consideration has been given to the status of land removed from the Green Belt as part of the Cambridge East Area Action Plan (AAP) now that Marshall/Cambridge Airport have stated their intention to stay, with only land under their control north of Newmarket Road (mostly in South Cambridgeshire) now coming forward for development. Given that the princi ple of major development at this previously developed site close to 
Cambridge has already been established, the airport site south of Newmarket Road will be safeguarded as a long- term strategic reserve 
outside the Green Belt. This is covered by Policy 13. Two small areas of ex-Green Belt land within Cambridge East and lying North of Cherry 
Hinton (part of which lies within South Cambridgeshire) are considered suitable for housing development in the medium term to which there are no fundamental planning objections and which are allocated as sites for housing (Sites R40 and R41). They are not considered to prejudice the operation of the airport, providing other plan policies are met in full.  
 
Sub- regional facilities  
 
2.58 There are a number of facilities, some of s ub-regional significance, which 
have struggled to find space within the city. Cambridge City Council and 
South Cambridgeshire District Council recognise that delivering such 
facilities within the sub -region is desirable, but are not satisfied that a 
compel ling case exists for the need for a community stadium in a Green 
Belt location. No evidence of need for other sub- regional facilities (see 
Section Eight), such as a new ice rink and concert hall, has been demonstrated.  Policy 73 allows such applications t o come forward and 
be judged on their merits in line with local and national policy.  
  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
31 Policy 5: Sustainable transport and infrastructure  
 
Development proposals must be consistent with and contribute to the 
implementation of the transport strategies and priorities set out in the Cambridgeshire Local Transport Plan (LTP) and the Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire (TSCSC). Cambridge City Council, Cambridgeshire County Council and developers will work together to achieve the objectives and implement the Cambridge-
specific proposals in the LTP and the TSCSC, with particular emphasis on securing modal shift and the greater use of more sustainable forms of transport. In addition, Cambridge City Council will work with partner s 
to support the implementation of transport schemes that will improve linkages across the region and by doing so increase the use of sustainable transport modes to get to and from Cambridge. More specifically, the following will be supported, in principle:  a. delivery of local and strategic transport schemes, subject to the outcome of up -to-date, detailed assessments and consultation, 
where appropriate;  
b. promoting greater pedestrian and cycle priority through and to the city centre, district centres and potentially incorporating public realm and cycle parking improvements;  
c. promoting sustainable transport and access for all to and from major employers, education and research clusters, hospitals, schools and colleges;  
d. working with partners in supporting the TSCSC’s aim for a joined- up, 
city-wide cycle and pedestrian network by addressing ‘pinch- points’, 
barriers and missing links;  
e. linking growth to the proposed city -wide 20 mph zone; and  
f. easing pressure on the air quality management area (AQMA) in the city centre . 
 
Supporting text:  
 
2.59 The spatial strategy seeks to continue the development of Cambridge as a dynamic compact city that has a high quality of life and place, underpinning its unique economic success. It ensures that the objectively assessed development needs for Cambridge will be met primarily within the existing urban area and in committed sustainable urban extensions, linked through high quality public transport routes and frequent services and cycle ways to the city centre, the railway station and main e mployment centres. The strategy also sets out a network of 
centres, defined to meet retail and service needs that support the diversity, vitality and viability of the city centre and district and local centres.  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
32  
2.60 Development proposed within this plan will only be deliverable and 
supported if suitable transport measures and investment are led, coordinated and, where appropriate, delivered by Cambridgeshire County Council. Development should seek to enhance transport, particularly public transport, and wider connectivity between new and existing developments to benefit disadvantaged communities in Cambridge.  
 2.61 Recent census data
8 demonstrated that a policy combination of demand 
management and accessibility measures, along with changing lifestyle choices m ade by the city’s residents, has significantly increased the use 
of sustainable travel modes for work in Cambridge. The local plan, along with the Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire 2013, will seek to continue to improve accessibility to key locations, such as the city, station and district centres, supporting and encouraging these lifestyle choices and habits. By doing so, the plan seeks to improve accessibility to employment and services from all areas of the city.  
 
Policy 6: Hierarchy of centres and retail capacity  
 The hierarchy of centres in Cambridge is set out in Table 2.5 below.  These centres are shown on the Policies Map.  
 
Table 2.5: Hierarchy of centres  
 
Type of centre  Designated centres  Linked 
policies  
1. City Centre  City Centre boundary and primary 
shopping area (PSA) defined on 
Policies Map  10 and 11  
 
2. District centres  Arbury Court, Cherry Hinton High 
Street, Histon Road, Mill Road East, 
Mill Road West, Mitcham’s Corner  72 
3. Local centres  Arbury Road/Milton Road, Barnwell 
Road, Cherry Hinton Road East, 72 
 
8 Census 2011 Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
33 Cherry Hinton Road West, Hills 
Road, Hills Road/Cherry Hinton 
Road, Newnham Road, 
Trumpington  
 New centres coming forward at the 
Station Area (CB1), NIAB 1 and the 
University of Cambridge’s North 
West Cambridge Site  
4. Neighbourhood 
centres  Adkins Corner, Akeman Street, 
Campkin Road, Carlton Way, 
Chesterton High Street, Ditton Lane, 
Fairfax Road, Grantchester Street 
(Newnham), Green End Road, 
Hawthorn Way, King’s Hedges 
Road, Norfolk Street, Wulf stan Way, 
Victoria Road  
New centre coming forward at Clay 
Farm 72 
 
The sequential approach and impact assessment  
 
Retail and other main town centre uses are directed to these centres in 
line with the sequential approach set out in the National Planning Po licy 
Framework (2012). Development should contribute positively to the vitality and viability of the centre, and should be appropriate to the scale, character and function of the centre.  
 Any retail developments proposed outside these centres must be subject to a retail impact assessment, where the proposed gross floorspace is greater than 2,500 sq. m. A retail impact assessment may be required below this threshold where a proposal could have a cumulative impact 
or an impact on the role or health of nearby centres within the catchment 
of the proposal.  
 Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
34 Meeting retail capacity 
 
The Council has identified a capacity to support 14,141 sq m net of comparison retail floorspace between 2011 and 2022. Cambridge city centre should be the focus for meeting most of this need.  This will be through:  
 
1. redevelopment in the Fitzroy/Burleigh Street/Grafton Primary 
Shopping Area (see Policy 12); and  
2. other appropriate redevelopment/infill where opportunities arise in the historic core. Exploration of the potential for extension to the Lion Yard/Grand Arcade in the former Post Office yard behind St Andrew’s Street for retail and mixed- use purposes is encouraged.  
 The Council has not identified any capacity for additional convenience goods floorspace, above existing commitments and the two medium -
sized supermarkets at NIAB (see Policy 20) and the University of Cambridge’s North West Cambridge site.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
2.62 Cambridge has a vibrant, outstanding city centre, which currently has 
low vacancy levels and increasing pressure for new development.  The city centre has a mult i-functional role and its contribution will increase 
as it continues to meet the needs of committed and new population growth in Cambridge and the sub- region.  
 2.63 In addition to the city centre, a network of centres is important as a focus for a range of uses. The NPPF (2012) defines main town centre uses as retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment facilities, the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive ‐through 
restaurants, bars and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  
 2.64 The position of a centre in the hierarchy reflects its size and range of services and facilities, and the size of its catchment. New development should be of a type and scale appropriate to the centre.  
 2.65 The centres in Cambridge are generally performing well and have a low vacancy rate. However, their vitality and viability needs to be supported. In particular, the smaller local and neighbourhood centres need to be Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
35 protected, as they perform an important function in providing for day -to-
day needs.  
2.66 New centres are planned in the urban extensions in the south and north 
west of the city, and once these have been developed they will be considered as part of the hierarchy.  
 2.67 The Cambridge Retail and Leisure Study Update 2013 has identified 
capacity for further comparison goods floorspace (clothing, home and electrical goods etc.), but no capacity for additional convenience goods floorspace (food and drink and non- durable household goods) above  
proposals already approved or in the pipeline. The study advises that, due to the level of uncertainty in forecasting over the plan period (including in the short to medium term), the Council should not plan to meet the identified capacity to 2031, but should focus on planning to meet the capacity identified to 2022 (i.e. 14,141 sq m net).  This will be subject to testing and monitoring over the period of the plan, including monitoring of retail and leisure development in the wider sub- region 
area, and this will inform the timescale for the next review of retail and leisure needs in Cambridge.  
 2.68 The comparison goods requirement will be met by following a ‘city centre first’ approach, focusing on the Fitzroy/Burleigh Street/Grafton Primary Shopping Area (PSA). There are fewer opportunities for additional retail in the historic core, although appropriate redevelopment may be possible to improve the retail offer. Development in the other centres lower down the hierarchy is supported if it would support the role of that centre and be of a scale and type proportionate to the 
centre’s position in the hierarchy.  
 2.69 New retail development should in the first instance be directed to the centres and then located according to the sequential test set out in the NPPF (2012).  Applications for retail development in out -of-centre 
locations will need to be supported by an impact assessment where they are above 2,500 sq m floorspace (gross), which is the same as the NPPF (2012) threshold. However, where the Council is concerned that a proposal might have a cumulative impact or an impact on the role or health of nearby centres within the catchment of the proposal, an impact assessment may be required for a smaller proposal, and developers should discuss this with the Council as soon as possible, at a pre-
application stage.  
  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
36 Policy 7: The River Cam  
 
Development proposals along the River Cam corridor should:  
a. include an assessment of views of the river and a demonstration that 
the proposed design of the development has taken account of the assessment in enhancing views to and from the river;  
b. preserve and enhance the unique physical, natural, historically and culturally distinctive landscape of the River Cam;  
c. raise, where possible, the quality of the river, adjacent open spaces  
and the integrity of the built environment in terms of its impact, location, scale, design and form;  
d. propose, where possible and appropriate to context, enhancement of the natural resources of the River Cam and offer opportunities for re-naturalisation of  the river;  
e. enable, where possible, opportunities for greater public access to the River Cam; and  
f. take account of and support, as appropriate, the tourism and recreational facilities associated with the river.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
2.70 The River  Cam is a key part  of the defining character of Cambridge.
9 
This important feature of Cambridge sweeps in from the rural hinterland 
to the heart of the city. A number of Cambridge’s colleges interface with the river along a section of the river known as The Backs and this is one of the world- famous landscapes in Cambridge. The River Cam corridor 
provides a landscape framework for the whole city and Cambridge owes much of its very special character to the way these spaces penetrate the urban fabric and the unique association between the built and green 
spaces. Any development must recognise this through carefully considered design.  
 2.71 The River Cam has also been designated as a county wildlife site in recognition of the river’s importance in linking semi -natural habitats, 
including ecologically -designated sites such as Stourbridge Common 
Local Nature Reserve and Sheep's Green and Coe Fen Local Nature Reserve, with the wider countryside of South Cambridgeshire. Although the river is almost entirely modified by human action, and its wildlife value severely depleted by river works and the effects of draining and raising the level of the riverside commons, it nevertheless supports a healthy population of fish and their predators, including otters and kingfishers. Several species of bat use the river, its tributaries and adjacent habitats for foraging and commuting, while the numerous willow 
 
9 Cambridge Landscape Character Assessment 2003  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
37 pollards offer roosting sites. If sensitively managed, the river and its 
banks provide opportunities for declining species such as the water vole to recover and disperse.
10 The River Cam and its associated floodplain 
habitats and tributaries function together as an ecological network, which requires enhancement, in line with paragraph 117 of the NPPF (2012).  
 
2.72 The River Cam is an international tourist attraction and contributes to the tourist economy in Cambridge. As a result of the number of visitors and users of the river increasing, pressure is put on the river corridor and the surrounding built environment. Through carefully co nsidered design, 
developments can help manage this demand.  
 2.73 The Cambridge Historic Core Appraisal 2006 recognises that large parts of the floodplain and setting of the River Cam are of very high significance, with Sheep’s Green and Coe Fen, which once form ed part 
of the commercial area of the town (where up to three watermills stood), an important part of the setting of the core area of Cambridge. Jesus Green and Midsummer Common are of high significance, with views to listed buildings and buildings of local interest. The Backs contain grade II* and grade II registered parks and gardens, with views to numerous grade I, II* and II listed buildings.  
 2.74 Any development should also be consistent with any adopted strategic study of the river.  
 
Policy 8: Setting of the city  
  
Development on the urban edge, including sites within and abutting 
green infrastructure corridors and the Cambridge Green Belt, open spaces and the River Cam corridor, will only be supported where it:  
 
a. responds to, conserves and enhances the setting, and special 
character of the city, in accordance with the Cambridge Landscape Character Assessment 2003, Green Belt assessments
11, 
Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy and their successor documents;  
b. promotes access to the surrounding countryside/open space, where appropriate; and  
c. safeguards the best and most versatile agricultural land unless sustainable development considerations and the need for development are sufficient to override the need to protect the agricultural value of land; and  
 
10 Cambridge Nature Conservation Strategy 2006  
11 LDA Design Cambridge Inner Green Belt Boundary Study (November 2015) and Cambridge Inner 
Green Belt Boundary Study (November 2015) Supplement – March 2016.  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
38 d.   includes landscape improvement proposals that strengthen or re-
create the well -defined and vegetated urban edge, improve visual 
amenity and enhance biodiversity.  
 
Proposals where the primary objective is to conserve or enhance 
biodiversity, particularly proposals for landscape- scale enhancement 
across local authority boundaries, will also be supported. The Council will support proposals which deliver the strategic green infrastructure network and priorities set out in the Cambridgeshire Green Infrastr ucture 
Strategy.  
Supporting text:  
 
2.75 Cambridge has a distinct and unique character and landscape setting 
and is surrounded by attractive green space, much of which is 
accessible.  Cambridge is characterised by its compact nature, well -
defined and vegetated edges, open spaces, and the green corridors that extend into the city centre from the countryside. These green corridors are protected as part of the Cambridge Green Belt or as Protected Open Space. A number of studies have considered the setting of the cit y and 
features that are considered to be critical to this setting. These studies have all highlighted that the interface between the urban edge and the countryside is one of the important and valued landscape features of the city, contributing to the quality of life and place enjoyed here.  
 
2.76 Given the multiplicity of sites which make up Cambridge’s natural 
environment and the strategic objectives of this local plan, the strategy for its management and enhancement is, in itself, one of a multi -
document, multi -layered approach.  This approach includes a number of 
interrelated initiatives, policies and players.  Together, as illustrated in Figure 2.2, they represent Cambridge’s natural environment strategy to deliver new green infrastructure and enhance existing blue and green 
infrastructure and deliver biodiversity enhancements, the components of 
which will be added to and updated as necessary and provide the 
necessary tools to realise the ongoing management of the city’s natural environment.  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
39 Figure 2.2: Cambridge’s Natural Environment Strategy:  
 
 
Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
40  Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
41 2.77 To date, Cambridge has retained its historic clear distinction between 
the city and the rural area that provides its setting. Development on the urban edge of the city, adjacent to the Green Belt, has the potential to have a negative effect on the setting of the city. As such, any development on the edge of the city must conserve and enhance the city’s setti ng. 
 
2.78 The long term capability of the best and most versatile agricultural land should be protected and areas of lower quality agricultural land should be used for development in preference to the best and most versatile agricultural land, where possible. Retaining the best and most versatile agricultural land enhances future options for sustainable food production and helps secure other important ecosystem services. Development has an irreversible adverse impact on the finite national and local stock of the best and most versatile agricultural land. Avoiding loss of this land is 
the priority as mitigation is rarely possible. Masterplanning should seek to target development in areas of poorer quality land, where possible, and developers should consider impacts on soil resources during construction and operation, adhering to Defra’s Code of Practice to protect soil resources and its successor documents.  
 
2.79 The NPPF (2012) also sets out the need for local planning authorities to plan for biodiversity and green infrastructure at a landscape- scale across 
local authority boundaries. Green infrastructure enhancement refers to large- scale projects, the principal aim of which is to link together existing 
habitats by improving the ecological quality of the wider rural and urban 
landscape.  
  
Policy 9: Review of the Local Plan  
 
The Council will undertake an early review of the Local Plan to 
commence before the end of 2019, and with submission to the Secretary 
of State for examination anticipated by the end of Summer 2022. The 
new Local Plan will be prepared jointly by Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire Councils for their combined districts (Greater Cambridge). Specific matters to be addressed by the review include the following:  
 
a. an updated assessment of housing needs ; 
b. the progress being made towards implementation of the spatial 
strategy for Greater Cambridge including the new settlements at Waterbeach and Bourn Airfield;  
c. working with the local housing authority, consideration of the implications of an assessment required by the Housing Act 1985, as amended by the Housing and Planning Act 2016, of the needs of Section 2: The Spatial Strategy  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
42 people residing in or resorting to their district with respect to the 
provision of sites on which caravans can be stationed.  
 
 
Supporting text:  
 
2.80 Through the Greater Cambridge Partnership the Councils committed to an early review of their local plans beginning in 2019. This was in order to establish what impact the anticipated changed infrastructure landscape and economic growth in the area might have on housing need and other aspects of spatial and transport planning. In addition, during the public examination into the adopted local plan a number of issues were highlighted for specific attention in the next review of the local plans. These relate to the assessment  of housing needs, progress in 
delivering the development strategy and in particular the new settlements and provision to meet the requirements of caravan dwellers. Policy 9 accordingly requires that the next full review of the local plan should start in 2019 with submission for examination anticipated by the end of Summer 2022.  
 
2.81 Furthermore, a non- statutory spatial plan is being prepared for the 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority. It is expected that, although non-statutory, the spatial plan will provide a strategy for 
the wider area that will inform the form and content of the joint local plan and should therefore precede its preparation.Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
43  
  
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
44 Section Three: City Centre, Areas of Major Change, 
Opportunity Areas and Site Specific Proposals 
 
3.1 The high- level approach set out in the vision and strategy for Cambridge 
is   complemented by policies and proposals that promote and manage 
change in key areas of the city and on specific sites. These policies and proposals aim to support the vision and deliver the objectives by:  
• responding to the opportunities and challenges that have been identified;  
• addressing a hierarchy of needs recognising local, city -wide and sub -
regional/regional roles;  
• reinforcing a coherent and legibl e spatial structure to the city;  
• conserving and reinforcing that unique character of the city and the way this contributes to the high quality of life and place;  
• contributing to sustainable development through the spatial location of development and infras tructure;  
• promoting renewal and the effective and efficient use of land;  
• meeting the growing needs of Cambridge by allocating land for development;  
• reinforcing and creating distinctive communities with clear identities; and 
• ensuring that sites can be developed effectively.  
 
3.2 The localities and sites covered by this section can be grouped under five  headings:  
• Cambridge City Centre;  
• sites covered by existing Area Action Plans (AAPs);  
• Area of Major Change (AOMCs);  
• Opportunity Areas; and 
• site specific proposals.  
 
Policy 10: The City Centre 
 
Cambridge City Centre will be the primary focus for developments 
attracting a large number of people and for meeting retail, leisure, cultural and other needs appropriate to its role as a multi -functional 
regional centre. The city centre boundary is shown on the Policies Map. Any new development or redevelopment should:  
 
a. add to the vitality and viability of the city centre;  
b. achieve a suitable mix of uses;  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
45 c. preserve or enhance heritage assets and their setting, open spaces 
and the River Cam;  
d. be of the highest quality design and deliver a high quality public realm; and  
e. promote sustainable modes of transport.  
 
Other policies in the plan set out opportunities for redevelopment or improvement within the city centre itself  or at the edge of the city centre, 
including:  
 
f. The Fitzroy/Burleigh Street/Grafton Area of Major Change (Policy 12)  
g. Old Press/Mill Lane Opportunity Area (Policy 26)  
h. Mill Road Opportunity Area (Policy 24)  
i. Eastern Gate Opportunity Area (Policy 23)  
j. Cambridge Railway Station, Hills Road Corridor to the City Centre 
Opportunity Area (Policy 25)  
 
Development in the city centre should contribute to the Council’s aim of improving the capacity and quality of the public realm throughout the city centre. The Council i ntends to set out more detail on how development 
can contribute to these improvements through the production of a city centre public realm strategy Supplementary Planning Document (SPD). This SPD will:  
 
k. set out how public realm improvements will be coordinated;  
l. focus on improving connections between the historic core and Fitzroy/Burleigh Street areas of the city centre, and connections between the city centre and the railway station;  
m. seek to improve facilities for pedestrians and cyclists;  
n. seek to unify streets through the use of high quality surface treatments and street furniture, lighting, tree planting and landscaping to reflect the quality of the historic environment; and  
o. set out improvements to the public realm around the Market Square, in order to make better use of this important civic space.  
 
The SPD will be developed in partnership with Cambridgeshire County Council, providers of infrastructure and other relevant stakeholders, and will be subject to public consultation.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
3.3 Cambridge city centre is a thriving regional centre and international tourist destination, in addition to providing for the needs of those living, working and studying in the city. It has an outstanding historic core. The city centre provides a wide range of uses including shopping, leisure, Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
46 entertainment, museums, university faculty buildings and colleges, 
offices and housing. It is the main transport hub, with all bus routes passing through the city centre and the bus station being located here.  
 
3.4 The policy sets out the Council’s aspirations in terms of any new development or redevelopment in the city centre, and identifies the specific proposals for parts of the city centre which are set out in other policies in the plan. The Council has aspirations to increase the capacity and for the improvement of the public realm within the city centre. This will be looked at holistically through the development of a city centre public realm strategy SPD.  
 
Policy 11: Development in the City Centre Primary Shopping Area  
 
In the Primary Shopping Area (PSA) in the city centre, as defined on the 
Policies Map, proposals for new retail use (A1) will be supported. Proposals for other centre uses, as defined in Table 3.1 in this policy, will be supported, provided:  
a. the proposal  complements the retail function and makes a positive 
contribution to the vitality, viability and diversity of the city centre;  
b. provision is made for an active frontage, such as a window display, in keeping with the character of the shopping area; and  
c. it would not give rise, either alone or cumulatively, to a detrimental effect on the character or amenity of the area through smell, litter, noise or traffic problems.  
 
Changes of use from A1 to another centre use (as defined in Table 3.1 below) will be appropriate where they satisfy the above criteria.  
 
Additionally, in the primary frontage (as defined on the Policies Map):  
d. retail (A1) uses should not fall below 70 per cent in any frontage 
(measured as a proportion of the number of units within the ‘A’ use 
classes in the street frontage or shopping centre) unless it can be 
shown that such a change would be beneficial to the vitality and viability of the frontage.   
 
In the secondary frontage (as defined on the Policies Map):  
e. retail (A1) should remain the predominant use on the frontage (i.e. above 50 per cent) unless it can be shown that such a change would be beneficial to the vitality and viability of the frontage. 
 
Within the Primary Shopping Area, the loss of centre uses at ground floor level to non-centre uses (see Table 3.1 below) will not be permitted, 
unless it can be demonstrated that the use is no longer viable, by Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
47 evidence of active marketing for at least 12 months showing that the 
premises are not reasonably capable of being used or redeveloped for a centre use acceptable in the PSA.  
Residential and student accommodation, offices and community facilities are supported on upper floors, provided that the use would have safe and convenient access and would not inhibit the functioning of the ground floor use.  
 Any new retail or leisure developments above 2,500 sq m should provide a mix of small and large retail units to cater for national retail occupiers and the demands of smaller independent and local traders.  
 Small units in the secondary frontage should not be joined together to make a larger unit, unless it can be shown that this would add to the vitality or viability of the street frontage.  
 The daily market in the Market Square and the arts and crafts market on All Saints Garden will be protected, and proposals to enhance these markets and, where appropriate, create new markets will be supported.  
 
Table 3.1: Uses suitable on all floors in the primary shopping area and those not suitable at ground floor level in the primary shopping area  
 
Centre uses (uses suitable on all 
floors in the PSA)  Non-centre uses (uses 
not suitable at ground 
floor level in the PSA)  
Shops (A1 uses)  Business uses, including 
offices and research and 
development (B1)  
Financial and professional services 
(A2 uses)  General industry (B2)  
Cafés and restaurants (A3 uses)  Storage and distribution 
(B8) 
Drinking establishments (A4 uses)  Residential institutions (C2 
and C2a)  
Takeaways (A5 uses)  Residential (C3)  
Hotels (C1 uses)  Houses in multiple 
occupation (C4)  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
48 Non-residential institutions such as 
healthcare, nurseries, schools, 
libraries and places of worship (D1 
uses)  Other sui generis uses  
Assembly and leisure (D2 uses)   
Certain sui generis uses typically 
found in centres, including theatres, nightclubs, amusement arcades, 
launderettes, tattooists, beauty 
parlours
  
 
  
 
Supporting text:  
 
3.5 Cambridge city centre is a regional shopping centre. The Primary 
Shopping Area (PSA) in the city centre is shown on the Policies Map. This is the area where retail development is concentrated and comprises the historic core and the Fitzroy/Burleigh Street area, including the Grafton. The daily market in Market Square and the weekend arts and crafts markets are also essential contributors to the range and choice of 
shopping in the city centre.  
 
3.6 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, 2012) defines the PSA as the primary frontages and those secondary frontages adjoining or closely related to the primary frontages. The primary frontages are the streets  where retail is particularly concentrated and are shown on the 
Policies Map. In these areas, the Council wants to maintain a high concentration of shops.  
 
3.7 The main secondary frontages are also shown on the Policies Map and 
fall within the PSA. In the secondary frontages there is more scope for different uses complementary to the retail function of the city centre, such as cafés, restaurants, bars and pubs, banks and estate agents. In some parts of the secondary frontage there are existing concentrations of uses, for example food and drink uses along Bridge Street, and food 
and drink and estate agents/employment agents along Regent Street. The concentration of uses provides a distinct character, but the Council Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
49 would generally like to maintain a diversity of  uses along frontages to 
maintain footfall and vitality and viability, and avoid any amenity 
problems such as those that can be associated with concentrations of food and drink uses.  
 3.8 Table 3.1 within the policy identifies those uses that the Council thinks are appropriate at ground floor level in the PSA. The NPPF (2012) identifies office and residential uses as town centre uses. While the value of these uses in centres is recognised, these are only appropriate in upper floors in the primary and secondary  frontages in Cambridge. 
These uses would not provide active frontages. The Cambridge Retail and Leisure Study Update 2013 identifies a significant capacity for additional comparison shopping, and the best location for this is within the city centre at the top of the retail hierarchy. Therefore, ground floor 
units should not be lost to offices or residential use, including student accommodation, and any applications for such a change of use would have to provide evidence of marketing and show there were exc eptional 
circumstances why a unit could not be used for a centre use.  
 
3.9 The Council wants to provide a diversity of uses within the city centre, including opportunities for smaller independent traders. The policy requires that any substantial new retail schemes provide a mix of unit sizes, and this should be discussed with the Council at a pre- application 
stage. The joining together of shop units in the secondary frontage to create larger units will generally be resisted, as these are likely to be less suita ble for smaller independent traders. The markets in Cambridge are 
supported and opportunities to enhance them or to create new markets are supported in principle.  
 
Policy 12: Fitzroy/Burleigh Street/Grafton Area of Major Change  
 
The Fitzroy/Burleigh Street /Grafton Area of Major Change (AOMC), as 
shown in Figure 3.1, is the primary focus for providing additional 
comparison retail in the city centre, along with other mixed uses.  
 This area is supported as a location for expansion and/or redevelopment for reta il and leisure use (A1, A2, A3, A4 and D2), with residential and 
student accommodation on upper floors. The evidence base suggests that up to 12,000 sq m of new comparison retail floorspace could be provided in the area, although the precise quantum of net  new retail 
floorspace and residential/student units will be subject to testing and demonstration through the development of a masterplan for the area.  
 Development should:  
 Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
50 a. be of a high quality, with well -designed edges securing significant 
townscape improvements to Burleigh Street and East Road;  
b. be sensitive to surrounding residential areas and the character and 
setting of the historic core and heritage assets;  
c. improve the bus interchange, including an increase in capacity and better waiting facilities for passengers;  
d. be focused on providing access by sustainable modes of transport including improvements for pedestrians and cyclists such as a managed cycle parking facility, and with no increase in car parking above current levels;  
e. improve the public realm along Fitzroy Street and Burleigh Street, by 
removing unnecessary signage and street furniture, and using a simple and durable palette of materials; and  
f. promote linkages to the historic core.  
 
The Council will coordinate the production of a m asterplan for the area, 
bringing together the scheme promoter, other landowners, 
Cambridgeshire County Council and other relevant stakeholders. The masterplan will need to be consulted upon locally and adopted by the Council as a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) before the submission of any major planning application. A comprehensive transport assessment and travel plan will be required as a part of the masterplanning process.  
  
Supporting text:  
 
3.10 This part of the city centre provides the greatest opportunity for 
accommodating the need for additional comparison retail, but also leisure, student accommodation and housing. The Cambridge Retail and Leisure Study Update 2013 identified it as the first priority for comparison retail in sequential terms, and the Cambridge City Centre Capacity Study 2013 identified it as an area of potential change. Given the proximity of the Area of Major Change to Anglia Ruskin University’s East Road Campus, student accommodation delivered in this area would be expected to address the identified needs of Anglia Ruskin University.  
 
3.11 The area is distinct from the historic core, and has an important role as an everyday, family shopping destination. However, the quality of the shop units along Fitzroy Street and Burleigh Street is v aried, and the 
public realm is cluttered with street furniture and signage and could be improved. The Grafton shopping centre was built in the early 1980s and there is scope for positive regeneration of the area through sensitive modernisation and extension of the centre.  
 Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
51 3.12 The area will need to be looked at comprehensively, and a masterplan 
produced. The Council will work pro- actively with landowners, 
developers and Cambridgeshire County Council as highway authority in the development of the masterplan. The masterplan will be subject to 
public consultation before it is adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document.  
 Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
52 
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
53 Areas covered by existing Area Action Plans 
 
3.13 This plan does not address the University of Cambridge’s North West 
Cambridge site, which is covered by the North West Cambridge Area Action Plan (AAP) and shown on the Policies Map.  
 
3.14 Similarly, the Cambridge  East site is dealt with by the Cambridge East 
AAP, which was adopted in 2008 by both Cambridge City Council and 
South Cambridgeshire District Council, with the exception of policies CE/3 and CE/35 of the AAP. These two policies are replaced by Policy 13: Cambridge East.  
 
Policy 13: Cambridge East  
 
1. Land at Cambridge East is allocated for development as shown on 
the Policies Map:  
 
a. Land north of Newmarket Road during the plan period (R45).  
b. Land north of Coldham’s Lane for residential during the plan period (R41).  
c. Land north of Cherry Hinton (R47) for approximately 780 dwellings during the plan period (along with adjoining land allocated in Policy SS/3 of the South Cambridgeshire Local Plan for approximately 420 dwellings).  
 
2. Proposals for residential development on sites a), b), and c) as shown on the Policies Map, will be supported if:  
 
a. acceptable mitigation of environmental and health impacts (including noise) from the airport can be provided; and  
b. a masterplan is submitted for the development of site R47 and 
adjoining land in South Cambridgeshire which safeguards the appropriate future development of the wider safeguarded land; and  
c. the continued authorised use of Cambridge Airport does not pose a 
safety risk.  
 
3. The masterplan for site R47, as shown on the Policies Map (together with adjoining land in South Cambridgeshire on site SS/3), will make provision for a primary and secondary school, a local centre with community hub, open space and a spine road connecting Coldham’s Lane with Cherry Hinton Road. Vehicular access to the site will only be permitted via the new spine road, unless needed for emergency access. Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
54  
4. The rest of the Cambridge East site is safeguarded for longer term 
development beyond 2031. Development on safeguarded land will 
only occur once the site becomes available and following a review of both this plan and the Cambridge East Area Action Plan.  
5. This policy replaces Policies CE/3 and CE/35 of the Cambridge East AAP. All other policies in the Cambridge East AAP are retai ned. 
Supporting text  
 
3.15 Land at Cambridge East was taken out of the Green Belt through the Cambridge Local Plan 2006 and Cambridge East Area Action Plan (AAP) 2008 for the development of a major new urban extension to the city. This was dependent on the relocation of current activities at the airport. The Marshall Group had been actively looking into relocation options for the airport activities since 2006. In 2010, they announced that they did not have a deliverable relocation option and they intended to remain at Cambridge Airport for the foreseeable future.  
 3.16 In reviewing the future options for this large site, Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council have concluded that it is appropriate that the site allocated in the AAP remains out  of the Green 
Belt. The corridor of Green Belt running from Coldham’s Common to Teversham will remain as Green Belt.  
 3.17 There is an opportunity during the plan period to deliver residential development on parts of Cambridge East while the airport remains on the site. A number of specific sites are allocated in Policy 13 (1) and Policy SS/3 (1) of the South Cambridgeshire Local Plan (see Figure 3.2). These were identified in the AAP as capable of coming forward ahead of the airport site, and potentially without it. Careful consideration of how the ongoing airport activities will interact with any new residential use will need to be undertaken at the planning application stage, to ensure that the new residences have an acceptable level of amenity, and that they 
do not impede on the ongoing use of the airport.  In terms of how any 
development might impede use of the airport, it will be for the airport operators to demonstrate how the development does this. Any development that comes forward in advance of the wider  site will have 
to be carefully planned so that it is capable of working both with and without the wider development, so as not to prejudice the potential delivery of development on the safeguarded land at some point in the future if it becomes available. This policy makes it clear that these areas are not part of the wider safeguarded site and could come forward for development before 2031. A masterplan for site R47 and adjoining land in South Cambridgeshire will be required in order to ensure a comprehens ive and coordinated approach to bringing these sites 
forward for development. The masterplan will take into account the context of the surrounding area, including development proposals on site Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
55 R41 (Land north of Coldham’s Lane). While vehicular access to t he site 
will be from the new spine road off Coldham’s Lane and Cherry Hinton 
Road, access for emergency vehicles only from alternative points will need to be considered at an early stage. In delivering appropriate future development across the wider site, consideration will need to have been given to the allocations made by the adopted Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Plan documents.  
 3.18 Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council accept that there is an existing need for  a new secondary school to serve 
the eastern part of Cambridge in response to demographic pressures. A significant shortfall in school capacity across the city is currently forecast from 2018, which coupled with proposed development north of Newmarket Road  and north of Cherry Hinton will require the early 
provision of the secondary school. Residential development on land north of Coldham’s Lane, Church End and Teversham Drift (R47) should not come forward before there is an agreed approach to the delivery of sufficient secondary school capacity in the area, including land for the provision of a secondary school being made available. As an exception to policy CE/6 of the Cambridge East AAP, the secondary school need not be included in the local centre. In com mon with practice elsewhere 
around Cambridge and in line with national policy on Green Belt, it will be acceptable for school playing fields to be located in the retained Green Belt.  
 3.19 This policy safeguards the main airport site for longer -term development  
needs beyond 2031. Were circumstances to change, a review of this Plan and the Cambridge East AAP could examine the consequences of the change. Policies in the existing Cambridge East AAP will remain other than Policies CE/3 and CE/35.  
  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
56   
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
57 Areas of Major Change  
 
3.20 Areas of Major Change (AOMCs) are extensive areas of development 
comprising defined and known sites collectively shaping the spatial structure of Cambridge. They require a comprehensive approach to development and renewal that recognises the dependencies between sites in order to bring forward holistic change. They also need careful integration with existing nearby communities. They embrace mixed uses and multiple functions, and require significant infrastructure investment and support.  
 
3.21 The Areas of Major Change include:  
• Northern Fringe East and land surrounding Cambridge North Station;  
• Land south of Coldham’s Lane;  
• Southern Fringe;  
• Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s Hospital);  
• West Cambridge;  
• Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road;  
• Station Areas West and the Clifton Road Area; and  
• Fitzroy/Burleigh Street/Grafton.  
 
3.22 The policies on these areas set out a planned approach to the Areas of Major Change, including both general and site specific requirements.  
 
 
Policy 14: Areas of Major Change and Opportunity Areas – general 
principles  
 
Development within the AOMCs and Opportunity Areas should be of the 
highest quality design and incorporate the principles of sustainable design and construction. With the exception of very minor development, the development of each site within the AOMCs and the Opportunity Areas shall only be permitted in the following circumstances:  
 
a. when the necessary infrastructure and associated arrangements to support that development have been secured, either by delivery as part of the development or through other stakeholders including relevant local authorities; or  
b. where acceptable alternative infrastructure provision, including temporary provision where appropriate, has been secured; or  
c. where an assessment shows that a particular development can 
take place in advance of such provision without causing unacceptable impacts.  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
58  
Additionally, development shall only be permitted:  
 
a. where it is in accordance with a comprehensive implementation plan for the area which has demonstrable support from all key landowners or it is supported by evidence to demonstrate that the comprehensive and successful delivery of the development can still take place without this being secured; and  
b. where the development is based on clearly articulated and justified 
objectives and approach through the provision of a site- wide 
masterplan, strategies and/or other over -arching coordination 
documents; and,  
c. in instances where the infrastructure provision is t o be phased, an 
approved phasing strategy is in place.  
 In terms of movement, density and activity, development should:  
 d. be of higher densities in the city centre, and around key transport interchanges (including Cambridge North Station), district centres and local centres; and  
e. create active and vibrant places that encourage social interaction and meeting, and foster a sense of community.  
 
In protecting existing assets, including heritage assets, landscape and 
water management, development should:  
 f. seek to  protect existing public assets, including open space and 
leisure facilities. Where the loss of such assets is unavoidable, appropriate mitigation should be provided, including where applicable the replacement of assets in an alternative location, in addit ion to infrastructure generated by the needs of the development;  
g. ensure public rights of way are protected, and enhanced where possible;  
h. develop a new, strong landscape framework that is guided by and incorporates existing positive landscape and townscape features and 
heritage assets; and,  
i. where practicable, undertake on- site strategic landscaping to the 
agreed framework early in the development of the site so that this will become established as development proceeds.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
3.23 Construction on several of the sites within the AOMCs in this plan is well advanced and based on the planning permissions currently in place. These developments will continue unless landowners/developers Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
59 choose to submit new proposals, which will be considered in accordance 
with this policy.  
 3.24 The Council wishes to ensure that the AOMCs and Opportunity Areas are developed in the most appropriate way, taking account of the sustainability, mixed -use and design objectives set out elsewhere in the 
plan.  
 3.25 As a fi rst step, this plan includes site specific policies for each of the 
AOMCs and Opportunity Areas. These policies set the broad framework for development and specify the principal land uses, accessibility considerations and landscape requirements for each ar ea. 
 3.26 This policy outlines a number of important additional requirements applicable to the consideration of planning applications for each of the AOMCs and Opportunity Areas. The purpose is to ensure that each area can be designed with the principles of sustainable development in mind, with appropriate densities of development, and supporting mixed uses and activity appropriate to the scale of development.  It also requires the protection/provision of landscape and other environmental requirements. In conservation areas development should preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the area concerned. Buildings that make a positive contribution to local townscape should generally be retained and integrated into development.  
 3.27 If appropriate, more detailed policy/guidance for the individual AOMCs and Opportunity Areas will be prepared in partnership with Cambridgeshire County Council, landowners and developers, with public consultation. The Council will also work in partnership with South Cambridgeshire District Council where the sites cross administrative boundaries and/or raise significant cross -boundary considerations. 
Subsequent planning applications should conform to approved guidance.  
 3.28 Substantial development will not be permitted in advance of the preparation and approval of a site- wide masterplan, strategies and/or 
other over -arching documents as required by the scale and nature of 
development. Limited small -scale development may be permitted, 
providing it would not prejudice the longer -term development of the sites 
and is not considered to be premature in advance of the preparation of these documents.  
 3.29 The appropriate planning policy guidance mechanism will be identified before work commences on design and delivery of development in each of the diff erent and varied AOMCs and Opportunity Areas.  The Council 
will actively promote with key partners, the production of further policy/guidance for any other large or complex sites within the built -up 
part of the city that come forward for development. Subsequent planning applications will be expected to be in accordance with the approved Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
60 documents. Where sites and developments are comparable in size and 
complexity to existing AOMCs and Opportunity Areas, the above policy will also apply.  
  
Policy 15: Cambrid ge Northern Fringe East and new railway station Area 
of Major Change  
 
The Cambridge Northern Fringe East and the new railway station will 
enable the creation of a revitalised, employment focussed area centred on a new transport interchange.  
 The area, shown on the Policies Map, and illustrated in Figure 3.3, is allocated for high quality mixed- use development, primarily for 
employment uses such as B1, B2 and B8, as well as a range of supporting commercial, retail, leisure and residential uses (subject t o 
acceptable environmental conditions).  
 The amount of development, site capacity, viability, timescales and phasing of development will be established through the preparation of an Area Action Plan (AAP) for the site. The AAP will be developed jointly between Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District 
Council, and will involve close collaborative working with Cambridgeshire County Council, Anglian Water and other stakeholders in the area. The final boundaries of land that the joint AAP will c onsider 
will be determined by the AAP.  
 All proposals should:  
 a. take into account existing site conditions and environmental and 
safety constraints;  
b. demonstrate that environmental and health impacts (including odour) from the Cambridge Water Recycling Centr e can be acceptably 
mitigated for occupants;  
c. ensure that appropriate access and linkages, including for pedestrians and cyclists, are planned for in a high quality and comprehensive manner;  
d. recognise the existing local nature reserve at Bramblefields, the  
protected hedgerow on the east side of Cowley Road which is a City Wildlife Site, the First Public Drain, which is a wildlife corridor, and other ecological features, and where development is proposed, provide for appropriate ecological mitigation , compensation and 
enhancement  measures either on- or off -site; and  
e. ensure that due consideration has been given to safeguarding the appropriate future development of the wider site.  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
61 Supporting text:  
 
3.30 Cambridge Northern Fringe East (CNFE) is within the Cambridge City 
Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council authority boundaries. The majority of the area is within Cambridge with Chesterton Sidings and part of the St. John’s Innovation Park within South Cambridgeshire.  An early review of the site through a jointly -prepared Area Action Plan will 
ensure a coordinated approach is taken.  This will enable the feasibility of development and its viability to be properly investigated and will ensure a comprehensive approach to redevelopment.  
 3.31 The new railway station on the sidings in South Cambridgeshire will be 
served by the Cambridgeshire Busway and will include cycle parking facilities and car parking. The station will significantly improve the accessibility of the site and surrounding area, including access to and from the Cambridge Business Park, St John’s Innovation Park and Cambridge Science Park, making the area a highly attractive business location.  
 3.32 The new railway station will provide a catalyst for regeneration of this area.  Early development around the new station could help create a vibrant area around this key infrastructure to meet the needs of users of the station and bring forward further phased delivery elsewhere within the CNFE area.  Planning applications will be considered on their own 
merits before the AAP has been adopted and subject to ensuring that they would not unduly prejudice the outcome of the AAP process and the achievement of the comprehensive vision for the area as a whole that will be established by the AAP.  
 3.33 The adopted Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste 
Core Strategy (2011) and Site Specific Proposals Plan (2012) designate a safeguarding area for the existing Cambridge Water Recycling Centre and another for an existing aggregates railhead; as w ell as a Waste 
Consultation Area for an existing waste management facility.  In addition, an area of search is identified for a household (waste) recycling centre to serve the north of Cambridge and an inert waste recycling facility.  Any development proposals will need to be assessed against the above minerals and waste policies and specifically will need to prove they are compatible to ensure the existing safeguarded aggregates railhead and waste operations can continue without conflict.  
 3.34 The sidings, in South Cambridgeshire, currently have a number of businesses importing aggregate using the railway that is used for construction and road maintenance in the wider Cambridge area. This provides an important source of building materials for the wider area.  
 3.35 Exploration in respect of the viability and feasibility of redevelopment of 
the Cambridge Water Recycling Centre to provide a new treatment Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
62 works facility either elsewhere or on the current site, subject to its scale 
will be undertaken as part of the feasibility investigations in drawing up the AAP. If a reduced footprint were to be achieved on the current site, this could release valuable land to enable a wider range of uses. Residential development could be an option, subject to appropriate ground conditions, contamination issues and amenity and air quality.  
 3.36 The development of Cambridge Northern Fringe East will require partnership working between landowners and developers, as well as the two local authorities and Cambridgeshire County Council. Highways England will also be engaged with on strategic road network issues.  
   Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
63  
 
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
64 Policy 16: South of Coldham’s Lane Area of Major Change  
 
The Council is seeking the wider regeneration of this area with appropriate redevelopment and the creation of an urban country park to 
serve the east of the city as shown in Figure 3.4. A masterplan for the area will be developed and this will set out the principal uses, quantum of development and extent of developable land, approach to the built form, circulation and movement, public access and landscape improvements, and future management and funding arrangements for the urban country park. The masterplan and associated transport assessment will need to be developed and adopted before any planning application is submitted. There are two main parts to this area:  
 a. the area immediately south of Coldham’s Lane (lying north of the railway line), which will allow for appropriate commercial uses on the areas marked A on Figure 3.4 and some outdoor recreational uses and ecological enhancement on the area marked B on Figure 3.4; and  
b. the area south of the railway line, including the water bodies, which will provide primarily passive outdoor recreation opportunities in the form of a new urban country park.  
 Both southern and northern parts of the site could contribute to the creation of a new urban country park. The areas marked A on Figure 3.4 could provide for relocation of ‘space intensive’ uses such as builders’ merchants sales and storage facilities which are currently located on land elsewhere in the city that could be made available for housing.  
 Development will be supported where it:  
 c. takes into account existing site conditions and environmental and safety constraints of this area, including the contaminated condition of the closed landfill sites, Cam bridge Airport to the north, related 
height and use restrictions within the A ir Safety Zone and A ir 
Safeguarding Zones, and the existing lakes;  
d. is subject to a detailed feasibility report (to be submitted before any redevelopment can take place on the closed landfill sites), and the form and nature of public access to the urban country park are to be established;  
e. includes the upgrading of existing public routes to support increased pedestrian and cycle access from the wider area;  
f. is part of a masterplan for  the entire area, which will provide the 
mechanism to deliver the required vision; and  
g. recognises existing sites of local nature conservation importance within and surrounding the site, and where development is proposed, provides for appropriate ecological  mitigation and/or enhancement 
measures , as compared to the 2005 Cambridge City Wildlife Survey 
baseline . Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
65  
Supporting text:  
 
3.37 This area of Cambridge, as shown in Figure 3.4, represents a precious 
resource that should be revitalised. The area provides a unique opportunity to introduce new uses, redevelop key sites and improve access. The redevelopment of the land south of Coldham’s Lane as an urban country park will help enhance the existing ‘green and blue corridor’ of important open spaces that runs from Coldham’s Common through the two closed landfill sites and the lakes into Cherry Hinton Hall, and then further south through to Limekiln Hill Local Nature Reserve and the Cherry Hinton Pit Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI).  
 3.38 Subject to appropriate access and safety arrangements, one or more of the former quarries and landfill sites could be used for recreation uses, as well as the lakes and their surroundings. Opportunities could include, but are not limited to, walking, bird watching, cycling, non-m otorised 
cycle BMX tracks, and other leisure uses.  
 3.39 Future uses will need to be sensitive to the nature conservation value of some of these sites. The former landfill sites at Coldham’s Lane include areas of potential ecological importance. Any redevelopme nt of the 
eastern portion of the landfill sites marked as areas A on Figure 3.4 will require ecological enhancement as part of any redevelopment on site and provision of enhanced wildlife habitat and publicly accessible open space on the western portion of  the landfill sites marked as area B on 
Figure 3.4.  
 3.40 In the life of this local plan, there are also a number of sites in the wider area, (adjoining the defined AOMC) which, in combination with this area, could deliver wider public benefits. Any sites coming forward in this way will be expected to comply with the requirements of Policy 14 and update the masterplan.  
 3.41 To help deliver any improved or new recreational uses, the masterplan will need to address issues including the nature and location of uses, the required funding and budget sources, an assessment of risk, and a long-term management and maintenance plan. Such a masterplan will need to be developed in collaboration with private and public bodies and will need to consider the required infrastructure, phasing, safety, and budgetary and management arrangements.  
  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
66  
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
67 Policy 17: Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s 
Hospital) Area of Major Change  
 
Development proposals will be permitted at Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus (including Addenbrooke’s Hospital) where it can be 
demonstrated that development is required to meet local, regional or national health care needs or for biomedical and biotechnology research and development activities within class B1(b), related higher education and sui generis medical research institutes.  
 Associated support activities for the site as a whole, including a hotel, seminar conference centre and small scale A1 (local shop), A3 (café), A4 (public house) and D1 (crèche) type uses, would be acceptable to meet the needs of employees and visitors and to add to the vibrancy of the area.  
 Section 106 agreements and planning conditions will be used to ensure occupation accords with this mix of uses and that sufficient land is available to meet the hos pital’s future development needs.  
 Any proposals for development should:  
 a. respect key views, especially of and from the chalk hills, create new vistas, and create an attractive landscape and building edge along the railway and landscape buffer areas of at least 20 metres along the southern boundary;  
b. maximise opportunities to improve the ‘legibility’ of the Cambridge Biomedical Campus by providing a network of cycle and pedestrian 
routes, high quality new public realm and open space;  
c. retain and incorporate the existing watercourses;  
d. include measures to enhance access to the Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus including for cyclists, pedestrians, wheelchair users and other disabled people,  and mitigate the impact on the existing road 
network and parking in the surrounding area;  
e. include provision for the extension of existing conventional bus services, the Cambridgeshire Busway and Park and Ride services to meet the needs of the resident and working populations, including disabled people; and  
f. connect to the Addenbrooke’s Hospital energy network, where feasible and viable.  
   Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
68 Supporting text:  
 
3.42 The Cambridge Biomedical Campus is an international centre of 
excellence for patient care, biomedical research and healthcare education. It plays a local, regional and national role in providing medical facilities and medical research. The local plan will support its continuing development as such, and as a high quality, legible and sustainable campus. It also reinforces the existing biomedical and biotechnology cluster in the Cambridge area.  
 3.43 This policy covers the existing campus, and sufficient land to allow its expansion to meet the health needs of the expanding city and for public and private organisations with a biomedical focus to co- locate.  
 3.44 The total area of the site is approximately 68 hectares comprising:  
 3.45 Existing NHS Trust area : this is the existing built -up area bounded by 
Robinson Way to the west. At the north west of the site outline approval has been granted for:  
• a learning/seminar/conference centre;  
• a hot el; and  
• ancillary and support activities.  
 
3.46 Area covered by outline approval : this is the area between the existing 
buildings and the railway line to the west, and the southern access road (under construction) to the south.  The current outline approval allows for: 
• the relocation of Papworth Hospital;  
• other NHS and private clinical development;  
• clinical research and biomedical and biotechnology research and development activities within class B1(b);  
• sui generis medical research institutions; and  
• related support activities.  
 
3.47 The Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology is within the outline permission site.  
 3.48 Expansion area: this is the area south of the southern access road.  Development here will be similar to that approved for the remainder of 
the site, with approximately a third of the land to be developed for NHS and private clinical development and two- thirds for biomedical and 
biotechnology research and development activities.  
 3.49 When approval is granted for this land, or other proposals within the Cambridge Biomedical Campus, conditions or legal agreements will be used to ensure future development and occupation will be in accordance with this mix of uses.  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
69 3.50 Energy centre : Addenbrooke’s Hospital has identified the need for a 
new clinical waste facility (energy from waste) to replace the existing 
facility. In response, the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy (July 2011) made a strategic site specific allocation for the replacement clinical waste facility (Policy CS19, area of search site W2). It also provided a waste consultation area around this to protect the site allocation (Policies CS19 and CS30). The area of search and the waste consultation area are shown on the Policies Map. An application has been approved by Cambridgeshire County Council for an energy 
innovation centre (energy from waste facility) within the site allocation.  
 3.51 This will allow Addenbrooke’s Hospital to benefit from an energy innovation centre and energy network serving the Cambridge Biomedical Campus as a whole. Developments within the site should, therefore, seek to connect to this energy network, subject to feasibility and viability. A benefit is that it can provide developers with a cost -
effective way to meet the carbon reduction requirements sought by the 
local plan.  
 3.52 Strategic masterplan : the Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust 
(the Trust) has developed a 2020 Vision for the extended campus area. It completed a strategic masterplan in 2010 which includes the following:  
• key routes and street hierarchy;  
• public realm strategy and open space;  
• building massing;  
• potential uses;  
• development phasing; and  
• sustainability.  
 3.53 The public realm strategy aims to achieve an environment that is attractive, well -designed and distinctive, accessible and inclusive. The 
masterplan is being partially updated by the Trust as developments come forward, and does cover development beyond 2020, working with development partners and the city and county Councils. These updates will be reported to the Council as appropriate to inform the consideration of applicatio ns as they come forward.  
 3.54 Figure 3.5 provides a diagrammatic representation of the principal land uses, access and transport arrangements and landscape provision for the Cambridge Biomedical Campus and its relationship with the Southern Fringe, and the res t of the city.  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
70 
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
71 Policy 18: Southern Fringe Areas of Major Change  
 
The Southern Fringe area, comprising Clay Farm, Trumpington 
Meadows, Bell School and Glebe Farm, is proposed to deliver high quality new neigh bourhoods for Cambridge.  
 The principal land use will be a mix of residential properties, including affordable housing.  
 Other land uses will be complementary uses necessary for the creation of a sustainable and vibrant community. These will include:  
 a. community facilities, including a health centre, library and meeting rooms;  
b. education facilities, including up to 5.6 hectares for a secondary school and a primary school;  
c. local shops and services of a scale that would not impact on the vitality and viability of the existing Trumpington local centre; and  
d. open space and recreation, including allotments and children’s play areas.  
 Some of the above uses could be dealt with comprehensively with other sites in the surrounding area, including on land in South Cambridgeshire, subject to timing and phasing.  
 Proposals should be in keeping with the requirements of Appendix D of the plan and should:  
 e. retain and enhance the strategic green corridor that extends from the Chalk Hills to Long Road along t he Vicar's Brook/Hobson's Brook 
corridor and retain the nature and character of the two watercourses;  
f. respect key views, especially to and from the Chalk Hills and create an attractive landscape edge along the southern boundary of the Bell 
School site;  
g. create a distinctive gateway to the city and a high quality urban edge 
as approached by road from the south and respect key views;  
h. be fully permeated by pedestrian and cycle routes (incorporating 
access for all), both within and between the development areas,  
improving links to the Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s Hospital);  
i. include provision for the extension of existing conventional bus services and Park and Ride services to meet the needs of all residents; and  
j. provide vehicular access for the Bell School site off Babraham Road only.  
  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
72  
 
 
Supporting text:  
 
3.55 The vision for the Southern Fringe is to create attractive, well -integrated, 
accessible and sustainable new neighbourhoods for Cambridge. It was 
informed by the Cambridge Southern Fringe Area Development Framework (ADF), key elements of which form Appendix D to this plan.  
 3.56 It comprises distinctive new residential extensions to the city to meet a range of needs for the Cambridge area, including additional housing, secondary and primary schools, local community and retail uses, and 
improved access to the countryside. It covers four main areas of land, the first three of which (below) are already being developed. When completed these sites will provide approximately 3,300 new h omes 
within the city boundary, 40 per cent of which will be affordable.  
 
Clay Farm (Site R42a)  
 
3.57 Approval has been granted for up to 2,250 dwellings, a secondary and 
primary school, a local centre with shops, and a community building including a health centre and library on land west of Hobson’s Brook. Development is progressing for a substantial amount of the site, including the community centre and secondary school.  
 3.58 There may be opportunities to enhance the pedestrian/cycle links between Clay Farm and Trumpington in conjunction with the residential development of site R16: Cambridge Professional Development Centre, Foster Road.  
 3.59 The land between the brook and the railway line was included within the outline application for open space, including playing fields associated with the secondary school, a recreation area and informal open space. This land was retained as part of the Cambridge Green Belt.  
 
Trumpington Meadows (R42b)  
 
3.60 This is part of a wider site including land in South Cambridgeshire Dis trict 
Council. Outline approval has been granted for up to 600 dwellings within Cambridge’s administrative area. Development is progressing on the Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
73 northern part of the site, and a primary school and country park are being 
provided on land in South Cambridgeshire.  
 
Glebe Farm (R42c)  
 3.61 Full permission has been granted for 286 dwellings and open space on the majority of this site (Glebe Farm 1). Development is well underway. The application includes access to the adjoining site at the eastern end that is also allocated for residential development (Glebe Farm 2).  
 
Bell School (R42d)  
 
3.62 Outline approval has been granted for up to 347 dwellings and 100- bed 
student residential accommodation. This has not yet been implemented.  Reserved matters approval has been granted for the vehicular access off Babraham Road.  
 3.63 Figure 3.5 provides a diagrammatic representation of the principal land uses, access and transport arrangements, and landscape provision for the Southern Fringe and its relationship with the Cambridge Bi omedical 
Campus (including Addenbrooke’s Hospital) and the rest of the city.  
 3.64 Any further planning applications within this area will need to be in accordance with the outline consents and/or this policy. Opportunities should be taken to enhance amenity and biodiversity in the associated Green Belt land and access to this and the open countryside beyond. Key features to be taken into account include Hobson's Brook and other features important for biodiversity, existing trees, and the sensitive transition between the urban fringe and the open countryside.  
 
 
Policy 19: West Cambridge Area of Major Change  
  
1. Development of this area will be permitted in line with the existing 
planning permissions.  
 
2. The principal land uses will be:  
 Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
74 a. D1 educational uses, associated sui generis research 
establishments17 and academic research institutes; and  
b. commercial research and development of products or processes within use class B1(b) that will support knowledge transfer and/or open innovation in respect of D1 higher educational uses, associated sui generis research establishments, academic research institutes, and/or other Class B1(b) uses already authorised or granted permission pursuant to this policy.  
 
3. Any densification of development on the site that results in a 
significant increase in floorspace, over that already approved, will be supported providing that:  
 
c. a revised masterplan supporting an outline planning application 
(OPA) is submitted and agreed that takes an integrated and comprehensive approach to the prov ision and distribution of the 
uses, and supporting facilities and amenities;  
d. phasing of the development will be determined through the outline planning permission (OPP) and as the need is proven;  
e. the approach to appropriate development heights will be determined through the OPP giving consideration to the sensitivity of the landscape within the Green Belt to the south and west;  
f. proposals respect the important adjacent Green Belt setting to the south and west, and other neighbouring residential uses and view s 
of the city from the west; 
g. it includes a comprehensive transport strategy for the site, incorporating a sustainable transport plan to minimise reliance on private cars. This should include assessing the level, form and type of car parking on the site;  
h. that walking, cycling and public transport links (including access for 
all) to the city centre, railway station(s), other principal educational and employment sites, and other key locations within the city are enhanced to support sustainable development; and  
i. that proposals provide appropriate green infrastructure which is well integrated with the existing and new development and with the surrounding area.  
 
4. The development will also include further phases of the sports centre.  
 
5. Small- scale community facilities , amenities, and A1 (local shop), A3 
(café), A4 (public house), D1 (crèche) type uses and student 
accommodation will be acceptable, if they support existing occupants on the site and add to the social spaces and vibrancy of the area, essential to its continued success.  
 
17 Research establishments/institutions are taken to mean sui generis uses affiliated with one of the 
Universities, the Medical Research Council or Addenbrooke’s Hospital, where there is a need for regular 
day-to-day contact or sharing of materials, staff an d equipment.  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
75  
6. The Council will be supportive of a site- wide approach to renewable 
or low carbon energy generation or the future proofing of buildings to 
allow for connections to energy networks.  
 
7. The precise quantum of new floorspace will be subject to testing and 
demonstration through the development of a revised OPA for the site.  
 
 
Supporting text:  
 
3.65 The West Cambridge site is allocated for uses related to the University 
of Cambridge. Development has begun in accordance with an approved planning permission and supported by an agreed masterplan and development guidelines.  
 3.66 The overall site (allocation reference M13), which covers 66.5 hectares, was the subject of an outline planning approval in 1999 that set out the density of development permitted. A masterplan was subsequently agreed with the University of Cambridge for the development of approximately 250,000 sq m of space 18, which creates a strategic 
framework to guide future development of the site. It also includes guidelines for monitoring the progress of development.  
 3.67 Reserved matters and full applications have been approved on a number of plots and a number have been completed or are in the pipeline. The precise sequence and timing of development has been down to the availabilit y of funding and that is likely to continue.  
 3.68 Figure 3.6 provides a diagrammatic representation of the principal land uses, access and transport arrangements and landscape provision for the West Cambridge site and its relationship with North West Cambridge, land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road, and the rest of the city.  
 3.69 The Council has identified an overall strategic need for further employment growth across the city, including making more efficient use of existing employment sites. The University of Cambridge supports that approach and wishes to intensify future development on the West Cambridge site. This is welcomed, as it will provide a more efficient use of land, increased opportunities to meet employment needs, a different approach to place ma king and enable the provision of more shared 
social spaces and other ancillary support services to enhance the 
 
18 This figure includes pre -existing buildings  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
76 vibrancy of the area. The latter may be best achieved through grouping 
of facilities, e.g. near the sports centre.  
 3.70 There is frequently a functio nal relationship between the commercial 
research sector and the academic research sector, which is of benefit to both, as well as between organisations within each sector, in particular through the encouragement of knowledge transfer and open innovation. Knowledge transfer refers to the exchange of knowledge and information 
between and within the commercial and academic sectors.  Open innovation promotes collaborative working between and within the academic research sector and the commercial research sector  with the 
objective of accelerating the rate and scope of innovation within both sectors and of expanding the market for external use of products of research.   The West Cambridge site will provide a development cluster for University science and technology research, knowledge transfer and/or open innovation.  
 3.71 Planning applications for new development should be accompanied by a Planning Statement setting out how proposals for commercial research will support knowledge transfer and/or open innovation in respect of D1 higher educational uses, associated sui generis research establishments, academic research institutes and/or other Class B1(b) uses already authorised or granted permission pursuant to this policy.  
 3.72 The new proposals will need to be accompanied by an illustrative new site-wide masterplan to be brought forward as part of a new outline 
planning application to advise on the form, content, density and phasing of the development, and how it will be integrated with the existing city. The outline planning permission should determine appropriate heights across the site, taking account of the Green Belt setting, views of the city from the west and other neighbouring residential uses. The increased density will provide further opportunities to enhance the built form, public realm and street scene of the area. Progress will be monitored and reviewed against the outline planning permission over the period of the plan.  
 3.73 The increased activity may put further pressure on the environment and the ameni ty of nearby residents; in particular the impact on biodiversity 
and noise and light pollution in the area will need to be considered in any masterplan review. The sensitivities in relation to the Green Belt and western setting of the city will also need to be appropriately considered.  
 
3.74 Key to the success of the new proposals will be an integrated and accessible sustainable public transport strategy (which considers all modes of travel, including public transport) to ensure that development has an acceptabl e impact on the surrounding transport network. This 
should take into account committed planned improvements to the public transport network that will be delivered by North West Cambridge. The additional development would have the advantage of establishing more Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
77 activity, which will make public transport routes to and from the site more 
viable. It will also provide an opportunity to review cycle and walking links, and car parking across the site.  
 
3.75 The increased densities being sought on the site, coupled with  the 
possible provision of a swimming pool within the West Cambridge Sports Centre, could open up the potential of combined heat and power technology. There may also be potential for a more comprehensive scheme by linking the site to wider energy networks,  for example the 
heat network being provided at the North West Cambridge site.  
  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
78   
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
79 Policy 20: Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road Area of 
Major Change  
 
Land between Huntington Road and Histon Road is proposed to deliver a high quality inclusive new neighbourhood on the edge of the city.  
 The principal land use will be a mix of residential properties, including affordable housing. Other land uses will be complementary uses necessary for the creation of a sustainable and vibrant community . 
These will include: 
 a. a primary school;  
b. retail facilities (A1 to A5) within a designated local centre;  
c. a foodstore of up to 2000 sq m net;  
d. community facilities, including a health centre, library, and meeting  
spaces ; and  
e. open space and recreation, including allotments, provision for  
childre n and teenagers . 
 Other uses will be delivered on other sites in the wider North West Quadrant (see Figure 3.6) including the provision of a secondary school on land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road in South Cambridgeshire.  
 Development should:  
 f. include a comprehensive transport strategy for the site, incorporating a sustainable transport plan to minimise reliance on private cars;  
g. only be directly accessed by motor vehicles from Huntingdon Road and Histon Road (through South Cambridgeshire);  
h. provide a direct route for public transport, including access for all, through the development, and a circuitous route for private motor vehicles; 
i. where possible retain and enhance existing definitive footpaths that cross the site, or provide suitable and safe equivalent links as part of the development;  
j. provide for walking, cycling, and improvements for disabled people (accessible for all) on- and off -site to offer more sustainable t ravel 
choices for residents, including an orbital cycle link from Huntingdon to Histon Road along the western boundary and enhancing the footpath to Thornton Way; and  
k. respect, take account of and integrate with the adjacent NIAB sites 2 and 3 in South Cambridgeshire, and ensure the timely provision of related infrastructure.  
  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
80 Supporting text:  
 
3.76 The vision for land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road, also known as the NIAB 1 site or Darwin Green 1 site, is to create a distinctive, integrated and accessi ble new residential neighbourhood for 
Cambridge, to the highest quality of design and embodying the principles of sustainability. The land is allocated for housing and associated mixed-use development, and any design will need to ensure good connections to other areas of the city.  
 3.77 Approval has been granted for up to 1,593 dwellings with associated community, educational, open space and retail uses. The total area of the site within the city is approximately 53 hectares. A small part at the eastern end of the site is within South Cambridgeshire, which includes the access off Histon Road. As part of the S106 agreement, contributions 
have been secured for off ‐site mitigation to compensate the loss of 
Christ’s and Sidney Sussex sports grounds.  
 
3.78 Key constraints on the site include noise pollution from the A14. In 
addition, definitive footpaths cross the site linking Histon Road and Huntingdon Road with Girton. The existing National Institute of Agricultural Botany (NIAB) building on Huntingdon Road, which is a local heritage asset adjoining the site, will need to be respected.  
 3.79 The Informal Planning Policy Guidance on Foodstore Provision in North West Cambridge (March 2011) identified the need for a foodstore of up to 2,000 sq m net on the NIAB site and another foodstore of up to 2,000 sq m net on the North West Cambridge site.  A separate planning application will bring this element forward.  
 
3.80 Figure 3.6 provides a diagrammatic representation of the principal land 
uses, access and transport arrangements  and landscape provision for 
the site and its relationship with North West Cambridge, West Cambridge, and the rest of the city.  
 3.81 Any further planning applications within this area will need to be in accordance with the outline consents and/or this policy. The design will also need to take account of existing character, retain environmental features of value, enhance biodiversity and create a well -integrated 
development with its context.  
 3.82 Development should be mindful of neighbouring developments on land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road in South Cambridgeshire, also known as NIAB 2 and 3 or Darwin Green 2 and 3, and the land between Huntingdon Road and Madingley Road. Where possible comprehensive, phased and integrated solutions to elements such as education, transport and community facilities should be considered.  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
81  
 
Policy 21: Station Areas West and Clifton Road Area of Major Change  
 
Development at the Station Areas West and Clifton Road Area of Major 
Change, as defined on the Policies Map and shown on Figure 3.7, will support the continued and complete regeneration of vibrant, mixed- use 
areas of the city, centred around and accessible to a high quality and improved transport interchange. The principal land uses will include:  
 
Station Area West (1)  – Site M14  
a. a major regenerated multi -modal transport interchange focused on 
the existing Cambridge Railway Station, which services Cambridge and its sub- region;  
b. residential use with an indicative capacity of 331 dwellings and 1,250 student units;  
c. B1(a) and B1(b) employment;  
d. a mix of uses in classes A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5;  
e. improved cycling and walking routes and facilities;  
f. open spaces, both hard surfaced and green;  
g. community uses; and  
h. hotel uses.  
Station Area West (2) – Site M44  
Land comprising 1.17 hectares fronting Hills Road will include:  
 i. B1 (a) and B1 (b) employment;  
j. residential  use; and  
k. a mix of uses in classes A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5;  
Clifton Road Area – Site M2  
l. a mix of Class B1(a) and B1(b) employment uses (2 hectares);  
m. leisure -related uses;  
n. residential use, with a maximum capacity of 550 dwellings; and  
o. open spaces, both hard surfaced and green.  
 The Clifton Road Area will be subject to the preparation and adoption of a Supplementary Planning Document (including detailed traffic assessment) to  guide the future development of the area, before any 
major planning application is submitted. The SPD will set out the vision for the area as a distinctive new mixed- use neighbourhood, well Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
82 integrated with and responsive to the established context, including the 
residential areas adjacent to the site. This highly accessible and sustainable location will need to be linked to the station by new cycle and pedestrian infrastructure, and future vehicle movements will be expected to be no greater than current levels. Proposals within Station Areas West and the Clifton Road Area should:  
 p. be designed to the highest quality to support the successful redevelopment of this area;  
q. allow the potential for future improvements to the access for pedestrians and cyclists between Station Areas West and Clifton Road Area, including investigation of a possible foot and cycle eastern entrance to the railway station; and  
r. provide surface water drainage improvements.  
 Station Area West 2 will be subject to masterplanning and detailed transport assessment before any new planning applications come 
forward.  
  
Supporting text:  
 
3.83 Development of the area surrounding Cambridge Railway Station 
comprises two key areas: the western transport -centred Station Road 
portion with the employment -led development at Betjeman House, and 
the existing eastern Clifton Road Industrial Estate portion.  
 3.84 Station Areas West was identified as an area for major change in the Cambridge Local Plan 2006 (the Station Area). An outline application has been approved and significant new development has taken place following the approval of reserved matters. The completion of the development of the Station Areas West represents a unique opportunity to create a high quality, mixed- use gateway to the city supported by 
excellent transport links and with a vibrant range of residential, employment and retail uses.  
 3.85 Development should be carried out in accordance with the masterplan 
and parameter plans established by the outline permission. However, it is recognised that some flexibility will be needed to respond to changes in planning policy and to ensure that the overall development continues to be capable of supporting the delivery of the transport infrastructure and improvements to the public realm.  
 3.86 The Clifton Road Area currently comprises the Clifton Road Industrial Estate, which includes a range of industrial and storage uses.  However, within the life of this plan there is the potential for redevelopment of the area to create a new, mixed- use development, including residential and Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
83 employment uses. The site could become a vibrant, highly accessible, 
new mixed- use a rea, near the Station Areas West and Cambridge 
Leisure Park.  
 3.87 The potential for improved or additional cycle/footbridges between Station Areas West and the Clifton Road Area of Major Change should be considered, subject to appropriate locations for access  and a 
feasibility analysis. The implications for parking controls in the neighbourhoods around the Clifton Road Area will need to be considered as part of bringing forward this area for redevelopment.  
  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
84  
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
85 Opportunity Areas  
 
3.88 Opportunity Areas provide opportunities to facilitate development and 
reinforce and create character and identity in key corridors and centres of the city, often through associated public realm improvements. Opportunity Areas embrace mixed uses and multiple functions, which provides opportunities and challenges and requires a policy framework to promote and guide overall change during the life of the plan. In order to guide the enhancement of these areas, proposals sites are shown where they lie within or beside the Opportunity Areas. The following policies set out planned responses to the needs and opportunities of these areas, including the protection of important features, identifying development sites, and outlining highway and environmental public realm improvements.  
 
3.89 Policy and practice relating to street design is changing rapidly. The 
Government’s National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, 2012) and Manual for Streets 1 and 2 emphasise the value of streets as places, used by everyone. The standard approach of claiming more land to resolve highway issues is detrimental to place making, as it erodes character and prioritises road space. In parts of the UK, precedents exist where standard traffic solutions have been replaced by simpler and more integrated solutions. While every street and its context are different, a key common element of the Opportunity Areas is that they all seek to bring a better balance to streets.  
  
Policy 22: Mitcham’s Corner Opportunity Area  
 
Development proposals within the Mitcham’s Corner Opportuni ty Area 
identified in Figure 3.8 will be supported if they promote and coordinate the use of sustainable transport modes, contribute to the creation of a sense of place, and deliver local shops and services.   
 The character of the area will be enhanced by creating a block structure and developing building forms that moderate the scale and massing of new development and respond to their context and the prevailing character of the area. Opportunities for rebalancing the needs of pedestrians and cyclists over motor vehicles, restoring a more active street frontage and contributing to a human- scale environment should 
be taken. Mitcham’s Corner and Chesterton Road will reinforce the ‘high street’ feel, using character and distinctiveness to their advantage. These streets will help maintain the vibrant community and provide 
attractive places to live in, work in and travel through. Where Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
86 redevelopment occurs, opportunities should be taken to provide a mix of 
uses, including residential uses on upper floors.  
Developm ent proposals will deliver a series of coordinated streetscape 
and public realm improvements to streets and junctions within the Mitcham’s Corner area. These will be set out in a Development Framework Supplementary Planning Document for the area, which mus t 
be approved before any major planning application is submitted and will:  
 
a. create a low -speed environment to help restore the balance between 
people and vehicles. Reducing the physical and visual width of the 
carriageway, in addition to reducing or removing road markings, will help change the perception of the street and contribute to lower speeds;  
b. emphasise ‘place making’ over vehicle movement, in particular at junctions, through the use of tighter geometry – by removing or 
revising the existing gyratory system; 
c. reinforce or re- establish historic routes and create opportunities for 
new public spaces;  
d. create a more comfortable and simplified pedestrian environment by providing wider pavements and more street trees, removing pedestrian guardrails and unnecessary signage, and introducing more direct crossings that respond to key desire lines; and  
e. use an appropriate and durable palette of materials.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
3.90 The Mitcham’s Corner Opportunity Area lies within the northern edge of 
the extended Central Conservation Area and is approximately 10 minutes’ walk from the city centre. The area owes its name to Charles Mitcham, who owned a draper’s shop on the corner of Chesterton Road and Victoria Avenue from the early - to mid -20th century. Today, the 
name is associated with the gyratory system that radically changed the area in the 1970s. The one- way system has left the backs of terraces 
exposed, created an unpleasant and difficult environment for pedestrians and cyclists, and has come to dominate and erode the 
character of the area. Despite the challenges, a diverse mix of services and small independent shops exist within the area, surrounded by a vibrant community.  
 
3.91 The vision for Mitcham’s Corner is to maintain the vibrancy of the local centre and pr omote high quality redevelopments of streets and sites 
which improve connectivity between people and places, and reinforce the area with a strong local character and identity. The radical transformation of the gyratory system is identified as a key public realm and infrastructure project.  Improving the traffic -dominated one- way 
system and promoting high quality redevelopment are fundamental to the overall vision. The creation of a low -speed environment and two- way Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
87 traffic flows will help create safer, more active and inclusive streets, and 
a place where it is pleasant to live and work. A masterplan will be 
necessary to develop the vision and guide new development proposals coming forward.  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
88  
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
89 Policy 23: Eastern Gate Opportunity Area  
 
Development proposals within the Eastern Gate Opportunity Area, 
identified in Figure 3.9, will be supported if they enhance the character of the area, improve connectivity and increase activity.  
 The character of the area will be enhanced by developing buildings of a scale and massing that respond to context and reflect the predominantly residential nature of the area (building heights are indicated on Figure 3.9). New visual and physical connections to well -loved buildings, 
spaces and between the north and south side of Newmarket Road should be created, along with active street frontages at ground floor level. Where redevelopment occurs, opportunities should be taken to provide a mix of uses, including residential uses on upper floors . 
 Development proposals will deliver coordinated streetscape and public realm improvements to streets and junctions within the Eastern Gate area which comply with the requirements set out in the Eastern Gate Area Development Framework Supplementary Planning Document and which:  
 
a. take an approach to street design consistent with Manual for Streets 
1 and 2 and their successor documents, creating a low -speed traffic 
environment to restore the balance between people and vehicles;  
b. emphasise ‘place making’ over vehicle movement, in particular at junctions, through the use of tighter geometry and radii, to reduce speeds and to reclaim public space;  
c. re-establish historic routes and create clear gateways/entry points 
into existing residential neighbourhoods;  
d. create a m ore comfortable and simplified pedestrian environment 
through provision of more generous pavements and street trees, removal of pedestrian guardrails and unnecessary signage, and introduction of more direct crossings that respond to key desire lines; 
and 
e. use an appropriate and durable palette of materials.  
 
The following key projects will be delivered through development 
proposals and in accordance with criteria a– e: 
 
f. Elizabeth Way roundabout – removal of the pedestrian underpass; 
creating pedestrian/cycle movements at grade; remodelling to 
provide a more land efficient design to reclaim an area for a new 
public urban space and to allow built form to define this important gateway into the city;  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
90 g. Newmarket Road and East Road – revision of the approach to traff ic 
management and highway engineering to create a high quality street 
environment, including continuous cycle lanes;  
h. East Road/St Matthew’s Street junction – remodelling to include new 
direct pedestrian/cycle crossings;  
i. Newmarket Road/Coldham’s Lane juncti on – remodelling to include 
new direct pedestrian/cycle crossings; and  
j. New Street and Harvest Way – two-way traffic flows and design of 
on-street parking as an integral component of the streetscape.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
3.92 The Eastern Gate Opportunity Area stretches from the Crown Court and 
Elizabeth Way roundabout to the beginning of the Newmarket Road 
retail park and is currently undergoing significant change. The large-scale highway interventions of the 1970s, the application of standard highway engineering solutions and the construction of unsympathetic bulky buildings that do not relate well to the public realm, particularly along the key arterial route of Newmarket Road, have eroded the quality and character of the area and created barriers between neighbouring communities. Despite these challenges, attractive, well -established 
spaces and neighbourhoods with a strong sense of community still exist in the area surrounding the Eastern Gate. The Council produced the Eastern Gate Area Development Framework Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) in 2011 after extensive consultation with local residents and other stakeholders, and this document has been used to inform this policy. The SPD still forms a material consideration and accordingly the further information and concepts contained within it should be referred to when considering development in this Opportunity Area.  
 
3.93 The vision for the Eastern Gate area is to reconnect people and places 
and it is focused on regenerating and transforming this key approach to 
the city through high quality development coupled with a series of key 
projects.  Opportunities for improving the area by successfully integrating new development and for rediscovering and realising the potential of underused spaces, exist throughout Eastern Gate. The five key public realm and infrastructure projects identified in the policy and in Figure 3.9 will address the problems associated with the congested roads and junctions, and will help to integrate currently separated local communities. Appropriate storey heights are shown in Figure 3.9. For example, 3– 4 + 1 means that developments of three to four storeys in 
height are likely to be appropriate, with the opportunity for an additional top storey set back from the building frontage. Any proposals that seek 
to exceed the storey heights set out in Figure 3.9 will need to be tested in a robust way, and applicants will need to demonstrate through Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
91 accurate 3D computer modelling that their proposal will not unacceptably 
impact upon the surrounding context.  
 
3.94 The key projects outlined in the policy and in the SPD combine to form 
a well- considered and comprehensive approach to improving the public 
realm and character of the Eastern Gate by setting out the expectations for re development in the area. A revised approach to street design, 
which creates a low -speed environment that helps to create safer, more 
active, sociable and inclusive streets is crucial to the overall success of the area. It is expected that planning obligations from the redevelopment of sites within the Opportunity Area will help to fund the key public realm projects identified above.  
  
 Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
92 
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
93 Policy 24: Mill Road Opportunity Area  
 
Development proposals along Mill Road Opportunity Area, identified in Figure 3.10, will be supported if they add to the vitality and viability of the street and protect and enhance its unique character, including the development of arts and cultural facilities. Allocated sites with the potential to deliver new development include 315– 349 Mill Road and 
Brookfields, Mill Road Depot and the Travis Perkins site on Devonshire Road.    To support the interests of Mill Road’s characteristic smaller independent traders, there should be no amalgamati on of units, unless 
there are exceptional circumstances or it can be shown that this would add to diversity, vitality and viability (see Policy 72). The Council will support proposals to improve and refurbish existing retail units and shop frontages.  
 To strengthen the distinctiveness of Mill Road and ensure its long- term 
success and viability, development proposals will deliver a series of coordinated streetscape and public realm improvements which:  
 a. take an approach to street design consistent with Manual  for Streets 
1 and 2 and their successor documents, creating a low -speed traffic 
environment to restore the balance between people and vehicles;  
b. emphasise ‘place making’ over vehicle movement, in particular at junctions, through the use of tighter geometry and radii, to reduce speeds and to reclaim public realm;  
c. create a series of  public realm improvements based around junctions and crossings in the road network, which respond to key spaces and buildings;  
d. create clear gateways/entry points into existing and new residential neighbourhoods;  
e. create a more comfortable and simplified pedestrian environment by 
providing improved pavements and more direct crossings that 
respond to key desire lines; and  
f. use an appropriate and durable palette of materials.  
 
Supporting text:  
 3.95 The Mill Road Opportunity Area sets out a new policy approach to Mill Road in order to maintain and enhance the distinctive and historic character of the area. It also sets out opportunities to improve the public realm along Mill Road. Mill Road has its own character with a diverse range of shops, high quality historic environment and sense of being a Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
94 distinctive local community. Mill Road has two district centres, providing 
a range of shops and services either side of the railway bridge. The 
majority of the Opportunity Area also falls within the Mill Road Conservation Area.  
 3.96 Mill Road is characterised by its large number of diverse and independent retail traders, which lend the area a cosmopolitan feel. There are a wide range of restaurants, cafés and hot food takeaways, particularly west of the railway bridge, which add to its viability but which can also lead to amenity problems. There are also a number of antique and bric -a-brac shops and the market at Hope Street, which add to the 
rich diversity and uniqueness of the area. The policy seeks to safeguard 
the independent, cosmopolitan feel of the street.  
 3.97 Surrounding the street are terraced residential streets, some of which have a high population of students or shared households. There is a real sense of community in the Mill Road area, and events such as the Winter Fair attract large numbers of people each year.   
 3.98 Mill Road is an extremely busy, narrow road and there are conflicts between cars, buses and cyclists. In places, the pavements  are narrow 
and cluttered with signs, lampposts and parked bicycles, making it difficult to move along them, particularly with a pram or for those who are disabled. The policy seeks to encourage improvements to the public realm and ensure that any development proposals in the area contribute to them. It could, for example, be a specific landscape treatment at a junction to aid traffic calming and improve the environment.  
 3.99 There are a number of sites with potential for redevelopment for residential uses, these include 315 –349 Mill Road and Brookfields 
(R21), Mill Road Depot (R10) and the Travis Perkins site on Devonshire Road (R9).  
 
 Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
95  
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
96 Policy 25: Cambridge Railway Station, Hills Road Corridor to the City 
Centre Opportunity Area  
 
Development proposals within the Cambridge Railway Station, Hills Road Corridor to the City Centre Opportunity Area, identified in Figure 3.11, will be supported if they help promote and coordinate the use of sustainable transport modes, and deliver and reinforce a sense of place and local shops and services. Allocated sites with the potential to deliver new development include 1 and 7– 11 Hills Road, 82 –90 Hills Road and 
57–63 Bateman Street, Station Areas West and the Clifton Road Area 
of Major Change.  
 Development proposals will deliver a series of coordinated streetscape and public realm improvements which:  
 
a. take an approach to street design consistent with Manual for Streets 
1 and 2 and their successor documents that creates a low speed traffic environment to restore the balance between people and vehicles; 
b. emphasise ‘place making’ over vehicle movement, in particular at junctions, through the use of tighter geometry and radii, to reduce approach speeds and to reclaim areas for additional public space;  
c. re-establish historic routes and create clear gateways/entry points 
into existing residential neighbourhoods;  
d. create a more comfortable and simplified pedestrian environment through provision of more generous pav ements and street trees, 
removal of pedestrian guardrails and unnecessary signage, and introduction of more direct crossings that respond to key desire lines; and 
e. use an appropriate and durable palette of materials.  
 
The following key projects will be delivered through development 
proposals and in accordance with criteria a- e: 
 f. Regent Street – reallocation of space for wider pavements to better 
cope with pedestrian flows, reduce street clutter and provide improved cycle parking facilities;  
g. Hyde Park Corner – improvement of the setting of the Our Lady of 
the English Martyrs Church and increase pavement widths in front of the terrace opposite. Simplify the pedestrian and cyclist user experiences through more direct crossings and investigate the potential for single stage crossings;  
h. Hills Road local centre – reconnection of both sides of the street and 
improvement of the pedestrian user experience through removing barriers and obstacles. Traffic management and the reallocation of Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
97 space will help to reduce  vehicle speeds and highlight the revitalised 
‘hub’ of Hills Road;  
i. Station Approach – linkage of the proposed CB1 Station Square from 
Tenison Road through to Hills Road, creating a high quality public 
realm;  
j. Cambridge Leisure Park – creation of a high qual ity connection into 
the site, by upgrading the existing link south of the station across Hills Road Bridge;  
k. Cherry Hinton Road junction – revision of the approach to traffic 
management and highway engineering in order to create a quality connection between the new developments on all sides of the 
junction through to Hills Road and Cambridge Leisure Park;  
l. Lensfield Road junction – simplification and rationalisation of the 
layouts of the two junctions remove the bottleneck that causes traffic to back along Gonville Place. Improve the quality of the public realm and connectivity for pedestrians and cyclists.  
Supporting text:  
 3.100  Cambridge’s railway station is a mile from the city centre. Decades of growth have absorbed the station into the wider urban area. The c urrent 
redevelopment of the area around the station, through the consented CB1 scheme, will deliver a high quality mixed -use scheme focused on a 
new station square alongside a new transport interchange.  
 3.101  Currently, the streets and junctions within the Opportunity Area are congested with traffic, and pedestrians experience a poor quality public realm.  The implementation of this policy will create an improved, high quality link connecting the city centre to the station. It will improve connectivity and character in this part of Cambridge by supporting and prioritising walking and cycling and creating a better sense of place. When linked, the key projects identified within the policy will create a high quality pedestrian and cycle route from the station in to the city 
centre and are shown in Figure 3.11.  
 3.102  Redevelopment of sites within the area will help improve the environmental quality of the whole area, creating a more inclusive public realm and promoting ‘place making’. These improvements will promote the character and distinctiveness of Hills Road and Regent Street to 
create streets that will foster a sense of community and provide attractive places to live in, work in and travel through. Where redevelopment occurs within the local centre, opportunities should be taken to provide a mix of uses, including residential uses on upper floors.  
  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
98  
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
99  
Policy 26: Old Press/Mill Lane Opportunity Area  
 
A masterplan for the Old Press/Mill Lane site will be prepared and 
agreed with the Council to support its future development.  Development proposals for the Old Press/Mill Lane site will be supported if they are in accordance with the agreed masterplan and they:  
 a. preserve and enhance the special historic character and appearance of heritage assets, including the conservation area and listed buildings and their settings;  
b. create the opportunity for the adaptive reuse of existing buildings, where possible;  
c. create the opportunity for redevelopment to provide high quality, sustainable new buildings of innovative design which contribute positively to their surroundings;  
d. introduce a range of complementary and compatible land uses, such as residential, commercial hotel and other uses;  
e. create and enhance areas of public open space and public realm to a high quality, potentially including a new public space fronting on to the river;  
f. improve permeability through the site and create safer streets with priority for pedestrians and cyclists;  
g. minimise non -essential car parking and improve servicing; and  
h. provide high quality, well -designed areas of cycle parking.  
 The capacity and viability of the site and the phasing of development will be established during the preparation of the site- wide masterplan. 
Further details on the implementation of this policy are set out  in the Old 
Press/Mill Lane Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).  
 
Supporting text:  
 
3.103  The Old Press/Mill Lane site lies in the historic core of the city and currently accommodates a range of the University of Cambridge’s academic and administrative facilities. The site contains some of the few remaining vestiges of the city’s commercial past, including former warehouses, traces of watermills and watercourses 19. It has long been 
recognised that the University of Cambridge is interested in moving some of its activities from the site to more appropriate buildings and 
 
19 Detailed assessment of the buildings and streets within the Old Press/Mill Lane site is provided in 
the Council’s Cambridge Historic Core Conservation Area Appraisal (August 2006) and the Mill La ne 
and Old Press Site Historic Environment Analysis (October 2008) by Beacon Planning.  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
100 locations within the city. The relocation offers the opportunity to create a 
lively, attractive area adjoining the river; scope to enhance the public realm and the setting of heritage assets; to address existing conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians; and to reuse and redevelop buildings for a range of land uses.  
 3.104  In 2008, the Council and the University of Cambridge undertook a viability assessment for development of the site in producing the Ol d 
Press/Mill Lane SPD (January 2010), which led to this indicative capacity being reached 20. Since this work was undertaken, further work has 
been undertaken by the University of Cambridge and it is now clear that the site is likely to deliver student accommodation rather than housing:  
 
Table 3.2: Indicative floorspace/units  
Land use  Indicative floorspace/units  
Student 
Accommodation  Student accommodation: Indicative capacity 
of 350 student rooms*  
Commercial 
(excluding retail)  Up to 6,000 sq m  
Hotel  Up to 75 bedrooms  
Other (excluding 
retail)  Up to 1,000 sq m  
 * The indicative capacity of this site is subject to detailed testing, including consideration of the site’s constraints, particularly the historic environment.  
 
3.105  The purpose of the masterplan for the Old Press/Mill Lane site is to provide the basis for determining future planning applications and the 
phasing of development. Before the masterplan is submitted, there 
should be extensive consultation with stakeholders and residents. However, regard will also be had to the most recent Historic Core Conservation Area Appraisal which provides more up- to-date 
information in respect of the heritage assets on this site and will therefore take precedence in respect of those assets.  
 
3.106  Development  proposals are unlikely to be delivered simultaneously for 
the entire Old Press/Mill Lane site, because of the timing of the relocation of University of Cambridge uses to other sites and the challenges of developing a constrained city centre site. The avai lability of different 
 
20 Old Press/Mill Lane SPD Option Appraisal: Summary Report (February 2009) and Old Press/ Mill 
Lane SPD (January 2010).  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
101 parts of the site will be a principal factor that will dictate the phasing of 
development. In order to progress the different parts of the site and their different scales of redevelopment and refurbishment, it is considered that the phasing strategy within the masterplan should sub- divide the site 
into discrete parcels. Those parcels will consist of areas where development is likely to come forward at the same time. The relationship between the parcels is vital in coordinating developm ent and achieving 
a high quality environment.  
 
3.107  Applications will be accompanied by Design and Access Statements, which will state how the proposal relates and contributes to achieving the aims of this policy aims and the wider masterplan, and the opportunities and constraints that the site presents. For further detail, the Old Press/Mill Lane SPD should be referred to.  
 
Site specific proposals  
 3.108  There are diverse opportunities on sites across the city for development to meet Cambridge’s needs to 2031. Such sites are broadly characterised by being comparatively small, or non- strategic, single sites 
with existing road access and clearly defined boundaries. They usually have an existing use, but with scope for renewal. They generally require relatively lim ited investment in infrastructure.  
 
3.109  The sites fall into five broad categories: residential and residential moorings use, mixed use, employment and university use.  
 
3.110  The following policy sets out a planned approach to these sites.  
  
Policy 27: Site specific development opportunities  
 Sites considered suitable for development to contribute towards Cambridge’s needs to 2031 are set out in the proposals schedule (Appendix B). Planning permission for the proposed developments and uses will be supported subject to:  a. any amelioration and mitigation needed to address issues of flooding and contamination;  
b. design considerations;  
c. satisfactory access and other infrastructure provision; and  
d. any other requirements of the policies in this plan, where applicable.  
 Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
102 Sites GB1  and GB2 (Land north and south of Worts’ Causeway), see 
Figure 3.12, are to be released from the Cambridge Green Belt for 
residential development of up to 430 dwellings. Given their location on the city’s urban edge, the development of these sites will be supported subject to:  
 e. the creation of a landscaped buffer where the sites adjoin existing housing;  
f. the assessment of the sites for potential for biodiversity enhancement 
and the creation of an ecological corridor between both sites;  
g. the early establishment of a generous landscaped edge to the 
eastern side of sites to help create an appropriate buffer and distinctive city edge between the development and the Cambridge 
Green Belt;  
h. the establishment of appropriate public footpaths linking the 
development with the surrounding chalk farmland;  
i. the retention of the country lane appearance and character of Worts’ Causeway, including its verges, hedgerows and bridleway;  
j. the retention of Worts’ Causeway’s use for buses only during peak periods, with limited car access to provide a green link into the Cambridge Green Belt with space for pedestrians, horse riders and cyclists; 
k. the provision of a single point of crossover between GB1 and GB2 and a single access on to Babraham Road;  
l. development  being of an appropriate scale, form and orientation 
where the site adjoins existing housing;  
m. the adoption of a sensitive approach to internal street layout and 
design in order to integrate the development into this setting on the edge of the Cambridge Green Belt;  
n. the integration of proposed and existing sustainable drainage measures on site;  
o. the investigation and preservation in sit u of any archaeological 
remains; and  
p. contributions  being made towards improved community facilities and 
services in this part of the city.  
 
For GB1 Land north of Worts’ Causeway only, the development of this site will be supported subject to:  q. the retention of sufficient buffer areas around the Netherhall Farm  
Meadow County Wildlife Site, the provision of a long- term 
management regime, including limited access, to protect and enhance the ecological value of the meadow, and assessment of the wider site for potential to create an ecological corridor between sites GB1 and GB2;  
r. the retention of or safe relocation of existing bat roosts at Netherhall Farm;  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
103 s. the retention of existing buildings of local interest, with potential for 
adaptive reuse, and maintenance and enhancement of the 
landscaped setting of the buildings of local interest.  
 The development of sites GB3 and GB4 (Fulbourn Road West 1 and 2), see Figure 3.13, will be supported for employment use, subject to the following:  
 t. excavation of sites to achieve appropriate profile and setting against 
the Cambridge Green Belt and agricultural land;  
u. the creation of a landscaped buffer where the sites adjoin existing 
housing;  
v. the early establishment of a generous landscaped edge to the 
southern side of the sites, including retention and enhancement of existing hedgerows, to help create an appropriate buffer and distinctive city edge between the development, the Cherry Hinton Pit SSSI and the Cambridge Green Belt; and  
w. careful  consideration of the design approach to development to 
ensure that the visual impact on the Cambridge Green Belt, Cherry Hinton Pit SSSI, and neighbouring residential uses is mitigated.  
Supporting text:  
 3.111  Working with other local authorities through the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough memorandum of cooperation approach, the Council has identified its development needs. Once needs are identified there is a responsibility to positively seek opportunities to meet the city’s objectively assessed development nee ds, with sufficient flexibility to 
adapt to rapid change, unless the adverse impacts of doing so would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits when assessed against the NPPF (2012). It is the requirement to meet these objectively assessed needs, and the spatial options for doing so within the Council's administrative area, that give rise to the exceptional circumstances that warrant a number of small Green Belt releases as a part of this local 
plan.  
 
3.112  In developing the local plan, the Council has assessed all available land 
within the city’s boundary in order to meet the housing and employment needs set out in Section Two: The Spatial Strategy. This assessment has recognised the context of a high level of need and house prices in the city, the national importance of supporting the Cambridge economy, the lack of available previously developed land, the current unavailability of the majority of Cambridge East and the importance of the green spaces within the city and Green Belt forming the  setting of the city. The 
majority of the city’s objectively assessed need for these uses is to be met through existing, but unimplemented allocations within the urban area of the city, including a number of sites at the city’s Southern Fringe, North West Cambridge and NIAB, which were previously released from Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
104 the Cambridge Green Belt. While the focus for new sites for development 
has been on previously developed land, it has not been possible to meet the city’s objectively assessed need in full from these sites alone.  
 
3.113  In order to meet the objectively assessed need for housing and employment, the Council has also assessed all Green Belt land within the city for its scope for future development. This assessment used robust criteria and realistic assumptions about densities. By assessing this land, it has been established that a significant proportion of it remains vitally important to the particular purposes of the Cambridge Green Belt. This work did, however, identify that there was very limited scope for a small amount of land to be released from the Cambridge 
Green Belt on the city’s south- eastern edge, without having a significant 
impact on the purposes of the Green Belt. Development of these four small sites within Cambridge will need to include considerable landscape enhancement in order to ensure that a strong and defensible Green Belt boundary is created as set out in Policy 27.  
  Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site 
Specific Proposals  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018    
105  
Section Three:  City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and Site Specific Proposals  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
106  
Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
107   
Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
108 Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and 
Managing Resources  
 
4.1 The local plan will seek to ensure that Cambridge develops in the most 
sustainable way possible. This means delivering our social and economic aspirations without compromising the environm ental limits of 
Cambridge for current and future generations, so that Cambridge becomes a low carbon, water sensitive city with a thriving economy. For this to be achieved, a holistic approach to sustainable development and reducing the environmental impac t of development should be embedded 
within all development proposals from the outset.  
 
4.2 This section focuses on how the local plan will contribute to the achievement of sustainable development in terms of how the plan will address the challenge of mitigating and adapting to our changing climate, and other resource management issues. Climate change mitigation focuses on designing new communities and buildings to be energy and resource efficient, using renewable and low carbon energy generation and promoting patterns of development that reduce the need to travel by less environmentally friendly modes of transport. Climate change adaptation focuses on ensuring that new developments and the wider community are adaptable to our changing climate. For Cambridge, this is likely to involve an increase in the urban heat island effect (UHI) 
due to increasing temperatures and an increase in flooding, both from rivers and watercourses and from surface water after periods of intense rainfall. Policies are included with the objective of making Cambridge a 
water sensitive city, where new developments contribute to an overall flood risk reduction and help improve the quality of water bodies. This section also seeks to ensure that new development contributes to improvements in the environmental quality of Cambridge, including improvements to air quality, reduction in noise and better management 
of waste.  
 
Policy 28: Carbon reduction, community energy networks, sustainable 
design and construction, and water use  
 
All development should take the available opportunities to integrate the 
principles of sustainable design and construction into the design of proposals. Promoters of major development, including redevelopment of existing floor space, should prepare a Sustainability Statement as part of the Design and Access Statement submitted with their planning application, outlining their approach to the following issues:  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
109 a. adaptation to climate change  
b. carbon reduction  
c. water management  
d. site waste management  
e. use of materials  
 
In order to ensure that the growth of Cambridge supports the 
achievement of national carbon reduction targets, and does not exacerbate Cambridge’s severe water stress, all new development will be required to meet the following minimum standards of sustainable construc tion, carbon reduction and water efficiency, unless it can be 
demonstrated that such provision is not technically or economically viable:  
New homes: 
 
Year*  On-site reduction of 
regulated carbon emissions 
relative to Part L 2006  Water efficiency  
2014  44% 110 litres/person/day  
2016 
onwards  44% - note this requirement will 
only apply until commencement 
of the amendments to Section 
(1) (c) of the Planning and 
Energy Act 2008  110 litres/person/day  
 
New non-residential development:  
Year*  Minimum 
BREEAM Level  On-Site carbon 
reduction Water eff iciency  
2014  Very good  In line with 2014 
Part L  Full credits to be 
achieved for 
category Wat 01 
of BREEAM  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
110 2016 
onwards  Excellent  In line with the 
minimum 
requirements 
associated with 
BREEAM 
‘excellent’  Full credits to be 
achieved for 
category Wat 01 
of BREEAM  
* Application subject to financial year  
  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
111 Where redevelopment/refurbishment of existing buildings is proposed, 
the development of bespoke assessment methodologies to assess the environmental impact of the proposals for submission with the planning application will be supported, subject to agreement of the scope of the alternative methodology with the Council.  Proposals that lead to levels of environmental performance equivalent to or higher than BREEAM will be supported.  Where proposals r elate to designated heritage assets, 
care will need to be taken to ensure that any proposals related to environmental performance are considered against the significance of the heritage asset and do not cause unacceptable harm to the asset’s significance.  
 In order to promote the use of community energy networks, a strategic district heating area is shown on the Policies Map. Major development proposals within this area should where possible connect to existing heat networks or networks under construction. This requirement will be 
relaxed if applicants can provide evidence that doing so would affect the viability of schemes. The Council will also be supportive of the future-proofing of developments so that they are capable of connecting to future heat networ ks. 
 
Supporting text:  
 
4.3 It is increasingly recognised that one of the most important factors in 
delivering a successful development scheme is ensuring that sustainability is a key part of the brief and is therefore integrated into the design from the outset . This almost always leads to a better design and 
lower lifetime costs, as options are greater at an early stage and there is more scope to identify options that achieve multiple aims. Sustainable design and construction is concerned with the implementation of sustainable development in individual sites and buildings. It takes account of the resources used in construction, and of the environmental, social and economic impacts of the construction process itself and how 
buildings are designed and used.  
 
4.4 The choice of sustainability measures and how they are implemented 
may vary substantially from development to development. However, the general principles of sustainable design and construction should be applied to all scales and types of development. Table 4.1 below outlines 
areas that should be covered in the Sustainability Statement.  
 
  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
112 Table 4.1: Areas to be covered in the Sustainability Statement  
Issue:  
Aim/objective  Recommended approach  
Climate change 
adaptation:  
All developments 
should be 
designed to be 
adaptable to our 
changing 
climate, both in 
terms of building design and their 
wider landscape 
setting  Adaptation measures can be implemented at a 
variety of scales, from individual buildings up to 
community and conurbation scale, as described in 
the Town and Country Planning Association’s 
Climate Change Adaptation by Design: a Guide for 
Sustainable Communities (2007). Figure 4.1 
(below) provides examples of how adaptation 
measures can be integrated into the design of new developments; precise 
measures will vary from 
development to development. Measures that will 
have benefits beyond site boundaries, and that will 
have a cumulative impact in areas where 
development is to be phased, should also be 
pursued.  
 
Carbon 
reduction:  
All development 
should be 
designed to 
minimise carbon and other 
greenhouse gas 
emissions 
associated with A hierarchical approach, as illustrated in Figure 4.2, 
should be taken to reducing carbon emissions. A 
three- pronged approach should be tak en that:  
• minimises the energy demand of new buildings;  
• utilises energy efficient supply through low 
carbon technologies; and  
• supplies energy from new, renewable energy 
sources.   
 
Consideration should also be given to the role that 
the masterplanning, sca le, layout, building 
orientation and massing of developments can play Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
113 new 
development  in reducing carbon emissions associated with 
energy use, for example through the promotion of 
natural ventilation strategies and passive solar 
design.  
Developments should also seek to reduce 
transport -related carbon emissions through location 
and the promotion of sustainable modes of 
transport. Policy 28 (above) sets requirements for 
carbon reduction for new non- residential buildings.  
 
 
 
Water 
management:  
To introduce 
high levels of 
water efficiency 
in new 
developments in 
order to respond 
to the water 
stress facing 
Cambridge  All new developments should be designed to 
optimise the opportunities for efficient water use, 
reuse and recycling, including integrated water 
management and water conservation.  
Policy 28 (above) sets targets for water 
consumption in line with the new nat ional technical 
standards for new residential development and 
BREEAM standards for non- residential 
development.  
Site waste 
management:  
All new development 
should be 
designed to 
reduce Developments should be designed in a way that 
reduces the amount of construction waste, and 
maximises the reuse and recycling of materials at 
all stages of a development’s lifecycle. In order  to 
increase rates of recycling and reduce waste being 
sent to landfill, storage capacity for waste, both 
internal and external, should be an integral element 
of the design of new developments. Reference Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
114 construction 
waste and to 
make it easier for 
future occupants 
to maximi se 
levels of recycling and 
reduce waste 
being sent to 
landfill.
  should be made to the requirements set out in the 
RECAP Waste Management Design Guide and the 
Council’s own guidance on household waste and 
recycling facilities in new developments24. The 
Council will be supportive of innovative approaches to waste management . 
Use of 
materials:  
All new developments 
should be 
designed to 
maximise 
resource 
efficiency and 
identify, source, 
and use 
environmentally 
and socially responsible 
materials  There are four principal considerations that should 
influence the sourcing of materials:  
• Responsible sourcing – sourcing materials 
from known legal and certified sources through 
the use of environmental management systems 
and chain of custody schemes including the 
sourcing of timber accredited by the Forestry 
Stewardship Council (FSC), or the Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC);  
• Secondary materials – reclaiming and reusing 
material arising from the demolition of existing 
buildings and preparation of sites for 
development, as well as materials from other 
post-consumer waste streams;  
• Embodied impact of materials –  the aim 
should be to maximise the specification of major building elements to achieve an area- weighted 
rating of A or B as defined in the Building 
Research Establishment (BRE) Green Guide to 
Specification. Consideration should also be 
given to locally -sourced materials;  
• Healthy materials –  where possible developers 
should specify materials that represent a lower 
risk to the health of both construction workers 
and occupants. For example, selecting 
materials with zero or low volatile organic 
compound (VOC) levels to provide a healthy 
environm ent for residents.  
 
 
24 Available at https://www.cambridgeshire.gov.uk/ business/planning- and-
development/planning- policy/recap- waste- management -design- guide/  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
 
CAMBRIDGE LOCAL PLAN 2018    
115  
  
Figure 4.1: Approaches to climate change adaptation  
 
A: Building scale approaches  
 
 Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  116 B: Site scale approaches  
 
 
C: Angled façade increases 
solar gain in the winter and 
reduces unwanted heat in the 
summer  
 
  D: External shutters may become a 
necessary addition in the UK. Image 
courtesy of AC Architects Cambridge  
  
 
 
 
  
Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  117 Figure 4.2: The energy hierarchy  
 
 
 
 
4.5 As well as the consideration of the above design and construction issues, 
the Sustainability Statement in support of the application should also address how the proposals meet all other policies relating to sustainability throughout the plan, including:  
• biodiversity and ecology;  
• land, water, noise and air pollution;  
• transport, mobility and access;  
• health and well -being, including provision of open space;  
• culture, heritage and the quality of built form, including efficient use of land.  
 
4.6 This policy also sets out requirements in relation to sustainable construction standards and carbon reduction for non- residential 
development  and water efficiency for both residential and non- residential 
development . The achievement of national targets for the reduction of 
carbon emissions
15 will require action across all sectors of energy use. 
Within Cambridge, this will involve balancing the overall increase in emissions associated with new development against the opportunities  
that these new developments offer for reducing carbon and greenhouse gas emissions, through measures such as improving energy efficiency and the provision of on- site renewable and low carbon energy 
generation. A high standard of construction in new development is therefore important if the United Kingdom is to meet its legally binding carbon reduction targets.  
 
4.7 Nationally described sustainable construction standards have been developed for new non- residential buildings (the BRE Environmental 
Assessment Method, BREEAM).   
 
15 The Climate Change Act 2008 contains a statutory target of securing a reduction in carbon dioxide 
levels of 80% below 1990 levels by 2050, with an interim target of 34% reduction by 2020  
Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  118 4.8 There are many approaches that can be taken to meeting the 
construction standards required by  this policy. The Council will be 
supportive of innovative approaches to meeting and exceeding the standards set out in the policy. While there are no nationally described standards for residential development, the Council will be supportive of schemes that seek to utilise standards such as the BRE’s Home Quality Mark, the Passivhaus Standard or Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED).  The development of bespoke standards for new housing and non- residential development would also be 
supported.  
 4.9 It may be possible in some areas for development to exceed the policy requirements set out above. For example, developments located within the strategic district heating area may be able to achieve higher levels of carbon reduction than set out in policy. In order to maximise opportunities to exceed minimum policy requirements, developers will be encouraged to engage with the Council from an early stage through pre-application discussions. The policy will also be reviewed periodically so that it can be updated to reflect any significant changes to construction standards and the national technical standards.  
Community energy networks  
 
4.10 A strategic district heating area (SDHA) has been identified on the Policies Map. Developments within this area will be required to connect to existing or planned district heat networks, subject to consideration of viability. Cambridge shows significant potential for the development of district heating networks, particularly in the city centre and areas of large mixed -use developments. There are a number of planned and existing 
heat networks within Cambridge, and this policy has been developed to support further development of such networks.  
 
4.11 A benefit of such an approach is that it can provide developers with a ready -made solution for them to meet future planning policy and zero 
carbon policy requirements at minimum cost, particularly in constrained city centre sites where opportunities for other renewable and low carbon energy generation would be limited. Requiring new buildings to be compatible with district heat networks entails the following considerations:  
• ensuring that plant rooms have access arrangements for entry of a heat main;  
• ensuring that the flow and return heating temperatures for buildings are optimised to suit the heat networks;  
• ensuring that other buried services do not create barriers to laying heat mains and, where possible, providing suitable duct space;  
• ensuring that the layout and density of new development is such that it minimises, as far as possible, the cost of laying heat mains;  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  119 • ensuring that individual sub- metering arrangements are put in place 
for each development.  
Policy 29: Renewable and low carbon energy generation  
 
Proposals for development involving the provision of renewable and/or 
low carbon energy generation, including community energy projects, will 
be supported, subject to the acceptability of their wider impacts. As part of such proposals, the following should be demonstrated:  
a. that any adverse impacts on the environment, including local amenity and impacts on the historic environment and the setting of heritage assets, have been minimised as far as possible. These considerations will include air quality concerns, particularly where proposals fall within or close to the air quality management area(s) or areas where air pollution levels are approaching the EU limit values, as well as noise issues associated with certain renewable and low carbon technologies; and  
b. that where any localised adverse environmental effects remain, these are outweighed by the wider environmental, economic or social benefits of the scheme.  
 Note that this policy does not apply to applications for wind turbines, which would be considered against the requirements set out in the Local Planning Written Ministerial St atement, dated 18 June 2015.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
4.12 Increasing the proportion of energy generated from renewable and low carbon sources will help Cambridge to meet its vision of a low carbon city. As well as national targets for carbon reduction, there are als o 
targets in relation to energy supplied from renewable energy sources, with a legal commitment for the United Kingdom to meet 15 per cent of its energy requirements from renewable sources by 2020
16. 
 
4.13 A number of studies have assessed Cambridge’s potential  for renewable 
and low carbon energy generation.  These studies suggest that the main focus for renewable and low carbon energy generation will be from the potential that Cambridge offers for the development of district heat networks and the use of microgeneration, such as solar panels. The Council recognises that the opportunities for stand- alone renewable 
energy schemes within Cambridge are limited. However, it is keen to support opportunities where they arise, in particular small -scale and 
community sche mes that are most likely to be viable within Cambridge.  
 
16 As of 2011, 4.1 per cent of the UK’s primary energy requirements came from renewable sources 
(data source: DECC National Renewable Energy Statistics)  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  120  
4.14 While the Council wishes to promote renewable and low carbon energy 
generation, there is also a need to balance this desire against other objectives for Cambridge, such as minimising pollution, and protection and enhancement of the historic environment. Applicants are expected to have taken appropriate steps to mitigate any adverse impacts through careful consideration of:  
• location, scale, design and other measures, including those necessary to minimi se any noise impacts;  
• cumulative impacts;  
• impacts on the landscape, the built environment, cultural heritage and biodiversity.  
 
4.15 Other policies in the local plan relate to the safeguarding of the natural and historic environment and the protection of international, national or locally -designated sites and buildings, and these should be taken into 
account in applications for energy schemes.  
 
4.16 Potential impacts may be acceptable if they are minor, or are outweighed by wider benefits, including the need for energy from renewable and low carbon sources, which will contribute to reducing carbon and other emissions.  
 
4.17 The wind resource in Cambridge is highly constrained due to the relatively modest raw resource and the urban characteristics of the area.  To this end, this local plan does not seek to allocate areas of land as being suitable for wind turbines.  This approach will be reviewed as part of any subsequent review of the local plan.  
 
Policy 30: Energy- efficiency improvements in existing dwellings  
 
In order  to assist with achievement of the plan’s vision for a low carbon 
city, and to tackle issues of rising fuel costs and fuel poverty for 
residents, applications for extensions to existing dwellings and/or the conversion of ancillary residential floorspace to living accommodation 
should be accompanied by cost -effective improvements to the energy 
efficiency of the existing dwelling. The requirements of this policy will apply where the following measures have not already been implemented:  
a. cavity wall insulation;  
b. loft insulation of 150mm or more (in non- converted roof spaces);  
c. the replacement of F and G rated boilers with an A -rated condensing 
boiler;  
d. heating controls upgrade; and  
e. draught stripping of doors, windows and letter boxes.  
 Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  121 Supporting text:  
 
4.18 In order for Cambridge to play a role in meeting national targets for 
carbon reduction, there is a need to reduce emissions from existing buildings as well as new ones. This policy seeks to utilise the opportunities that arise for making cost -effective energy efficie ncy 
improvements when works to extend existing homes are undertaken. Applicants will be asked to complete a simple online home energy questionnaire, which will help to identify suitable measures. Where an applicant has recently had a Green Deal assessment undertaken or the property has an Energy Performance Certificate (EPC), these could also be submitted as part of the planning application to demonstrate the need to comply with the policy.  
 
4.19 The aim of the policy is to help homeowners implement measures that will enhance the energy efficiency of their homes, helping to reduce fuel costs at a time of rising energy prices. This might help reduce the risk of some homeowners finding themselves in fuel poverty, or in cases where residents are already in fuel poverty, help get them out of this situation. There is also some evidence to suggest that carrying out energy efficiency measures can also increase the value of properties.  The focus is on cost -effective measures with a simple payback of seven years or 
less and that would be relatively simple to install with limited disruption.  
 
4.20 Care will need to be taken in applying the policy to listed buildings and other heritage assets, to ensure that they are not damaged by inappropriate interventions. The implementation of the policy will be case by case, with officers recommending measures that would be suitable for that particular property, bearing in mind its age, type of construction and historic signi ficance. There may be cases where improvements 
cannot be made to an existing dwelling without causing harm to the significance of the heritage asset, and in such circumstances the requirements of this policy will not be implemented.  
  
Policy 31: Integrated  water management and the water cycle  
Development will be permitted provided that:  
a. surface water is managed close to its source and on the surface where reasonably practicable to do so;  
b. priority is given to the use of nature services
17; 
 
17Nature services are defined by the National Planning Policy Framework  (2012) as: ‘The benefits people 
obtain from ecosystems such as, food, water, flood and disease control and recreation’. These are also 
known as ecosystem services.  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  122 c. water is seen as a resource and is re- used where practicable, 
offsetting potable water demand, and that a water sensitive approach 
is taken to the design of the development;  
d. the features that manage surface water are commensurate with the design of the development in terms of size, form and materials and make an active contribution to making places for people;  
e. surface water management features are multi -functional wherever 
possible in their land use;  
f. any flat roof is a green or brown roof, providing that it is acceptable in terms of its context in the historic environment of Cambridge (see 
Policy 61: Conservation and Enhancement of Cambridge’s Historic 
Environment) and the structural capacity of the roof if it is a refurbishment. Green or brown roofs should be widely used in l arge-
scale new communities;  
g. there is no discharge from the developed site for rainfall depths up to 5 mm of any rainfall event;  
h. the run- off from all hard surfaces shall receive an appropriate level of 
treatment in accordance with Sustainable Drainage Syste ms 
guidelines, SUDS Manual (CIRIA C753), to minimise the risk of pollution;  
i. development adjacent to a water body actively seeks to enhance the water body in terms of its hydromorphology, biodiversity potential and setting;  
j. watercourses are not culverted and any opportunity to remove culverts is taken; and  
k. all hard surfaces are permeable surfaces where reasonably practicable, and having regard to groundwater protection.  
Supporting text:  
 
4.21 The Surface Water Management Plan
18 and Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment for Cambridge19 have found there is little or no capacity in 
our rivers and watercourses that eventually receive surface water run -
off from Cambridge and that it needs to be adequately managed so that 
flood risk is not increased elsewhere. The appropriate application of 
sustainable drainage systems to manage surface water within a development is the approach recommended within the planning practice guidance to the National Planning Policy Framework
20 (NPPF , 2012) as 
a way of managing this risk.  
 
4.22 Current best practice guidance such as the SUDS Manual and Planning for SUDS (CIRIA C753 and C687) should be followed in the design of 
developments of all sizes, with design principles that are important to Cambridge set out in this policy. Smaller, more resilient features 
 
18 Cambridge and Milton Surface Water Management Plan (2011), Cambridgeshire Flood Risk 
Partnership  
19 Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2010)  
20 Planning practice guidance - Flood risk and coastal change (2014)  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  123 distributed throughout a development should be used, instead of one 
large management feature. Figure 4.3 provides examples of how to successfully integrate SuDS into a range of developments.  
 
4.23 Managing water close to where it falls and on the surface is often the most cost -effective way to manage surface water. Early consideration in 
the design process helps achieve this. Managing water on the surface is an opportunity to celebrate water and create developments distinctive to Cambridge.  
 
4.24 Climate change will in future see times of too much water and times of too little water more frequently than now. The design of new developments should reflect this change and value water as a resource that can be stored in times of plenty for re- use in times of deficit.  
 
Figure 4.3: Examples of integrating SuDS into developments
21 
 
 
  
 
21 Source: Dickie, S, McKay, G, Ions, L, Shaffer, P (2010) Planning for SUDS - Making it 
happen, CIRIA, C687, London (ISBN: 978-0- 86017- 687-9) Go to: www.ciria.org  
Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  124  
 
  
 
4.25 Green and brown roofs are a key measure in terms of Cambridge’s climate change adaptation policy. They offer multiple benefits for a comparatively small additional construction cost, including forming part of an effective sustainable drainage solution, reducing the amounts of storm water run- off and attenuating peak flow rates. In the summer, a 
green roof can typically retain 70- 80 per cent of rainfall run- off. Predicted 
climate change means that Cambridge will experience increasing risks of flooding, overheating and drought, manifested through hotter drier summers and warmer wetter winters. Living roofs can reduce the negative effects of climate change, for example by improving a building’s energy balance and reducing carbon emissions. The use of vegetation 
Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  125 on a roof surface ameliorates the negative thermal effects of 
conventional roof surfaces through the cooling effect of evapotranspir ation, which can also help ameliorate the urban heat island 
effect (UHI). It can also provide benefit in the form of insulation, helping to reduce the internal cooling load of buildings, thereby reducing energy use and associated carbon emissions. The biodiversity benefits of green roofs are manifold, supporting rare and interesting types of plant, which in turn can host a variety of rare and interesting fauna. Accessible roof space can also provide outdoor living space, particularly in high- density 
developments. As such, accessible roof space should be viewed as an integral element of a well -designed, high- quality, high- density, more 
efficient, attractive and liveable city.  
 
4.26 Green/brown roofs can be more cost effective than a traditional roof over the lifet ime of a development. A flat roof is defined as a roof with a pitch 
of between 0° and 10° . 
 
4.27 The EU Water Framework Directive and the associated River Basin Management Plan for the Anglian region
22 require public bodies to have 
a positive impact on the quality of lakes, rivers and groundwater, collectively called water bodies. The water bodies in Cambridge are currently failing to achieve the required status of ‘good’. Quality refers to the quality of the water body in terms of the quality of the water itself, the quality of the shape and form of the water body, and the quality of its biodiversity.  
 
4.28 This policy seeks to ensure all surface water that is discharged to ground or into rivers, watercourses and sewers has an appropriate level of treatment to reduce the risk of diffuse pollution.  
 
4.29 The policy also recognises that development adjacent to a water body provides an opportunity for both the development and the water body , 
and that they should complement and enhance each other.  
 
Policy 32: Flood risk  
Potential flood risk from the development  
 
Development will be permitted providing it is demonstrated that:  
a. the peak rate of run- off over the lifetime of the development, allowing 
for climate change, is  no greater for the developed site than it was for 
the undeveloped site;  
 
22 Environment Agency (2009). Water for life and livelihoods. River Basin Management Plan – Anglian 
River Basin District  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  126 b. the post -development volume of run- off, allowing for climate change 
over the development lifetime, is no greater than it would have been 
for the undeveloped site. If this cannot be ac hieved then the limiting 
discharge is 2 litre/s/ha for all events up to the 100- year return period 
event23; 
c. the development is designed so that the flooding of property in and adjacent to the development would not occur for a 1 in 100 year event, plus an allowance for climate change and in the event of local drainage system failure;  
d. the discharge locations have the capacity to receive all foul and surface water flows from the development, including discharge by infiltration, into water bodies and into sewer s; 
e. there is a management and maintenance plan for the lifetime of the development, which shall include the arrangements for adoption by any public authority or statutory undertaker and any other arrangements to secure the operation of the scheme throughout its lifetime; and  
f. the destination of the discharge obeys the following priority order:  
• firstly, to ground via infiltration;  
• then, to a water body;  
• then, to a surface water sewer.  
 Discharge to a foul water or combined sewer is unacceptable.  
 
Potential flood risk to the development  
 Development will be permitted if an assessment of the flood risk is undertaken following the principles of the National Planning Policy Framework (2012) and additionally:  
 
For an undeveloped site : 
 
a. if it is not located  within the Environment Agency’s flood zone 3b, 
unless it is a water -compatible development and does not increase 
flood risk elsewhere by either displacement of flood water or interruption of flood flow routes and employs flood resilient and resistant cons truction,  including appropriate boundary treatment and 
has a safe means of evacuation; and  
 
23 Where the pre- development peak rate of run- off for the site would result in a requirement for 
the post -development flow rate to be less than 5 litre/s at a discharge point, a flow rate of up to 
5 litre/s may be used where required to reduce the risk of blockage. If discharge is to be pumped 
then this allowance does not apply.  
 Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  127 b. if it is not located within the Environment Agency’s flood zone 3a, 
unless it is a water compatible development or minor development when the principles in a) above apply; and  
c. if it is located within the Environment Agency’s flood zone 2 or a surface water wet  spot and employs flood resilient and resistant 
construction as appropriate; and  
d. floor levels are 300mm above the 1- in-100-years flood level, plus an 
allowance for climate change where appropriate and/or 300mm above adjacent highway levels where appropriate.  
 
For a previously developed site:  
 Opportunities should be taken to reduce the existing flood risk by the positioning of any development so that it  does not increase flood risk 
elsewhere by either displacement of flood water or interruption of flood flow routes, and it employs flood resilient and resistant construction 
including appropriate boundary treatment and has a safe means of 
evacuation.  
 
Supporting text: 
 
4.30 Both the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Management Plan for Cambridge have found that without the mitigation measures outlined in this policy, developments could increase flood risk elsewhere. Flood risk assessments should make reference to the latest version of these studies. There is also an opportunity to reduce the overall flood risk in Cambridge through redevelopment. This policy seeks to address this with the same design standards applied to new developments on previously developed sites as undeveloped sites, as this refers to the site in its natural state prior to any development taking place.  
 
4.31 The rivers, watercourses, sewers and ground conditions throughout Cambridge have varying amounts of capacity for flow from new  
developments and an adequate assessment of this capacity must be undertaken to support any development proposals. This policy builds upon the standards currently being achieved in the major growth sites on the fringes of Cambridge.  
 
4.32 The appropriate responsible bodies including the Environment Agency, Anglian Water and Cambridgeshire County Council should be consulted, as appropriate, during the initial design process for any new development or redevelopment. The area of the city covered by the Environment Agency’s flood zones
24 can be seen on the Environment 
Agency’s website (note that this relates to fluvial flooding only).  
 
24 For further information on the flood zones please see the Environment Agency’s website  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  128  
4.33 The Great Ouse Catchment Flood Management Plan25 has assessed 
how an increase in the flow of water in rivers and watercourses due to 
climate change will affect Cambridge. It has concluded that flood zones will be inundated more frequently and for longer. This seeks to clarify what development would be acceptable in which flood zones. The findings of the Surface Water Management Plan for  Cambridge 
highlights the importance of a careful consideration of the levels within a development such that if extreme events occur or there is a maintenance issue that causes the drainage system to stop working, properties will not flood as a result of s urface water flooding (pluvial).  
 
4.34 In the Environment Agency’s flood zone 3, water may be flowing in the general direction of the river and interruption of these flows can increase flood risk to adjacent developments. Careful consideration must be given to the positioning of development on the site so there is no interruption 
of these flows. This should also include the consideration of boundary treatments to enable floodwater to flow with a minimum of hindrance to the flow.  
4.35 Discharge of surface water to a foul or combined sewer is unacceptable.  
 
Policy 33: Contaminated land  
 
Development will be permitted where the applicant can demonstrate 
that: 
a. there will be no adverse health impacts to future occupiers from 
ground contamination resulting from existing/previous uses of the area;  
b. there will be no adverse impacts to the surrounding occupiers, controlled waters and the environment from suspected/identified ground contamination from existing/previous uses, caused by the development; and  
c. there will b e no impact to future and surrounding occupiers from on-
site and off -site gas migration.  
 
Where contamination is suspected or known to exist, an assessment 
should be undertaken to identify existing/former uses in the area that 
could have resulted in ground contamination; and if necessary:  
d. design and undertake an intrusive investigation to identify the risks of 
ground contamination, including groundwater and ground gases; and if proven there is a risk;  
e. submit a remediation strategy and/or adopt and implement  mitigation 
measures, to ensure a safe development and ensure that the site is 
 
25 Environment Agency (2011), Great Ouse Catchment Flood Management Plan  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  129 stable and suitable to the new use in accordance with the National 
Planning Policy Framework  (2012) ; 
f. ensure that there are no adverse health impacts to future/surrounding occupi ers and groundwater impacts and that there is no deterioration 
of the environment.  
 
Proposals for sensitive developments on existing or former industrial areas will be permitted where it is demonstrated that the identified contamination is capable of being suitably remediated for the proposed 
end use.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
4.36 Pollution can arise from a number of activities and sources. Land and 
groundwater can present a potential source of pollution if they have been contaminated by previous land uses. Groundwater is the primary source of potable  supply to Cambridge and also provides flow to watercourses 
used for irrigation, public supply and industry.  
 
4.37 Land contamination is a material consideration for the purposes of planning. It is important to ensure that proposed developments are situated on land that will be safe and suitable for the proposed use and will not cause pollution elsewhere.  There will be situations where remediation works will be required to make land safe prior to being developed; for example, if a site’s previous use was a petrol station, there will be a need to ensure that no residual fuel is left on- site in 
storage tanks or in the soil itself as it may cause a health hazard for future users, underlying aquifers and their abstractors. In some instances, the level and type of contamination may make land unsuit able 
for certain types of development; for example, former landfill sites may be considered unsuitable for residential development. Gas monitoring, including a gas risk assessment and protective measures, if necessary, will be required for sites within the  250m buffer zone of a former landfill 
site. 
 
4.38 On a precautionary basis, the possibility of contamination should be assumed when considering both development plans and individual planning applications in relation to all land subject to or adjacent to previous industrial use and also where uses are being considered that are particularly sensitive to contamination. Initial assessment will be needed to identify the land and groundwater sensitivity of a site to pollution.  It will need to be shown that the development is appropriate for its location. Conditions shall be applied to planning permissions to secure appropriate pollution prevention or mitigation measures where required. In major developments, it will also be required to demonstrate sustainable forms o f managing contaminated land (mitigation 
measures), which reduce the need to landfill and minimise the impacts on climate change.  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  130  
4.39 In the context of this policy, examples of sensitive developments include 
housing, schools, hospitals and children’s playing areas. The Department of the Environment Industry Profiles, available for download from the Environment Agency website, provide details on the processes and substances associated with common industrial uses. For guidance on the principles and practice for groundwater protection, the interested parties should refer to the Environment Agency website (currently GP03:2012, or any document which supersedes it).  
  
Policy 34: Light pollution control  
 
Development proposals that include new external lighting or chan ges to 
existing external lighting will be permitted where it can be demonstrated that: 
a. it is the minimum required to undertake the task, taking into account public safety and crime prevention;  
b. upwards or intrusive light spillage is minimised;  
c. it minimises impact to local residential amenity; and  
d. it minimises impact to wildlife and landscape character, particularly at sites on the edge of Cambridge.  
 
Developers of major sites will be required to submit an assessment of the impact on any sensitive residential premises both on- and off -site. 
 
Supporting text:  
 
4.40 The lighting of new developments must be carefully designed to ensure 
that areas are appropriately lit, while avoiding or minimising light pollution. Excessive lighting reduces the visibility of the night sky, is a waste of energy and can harm residential amenity by disturbing people’s sleep. It can also disturb wildlife and be visually intrusive in the landscape. Details of the proposed lighting scheme should be in line with the latest national ly-accepted guidance available at the time of the 
application and submitted with the planning application. Lights should be carefully selected and sited for their purpose, directed only on to the area where they are needed, and where necessary shielded by way of appropriate landscaping. Particular care will need to be taken with floodlighting of sports pitches. Where appropriate, conditions will be used to control lighting, including limiting the hours of illumination.  
 
4.41 The Council supports the lighting of appropriate buildings and public 
spaces, where it is carried out in a sensitive way avoiding light spillage.  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  131  
 
Policy 35: Protection of human health and quality of life from noise and 
vibration  
 
Development will be permitted where it is demonstrated that:  
a. it will not lead to significant adverse effects and impacts, including 
cumulative effects and construction phase impacts wherever applicable, on health and quality of life/amenity from noise and vibration; and  
b. adverse noise effects/impacts can be minimised by appropriate reduction and/or mitigation measures secured through the use of conditions or planning obligations, as appropriate (prevention through high quality acoustic design is preferable to mitigation).  
 
People’s health and quality of life needs be protected from unacceptable noise impacts by effectively and appropriately managing the relationship between noise sensitive development and noise sources through land use planning.  Noise must be carefully considered when new development might create additional noise and when development would be sensitive to existing or future noise.  
 Residential and other noise sensitive development will be permitted where it can be demonstrated that future users of the development will not be exposed internally and externally to unacceptable levels of noise pollution/disturbance from existing or planned uses.  This would include proposed noise sensitive development that may experience adverse impacts as a result of exposure to noise from existing or planned/future (i) transport sources (air, road, rail and mixed sources) or (ii) industrial, trade or business / commercial sources.  
 Noise generating development including industrial, trade or 
business/commercial uses with associated transport noise sources will 
be permitted where it can be demonstrated that any nearby noise sensitive uses (as existing or planned) will not be exposed to noise that will have an unacceptable adverse impact on health and quality of life both internally and external ly. 
 A Noise Impact Assessment will be required to support applications for noise sensitive and noise generating development as detailed above including consideration of any noise impacts during the construction phase wherever applicable, when noise sensitive uses are likely to be exposed to significant or unacceptable noise exposure and impacts.  
 Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  132 Supporting text:  
 
4.42 Noise, including vibration, can have a significant adverse impact upon 
environmental quality, health and quality of life including amenity. Nois e 
not only causes annoyance but it can also cause serious disturbance such as the loss of sleep. Research by the World Health Organisation (WHO) has also shown noise to cause measurable health effects. Due to the urban nature of Cambridge, noise levels vary from relatively quiet areas within some of the city’s public parks to noisier areas close to business and commercial uses in the city centre, near busy roads, the A14, M11 and industrial areas including Cambridge Airport.  
 
4.43 Some aspects of noise are covered by other legal controls, such as nuisance law. These controls cannot meet the aim of the planning system, which is the protection of amenity, and the test of ‘statutory nuisance’ sets a much higher standard than that of ‘unacceptable harm’. Neither do they include the impact from transport -related noise on a 
development. Therefore noise is a material planning consideration. However, it is not the role of the local plan to prevent all forms of development that may result in some measure of noise, but rath er to 
control development that may have significant adverse effects and reduce and minimise other adverse impacts. The plan does not seek to duplicate the statutory nuisance and noise controls provided by other legislation.  
 
4.44 This policy relates to noise fr om all potential sources, and protects and 
secures a good standard of amenity for all existing and future occupants of land and buildings, particularly to noise- sensitive receptors, including 
people living and working in Cambridge. It will also aim to prot ect any 
‘Quiet Areas’ (or areas of tranquillity) that may be identified in the future under the Environmental Noise (England) Regulations 2006.  
 
4.45 Where a Noise Impact Assessment is required, the remit and 
methodology shall be agreed in advance and shall be undertaken in 
accordance with the most relevant national and industry codes of practice, British Standards and technical guidance, and shall:  
 
• identify all significant sources of noise and noise sensitive receptors 
either existing or proposed;  
• assess the likely short and long term impacts of noise generated or noise sensitive receptor exposure to noise both internally and externally in and around buildings;  
• assess the suitability of the site for the development proposed, having regard to noise impact on quality of life and health both internally and externally; and  
• if proposals are identified as giving rise to unacceptable noise impact, either through noise exposure or generation, demonstrate in detail, 
including through good acoustic design, how the development will be Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  133 designed, located and noise otherwise avoided or mitigated to reduce 
and minimise any unacceptable adverse impacts.  
 
4.46 The internal and external acoustic environment and good acoustic design in and around new noise sensitive and noise generating development should be considered as early as possible in the development control process.  This shall include:  
 
• consideration of the feasibility of relocating or reducing noise from relevant sources;  
• adequate distance separation from noise sources;  
• site and building layout/orientation;  
• internal room configuration;  
• provision and retention of acoustic barriers or other screening;  
• acoustic insulation of buildings/noise sources;  
• building ventilation strategy;  
• noise limits at site boundaries;  
• the need for restrictions on types of activity and/or limitations on hours of operation.  
 
4.47 Consideration should also be given to whether adverse effects in a building can be completely removed by closing windows. In the case of 
new residential development, if the proposed mitigation relies on windows being kept closed, a suitable alternative means of ventilation is likely to be necessary. In the hierarchy of mit igation measures, noise 
should be mitigated at source and reliance on building envelope noise insulation schemes and the sealing of the building envelope should be the last resort. Care should be taken to ensure that good acoustic design is an integrated solution and that noise mitigation should not adversely affect general living conditions, including issues of overheating and thermal comfort, or result in design which is unacceptable in other planning respects and requirements.  
Noise Action Plans and Important Areas  
 
4.48 National planning practice guidance states that where relevant, Noise 
Action Plans, and, in particular the Important Areas identified through the process associated with the Environmental Noise Directive and corresponding regulations should be  taken into account when 
considering noise impacts.   ‘Important Areas ’ for road and rail have been 
identified within Cambridge and an indicative plan of these areas can be viewed at http://extrium.co.uk/noiseviewer.html  (England Noise Map 
Viewer) . 
 
4.49 These areas give a good indication of those places that are exposed to 
the highest levels of existing road and rail transport noise. Proposals for new residential development in these locations need to be carefully considered and opportunities to reduce noise levels in these areas Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  134 should be secured to improve the acoustic quality of the environment. 
The local authority environmental health department may also be able to provide additional information about the location of identified ‘Important Areas’.  
 
4.50 Cambridge Airport is recognised as a noise source within Cambridge.  Under the Environmental Noise Regulations, DEFRA has approved a Cambridge Airport Noise Action Plan 2014- 2019.  The action plan also 
contains airport noise contours, which will be of relevance to development proposals within close proximity to the airport.  Further policy relevant to Cambridge Airport is contained within Policy 83: Aviation development.  
  
Policy 36: Air quality, odour and dust  
 
Development will be permitted where it can be demonstrated:  
a. that it does not lead to significant adverse effects on health, the environment or amenity from polluting or malodorous emissions, or dust or smoke emissions to air; or  
b. where a development is a sensitive end- use, that there will not be 
any significant adverse effects on health, the environment or amenity arising from existing poor air quality, sources of odour or other emissions to air.  
 According to the end- use and nature of the area and application, 
applicants must demonstrate that:  
a. there is no adverse effect on air quality in an air quality management 
area (AQMA);  
b. pollution levels within the AQMA will not have a significant adverse effect on the proposed use/users;  
c. the development will not lead to the declaration of a new AQMA;  
d. the development will not interfere with the implementation of the current Air Quality Action Plan (AQAP);  
e. any sources of emissions to air, odours and fugitive dusts generated by the development are adequately mitigated so as not to lead to loss of amenity for ex isting and future occupants and land uses; and  
f. any impacts on the proposed use from existing poor air quality, odour and emissions are appropriately monitored and mitigated by the developer.  
 
Supporting text:  
 Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  135 4.51 Pollution to air can arise from many sources and activities, including 
traffic and transport, industrial processes, commercial premises, energy generation, agriculture, waste storage/treatment and construction sites. This policy relates to air pollution from all potential sources, in any potential form and includes dust, fumes and odour.  
 
4.52 The primary local impacts on air quality in Cambridge are from road transport, and domestic, commercial and industrial heating sources, such that an air quality management area (AQMA) was designated in the central part of Cambridge in August 2004. Pollution to air can also arise from industrial processes, commercial premises, energy generation, agriculture, waste storage/treatment and construction sites. Despite increasing economic activity and consequent population increases, the application of air quality management and transport policy has not led to an increase in air pollution in Cambridge. It is important to ensure that development proposals continue to contribute to and enhance the natural and local environment throughout their lifetime.  
 
4.53 Applicants shall, where reasonable and proportionate, prepare and submit with their application a relevant assessment, taking into account guidance current at the time of the application. The criteria for requiring a dust risk assessment/management and/or an air quality assessment are set out in the Air Quality in Cambridge Developers’ Guide. Some applications may require appropriate pollution prevention or mitigation measures to be acceptable. Some development may also require a permit under the Pollution Prevention and Control Act 1999.  
 
 
Policy 37: Cambridge Airport Public Safety Zone and Air Safeguarding 
Zones  
Public Safety Zone:  
 
Development, including change of use, which is likely to lead to an 
increase in the number of people living, working or congregating on land within the Cambridge Airport Public Safety Zone, as identified on the Policies Map, will not be permitted.  
 
Air Safeguarding Zones:  
 Applications for development within Cambridge Airport’s Air Safeguarding Zones will be the subject of consultation with the operator of the airport and the Ministry of Defence. Restrictions in height, or changes to the detailed design of development may be necessary to mitigate the risk of aircraft accident and maintain the operational integrity of the airport.  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  136  
Supporting text:  
 
4.54 The purpose of the Public Safety Zone is to restrict development in order 
to minimise the number of people on the ground at risk in the event of an aircraft crash on take- off or landing.  
 
4.55 The Department for Transport Circular 1/2010, Control of Development 
in Airport Public Safety Zones, should be consulted for further advice. There is a general presumption against new development, but some types of development may be acceptable in these areas such as extensions, alterations or change of use, which could not reasonably be expected to increase the number of people living, working or congregating within the Public Safety Zone.  
 
4.56 Air Safeguarding Zones (shown in Figure 4.5) are also taken into account in any relevant planning decisions. The zones represent referral 
heights for consultation with Marshall and the Ministry of Defence. The purpose of airport safeguarding is to take the measures necessary to ensure the safety of aircraft, their passengers and crew while taking off or landing or while flying in the vicinity of Cambridge Airport. This is achieved by assessing proposed development so as to:  
 
• protect the air through which aircraft fly;  
• protect the integrity of radar and other electronic aids to air 
navigation;  
• protect visual aids, such as approach and runway lighting, by preventing them from being obscured, or preventing the installation of other lights; and  
• avoid any increase in the risk to aircraft of a birdstrike.  Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  137  
 
Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  138 Policy 38: Hazardous installations  
 
Proposals for the development of hazardous installations/pipelines, modifications to existing sites, or development in the vicinity of hazardous installations or pipelines, will be permitted where:  
a. it has been satisfactorily demonstrated that the amount, type and location of hazardous substances would not pose adverse health and safety risks; and  
b. any necessary special precautions to limit potential societal risks to an acceptable degree would be put  in place prior to the 
commencement of development.  
Supporting text:  
 
4.57 Current pressures on land use and the need to make the most efficient use of previously developed land increasingly mean that developments have the potential to come into conflict with one another. This is 
particularly relevant where new hazardous installations and pipelines are 
developed or where new development would be in close proximity to existing hazardous installations and pipelines. The level of risk associated with hazardous inst allations will depend on the nature of both 
the development and the hazardous installation. This will be considered on a case- by-case basis.  
 
4.58 Planning applications for the development of hazardous  installations/  
pipelines and development close to hazardous  sites or pipelines will be 
referred to the Health and Safety Executive and/or the Environment Agency.  
  
Policy 39: Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory, Lord’s Bridge  
 
Development proposals within the Lord’s Bridge Consultation Area, covering the whole of Cambridge City Council’s administrative area, which could adversely affect the operation of the Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory will:  
a. be subject to consultation with the University  of Cambridge; and  
b. only be granted planning permission where there is no harm to its scientific operation or where any harm can be overcome by measures secured by condition or planning obligation.  
 Section Four: Responding to Climate Change and Managing Resources  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  139 Supporting text:  
 
4.59 The Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory at Lord’s Bridge is of 
international importance and must be safeguarded. The observatory contains unique radio and optical telescopes operated by the University of Cambridge, the University of Manchester and Jodrell Bank. The telescopes measure signals that are very weak and hence highly susceptible to many forms of interference: specifically to electrical interference; microwave interference from telecommunications masts and equipment; and light pollution and mechanical vibration from domestic, industrial plant and other sources, such as the movement of vehicles, including aircraft.  
 
4.60 The Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory is within South Cambridgeshire District Council’s administrative area. There is one consultation area, which covers the whole of Cambridge City Council’s administrative area, requiring consultation with the University of 
Cambridge on applications involving microwave transmission, such as telecommunications masts and equipment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  140  
  
Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  141 Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
 
5.1 Cambridge has a successful local economy that is resilient and dynamic. The University of Cambridge has helped develop Cambridge as a centre of excellence and world leader in the fields of education and rese arch. 
The University of Cambridge’s success has contributed to the energy, prosperity and further expansion of the local economy. The concentration of high technology businesses and links between the University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, and other leading edge research facilities has helped with knowledge transfer from academic research into commercial applications. Cambridge’s economy continues to perform well despite the national and global economic downturn.  
 5.2 The Council aims to strengthen and diversify Cambridge’s economy and 
enable a range of job opportunities across the city. Cambridge’s excellence in the fields of research, higher education and high technology uses will be promoted.  
 5.3 Cambridge’s high technology economy has flourished since development of the Cambridge Science Park on the edge of the city in the 1970s, and over the intervening years the area has developed a global profile and importance in terms of its technology -based business 
community and wider research community. In the Cambridge area, there are around 1,500 high technology businesses, employing around 53,000 people. The high technology cluster is diverse and innovative; it includes businesses in a wide variety of sectors, including drug discovery, bioinformatics, software, computer hardware, electronics, ink -jet 
printing, computer games, clean technology and web- based new media.  
 5.4 The continuing vibrancy of the Cambridge high technology business sector is fuelled by the scale and excellence of the wider research community. This has two key impacts: the science itself, and the influence on the character of the labour market in and around Cambridge. The high technology business sector and the research community overlap in important respects and the relationship betw een 
them is central to the cluster’s character and performance. They operate in a global marketplace and their competitors are as likely to be overseas as in the United Kingdom. For this reason, maintaining the quality of life in Cambridge, including its key competitive advantage of compactness, is critical. This quality of life has been critical in sustaining the success of the Cambridge Cluster over 50 years.  Sustainable economic growth as achieved in Cambridge therefore depends on the achievement of the  
other aspects of sustainable development that positively contributes to maintaining and enhancing the quality of life and place.  
  Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  142 5.5 Cambridge also has a thriving low technology and services economy; 
this includes offices in the city centre associated with the high technology economy and serving the local population. There is also a legacy of industrial uses alongside the railway and on industrial estates in Cambridge. Over the last ten years, and beyond, Cambridge has seen a loss of land and premises in industrial use as higher value uses, such as residential and retail, have put pressure on sites. The offices and industrial uses make up an important part of the economy; they meet the needs of people and businesses in the local area, in particular the business services that high technology firms rely on, as well as helping to provide a diverse range of jobs. The low technology businesses operate in a more local marketplace and their competitors are more likely to be in other businesses operating in the Cambridge area, and in some cases other businesses around the UK.  
  
Policy 40: Development and expansion of business space  
 
New offices, research and development and research facilities are encouraged to come forward within the following locations:  
a. in the city centre and the Eastern Gateway, providing they are of an appropriate scale and are part of mixed- use schemes with active 
frontage uses where practicable at ground floor level;  
b. in the areas around the two stations (defined and subject to policies in Se ction Three); and  
c. research, and research and development facilities will be supported in the Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s Hospital), and at the West Cambridge site, provided they satisfy relevant policies in Section Three of the pla n. 
 
Proposals for the development of these uses elsewhere in the city will be considered on their merits and alongside the policies in Section Three of the plan.  
Development of larger employment sites, with multiple occupiers, should consider whether they want to provide shared social spaces within the site, to enhance the vitality and attractiveness of the site.  
Supporting text:  
 5.6 The Council will support the forecast growth of 22,100 net additional jobs in Cambridge by 2031, including a net gain of some 8,800 jobs in the ‘B’ use classes (offices and industry). Growth of jobs in other use classes (including retail, health and education) is more difficult to quantify. Land requirements for and plans for other employment -generating 
development are considered elsewhere in the plan. Growth on this scale would generate a net demand for just around 70,200 sq m of additional Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  143 floorspace or 7.4 hectares of land, as shown in Table 5.1, below. 
Planning for this employment space will ensure the local plan will sup port 
the continued development of a strong local economy that is able to compete on a global stage and will continue to provide job opportunities to residents of the area. Proposals for the development of employment uses will be considered alongside the policies in Section Three of the plan and the allocations in Appendix B.  
 
Table 5.1: Employment forecasts – jobs growth and land and 
floorspace requirements 2011- 2031  
 
Use Jobs  Net floorspace 
(sq m)  Net land 
(hectares)  
B1(a) – 
offices  7,000  83,000  12.2 
B1(b) – 
research 
and 
development  2,700  32,700  4.8 
B1(c)/B2 –
industrial  -300 -11,800  -2.8 
B8 –
warehousing  -600 -33,700  -6.7 
All B use 
classes 8,800  70,200  7.4 
Source: Employment Land Review Update 2013.  
 
5.7 Table 5.1 shows the breakdown of land and floorspace requirements 
deriving from the forecast 8,800 net additional jobs growth in B use classes between 2011 and 2031. These figures are based on assumptions around the sectors applied to the outputs from the East of England Forecasting Model (EEFM), which itself has a number of assumptions built in to it. The employment land requirements are, therefore, a guide and the figures outputting from it are directions of travel rather than hard targets. The Council also has less influence on the delivery of jobs than of housing. The Council can help ensure that suitable land is available in the right place to be attractive to business, and that conditions in Cambridge are conducive to doing business, but ultimately business growth is dependent on different fac tors for different 
businesses and wider economic conditions. The Council understands Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  144 the importance that the quality of life and place in Cambridge plays in 
supporting economic success.  
 5.8 While Table 5.1 indicates an overall net need for 7.4 hectares of employment land, the detail of the numbers tells a more complex story. It shows an anticipated net growth in land needed for office and research and development, particularly offices, set against net losses of industrial and warehousing land. In essence, the forecasts show the replacement of older, more land- hungry industrial uses with new, denser, high 
technology and professional uses.  
 
Table 5.2:  Key employment sites in Cambridge with planning 
permission at 31 March 2017 
 
Site Employment 
use Net floorspace  
(sq m) Net land 
(hectares)  
Station Areas West  Offices  16,942  0.67 
West Cambridge *  Research 
and 
development  19,896*  3.03 
Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus 
and Addenbrooke’s  Offices and 
research and development  163,547  16.43  
North West 
Cambridge  Research 
and 
development  31,200  7.55 
Fulbourn Road (GB3 
and GB4) ** Offices and 
research and 
development  20,408 ** 4.41 
 
*For West Cambridge, the figures relate to the outstanding consent on 
the site as of 31 March 201 7.  Paragraph 5. 11 outlines the long term 
aspirations for the site.  
 **Fulbourn Road (GB3 & GB4) has planning permission for all of GB4 and part of GB3.  There is the potential for further floorspace to be 
delivered on site.  
 Source: Cambridge Business Commitments and Completions 201 7, 
Cambridgeshire County Council.  Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  145  
5.9 There are six key employment sites in Cambridge that will deliver new jobs and prosperity to the Cambridge area. These are:  
• Station Areas West;  
• West Cambridge;  
• Cambridge Biomedical Campus and Addenbrooke’s;  
• North  West Cambridge;  
• Fulbourn Road (GB3 & GB4); and  
• Cambridge Northern Fringe East  
 
5.10 Developments on these sites will help grow the Cambridge Cluster, by ensuring that there is sufficient employment land available in the right 
locations. Most of these new allocations are for new office or research and development land, as indicated by the forecasts. Many of these sites are highly specialised and their occupancy is restricted; for example, Addenbrooke’s has a strong clinical, health and biomedical focus, while West Cambridge has an academic and physical science focus. The 
specialised nature of these sites means that their build out may be slow as the site managers have particular objectives when seeking to find occupants.  
 
5.11 Table 5.2 sets out the committed level of employment floorspace and the amount of land for the key employment sites that had planning permission at 31 March 2012. The level of employment development at West Cambridge is being reviewed in line with the aspirations in Policy 19 of the Plan.  The site could provide approximately 468,300 sq m of 
academic and commercial space in total, of which around 210,400 sq m 
would be for B1(b) commercial uses.  The precise amount of floorspace to come forward will be agreed as part of the development manag ement 
process, subject to design, transport and other considerations.  In terms of Cambridge Northern Fringe East, the Council has commenced work on an Area Action Plan for the area with South Cambridgeshire District Council.  The development potential of this area will be significantly 
enhanced by the opening of the new Cambridge North Station in May 2017.  This will link up with the wider transport network, including the Cambridge to Huntingdon Busway.  The precise amount of employment floorspace to be provided in this highly accessible and sustainable urban location at Northern Fringe East will be determined by any planning 
permissions granted and the comprehensive vision for the area as a whole which will be established through the Area Action Plan.  
 
  Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  146 Table 5.3:  Employment land supply at March 2012  
 
Employment land provision 2011 to 2031  Net land 
(hectares)  Net 
floorspace 
(sq m) 
Employment land developed between April 
2011 and March 2012  -7.31 2,812  
Employment land allocated or with planning 
permission at March 2012  19.32  218,955  
Total employment land built, allocated or with 
planning permission 2011 to 2031  12.01  221,767  
Source: Cambridge Business Commitments and Completions 2012, 
Cambridgeshire County Council.  
 5.12 Table 5.3 shows that the supply of employment land in Cambridge at March 2012 is healthy. One of the rows in the table looks counter -
intuitive in that it shows a loss of land with a growth in floorspace. This is due to the fact that the employment land being lost tends to have les s 
floorspace on it than the new employment land being proposed or developed. In essence, these figures show the densification of employment land in Cambridge, as a denser form of development replaces less dense sites. While there is more employment land available than the forecasts indicate is needed, there are a number of 
benefits to this approach. It allows for flexibility within the supply of employment land. There will always be a certain amount of churn as businesses start and grow and move to new premises to meet their needs; a larger supply of employment land means that there is more likely to be empty land or floorspace to move into, and businesses will not have to wait as long for someone else to move out. This also means that the inherent uncertainties in forecasts will not unnecessarily constrain business growth.  
 5.13 It is also worth noting that Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s Hospital) is  the largest allocated employment site in 
Cambridge, both in land and floorspace terms. Addenbrooke’s Hospital is a regional hospital that serves a far wider area than just Cambridge. If the floorspace at Addenbrooke’s were left out of the net floorspace provision to 2031 then the remaining floorspace would be just over 70,000 sq m, around the level the net forecasts predict.  
 5.14 Employment proposals in B use class that are situated in sustainable locations will be supported. Evidence suggests that over the past few years demand for office space has contracted to the city centre and down Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  147 Hills Ro ad to Cambridge Station, and the business parks and Cambridge 
Science Park on the northern edge of the city. This policy seeks to meet 
the demand for new office space by supporting the development of business space in areas where there is strong demand. Business growth of appropriate scale in other sustainable locations throughout the city will also be supported.  
 5.15 In the past, employment policies sought to support the high technology economy through selective management of the economy, reserving employment land in Cambridge for high technology uses. There is now 
a significant supply of land for high technology uses, enough to last beyond the lifetime of the plan, and hence this policy emphasis has changed. Changes in national policy, combined with new local evidence, 
indicated that this approach was no longer the best for Cambridge. Consequently, the previous policy no longer applies and the new approach supports all types of employment development, subject to a number of criteria.  
 5.16 The Cambridge Cluster Study 2011 identifies the fact that a number of peripheral employment sites are perceived to be isolated, both in relation to each other and in relation to the city centre and the railway station. 
The lack of a social aspect, especially on the newer peripheral  
employment sites, is making them less attractive places to locate to. Larger employment sites away from the city centre should consider 
whether to provide shared social spaces to enhance the vitality and attractiveness of the site from the outset.  
Policy 41: Protection of business space  
 
Within protected industrial sites as identified on the Policies Map, development (including change of use) that would result in the loss of floorspace or land within use class B or sui generis research institutes will not be permitted unless:  
a. the loss of floorspace would facilitate the redevelopment and 
continuation of employment uses (within B1(c), B2 or B8 use class) 
on the site and the proposed redevelopment will modernise buildings that are out of date and do not meet business needs; or  
b. the site has been realistically marketed for a period of 12 months for employment uses (within B1(c), B2 or B8 use class), including the option for potential modernisation for employment uses (in use class B1(c), B2 or B8) and no future occupiers have been found, in which case other employment uses will be considered. If other employment uses do not prove possible, then other uses will be considered, subject to their compatibility with surrounding uses.  
 There will be a presumption against  the loss of any employment uses 
outside protected industrial sites. Development (including change of use) resulting in the loss of employment uses will not be permitted unless:  Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  148 c. the loss of a small proportion of floorspace would facilitate the 
redevelopment and continuation of employment uses (within B use class or sui generis research institutes) on the site and that the proposed redevelopment will modernise buildings that are out of date and do not meet business needs; or  
d. the site is vacant and has been realistically marketed for a period of 12 months for employment use, including the option for potential modernisation for employment uses and no future occupiers have been found.  
 
In this policy, the phrase ‘employment use’ refers to the B use classes  
and sui generis research institutes. It does not refer to other uses that generate employment (such as, for example, retail, schools, and care institutions).  
 Temporary changes of use to sui generis uses that generate employment opportunities will be appr opriate while marketing of the site 
takes place (e.g. taxi businesses, vehicle hire).  
 This policy does not apply to sites in employment use that are allocated for another use and being developed for the use they are allocated for.  The principle of the loss from employment use was accepted when the site was allocated.  
 
 
Supporting text:  
 
5.17 The Employme nt Land Review (updated in 2012) noted  a signif icant loss 
of industrial floorspace in Cambridge, although offices have also been 
lost. High residential land values and a scarcity of developable land in Cambridge mean that there will be a continuing pressure on employment floorspace from other uses. Maintaining a good supply of employment land is essential for Cambridge’s economy and hence its quality of life 
and place. Without the high technology businesses involved in research 
and development in Cambridge, the Cambridge Cluster would not be able to lever the advantages from university and other research. Furthermore, without the professional services and industry that make up Cambridge’s diverse economy, the cluster would also be harmed. These elements unify to define the success of the Cambridge Phenomenon.  
 5.18 This policy seeks to protect land in employment use (B use class) and sui generis research institutes, to ensure that sufficient supply remains to meet demand. One option when seeking to redevelop sites that are nearing the end of their useful life is to build ‘hybrid’ buildings. A key emergence over the past few years has been ‘hybrid’ res earch and 
development buildings. Examples of these can be found in the science parks around Cambridge and typically they comprise modern Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  149 warehouse- type construction with high quality office fit -out typically 
occupying 20– 50 per cent of the built space. Ext ernally, the buildings will 
have the appearance of office buildings with high quality landscaping, 
street furniture and external finishes. They will combine office functions, but also research and development and production facilities, all under one roof. The Employment Land Review (update 2012) identifies ‘hybrid’ buildings as a likely growth area.  
 5.19 The policy allows for the loss of employment space if it is marketed for that use, including with potential for modernisation, for a period of 12 months and there is no genuine interest. This is to test whether there is a reasonable prospect of the site having continued use as an employment site. If the market rejects the site through this test, then redevelopment for other uses will be supported.  
 5.20 Employment land on protected industrial sites is treated slightly differently than employment land elsewhere. In the first instance land and buildings on these sites should be retained in industrial or storage use. It is treated differently for three reasons: firstly, industrial land in Cambridge has come under significant pressure over recent years and a number of sites have been lost; secondly, buildings in industrial use can be ‘bad neighbours’ – there can be noise and/or odour associated 
with operation that would be a nuisance to non- industrial uses. These 
underlying reasons make the preservation of these sites in industrial use an important objective. Finally, the reorganisation of the economy and the redevelopment of some well -located former industrial sites for mi xed 
use requires a stock of more traditional industrial estate- type land for 
firms to locate or relocate to. Overall then, there is a range of employment floorspace that needs to be provided, from pure offices, offices aimed at research and product development, smaller business service space and space for start -ups, and more traditional industrial and 
warehousing and modern production and hybrid warehousing space. A particular priority is negotiating affordable space for start -ups in the high 
technology sector. This policy only seeks to protect employment uses from change of use where a planning application (including variation of condition) is required.  
 5.21 This policy needs to be read in conjunction with the spatial strategy set out in Section Two and the area- based policies in Section Three. In 
particular, the policies allow two existing industrial areas near Cambridge Station to be redeveloped for mixed uses at higher densities. Industrial uses near the new Cambridge North Station are not specifically identified 
on the Policies Map as the strategy allows for mixed use employment -
based intensification around that station once a new Area Action Plan 
(AAP) is adopted. Finally, Section Three has special policies for the expansion/intensification and consolidation of a number of high tech employment and research areas, such as at West Cambridge and St John’s Innovation Park. Appendix K of the Plan provides some guidance as to how any marketing campaign is expected to be carried out, and under what circumstances a shorter time period would be considered.  Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  150 Policy 42: Connecting new developments to digital infrastructure  
 
Provision for high capacity broadband (such as ducting for cables) 
should be designed and installed as an integral part of development, to minimise visual impact and future disturbance during maintenance. All telecommunications infrastructure should be capable of responding to changes in technological requirements over the period of the development.  
 
Supporting text : 
 
5.22 Early provision of high quality broadband to new homes and offices in Cambridge can avoid future disruption and harm to the street scene, and ensure that all new development is fully integrated into modern communications technology. This will:  
• help communication for business and residents;  
• allow for increased home working (impacting on demand for business land);  
• reduce the need to dig up pavements; and  
• help address isolation.  
 
Policy 43: University development  
 
The development or redevelopment of faculty, research and administrative sites for the University  of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin 
University (including teaching hospital facilities) will be supported when it meets the principles set out in this policy and other planning policies.  
 
University development in the City Centre  
 
In the city centre, these uses will be permitted provided they:  
a. make effective use of land, including a mix of uses on larger sites to meet the needs of the relevant institution, and  
b. take reasonable opportunities to improve circulation for pedestrians and cyclists, together with public realm improvements, reductions i n 
car parking provision and the introduction of active frontages at ground floor level.  
 
The following sites are allocated for these uses and shown on the Policies Map:  
c. mixed -use redevelopment of the Mill Lane/Old Press site (Policy 26, 
Site U1); and  Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  151 d. mixed -use redevelopment of the New Museums site (Site U2).  
 
In addition, development of sites in the Eastern Gateway or near East 
Road should consider including a significant element of university development.  
 
University development outside the City Centre 
 Beyond the city centre, the following sites will provide opportunity for 
enhanced faculty and research facilities:  
e. the development of medical teaching and research facilities and related university research institutes at Cambridge Biomedical Campus (see Poli cy 17); and 
f. the continued development of the West Cambridge site at Madingley Road (see Policy 19).  
 
Other proposals for these uses will be treated on their merits, although there will be a presumption against proposals if they result in a shortage of land for other uses as identified in this plan.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
5.23 Cambridge is a university city, home to both the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin University.  
 5.24 The University of Cambridge continues to be a world leader in higher education and research. The University of Cambridge is consistently ranked in the top three research universities globally, based on the two internationally recognised measures. It is a vital driver of the Cambridge economy and is the reason why so many high technology an d 
knowledge- based employers decide to locate in the city. It contributes to 
and is dependent upon the quality of life in the city and city centre. The 
University of Cambridge’s esteemed reputation has underpinned the Cambridge Phenomenon and much of the ci ty’s prosperity in recent 
years. The University of Cambridge and its colleges are also significant employers in their own right, providing over 12,000 jobs. Their reputation and heritage continues to attract students from across the world, tourists, language students, spin- off enterprise and medical research, and it 
continues to be a vital driver of the local and national economy.  
 5.25 The University of Cambridge has an overall estate comprising around 650,000 sq m on 247 hectares, distributed across a number o f key 
locations in the city centre and West Cambridge. West and North West 
Cambridge have been the focus of the University of Cambridge’s growth and relocations in the past 14 years. Remaining development there will focus on further academic development and commercial research and development. Cambridge Biomedical Campus now has outline consent. Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  152 Other key locations where significant change is still planned are the Old 
Press/Mill Lane area and the New Museums site. An SPD has been prepared for Old Press/Mill  Lane and a Development Framework SPD 
has been prepared for New Museums. In addition to these sites, other sites where there is the potential for change to occur during the Plan period, include the Sidgwick Site, the Old Addenbrooke's Site, the Downing Sit e, the former Scroope House Site (Department of 
Engineering), and the Department of Chemistry (Lensfield Road).  
 5.26 The University of Cambridge has plans to grow undergraduate numbers by 0.5 per cent a year and postgraduates by 2 per cent a year in order to m aintain its globally successful institution. The University of 
Cambridge’s key growth needs are being met by the developments in West and North West Cambridge and around Addenbrooke’s, including those satellite centres where the plan is seeking densificati on and a 
broader mix of uses. The development of the University of Cambridge’s North West Cambridge site is assessed in accordance with the North West Cambridge AAP. The policy acknowledges existing plans of the University of Cambridge on sites outside of the city centre and also 
provides an opportunity for redevelopment of sites in the city centre 
where plans are evolving. The University of Cambridge has other, less advanced, plans for development of faculty uses, for example at Madingley Rise. These will be considered on their merits, and against other relevant policies in the plan – for instance, at Madingley Rise much 
of the open space is protected.  
 5.27 Anglia Ruskin University has made significant progress on the East Road site in modernising the faculty a ccommodation within the 
framework of the agreed 2009 masterplan. A planning application was subsequently approved and this work is now largely complete and provides around 9,000 sq m of new accommodation.  
 5.28 When the masterplan was written in 2008, Anglia Ruskin University needed around 12,000 sq m. The campus on East Road remains one of the tightest in the sector. However, implementation of the masterplan has left a shortfall in teaching space.  The most recent Anglia Ruskin University estate strategy and corporate plan 2012- 2014 has identified a 
need for at least 6,000 sq m of additional space. As well as catering for growth in student numbers, there is also a need to enhance existing space and recently redeveloped space, e.g. for laboratories, which are not meeting current requirements, and to reconsider the future of Anglia 
Ruskin University’s library on the site. This will require the masterplan for Anglia Ruskin University to be revisited.  
 5.29 The East Road site and area remain the most sustainable location for Anglia Ruskin University during the next plan period, and any future needs for this institution should, in the first instance, be met close to this site. Therefore, any development proposals that come forward in these areas should consider whether faculty development is an appropriate use. Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  153 Policy 44: Specialist colleges and language schools  
 
The development of existing and new specialist colleges and/or 
language schools will not be permitted unless they provide residential accommodation, social and amenity facilities for all non- local students 
(students arriving to study from outside Cambridge  and the Cambridge 
sub-region), with controls in place to ensure that the provision of 
accommodation is in step with the expansion of student places. The use of family dwelling houses to accommodate students of specialist colleges and/or language schools only is not appropriate.  
Supporting text:  
 5.30 There are a growing number of specialist colleges in Cambridge, 
including secretarial and tutorial colleges, pre‐ university foundation 
courses and crammer schools. These colleges concentrate on GCSE 
and A level qualifications and pre- university foundation courses. They 
attract a large number of students and contribute to the local economy.  
 5.31 Cambridge is also an important centre for the study of English as a foreign language. For more than 50 years, overseas  students have been 
coming to Cambridge to study English in language schools. The city has a large number of permanent and temporary foreign language schools which set up in temporary premises over the summer months.  
 
5.32 The industry has matured in recent years and more and more courses are being run throughout the year and are being focused at a much broader range of students, including people working in business as well as the more traditional younger students.  
 5.33 The Cambridge Cluster Study recognised the increasing contribution these establishments make to the local economy and has suggested a review in the policy approach, as they contribute £78m per annum to the local economy. The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, 2012 ) 
supports a policy approach t hat seeks to take advantage of this benefit. 
The Council considers it appropriate to support the expansion of such colleges and schools where they manage the impacts of their growth.  
 5.34 Specialist colleges and language schools can place additional burdens on the housing market. This policy seeks to ensure that when specialist 
colleges and language schools seek to grow, those burdens are mitigated. The applicant will need to demonstrate how many additional 
students will be generated by the proposal. This will allow the Council to 
judge the residential, social and amenity impact generated. The Council will require a robust method of calculating the additional number of students arising from any proposal, and will consider a range of mechanisms to agree an upper limit to the number of additional students. Section Five: Supporting the Cambridge Economy  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  154 The range of mechanisms considered may include, but not be limited to, 
controlling the hours of operation, the number of desk spaces and the number of students. This will ensure that a proposal will generate a specific level of growth that can be measured and mitigated. Student 
accommodation is dealt with under Policy 46 in Section Six.  
 
5.35 The housing market in Cambridge is already under significant pressure. The growth of specialist colleges and language schools should not worsen this situation. Appropriate residential accommodation can take the form of home- stay (with resident families in the area) or the use of 
existing accommodation outside term time, and the use of purpose- built 
student accommodation within the curtilage of the college/school. Use of family dwelling houses to accommodate students only is not appropriate, as this will put additional pressure on the housing market. Promoters of language school and specialist college development will be expected to submit evidence to demonstrate how this issue is being addressed as a part of their planning application.  
  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  155  
  
Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  156 Section Six: Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
6.1 Housing in Cambridge has an important part to play in supporting both the local and national economy, as well as being critical in promoting well-being and achieving positive health outcomes. Cambridge is a 
thriving, prosperous and dynamic city, with successful universities and a vibrant historic core surrounded by attractive and accessible green spaces. While these factors contribute to the overall quality of life of residents, demand for housing is high, with high rents and high house prices. It is important to increase the supply of all types of housing, including affordable housing, and maintain a mix of different sizes, types and tenures of housing to meet a wide range of housing needs. The Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) for the Cambridge sub-region dr aws on a number of data sources and has been developed with 
a range of partners. It assesses the housing needs of the sub- region as 
well as each district, and helps to inform the scale and mix of housing and the range of tenures that are required to meet t he need.  
 6.2 This section of the plan sets out the policies on housing for Cambridge. Alongside other sections of the plan that address the need to manage resources effectively, mitigate climate change and provide high quality well-designed places, the policies in Section Six set out the parameters 
for different forms and types of housing and establish standards for 
residential development.  
 
Policy 45: Affordable housing and dwelling mix  
 
Planning permission will only be granted for residential development on 
sites where the minimum percentage of affordable housing has been secured on site in line with the thresholds and percentages set out in Table 6.1 below:   Table 6.1: Affordable housing requirements  
No. of 
dwellings  Minimum percentage of 
affordable housing 
required  
11-14 units 25% 
15 or more units 40% 
 Where it appears that a larger site has been subdivided into smaller development parcels in order to circumvent the requirements of this Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  157 policy, or for any other reason, the threshold and the pro- rata percentage 
of affordable housing sought will apply to the requirement from the larger 
area as a whole.  The required density on a given site will need to have regard to its wider context and other policies of this plan. All devel opments of 11 dwellings or more, or on sites of less than 11 units if 
the combined gross internal floorspace of the proposed development exceeds 1,000 sqm will provide affordable housing.  
The occupation of affordable housing will be limited to people in housing need and shall be available in perpetuity. Affordable housing shall be provided on development sites with the capacity of 11 dwellings or more in accordance with the percentages and thresholds set out above unless exceptional circumstances are demonstrated. Where affordable housing is provided, it shall be of tenure blind design indiscernible from and well integrated with the general market housing.  
 Developments should include a balanced mix of dwelling sizes*, types and tenures to meet projected future household needs within Cambridge. The mix of dwellings and tenure types shall have regard to the differing needs for different unit sizes of affordable housing and market housing.  
  All sites** including employment related housing will be required to m ake 
affordable housing provision in line with the thresholds and percentages set out above. Affordable housing provision should be calculated on the basis that the thresholds are to be considered against the net increase in the number of units on the site.  
 Further details on the practical implementation of this policy will be set out in an up to date Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document.  
 *Measured by the number of bedrooms to be provided in each dwelling  
** Except for Starter Homes Exception Sites  
  
Supporting text:  
 Affordable housing  
 6.3 With a strong economy, Cambridge is at the centre of an area of significant housing growth planned for the coming years. With high housing costs but only limited land available for housing, the city also has a strong housing need. The Council recognises th at meeting 
housing need is a key priority. However, following assessment of development viability across the city, the affordable housing requirement is not applied to planning applications for student accommodation.  
  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  158 6.4 Most sites in Cambridge with the capacity to deliver between 11 and 14 
residential units can deliver 25 per cent affordable housing whilst remaining viable, whilst most schemes containing 15 or more residential units remain viable with 40 per cent affordable housing.
33 In instances 
where higher levels of affordable housing than the percentages set out in the policy are proposed, this is supported by the Council as it will contribute to meeting affordable housing need. Where a developer considers that meeting the affordable housing target percentage will be unviable, robust evidence of this must be provided in the form of an independent viability appraisal. Negotiations between the Council and the developer will need to take place to ensure clarity about the particular circumstances which have given rise to the development’s reduced 
viability or non -viability, either on an open book valuation or involving an 
independently commissioned assessment using the Homes and Communities Agency’s Development Appraisal Tool
34 or other  
equivalent tools agreed with the Council in advance of assessment.  
 
Table 6.2: Affordable housing definition 
 
Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided to 
eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is 
determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. 
Affordable housing should include provisions to remain at an affordable 
price for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be recycled for 
alternative affordable housing provision.  
 
 Social rented housing is owned by local authorities and private 
registered providers (as defined in section 80 of the Housing and 
Regeneration Act 2008), for which guideline target rents are determined 
through the national rent regime. It may also be owned by other persons 
and provided under equivalent rental arrangements to the above, as 
agreed with the local authority or with the Homes and Communities 
Agency.  
 
Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities or private registered 
providers of social housing to households who are eligible for social 
rented housing. Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require a 
rent of no more than 80 per cent of the local market rent (including 
service charges, where applicable).  
 
Intermediate housing is homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above 
social rent, but below market levels subject to the criteria in the 
affordable housing definition above. These can include shared equity 
(shared ownership and equity loans), other low cost homes for sale and 
intermediate rent, but not affordable rented housing.  
 
33 Dixon Searle (2013) Cambridge City Council Local Plan – Community Infrastructure Levy 
Viability Assessment  
34 Homes and Communities Agency’s Development Appraisal Tool is available at 
http://www.homesandcommunities.co.uk/ourwork/development -appraisal -tool  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  159  
Homes that do not meet the above definition of affordable housing, such 
as “low cost market” housing, may not be considered as affordable 
housing for planning purposes.  
 
6.5 The Council has adopted this approach to overcome concerns about the number of planning applications coming forward in the city below the previously adopted affordable housing threshold of 15 dwellings. However, it is noted that the introduction of single percentage for affordable housing at a lower threshold than 15 dwellings could make schemes less viable or unviable and could reduce the amount of housing delivered. A graduated approach towards affordable housing requirements, starting at lower site size thresholds and percentages, is considered more appropriate. Where applications are made for outline planning  permission, a planning obligation will be required to secure affordable housing in accordance with the thresholds and percentages in the policy.  
 
6.6 On larger sites delivering 11 units or more, developers will be expected to deliver whole units on site with financial contributions sought for fractions of units.  Note that a vacant building credit may apply to 
developments bringing vacant buildings on site back into law ful use or 
where such buildings are demolished as part of a development. If a vacant building credit is allowed, the effect would be to reduce the expected affordable housing contribution from a site.  
 Employment related housing  
 
6.7 The existing pressures on the housing market in Cambridge can lead to employers facing difficulties with the recruitment and retention of staff. Due to Cambridge’s high house prices and levels of housing need, it is important to allow the possibility of employers providing housing specifically for their employees, as part of schemes for employment development.  
 6.8 It is anticipated that this policy will facilitate small numbers of employment related dwellings coming forward. Affordable housing requirements will apply to schemes in line with the thresholds set out in Policy 45 above. The provision of dwellings related to specific employers will need to be justified and managed by reference to the employer carrying out detailed survey work to ascertain the level of demonstrable need for such housing. This can be established by identifying the level of recruitment and retention problems experienced. Survey work would need to establish:  
• the level of staff turnover for a five year period;  
• any likelihood of the need for future  expansion of the business in 
question;  
• housing circumstances of employees; and  
• income of employees.  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  160  
Occupation of employment related housing will be secured through a 
Section 106 obligation.  
 Mix of dwelling types, sizes and tenures  
 
6.9 In order to provide affordable homes to those who need them, the Council will require a high proportion of affordable housing to be 
provided on site. It is also vital to provide an appropriate mix of housing 
types and sizes to meet the needs of different households within the wider community. This allows residents to remain in the locality as their housing needs change, and helps build balanced and mixed communities.  
 6.10 In addressing development proposals coming forward, the Council needs to have an up- to-date understanding of the local housing market, 
and how it interacts with other housing markets, and the level of local need for housing. Our Strategic Housing Market Assessment for the Cambridge housing market area draws on a number of data sources and has been developed with a range of partners. This will inform the development of a new Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document, which will address both tenure and dwelling mix. Applicants need to demonstrate that the proposed mix of units will deliver a balanced mix of dwelling sizes, types and tenures to meet projected future household need within Cambridge in line with the approach towards tenure and dwelling mix set out in the Council’s Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document.  
  
Policy 4 6: Development of student housing 
 
Proposals for new student accommodation will be permitted if they meet 
identified needs of an existing educational institution within the city of Cambridge in providing housing for students attending full -time courses 
of one academic year or more. Schemes should demonstrate that they 
have entered into a formal agreement with at least one existing educational establishment within Cambridge providing full -time courses 
of one academic year or more. This formal agreement will confirm that the proposed accommodation is suitable in type, layout, affordability and maintenance regime for the relevant institution.  The Council will seek appropriate controls to ensure that, within academic terms, the approved schemes are occupied sol ely as student accommodation for an identified 
institution. Applications will be permitted subject to:  
a. there being a proven need for student accommodation to serve the institution;  
b. the development not resulting in the loss of existing market housing and af fordable housing;  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  161 c. it being in an appropriate location for the institution served;  
d. the location being well served by sustainable transport modes;  
e. having appropriate management arrangements in place to 
discourage students from keeping cars in Cambridge;  
f. room s and facilities being of an appropriate size for living and 
studying; and  
g. minimising any potential for antisocial behaviour and, if appropriate, being warden- controlled.  
 
The loss of existing student accommodation will be resisted unless adequate replacement accommodation is provided or it is demonstrated 
that the facility no longer caters for current or future needs.  
 Where students do not attend full -time courses of one academic year or 
more, their accommodation requirements will be expected to be provided within the site of the institution which they attend; or by making effective use of existing student accommodation within the city outside term time; or by use of home- stay accommodation.  
 Permanent purpose built student accommodation will not be supported on sites allocated for housing, or with an extant planning permission for residential development, or sites identified as potential housing sites within the Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
6.11 The presence of two large universities and a number of other educational institutions has a significant impact on Cambridge’s demography and on 
its housing market. The student communities, including undergradu ates 
and postgraduates, contribute significantly to the local economy, and to the vibrancy and diversity of the city. Out of term time and throughout the year, the city is also a temporary home to conference delegates and other students attending pre- university courses and short courses at 
specialist colleges, or studying English as a foreign language at one of the city’s language schools.  
 
6.12 Although  student communities contribute greatly to Cambridge’s 
diversity, the number  of students who share privately -rented 
accommodation affects the availability  of larger houses in the general 
market. Development of new student accommodation may free up accommodation suitable for wider general housing needs.  The restriction 
on occupation by full -time students enrolled on courses of at least one 
academic year does not apply outside term -time. This ensures 
opportunity for use of the accommodation for conference delegates or summer language school students, while providing more long- term 
student accommodation when needed.  
 Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  162 6.13 Although the provision of student accommodation can contribute to the 
development of balanced and mixed communities, careful consideration should be given to the scale and impact of the development on local residential amenity. Accessibility by public tran sport is important, as 
students in purpose- built accommodation do not usually have access to 
cars. The policy should ensure students are able to live in a convenient location, and in a well -managed development subject to restrictions on 
car usage to help maintain the character of residential areas.  
 
6.14 The Council commissioned a study
35 to identify the demand for and 
supply of student accommodation within the city. This study provides information on the potential level of purpose built student accommodation to address current and future student numbers (to 2026) if all students were to be accommodated in purpose built student accommodation. Having considered the findings of the study, the Council recognises that student accommodation can be provided in a variety of ways, including through allocations for student accommodation and through windfall sites. The plan, including Policy 46, is intended to deliver accommodation to address the identified future growth aspirations of the institutions and to provide additional flexibility. The City Council is not seeking through the local plan to provide purpose built student accommodation for all of the existing resident student population. The student accommodation study identifies that the University of Cambridge is looking to grow by a further 2,874 students to 2026. While Anglia Ruskin University  has confirmed that it has no growth 
aspirations to 2026, a number of the other institutions in Cambridge have stated aspirations to grow. These institutions have a total growth figure to 2026 of 230 students. This gives rise to a total growth figure for t he 
universities and the other institutions of 3,104 to 2026. Taking into account student accommodation units under construction or with planning permission, allocations in the local plan and the remaining allocation at North West Cambridge, these sources of supply would address and go beyond the growth figure of 3,104 and would provide flexibility. Any provision over and above these sources of supply would need to be considered on its merits against the criteria in Policy 46 and having regard to the absence of any policy requirement at either national 
or local level for all students to be provided with purpose built student accommodation.  
 
6.15 In order to show that the known needs of specific institutions are being met, evidence must be provided as a part of the application to show a linkage with at least one higher or further education institution. This will 
need to comprise a formal agreement with the institution which confirms that the accommodation will be occupied by students of the institution undertaking full -time courses of one academic year or more. When 
planning permission is granted for new student accommodation, a planning agreement will be used to robustly secure that use and the link 
 
35 Assessment of Student Housing Demand and Supply for Cambridge City Council, Cambridge Centre 
for Housing and Planning Research, January 2017.  
 Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  163 to the particular institution for which the accommodation is to be 
provided. This policy only applies in instances where planning permission is required for development housing more than six students (sui generis). Student accommodation should be well designed, 
providing appropriate internal and/or amenity space and facilities. Provision should be made for disabled students.  
 
Policy 47: Specialist housing  
 
Planning permission will be granted for the devel opment of specialist 
housing, subject to the development being:  
a. supported by evidence of the demonstrable need for this form of development within Cambridge;  
b. suitable for the intended occupiers in relation to the quality and type of facilities, and the provision of support and/or care;  
c. accessible to local shops and services, public transport and other sustainable modes of transport, and community facilities appropriate to the needs of the intended occupiers; and  
d. in a location that avoids excessive concentration of such housing within any one street or small area.  
 Where the development falls within use class C3 (dwelling houses), the development will be expected to contribute to the supply of affordable housing within Cambridge in accordance with Policy 45. If development,  
including change of use, would involve a net loss of specialist residential floorspace, this will only be permitted where appropriate replacement specialist housing accommodation will be made that satisfies the four criteria a –d or it is de monstrated that there is no local need for the 
floorspace to be retained for the current use, last use or for any other form of specialist housing and that there is no demand for the floorspace from other operators of specialist housing.  
 
Supporting text:  
  
6.16 This policy relates to housing designed and designated for occupation by older people, disabled people, and vulnerable people with specific housing needs, referred to within the policy and hereafter as ‘specialist housing’. People with the need for specialist housing contribute to the 
community in many ways, but for some their ability to participate fully in society is hampered by poor or inappropriate housing, which affects their physical or mental health, or their ability to receive the support they need to live as independently as possible.  
 
6.17 Forms of housing covered under this policy include:  
• sheltered housing  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  164 • residential care and nursing homes  
• extra -care housing  
• shared homes  
• cluster units  
• respite, rehabilitation and convalescent accommodation  
• hostel accommodation.  
 
6.18 This policy does not relate to student accommodation or other types of 
accommodation within the C2 use class (residential institutions) not specifically for older, disabled or vulnerable people, e.g. hospitals and boarding schools. It also does not relate to individual homes built to wheelchair -accessible standards.  
 
6.19 Specialist housing is intended to enable people to live as independently as possible, but is designed so that support can be provided to them (and often to others in the wider community) on- site. Where possible, such 
housing should be designed flexibly so that it can be adapted to meet alternative housing uses as needs change in the future. Such housing should be provided across the city, as opposed to being concentrated in certain areas, to help to enable people moving into such accommodation to remain in their local area and to create and maintain balanced communities. Safe and accessible high quality amenity space should be 
provided for specialist housing in compliance with Policy 50 on residential space standards.  
 
6.20 In demonstrating need for specialist housing, applications should refer to the Council's Housing Strategy, Cambridgeshire County Council’s Joint 
Strategic Needs Assessment, the Cambridgeshire Health and Wellbeing Strategy, Local Health and Social Care Commissioning Strategies and, 
where appropriate, the Commissioning Strategy for Extra Care Sheltered Housing in Cambridgeshire 2011 – 2015 and its successor documents. 
Ideally the scheme should be endorsed by the appropriate revenue 
funding commissioners under the newly emerging health and social care commissioning arrangements, where care and/or support funding may be required for some or all of the residents – either from the outset or f or 
future residents.  
 
6.21 Where a proposal includes the loss of specialist residential floorspace, the applicant will be expected to provide appropriate replacement floorspace as required by the policy or will be expected to provide adequate evidence of lack of local need and demand for the floorspace for any form of specialist housing. In providing evidence of lack of local need and demand, the facility will be required to have been offered on the open market and the guidance within Appendix K should be adhered to. Local need in this instance is considered to be city -wide.  
Policy 48: Housing in multiple occupation  
 Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  165 Proposals for large houses in multiple occupation (sui generis) as 
defined by the Government’s Circular 08/2010 and its successor documents will be supported, where the proposal:  
a. does not create an over -concentration of such a use in the local 
area, or cause harm to residential amenity or the surrounding area;  
b. the building or site (including any outbuildings) is suitable for use as housing in multiple occupation, with provision made, for 
example, for appropriate refuse and recycling storage, cycle and car parking and drying areas; and  
c. will be accessible to sustainable modes of transport, shops and other local services.  
 Appropriate management arrangements should be put in place in order to monitor and minimise antisocial behaviour and adverse impact on local residents. A condition to this effect may be applied to any planning consent.  
Supporting text:  
 
6.22 Housing in multiple occupation (HMO) are flats or houses permanently occupied by more than one household, where each household does not have exclusive access to all cooking, washing and toilet facilities behind a locked front door. In planning terms, HMOs are split into two different use classes, based on the number of occupants:  
 
• A small HMO  – a shared dwelling house occupied by between three 
and six unrelated individuals who share basic amenities such as a 
kitchen or bathroom. This falls into use class C4 under the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 2010. 36  Permitted 
development rights enable a flat or house in use class C3 (i.e. in 
simple terms, a normal ‘family’ house) to change use to use class C4 without submission of a planning application;  
• A larger HMO  – more than six unrelated individuals sharing basic 
amenities such as a kitchen or bathroom. This falls outside the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 2010 and is categorised as sui generis.  
 Proposals for smaller HMOs (use class C4) will be considered in the same way as a proposal for C3 residential development.  
6.23 Cam bridge’s HMOs have an important role to play within the local 
housing market. They provide a range of shared accommodation, predominantly occupied by students and young professionals. However, it is acknowledged that HMOs can reduce the number of family ho mes 
 
36 The Town and Country  Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Order 2010  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  166 available, impact negatively on the character of an area and contribute 
to local parking problems.  
 
6.24 It is also important to ensure that HMOs provide a standard of accommodation equivalent to that enjoyed by other residents and that the amount of activity generated by the proposed level of occupation does not detract from the amenities of neighbouring occupiers. Policy 51: Accessible homes and Policy 50: Residential space standards will therefore be aspired to for proposals of change of use to HMOs  and 
should also be applied to the provision of new HMOs.  The application of 
the space standards will help to determine the number of occupiers that a property can reasonably accommodate as a HMO. This not only ensures reasonable living conditions for occupiers, but will also ensure that the intensification of such activity associated with any HMO is proportionate to the size of the property.  
  
Policy 49: Provision for Gypsies and Travellers  
 
The Council, working with neighbouring authorities, will maintain a local 
assessment of need for pitches for Gypsies and Travellers and plots for Travelling Showpeople. The outcome of this assessment will assist the Council in determining planning applications. The latest published evidence (2016) indicates there is no identified need for pitches or plots in Cambridge between 2016 and 2031. This local plan therefore makes no specific provision for new sites in Cambridge. Proposals for permanent, transit and emergency stopping provision for Gypsies and Travellers will only be permitted where:  
a. the applicant or updated Council evidence has adequately demonstrated a clear need for the site in the city, and the number, type and tenure of pitches/plots proposed, which cannot be met by a lawful existing or available allocated s ite; 
b. the site is accessible to local shops, services and community facilities 
by public transport, on foot or by cycle;  
c. the site has safe and convenient vehicular, pedestrian and cycle 
access for the type of vehicles that could reasonably be expected to use or access the site;  
d. the site is capable of being provided with essential utilities, including mains water, electricity, sewerage, drainage and waste disposal;  
e. the site will provide an acceptable living environment and the health and safety of the site’s  residents should not be put at risk. Factors to 
be taken into account include flood risk, site contamination, air quality and noise;  
f. the site will not have an unacceptable adverse impact on the amenity of nearby residents or the appearance or character of  the 
surrounding area. The site should respect the scale of the surrounding area and appropriate boundary treatment and landscaping should be capable of being provided;  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  167 g. the site will allow the needs of the residents of the site to be met 
without putting undue pressure on local services; and  
h. the site provides adequate space for vehicle parking, turning and servicing of large vehicles, storage, play and residential amenity.  
 
Should an up to date needs assessment indicate there is a need, then 
opportunities to deliver sites for Gypsies and Travellers will be sought as part of significant major development sites. The location of site provision will be identified through the masterplanning and design process. Gypsy and Traveller sites are inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Any proposals in the Green Belt would also have to demonstrate compliance with national and local policy regarding development in the Green Belt. Sites will not be located in identified areas of green separation. Sites provided will meet the following criterion in addition to the above criteria (a– h): 
i. sites will be well- related to the major development, enabling good 
access to services and facilities, and providing safe access on foot, cycle and public transport. Access  should not rely on minor 
residential roads.  
Supporting text:  
 
6.25 The Government’s Planning Policy for Traveller Sites requires that local planning authorities set targets for the provision of Gypsy and Traveller pitches and Travelling Showpeople plots which address the likely site accommodation needs of Travellers in their area, working collaboratively with neighbouring local planning authorities. The Government’s policy approach requires Councils to maintain a five year land supply of Traveller sites, in a similar way to housing, and identify deliverable sites to meet the needs identified for the first five years. This planning guidance was revised in 2015, in particular revising the definition of Gypsies and Travellers for the purposes of planning. Applicants will need to demonstrate that they meet the definitions provided by the Government’s Planning Policy for Traveller Sites.  
 
6.26 These requirements necessitate collaborative working with neighbouring authorities on both assessment of need and ongoing provision. In informing debate on need, a number of Cambridgeshire, Norfolk and Suffolk authorities commissioned the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment 2016 (GTAA) to cover the period 2016-2036. This assessment concluded that there was no identified need in 
Cambridge for permanent pitches for Gypsies and Travellers or plots for Travelling Showpeople between 2016 and 2031. The local plan does not propose any allocations. The assessment acknowledges that it was not possible to determine the travelling status of existing households who did not participate in surveys carried out for the purpose of the assessment. These households may or may not include individuals who meet the definition provided in the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites and therefore give rise to some need for pitch provision. However, the extent Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  168 of such need (if any) cannot be identified. Any proposals for sites will be 
considered according to Policy 49: Provision for Gypsies and Travellers.  
 
6.27 The GTAA refers to a need for transit/emergency stopping place provision, but it was not possible to determine precise demand for such temporary accommodation in any one local authority area, particularly in light of changes to the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites potentially leading to more hous eholds travelling. There will be a need to monitor 
and review the plan, as necessary, to take account of up to date evidence.  
 
6.28 The Government’s Planning Policy for Traveller Sites requires plans to identify specific sites or broad locations, where need wil l be met within 
the plan period. The Council considers that significant major developments provide an opportunity to deliver provision to meet longer -
term needs. This would allow the delivery of pitches as an integral part of the development, in sustainabl e locations close to services and 
facilities. Given the significant education, health and disability -related 
inequalities experienced by many Gypsies and Travellers, the provision of pitches within sustainable, major developments could help to address these issues. Additionally, as stated in The Road Ahead: Final Report of 
the Independent Task Group on Site Provision and Enforcement for Gypsies and Travellers, published by the Department for Communities and Local Government in December 2007, the approach of  integrating 
the provision of accommodation for Gypsies and Travellers as part of new development helps to erode misconceptions and distrust.  
 
6.29 The local plan has not identified specific sites for pitch provision for Gypsies and Travellers at significant existing major development sites in the city’s urban extensions as many of the sites have already established outline consents and masterplans. The criteria- based policy on pitch 
provision for Gypsies and Travellers will be used to determine any applications  coming forward and to guide the identification of a site 
through the masterplanning of developments. This would allow design issues and the relationship between land uses to be considered fully at the design stage. The policy provides flexibility with regard to the location of provision, in order that the best location can be identified through the masterplanning and design process. Phasing plans would also need to consider the availability of services and facilities when sites were to be occupied.  
 
6.30 When applications for planning permission or reserved matters approval come forward for large scale new communities or significant major development sites, consideration will be given to whether there is a current need for Gypsy and Traveller site provision, and  the opportunity 
to deliver appropriately a site or sites within that phase of the development will be reviewed.  
   Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  169 Policy 50: Residential space standards Internal residential space 
standards  
 
New residential units will be permitted where their gross internal floor 
areas meet or exceed the residential space standards set out in the Government’s Technical Housing Standards – nationally described 
space standard (2015)
37. 
The internal design standard requires that:  
a. the dwelling provides at least the gross internal floor area and built -
in storage area set out in Table 6.3 below;  
b. a dwelling with two or more bedspaces has at least one double (or twin) bedroom;  
c. in order to provide one bedspace, a single bedroom has a floor area of at least 7.5m² and is at  least 2.15m wide;  
d. in order to provide two bedspaces, a double (or twin bedroom) has a floor area of at least 11.5m²;  
e. one double (or twin bedroom) is at least 2.75m wide and every other double (or twin) bedroom is at least 2.55m wide;  
f. any area with a headroom of less than 1.5m is not counted within the Gross Internal Area unless used solely for storage (if the area under the stairs is to be used for storage, assume a general floor area of 1m² within the Gross Internal Area);  
g. any other area that is used solely for storage and has a head room of 900- 1500mm (such as under eaves) is counted at 50% of its floor 
area, and any area lower than 900mm is not counted at all;  
h. a built -in wardrobe counts towards the Gross Internal Area and 
bedroom floor area requirements, but should not reduce the effective width of the room below the minimum widths set out above. The built -
in area in excess of 0.72m² in a double bedroom and 0.36m² in a single bedroom counts towards the built -in storage requirement;  
i. the minimum floor to ceiling height is 2.3m for at least 75% of the 
Gross Internal Area.  
   
 
37 Or successor document  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  170 Table 6.3: Minimum gross internal floor areas and storage (m²)  
 
Number 
of 
bedrooms 
(b) Number 
of bed 
spaces 
(persons)  1 storey 
dwellings  2 storey 
dwellings  3 storey 
dwellings  Built -in 
storage  
1b 1p 39 (37)38   1.0 
 2p 50 58  1.5 
2b 3p 61 70  2.0 
 4p 70 79   
3b 4p 74 84 90 2.5 
 5p 86 93 99  
 6p 95 102 108  
4b 5p 90 97 103 3.0 
 6p 99 106 112 
 
 7p 108 115 121 
 
 8p 117 124 130 
 
5b 6p 103 110 116 3.5 
 7p 112 119 125  
 8p 121 128 134  
6b 7p 116 123 129 4.0 
 8p 125 132 138 
 
 
Further detail on how to apply this standard can be found by referring to the technical housing standards – nationally described space standard 
(2015)
39 
 Applicants  should state the number of bedspaces/occupiers a home is 
designed to accommodate rather than simply the number of bedrooms.  
 
 
38 Where a one person flat has a shower room rather than a bathroom, the floor area may be 
reduced from 39m2 to 37m2 
39 Or successor document  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  171 External residential space standards  
 
All new residential units will be expected to have direct access to an area of private amenity space. The form of amenity space will be dependent on the form of housing and could include a private garden, roof garden, balcony, glazed winter garden or ground- level patio with defensible 
space from any shared amenity areas. In providing appropriate amenity space, development should:  
a. consider the location and context of the development, including the character of the surrounding area;  
b. take into account the orientation of the amenity space in relation to the sun at different times of year;  
c. address issues of overlooking and enclosure, which may otherwise impact detrimentally on the proposed dwelling and any neighbouring dwellings; and  
d. design the amenity space to be of a shape, size and location to allow effective and practical use of the space by residents. 
 
Supporting text:  
 
6.31 The provision of sufficient space within new homes is an important 
element of good residential design and new dwellings should provide sufficient space for basic daily activities and needs. It is recognised that many new developments are perceived to provide inadequate amounts of both internal and external amenity space. These standards are applicable for both private and affordable housing in Cambridge as they cover a full range of dwelling types and consider the amount of space needed by residents within their dwellings. New homes created through residential conversions and homes created by changes of use from non-residential land uses should seek to meet or exceed the standards as far as it is practicable to do so.  
 
6.32 The standards are intended to encourage provision of enough space in 
dwellings to ensure that homes can be used flexibly by a range of residents. The standards also aim to ensure that sufficient storage can be integrated into units. It is also important to consider that these standards are expr essed as minimum space standards. Housing that 
exceeds minimum dwelling sizes will always be encouraged, and in order to achieve certain design configurations, to work within site constraints or to deliver units to a particular segment of the housing market, designers and developers may need to make early allowance to exceed the minimum gross internal area for that dwelling type. Application of 
residential space standards, both internally and externally, should be shown on all submitted layouts and floorplans and be clearly demonstrated in the Design and Access Statement, which will be used to assess the acceptability of any proposal.  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  172  
6.33 Private amenity space can make an important contribution in improving 
the quality of life of the city’s residents and suppor ting and enhancing 
local biodiversity. The National Planning Policy Framework40 (2012) sets 
out the need to secure high quality design and a good standard of amenity for all existing and future occupants of land and buildings.  
 
6.34 External amenity space should be sufficient to accommodate:  
• a table and chairs suitable for the size of dwelling;  
• where relevant, provision of a garden shed for general storage (including bicycles where no garage provision or cycle storage to the frontage of the dwelling is poss ible);  
• space for refuse and recycling bins;  
• an area to dry washing;  
• circulation space; and  
• an area for children to play in.  
 
Considering how much space might be required will be based on bedspaces. External amenity space would not include car parking or turning areas. Suitable arrangements for access to refuse and recycling bins should be made, in order to prevent bins/bags being transported through dwellings.  
 
6.35 One bedroom dwellings would not be expected to provide space for children to play, due to the lower likelihood of children occupying these units. Dwellings with more than one bedroom would need to take space 
for children to play into account. In addition to private amenity space, 
developments with flats will need to provide high- quality s hared amenity 
areas on site to meet the needs of residents, including play space for children.  
 
Policy 51: Accessible homes  
 
In order to create accessible homes:  
a. all housing development should be of a size, configuration and internal layout to enable Building Regulations requirement M4 (2) ‘accessible and adaptable dwellings’ to be met; and  
b. 5 per cent
41 of the affordable housing component of every housing 
development providing or capable of acceptably providing 20 or more self-contained affordable homes
42, should meet Building Regulations 
 
40 Paragraph 17 of the National Planning Policy Framework  (2012)  
41 Rounded up to the nearest whole unit.  
42 Part M of the Building Regulations generally does not apply to dwellings resulting from a conversion 
or a change of use. Additional guidance on the applicable requirements of the Building Regulations 
(amended 2015) can be found in: Approved Document M Access to and use of buildings Volume 1: Dwellings.  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  173 requirement M4 (3) ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ to be wheelchair 
accessible, or be easily adapted for residents who are wheelchair 
users. 
 
Compliance with the criteria should be demonstrated in the Design and Access Statement submitted with the planning application.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
6.36 This plan throughout adopts the principle of inclusive design: “ The design 
of mainstream  products and/or services that are accessible to, and 
usable by, as many people as reasonably possible ... without the need 
for special adaptation or specialised design" (BSI 2005)43. This principle 
applied to housing has resulted in the concept of Lifetime Homes and 
indeed goes wider to the concept of Lifetime Neighbourhoods , which 
enable an increasingly aging society to get out and about in the areas in 
which they live – both physically and virtually – and connect with other 
people and services in the immediate neighbourhood and beyond. The Lifetime Homes and Wheelchair Housing Design Standards have now 
been superseded by optional housing standards on accessibility introduced by the Government through Part M of Building Regulations in 2015.  
 
6.37 An accessible home supports changing needs of residents from raising children through to mobility issues faced in old age or through disability. This essentially allows people to live in their home for as much of their life as possible. Such homes have design features that have been tailored to foster accessible living, helping to accommodate old age, injury, disability, pregnancy and pushchairs or enable future adaptation to accommodate this diversity of use.  
 
6.38 The standards for housing to meet Building Regulations requirement M4 (2) and M4 (3) relate to the layout of self -contained homes for permanent 
occupancy. Meeting Building Regulations requirement M4 (2) and M4 (3) will normally be controlled through the use of a planning condition to ensure that the relevant homes are delivered to meet the standards. The National Planning Practice Guidance states that local plan policies for wheelchair accessible homes (M4 (3)) should only be applied to those dwellings where the local authority is responsible for allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling. In the interest of mixed and balanced communities, the Council would also encourage developers to build wheelchair accessible market homes.  
 
  
 
43 BSI (2005), Managing inclusive design.  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  174 Policy 52: Protecting garden land and the subdivision of existing 
dwelling plots  
 
Proposals for development on sites that form part of a garden or group 
of gardens or that subdivide an existing residential plot will only be permitted where:  
a. the form, height and layout of the proposed development is appropriate to the surrounding pattern of development and the character of the area;  
b. sufficie nt garden space and space around existing dwellings is 
retained, especially where these spaces and any trees are worthy of retention due to their contribution to the character of the area and their importance for biodiversity;  
c. the amenity and privacy of neighbouring, existing and new properties is protected;  
d. provision is made for adequate amenity space, vehicular access arrangements and parking spaces for the proposed and existing properties; and  
e. there is no detrimental effect on the potential comprehensive  
development of the wider area.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
6.39 For the avoidance of doubt, proposals that are considered to be 
appropriate on garden sites in accordance with the criteria set out in this policy will also be assessed against other policies within the local plan, to ensure that they achieve a high standard of development. This policy covers sites where:  
• an existing house or houses are retained and new dwellings are erected in the garden or multiple garden areas or curtilage; and/or  
• the existing buildings are demolished and the plot(s) subdivided in order to make way for further residential development.  
 
6.40 Gardens are an important environmental resource and are a vital component of Cambridge’s character . They form part of an area's 
development pattern, providing a setting for buildings, which in turn informs the prevailing privacy and amenity enjoyed by residents. They provide space for food production and a semi -natural habitat for local 
wildlife and corridors for the movement of wildlife through the urban environment. Collectively, they help to mitigate fluvial and surface water flooding in otherwise built -up parts of the city.  
 
6.41 As the definition of previously developed land within the National Planning Policy Framework (2012) excludes private residential gardens 
and in the light of the need to consider the environmental impacts of Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  175 development on garden land, the inappropriate development of garden 
sites will be resisted. However, some forms of redevelopm ent and infill 
development, which are well designed and make efficient use of land, will continue to be a valuable additional source of housing supply and need not be inappropriate.  
Policy 53: Flat conversions  
 
Proposals to convert a single family dwelling house or a non- residential 
building into self -contained flats will be permitted where:  
a. the proposed development (the original building including acceptable extensions and roof conversions) has an internal gross floor area of at least 120 sq m (excluding stairwells, balconies, external open porches, conservatories and areas with a floor to ceiling height of less than 1.5m), and proposed room sizes meet minimum room sizes (see Policy 50);  
b. the ground or lower ground floor includes a family unit (two bedroom plus) with garden access;  
c. the proposal, in terms of the number of units and scale of associated extensions, would not have a negative impact on the amenity or character of the area or on highway safety in streets already experiencing parking stress;  
d. the proposal would result in a good standard of amenity for its occupiers and is designed to avoid cumulative and negative impacts on neighbouring residential properties; and  
e. the proposal includes appropriate refuse, recycling and cycle storage to serve the devel opment.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
6.42 The subdivision of predominantly large houses into flats has contributed to the supply of reasonably affordable private rented accommodation in Cambridge over time, meeting a need in the market. However, in some circumstances, re sidential conversions have proved unsatisfactory, 
providing poor or inadequate accommodation for tenants and leading to problems and issues for adjoining residents and for wider local areas. As 
dwelling conversions tend to come forward sporadically, it is often difficult to account for the cumulative impact of the conversions. While an individual scheme may appear to have a relatively minor additional impact on its own, it is important to consider cumulative impact when looking at individual schemes. Increasing the units of accommodation within existing established streetscapes can generate additional car parking requirements. In many cases, it is not possible to provide on- site 
parking, and this leads to saturation of existing on- street spaces. This 
not only removes opportunities for other nearby residents to park within Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  176 the street, but also has an overall negative impact on the quality of the 
streetscape.  
  
6.43 The detrimental impact of the conversion of existing single dwelling houses or non-residential developments into two or more smaller units 
of accommodation can include:  
• off-street parking within front gardens with an associated reduction 
in front garden space and vegetation and loss of domestic character;  
• disturbance of the building’ s façade and entrances;  
• extension of the building with associated impacts on privacy and quality of life, daylight and the character of the area;  
• intensification of the building’s use, with potential for impacts on overlooking/privacy and acoustic issues;  
• saturation of on- street parking, resulting in car -dominated 
environments.  
 
6.44 In all flat conversions, it is expected that the resulting development does not cause detriment to the character of the area or the amenity of surrounding properties. In order to ensure that the proposed development provides units of a sufficient size for its occupiers, individual units must provide appropriate minimum internal floor standards and headroom in accordance with the Council’s minimum internal floorspace standards set out  in Policy 50. Furthermore, the 
stacking between units should ensure that different rooms are not stacked inappropriately, e.g. the kitchen of one unit over the bedroom of another unit, with resultant noise impacts on the bedroom.  
 
6.45 Notional parking capacity on streets is defined from the maximum number of spaces that can be lawfully parked on. This excludes double parking, corner parking, parking on spaces with yellow line controls, in bus-only lanes and cycle lanes (including outside areas of formal 
enforc ement), and in spaces in controlled parking zones blocking 
driveways and access for emergency vehicles. In order to ascertain whether streets are experiencing parking stress, a survey should be completed for planning applications for flat conversions. Park ing stress 
is defined as occurring in those streets where surveys show that there is less than 10 per cent free notional parking capacity. This requirement will be relaxed in controlled parking zones where the scheme is car -
capped through the permit system, or where a planning obligation prevents residents applying for parking permits, or the development is defined as a car -free development.  
 
6.46 The following guidelines should be followed when undertaking a survey. If these guidelines are not followed, the Cou ncil may not be able to make 
a full and proper assessment of the proposed development.  
 
6.47 The Council  requires a parking survey to cover the area where residents 
of a proposed development may want to park. This generally covers a Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  177 200m walk ing distance around a site. The survey should be undertaken 
when the highest number of residents are at home, which is generally 
late at night during the week. A snapshot survey between the hours of 00:30-05:30 should be undertaken on two separate weekday nights 
(Monday to T hursday).  
 
6.48 For sites subject to high levels of daytime parking given the proximity of a major employer, school, or transport node close to any of the following land uses, additional survey times may be necessary. In these cases, surveys between the hours of 10: 30-12:30. 
 
6.49 Surveys should not be undertaken in weeks that include Public Holidays and school holidays and it is advised that weeks preceding and following holidays should also be avoided, as should surveys on or close to a date when a local event is taking place,  since this may impact the results of 
the survey.  
 
 
Policy 54: Residential moorings  
 
Proposals for residential moorings will be permitted, where the proposal:  
a. integrates successfully and positively with the surrounding landscape  
and/or townscape;  
b. is served by adequate pedestrian and vehicular access;  
c. is served by appropriate electricity, sewerage and refuse disposal facilities;  
d. has no significant negative effect on the amenity, visual character, water quality, historic and ecological value of the river or nearby land;  
e. is close to existing services and amenities;  
f. only provides minimal essential lighting, which shall be located so as to minimise glare and/or visual intrusion; and  
g. does not impede navigation and/or the use of any foot path.  
 
Site RM1 at Fen Road is allocated for off -river residential moorings within 
the proposals schedule set out in Appendix B and as shown on the Policies Map.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
6.50 The delivery of further residential moorings within off -river basins or 
marinas will be considered favourably, providing appropriate access 
arrangements can be made and onshore facilities constructed which comply with other policies of the plan.  
  Section Six : Maintaining a balanced supply of housing  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  178 6.51 Over the last two decades, the city has seen a gradual increase in the 
number of  boat owners wishing to live permanently on the River Cam 
and the number of visitors spending time on the city’s waterways. They may only be suitable for the needs and housing expectations of a small sector of the population, but they contribute both to the diversity of the city and to the supply of different forms of housing.  
 
6.52 The Conservators of the River Cam are the statutory navigation authority, responsible for the maintenance of navigation on the River Cam from the Mill Pond, Silver Street, to Bottisham Lock. Working with the Conservators and other stakeholders, the Council is responsible for the management of existing residential and visitor moorings on the River Cam and has set out its approach to this issue through a moorings management policy. A limited number of licences are issued to those wishing to moor boats at specific areas along the River Cam at Midsummer Common, Stourbridge Common and Jesus Green.  
 
6.53 Given the extensive use of the river by other river users, including anglers and rowers, and the potential for further moorings on the river itself to have a detrimental effect on navigation, the delivery of further residential moorings within off -river ba sins or marinas will be considered 
favourably. If developed together with the adjacent allocation for 
residential moorings within South Cambridgeshire District Council’s administrative boundary, Site RM1 at Fen Road could provide off -river 
moorings for residential and leisure boating purposes.   The Council will 
continue to work with the Conservators of the River Cam, boaters, landowners, and other stakeholders to increase the supply of residential moorings in Cambridge.  
 
6.54 Where new residential mooring proposals come forward, consideration will need to be given to the quality of life experienced by both the boaters themselves and any neighbouring occupiers. Furthermore, the impact on the natural and historic environment is also paramount, given the richness of  the River Cam’s wildlife, its cultural and historic significance 
and its role in flood risk management. Residential car and cycle parking standards will be applied as set out in Policy 82 with consideration given to the impact of car and cycle parking on nearby streets.  
  Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  179   
Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  180 Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the 
character of Cambridge 
 
7.1 An essential aspect of Cambridge’s attractiveness as a place to live, 
work, study and visit is its character. This character stems from the interplay between its rich architecture and the spaces between buildings. Trees and high quality public realm also play a significant role. The interface between the urban edge and the countryside is a key component of how the city is appreciated in the landscape and contributes to the quality of life and place.  
 
7.2 The challenge therefore of any new development is t o ensure the city’s 
character is not adversely affected. This can be achieved with high quality design that maximises opportunities to support the natural environment with new and existing open spaces, among other benefits.  
Policy 55: Responding to context  
 
Development will be supported where it is demonstrated that it responds positively to its context and has drawn inspiration from the key characteristics of its surroundings to help create distinctive and high quality places. Development will:  
a. identify and respond positively to existing features of natural, historic or local importance on and close to the proposed development site;  
b. be well connected to, and integrated with, the immediate locality and wider city; and  
c. use appropriate local characteristics to help inform the use, siting, 
massing, scale, form, materials and landscape design of new development.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.3 An understanding of and appropriate response to context will ensure that the special character of Cambridge is protected and enhanced. The context of a development describes the setting of a site or area including land uses, open spaces, the built and natural environment and social and physical characteristics. Proposals for new development should create a scale and form that is  appropriate to existing buildings, the 
public realm and open spaces, which complement the local identity of an area.  
 7.4 It is essential that the context of any proposal be considered early on as part of the design process. A development that responds positi vely to its Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  181 context is one that will either enhance areas of existing high quality, or 
will seek to introduce distinctiveness to areas of weaker character. The outcome of this thorough understanding and well considered response should be the successful integration of new development into the natural, built and historic environment.  
Policy 56: Creating successful places  
 
Development that is designed to be attractive, high quality, accessible, inclusive and safe will be supported. Proposals should:  
 
a. provide a comprehensive design approach that achieves the 
successful integration of buildings, the routes and spaces between buildings, topography and landscape;  
b. create streets that respond to their levels of use while not allowing vehicular traffic to dominate;  
c. cr eate attractive and appropriately -scaled built frontages to positively 
enhance the townscape where development adjoins streets and/or public spaces;  
d. ensure that buildings are orientated to provide natural surveillance;  
e. create active edges on to public space by locating appropriate uses, as well as entrances and windows of habitable rooms next to the street;  
f. create clearly defined public and private amenity spaces that are designed to be inclusive, usable, safe and enjoyable;  
g. be designed to remove the threat or perceived threat of crime and 
improve community safety;  
h. use materials, finishes and street furniture suitable to the location and context;  
i. create and improve public realm, open space and landscaped areas that respond to their context and dev elopment as a whole and are 
designed as an integral part of the scheme;  
j. embed public art as an integral part of the proposals as identified through the Council’s Public Art Supplementary Planning Document; and 
k. ensure that proposals meet the principles of inclusive design, and in particular meet the needs of disabled people, the elderly and those with young children.  
 
Supporting text:  
 7.5 Successful places will create environments that are inclusive and accessible by balancing the needs of all users through hig h quality 
design. Such places are well integrated into their surroundings, having identified and responded to the opportunities and constraints of a site and resulting in attractive and enjoyable places available to everyone. Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  182 The economic success of Cambridge is underpinned by the quality of life 
and place in the city, demonstrating its importance.  
 
7.6 The structuring principles of movement, land use, density and open space should form the basis for creating appropriate design responses at all scales. Differen t elements of place making may be more or less 
important than others, depending on the nature and complexity of the site and its surroundings. In busier areas with accessible, high quality public transport, a mix of appropriate uses is required.  
 7.7 Well- planned buildings, streets and spaces are fundamental to the 
creation of high quality development. There should be a holistic approach taken to the design of buildings, streets and landscape to ensure that these elements integrate well with each other. The cre ation 
of gated developments that limit social cohesion and integration will not be supported.  
 7.8 Creating a well -used and active public realm helps to foster a sense of 
community and reduces crime. The way buildings front on to public spaces, through proposed uses, functions and activity and the way open spaces are designed to meet the needs of residents and visitors is crucial to the creation of high quality and enduring places. Other aspects such as the appropriateness of materials and finishes and ongoing maintenance will determine how attractive, well -used and successful 
places will be in the future.  
 7.9 Cambridge benefits from a wide range of publicly -sited works of art. 
Public art makes an important contribution to the character and visual quality of the city. Art is frequently integrated into buildings, because the historic street pattern of older parts of the city offers limited opportunities for free -standing works. The Council is committed to the provision of 
public art within developments and in the public realm.  
  
Policy 57: Designing new buildings  
 
High quality new buildings will be supported where it can be 
demonstrated that they:  
a. have a positive impact on their setting in terms of location on the site, height, scale and form, materials and detailing, ground floor activity, wider townscape and landscape impacts and available views;  
b. are convenient, safe and accessible for all users;  
c. are constructed in a sustainable manner and are easily adaptable;  
d. successfully integrate functional needs such as refuse and recycling, bicycles and car parking;  
e. design measures to reduce the environmental impact of the buildings, such as renewable energy systems and other rooftop plant and services, in an architecturally integrated way;  Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  183 f. successfully integrate features such as meter boxes in an 
unobtrusive manner;  
g. position building names and numbers clearly and ensure that secure letter boxes are conveniently located and accessible from the street; and 
h. include an appropriate scale of features and facilities to maintain an d 
increase levels of biodiversity  in the built environment.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.10 High quality building design is linked to context, in terms of appropriateness, and to place making in terms of how the proposed development will be sited. Without imposing architectural tastes or 
styles, it is important that a proposed development is considered in terms of site location, height, scale, form and proportions, along with materials and detailing, with the latter two linking directly to the quality and durability of a proposal. Where new buildings are proposed or existing 
buildings altered or extended, it is important that any heritage assets and their settings are carefully considered. This would include the analysis of the special character of that asset and justification of the approach to the proposed development (this applies equally to Policy 58 on altering and extending buildings). New developments should have regard for and maximise opportunities to incorporate features that support biodiversity (see Appendix J).  
 7.11 Materials to be used for new buildings should be suitable for their purpose and setting. The durability of materials and how they weather are important factors. All the necessary environmental services, plant, recycling and refuse storage,  bicycle and car parking must be 
considered early in the design process and be successfully integrated into the development to form part of the overall design and not as an afterthought. Such features must be secure and located conveniently but unobtrusively.  
  
Policy 58: Altering and extending existing buildings  
 
Alterations and extensions to existing buildings will be permitted where 
they:  
a. do not adversely impact on the setting, character or appearance of listed buildings or the appearance of conservation areas, local 
heritage assets, open spaces, trees or important wildlife features;  
b. reflect, or successfully contrast with, the existing building form, use of materials and architectural detailing while ensuring that proposals are sympathetic to the existing building and surrounding area;  Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  184 c. ensure that proposals for doors and windows, including dormer 
windows, are of a size and design that respects the character and proportions of the original building and surrounding context;  
d. create altered or new roof profiles that are sympathetic to the existing building and surrounding area and are in keeping with the requirements of Appendix E (Roof extensions design guide);  
e. do not unacceptably overlook, overshadow or visually dominate neighbouring properties;  
f. respect the space between buildings where this contributes to the character of an area; and  
g. retain sufficient amenity space, bin storage, vehicle access and cycle and car parking.  
 
Supporting text:  
 7.12 Buildings, both residential and non- residential, often need to be adapted 
over time to meet the changing needs of occupiers. Finding new uses for redundant buildings or extending to create additional space helps to further the life of buildings and make more efficient use of land. It is vital that any alteration or extension is carefully designed to avoid them destroying the character or integrity of the existing building or negatively impacting on the amenity of neighbouring properties or area.  
 
Policy 59: Designing landscape and the public realm  
 
External spaces, landscape, public realm, and boundary treatments 
must be designed as an integral part of new development proposals and coordinated with adjacent sites and phases. High quality development will be supported where it is demonstrated that:  
a. the design relates to the  character and intended function of the 
spaces and surrounding buildings;  
b. existing features including trees, natural habitats, boundary treatments and historic street furniture and/or surfaces that positively contribute to the quality and character of an area are retained and protected;  
c. microclimate is factored into design proposals and that public spaces receive adequate sunlight;  
d. materials are of a high quality and respond to the context to help create local distinctiveness;  
e. an integrated approach is taken to surface water management as part of the overall design;  
f. a coordinated approach is taken to the design and siting of street furniture, boundary treatments, lighting, signage and public art;  
g. trees and other planting is incorporated, appropriate to both the scale of buildings and the space available;  Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  185 h. species are selected to enhance biodiversity through the use of 
native planting and/or species capable of adapting to our changing climate; and  
i. the design considers the needs of all users and adopts the princ iples 
of inclusive design.  
Supporting text:  
 7.13 Buildings and the spaces around them should be thought about holistically, with the landscape and public realm being as important as the building itself. Successful landscape design will integrate development into its surroundings and enhance the function, character and amenity value of spaces and boundaries. Taking account of existing landscape features, such as trees, is crucial in creating high quality and responsive schemes. Existing trees can provide a sense of maturity to new developments and play an important role in softening and integrating development into the wider city. Landscape design extends beyond the curtilage of new buildings to include streets, parks and other open spaces and should help to support an attractive and high quality public realm. This policy does not seek to control the design of individual gardens unless these are a key part of a heritage asset.  
 7.14 Landscape proposals should result in high quality amenity spaces, which receive adequate sunlight (in accordance with best practice guidance) 
and which work with the buildings to help define thresholds and boundaries and to provide opportunities for private usable amenity space through gardens, roof terraces and balconies.  
 7.15 Areas of hard paving to be adopted by Cambridgeshire County Council, 
as the highway authority, and other hard surfacing and landscape, including sustainable drainage (SuDs) features to be adopted by Cambridge City Council, must be clearly identified on propos als. 
Maintenance and management plans must be provided with any proposals and considered early in the design process. Species that 
enhance biodiversity and cope with climatic changes will also be sought. 
Where major development is proposed, applicants will  be required to 
submit the Council’s biodiversity checklist as part of their proposals.  
  Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  186 Policy 60: Tall buildings and the skyline in Cambridge  
 
Any proposal for a structure that breaks the existing skyline and/or is 
significantly taller than the surrounding built form will be considered against the following criteria:  
a. location, setting and context – applicants should demonstrate 
through visual assessment or appraisal with supporting accurate visual representations, how the proposals fit within the existing landscape and townscape;  
b. impact on the historic environment  – app licants should demonstrate 
and quantify the potential harm  of propo sals to the significance of 
heritage asset s or other sensitive r ecepto rs (view of, ba ckdrop and 
setting), assessed on a site-by-site basis but including impact on 
key landmar ks and view points, as well as from the main  streets, 
bridges and op en spaces in the city cent re and from t he main  historic 
approac hes, including r oad and river, to the historic core. Tall 
building proposals must ensure that  the characte r or appearance  of 
Cambridge, as a city of sp ires and towers eme rging a bove the 
estab lished tree line, remains dominant from relevant viewpoints as 
set out in Appendix F;  
c. s
cale, massing and architectural quality – applicants should 
demonstrate through the use of scaled drawings, sections, accurate visual representations and models how the proposals will deliver a high quality addition to the Cambridge skyline and clearly demonstrate that ther e is no adverse impact;  
d. amenity and microclimate – applicants should demonstrate that there 
is no adverse impact on neighbouring buildings and open spaces in terms of the diversion of wind, overlooking or overshadowing, and that there is adequate sunlight and daylight within and around the 
proposals; and  
e. public realm – applicants should show how the space around tall 
buildings will be detailed, including how a human scale is created at street level.  
 
Further advice on tall buildings and the skyline and the requirements of the assessment criteria for proposals is set out in Appendix F and further guidance is contained in ‘The Setting of Heritage Assets : Historic 
Environment  Good Practice Advice in Planning Note 3 (Second Edition)’ 
published by Historic England in December 2017 (or its successor document ). 
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.16 The city is generally free from clustered modern towers and bulky buildings with the notable exception of the hospital buildings at Addenbrooke’s and the hangars at Cambridge Airport, which sit in stark Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  187 contrast to the surrounding, low lying suburbs. While there has been a 
move to build a number of taller buildings across the city in recent years, further opportunities to create new taller buildings in the city must be carefully considered and placed in the right locations.  
 
7.17 In the historic core, ‘background buildings’ tend to rise to between three and five- storeys tall but occasionally include six -storey modern buildings 
such as the Grand Arcade. Floor to floor heights can vary significantly between buildings, and are often exacerbated by the service requirements in modern buildings. In the suburbs, overall building heights tend to be two storeys, with limited areas of three storey buil dings 
focused principally along the key approach roads leading into the city.  This characteristic leads to the setting of height thresholds against which proposals will be judged in accordance with the criteria of Policy 60.  
 
7.18 There are a large number of designated heritage assets within the historic core, including a significant number of highly graded heritage assets of great national importance. Accordingly, the potential impact that a proposal for a tall building have on the significance of those asset s 
will be a critical factor in the consideration of the proposal. For this reason, it is very unlikely that there would be many instances or scope for introducing new tall buildings in or around the historic core. The impact on the setting of heritage assets should be assessed in accordance with the guidance set out in ‘The Setting of Heritage Assets: Historic Environment Good Practice Advice in Planning Note 3 (Second Edition)’ December 2017 or any successor document.  
 
7.19 Trees form an important element of the Cambridge skyline, within both the historic core and surrounding suburbs. Elevated views from the rural hinterland and from Castle Mound reveal a city of spires and towers emerging above an established tree line. Buildings therefore work with subtle changes in topography and the tree canopy to create a skyline of ‘incidents’, where important buildings rise above those of a prevailing lower scale.  
 
7.20 Cambridge should seek to maintain and, where appropriate, enhance the overall character and qualities of its skyline as the city continues to grow and develop into the future. Any proposals for new tall buildings will need to demonstrate how they have taken account of the prevailing context and more distant views to enhance the skyline.  
 
7.21 In developing any proposals for tall buildings, developers should make reference to Appendix F of the plan, which provides a more detailed explanation of the required approach, methodology and assessment to developing and considering tall buildings in Cambridge and set out in ‘The Setting of Heritage Assets: Historic Environment Good Practice 
Advice in Planning Note 3 (Second Edition)’ December 2017 or its successor document.  
  Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  188  
Policy 61: Conservation and enhancement of Cambridge’s historic 
environment  
 
To ensure the conservation and enhancement of Cambridge’s historic 
environment, proposals should:  
a. preserve or enhance the significance of the heritage assets of the city, their setting and the wider townscape, including views into, within and out of conservation areas;  
b. retain buildings and spaces, the loss of which would cause harm to the character or appearance of the conservation area;  
c. be of an appropriate scale, form, height, massing, alignment and detailed design which will contribute to local distinctiveness, complement the built form and scale of heritage assets and respect the character, appearance and setting of the locality;  
d. demonstrate a clear understanding of the significance of the asset and of the wider context in which the heritage asset sits, alongside asse ssment of the potential impact of the development on the 
heritage asset and its context; and  
e. provide clear justification for any works that would lead to harm or substantial harm to a heritage asset yet be of substantial public benefit, through detailed an alysis of the asset and the proposal.  
 
Supporting text:  
 7.22 Cambridge’s historic and natural environment defines the character and setting of the city, and contributes significantly to Cambridge residents’ quality of life.  Against the backdrop of a successful, growing city, it is important to preserve and enhance the historic and natural environment to ensure that Cambridge remains compact and walkable and that the connection between the city’s historic core and the wider countryside is maintained.  The city has a varied architectural heritage, from the internationally recognised grandeur of King’s College Chapel to the more modest vernacular buildings reminiscent of an East Anglian market town. The number of grade I and grade II* listed buildings is high, with an exceptional concentration of collegiate buildings around the arc of the River Cam. Green open spaces such as the commons, greens and The Backs are also key features of the city’s life and layout. In addition, there are a number of registered parks and  gardens of special historic interest, 
including college grounds, cemeteries and the Cambridge University Botanic Garden.  
 
7.23 Archaeological work in Cambridge has discovered remains from early prehistory, with significant settlement known from at least the Iron Age. Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  189 Development within the city’s boundaries has revealed significant 
archaeological remains, some of which are of national importance, and further discoveries are to be expected.  
 
7.24 Viewed simply, Cambridge has an historic centre surrounded by concentri c rings of development. This development takes the form of the 
commercial city core, surrounded by mainly collegiate and university buildings and open spaces. A pre- university urban core existed on 
Castle Hill, with other remains extending towards the current centre. Beyond the open spaces, which include The Backs, Midsummer Common, Jesus Green and Parker’s Piece, the city takes on a predominantly residential character. This comprises different areas of townscape character, including the large Victorian houses to the west of the city centre, railway -related development of the Newtown and 
Romsey areas, inter -war development to the south and west and the 
post-war suburbs of King’s Hedges, Arbury, and Abbey wards.  
 
7.25 Given the rich tapestry of Cambridge’s historic and natural environment and the strategic objectives of this local plan, the strategy for its management is, in itself, one of a multi -document, multi -layered 
approach which includes a number of interrelated initiatives, policies and players.  Together, as illustrated in figure 7.1, they represent 
Cambridge’s historic environment strategy, the components of which will be added to and updated as necessary and provide the necessary tools to realise the ongoing management of the city’s her itage assets.  
Planning decisions will be made having regard to the content of the relevant components of the strategy.  
 
7.26 The conservation of a designated heritage asset is a material planning consideration and the higher the significance of the asset, the more 
weight will be given to its preservation and/or enhancement. The level of information or investigation required to support a proposal that could impact on a heritage asset needs to be proportionate to the work proposed to the asset and to its signific ance.  Scheduled 
monuments/archaeological areas, listed buildings, conservation areas and registered parks and gardens are all designated heritage assets. Listed building descriptions, conservation area appraisals and management plans and suburbs and approaches studies should be referred to as a material consideration in making and determining applications.  In order to comply with the requirements of the NPPF (2012), it may be necessary to access other sources of information such as the Historic Environment Record, and commission further evaluation, in order to properly understand the significance of the asset and to be able to explain the impact that a proposal may have on that significance.  
 
 Section Seven : Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  190 Figure 7.1: Cambridge’s Historic Environment Strategy:   
 
 
Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  191 7.27 It is important to identify and assess the impact of the development on 
the special character of the heritage asset in the Cambridge context. This could include:  
• the effect on views or the setting of buildings and spaces;  
• how the proposals will preserve or  enhance the character or 
appearance of a conservation area; and  
• consideration of how the scale, height, massing, alignment and materials respond to the local context.  
 7.28 Before undertaking any works to a designated heritage asset, the significance of that asset must be clearly understood, as well as the potential impact of the development. Where listed buildings are concerned, it is important to address the full impact of modern building standards concerning aspects such as fire prevent ion, sound and 
thermal insulation, energy -efficiency savings and disabled access. Pre-
application meetings are strongly recommended to ensure that standards can be accommodated without jeopardising the special interest of the building. Applicants considering works to a listed building are also advised to consult best practice guidance.  
 7.29 Given the high potential for assets of archaeological importance in the urban area, applicants should also obtain archaeological advice. Consideration needs to be given to t he potential for harm or substantial 
harm to such assets, and to their setting. Further information on heritage assets can be obtained from the Cambridgeshire Historic Environment Record.  
Policy 62: Local heritage assets  
The Council will actively seek the retention of local heritage assets, including buildings, structures, features and gardens of local interest as detailed in the Council’s local list and as assessed against the criteria set out in Appendix G of the plan.  
Where permission is required, proposals will be permitted where they retain the significance, appearance, character or setting of a local heritage asset.  
 Where an application for any works would lead to harm or substantial 
harm to a non -designated heritage asset , a balanced judgement will b e 
made having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the significance 
of the heritage asset . 
 
  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  192 Supporting text:  
 
7.30 Local heritage assets, including buildings, structures, features and gardens of local interest, are an important element of the rich history of the city and reinforce local distinctiveness and sense of place. The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, 2012) requires local planning authorities to have an up- to-date understanding of the local 
historic environment and its significance. Although not likely to meet the current criteria for statutory listing, local heritage assets are important to their locality by reason of their cultural, architectural and historical contribution. For example, the Council currently has a local list of mor e 
than 1,000 buildings of local interest, which are of significant character and distinctiveness and should be protected from inappropriate development. The local list forms part of Appendix G and will be updated in the Council’s annual monitoring report.  
 
7.31 The retention of local heritage assets may be achieved through appropriate adaptive re -use or change of use. Building Regulations allow 
a more flexible approach to meeting the required standards when altering buildings of local interest.  
Policy 63: Works to a heritage asset to address climate change  
 
Proposals to enhance the environmental performance of heritage assets will be supported where a sensitive and hierarchical approach to design and specification ensures that the significance of the asset is not  
compromised by inappropriate interventions.  
 Any works should be undertaken based on a thorough understanding of the building’s historic evolution and construction (where these matters 
relate to the heritage significance of the asset), architectural and historic significance, and demonstration of the building's environmental performance.  Applications should be accompanied by an assessment of the building’s current fabric and energy performance. For  relevant 
planning applications, details of post -construct ion monitoring in the form 
of a building monitoring and management strategy will be required to be submitted in order to assess the ongoing impact of the implemented measures on the asset’s historic fabric. Monitoring requirements will be proportionate to the significance of the asset and the scale and scope of 
works undertaken.  Where monitoring shows that interventions are causing harm to the significance of the asset, appropriate remediation works will be required.  
 
Supporting text:  
 Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  193 7.32 The Council is committed to tackling climate change and reducing the 
carbon emissions of Cambridge. At the same time, the Council is committed to conserving the city’s historic environment, particularly preserving and enhancing the character and appearance of its heritage assets. The Council’s aim, therefore, is to ensure a balanced approach between protecting the heritage assets of Cambridge and ensuring that they contribute to tackling climate change and reducing the carbon emissions of the city.  
 7.33 Due to the nature of construction of historic buildings, it would be difficult to match the performance of modern structures. However, vernacular design and traditional construction have evolved over time and deal with local conditions. Adaptive re- use of a building gives significant carbon 
savings in terms of embodied energy in the fabric of the building, so the focus will be on enhancing the performance of traditional buildings as much as practicable without damaging their significance. A cceptable 
levels  of in tervention will vary depe ndent upon the impact on th e 
significa nce of the heritage asset in question. Where works would harm 
the building's integrity or si gnifica nce, that harm will be weighed against 
the public benefit of the proposal . 
 
7.34 Applications for works to heritage assets will need to  demonstrate a 
thorough understanding of the building in question via the submission of the following information:  
• surveys of existing construction, to include walls, floors, ceilings and roofs;  
• submission of baseline energy consumption data before and after improvements have taken place;  
• measured data of existing environmental performance of the building’s fabric;  
• an indication of any national performance standards being targeted as a result of w orks; and  
• recommendations on the environmental performance measures to be implemented in order to achieve the standard.  
 
7.35 When considering ways to reduce a building’s carbon footprint, it is important that the energy hierarchy (see Section Four, Figure 4.2)  is 
adopted. Prior to looking at alternative means of generating energy, it is important to investigate and put into practice all possible means of conserving energy.  The Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers’ guidance on building services in historic buildings sets out four principal aims when seeking to enhance the sustainability of heritage assets:  
• Aim 1 – preserve historic fabric;  
• Aim 2 – extend the beneficial use of older buildings;  
• Aim 3 – reduce carbon emissions, using the hierarchical approach; 
and  
• Aim 4 – specify environmentally conscious materials.  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  194   
Policy 64: Shopfronts, signage and shop security measures  
 
Shopfront design, signage and proposals to improve shopfront security 
should:  
a. retain existing historic shopfronts and features of architectural and 
historic interest;  
b. respect the scale, proportions, character and materials of the whole building and, where appropriate, adjoining buildings and the wider streetscene;  
c. incorporate materials appropriate to the age and character  of the 
building; and  
d. have regard to the guidance on shopfronts and signage in Appendix H. 
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.36 High quality design is important to the success of Cambridge as a 
regional shopping centre and to maintain its thriving district and local centres . Many of the historic buildings in the city centre have traditional 
shopfronts, which often date from the 18th, 19th or early 20th centuries and many are listed buildings. Elsewhere in the conservation areas and in streets such as Mill Road, old shopfronts usually date from the late Victorian or Edwardian eras. Well -designed shopfronts and associated 
signage add to the character and quality of the city and play an important part in defining distinctive shopping areas. Shopfronts should be designed to provide active building frontages with display windows, which contributes to the vibrancy of the shopping area and provide visual interest in the streetscene. Signage should be subtle and complement the built environment.  
 7.37 Where proposals are located within the curtilage of a listed building, or 
within a conservation area, the design and materials will need to take into account the property or area’s character and appearance.  
 
Policy 65: Visual pollution 
 
Proposals for fixed and mobile advertising, street furniture, signage, 
telecommunications cabinets and other items that could constitute visual pollution within the public realm will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that:  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  195 a. they do not have an adverse impact on the character and setting of 
the area and its visual amenity;  
b. they do not impede pedestrian and vehicular movements or impact on public safety;  
c. they have a clearly defined purpose and avoid unnecessary clutter;  
d. they are in keeping with their setting, in terms of size, design, illumination , materials and colour; and  
e. consideration has been given to the cumulative impact of the proposals, with an emphasis on avoiding an accumulation of street clutter.  
 
The Council expects applicants to work collaboratively with Cambridgeshire County Council and infrastructure providers to minimise visual pollution by reducing street clutter and unnecessary signage.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.38 Visual pollution is the term given to unattractive and man- made visual 
elements of the built environment. Visual pollution is  an aesthetic issue, 
referring to the impacts of pollution that impair a person’s ability to enjoy a public vista or a view and it can have a negative impact on the attractiveness of an area, quality of life and the visitor economy.  
 7.39 Within the historic core of the city, and in its conservation areas particularly, visual pollution can have a significant impact on the character and setting of heritage assets, detracting from the special qualities of the city that make its historic environment of such international renown. Advertising signs, satellite dishes and street furniture are among the things that can contribute to visual pollution. Where planning permission is required, the Council will seek to ensure 
that proposals for advertisements, signage and street furniture are sympathetic to the character and setting of Cambridge and do not add to an accumulation of street and building clutter. A proactive approach 
will be taken to enforcement by the Council in collaboration with the 
highway authority.  
 7.40 The Council will be supportive of high quality materials and innovative design solutions and will look for the improvement of existing authorised signs and other items where the opportunity arises. Scope for reducing visual pollution and street clutter will be addressed through the development and introduction of a city centre public realm strategy 
supplementary planning document (SPD).  
  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  196 Policy 66: Paving over front gardens  
 
Proposals for the paving over of front gardens will only be permitted 
where it can be demonstrated that:  
a. there will be no adverse impact on surface water run- off, particularly 
for those areas of the city with high levels of surface water flooding;  
b. it will not have a negative impact on the character and setting of the immed iate area, particularly where applications fall within 
conservation areas or in the curtilage of a listed building; and  
c. it will not result in a net loss of biodiversity.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.41 The hard surfacing of front gardens to provide car parking can be harmful to the appearance of streets and the character of conservation areas, giving rise to the loss of walls and other features, which may have 
contributed positively to the character and appearance of an area. In 
addition, the replacement of front gardens with hard surfacing can place extra pressure on surface water drainage with the potential of increasing the risk of surface water flooding, can lead to the increased pollution of watercourses and can have a negative impact on biodiversity and the wider ecological networks of the city.  
 7.42 While planning permission is not required if a new or replacement driveway uses permeable (or porous) surfacing, permission is required where the surface to be covered is more than 5 sq m, or where a traditional impermeable driveway that does not provide f or water to run 
to a permeable area is proposed. Where permission is required, proposals will be assessed in terms of their impact on surface water flooding in an area, impact on the character and setting of an area, and whether they would result in a net loss of biodiversity. Information on areas of the city with high risks of surface water flooding can be obtained from the Council. It should be noted that under the Highways Act, it is illegal to drain water from front gardens/drives over the public footpath. The Council’s preference would be for permeable materials to be used, and further guidance is available in the Government’s guidance document, Guidance on the Permeable Surfacing of Front Gardens 
(2009).  
 
Policy 67: Protection of open space  
 
Development proposals will not be permitted which would harm the 
character of, or lead to the loss of, open space of environmental and/or recreational importance unless:  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  197 a. the open space can be satisfactorily replaced in terms of quality, 
quantity and access with an equal or better standard than that which is proposed to be lost; and  
b. the re- provision is located within a short walk (400m) of the original 
site. 
 In the case of school, college and university grounds, development may be permitted where it meets a demonstra ble educational need and does 
not adversely affect playing fields or other formal sports provision on the site. Where replacement open space is to be provided in an alternative location, the replacement site/facility must be fully available for use before the area of open space to be lost can be redeveloped.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.43 Open spaces, regardless of ownership, make a significant contribution to the character of Cambridge. These areas are also valuable in terms of supporting a range of city -wide strategies, such as supporting health 
and well -being, flood risk mitigation and climate change strategies. It is 
therefore essential that these spaces be protected while allowing improvements to their recreational capacity and/or environmental value.  
 7.44 Open spaces  protected under this policy are:  
• areas designated protected open space (POS) on the Policies Map; and 
• undesignated areas that fulfil at least one of the criteria to assess open space included in the plan (see Appendix I). This has separate criteria for environmental and recreational importance.  
 7.45 The Open Space and Recreation Strategy 2011 (as amended) includes an assessment of sites identified on the Policies Map. This shows whether each site is important for environmental and/or recreational reasons, according to the assessment criteria listed in Appendix I. It also identifies those wards with deficiencies in open space provision.  
 7.46 Previously unidentified sites/facilities qualify as protected open space if they meet one or more of the criteria. If an application is received which affects a site that may be worthy of protection, an assessment will be made of the site against the assessment criteria listed in Appendix I.  
 7.47 There is a clear presumption against the loss of open space of environmen tal or recreational importance. However, there may be 
circumstances where development proposals can enhance the character, use and visual amenity of open space, and provide ancillary recreational facilities, such as changing facilities, or materially improve the recreational or biodiversity value of the site. In the case of school, college and university grounds, there might be a legitimate educational Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  198 need that allows the potential for new educational buildings on parts of 
the site that are not in playing field or other formal sports use and could not readily be used as such (e.g. small areas of amenity grassland separated from the main playing field). Such proposals will be determined on a case- by-case basis on their merits and how they 
conform to sustainable development. Only proposals that respect the character of these areas and improve amenity, enhance biodiversity, improve sports facilities or increase public access will be supported. Further guidance is included in the Council’s Open Space and Recreat ion Strategy. Proposals should support relevant strategies, 
where possible, such as the Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy. Any proposal involving the loss of open space must include an assessment (using the criteria listed in Appendix I) to determine the important aspects of the site that should be retained within the new development, in agreement with the Council. As part of any planning application, applicants will need to clearly demonstrate how the proposal will minimise its impact on the sit e’s intrinsic qualities and where possible 
enhance the remaining part of the site. Due regard must also be given to any potential impact on the character and wider setting of the site.  
 7.48 Replacement sites/facilities should be no more than a short walk (400m ) 
from the site that is to be replaced unless it can be proved that a more accessible area of open space can be provided. Replacement sites/facilities should not increase any identified deficiencies in open space in the ward where the original site is located. Consideration should also be given to how they link with the wider ecological network and enhance biodiversity.  
 7.49 Indoor sports facilities are protected by Policy 73: Community, sports and leisure facilities.  
 7.50 As part of any planning application involving the loss or replacement of an outdoor sports site/facility, the results of any relevant planning tools provided by the relevant statutory organisation for sport or national sports association should be provided to support the planning proposal.  
 
Policy  68: Open space and recreation provision through new 
development  
 
All residential development proposals should contribute to the provision of open space and recreation sites/facilities on- site. The successful 
integration of open space into a proposed development should be considered early in the design process. The precise type of on- site 
provision required will depend on the size and location of the proposal and the existing open space provision in the area. Where there are deficiencies in certain types of  open space provision in the area 
surrounding a proposed development, the Council will seek variations in Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  199 the component elements to be provided by the developer in order to 
provide the type of open space most needed.  
 Requirements will be calculated using the Open Space and Recreation Standards (see Appendix I) and will have regard to the Council’s adopted Open Space and Recreation Strategy, Playing Pitch Strategy and Indoor Sports Facility Strategy.  
 Alternative provision off -site of open space may be acceptable in the 
following circumstances:  
a. if the proposed development site is of insufficient size in itself to make the appropriate provision (in accordance with Appendix I) feasible within the site; or,  
b. in exceptional circumstances, if taki ng into account the 
accessibility/capacity of existing open space sites/facilities and the circumstances of the surrounding area the open space needs of the proposed residential development can be met more appropriately by providing either new or enhanced provision off -site. 
 
Where appropriate, and subject to the Regulations in force at the time, the Council will seek to enter into a Section 106 agreement with the developer to implement the above, and for the future management and maintenance of the open sp ace provision, before granting planning 
permission.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.51 Open spaces, regardless of ownership, are a key aspect of high quality urban environments and are fundamental to the character of the city. Attractive, accessible and well -designed ope n space can support and 
enhance the appearance of an area, creating more desirable places to live and underpinning economic success. Open spaces and recreation facilities provide people with a place to relax and socialise as well as 
encouraging healthier lifestyles by providing opportunities for sport, 
informal play and daily encounters with the natural environment. An essential part of Cambridge’s character stems from the relationship between the city’s buildings and open spaces, with many of the open spac es following the River Cam and linked together with footpaths and 
cycle routes, forming an extensive green network, with frequent juxtaposition of public and private spaces of different sizes and functions.  
 
7.52 On-site provision in new major developments will  be considered the 
norm.  New major developments will need to meet their obligations on open space on- site, as opposed to relying on spare capacity within 
existing facilities.  This recognises the demand for additional sports and recreation facilities to meet the needs of a growing and increasingly active population.  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  200 7.53 Any new green spaces should be multi -functional. On- site open space 
provision should be completed before half of the residential dwellings are 
occupied, to ensure on -site provision is implemented in a timely manner. 
For large- scale residential developments, the S106 agreement should 
ensure the delivery of on- site provision is linked to the delivery of new 
residential units.  
 7.54 In assessing whether any open space that is provided in accordance with policy will be acceptable, the Council will take into account the need to ensure that the proposed site will keep potential nuisance to a minimum and that there is sufficient supervision and surveillance from homes for children’s play areas . Any on -site provision should be an integral part of 
the overall development scheme and therefore should be considered at the earliest stage of design.  
 
7.55 Provided that the size, location and site characteristics of open spaces are acceptable, they have bee n fully laid out in accordance with the 
Council's requirements and are in a satisfactory condition, the Council will normally be prepared to adopt and maintain them. For adoption purposes, developers will be required to enter into an agreement with the Council, which will include payment by the developer of a commuted sum to cover the costs of future maintenance of the open space site/facility.  
 7.56 Proposals that require the delivery of open space through new development should explain how the proposed on- site provision and off -
site contributions comply with the Open Space and Recreation Standards (Appendix I), Playing Pitch Strategy, Indoor Sports Facility Strategy and the adopted Open Space and Recreation Strategy.  
 7.57 The open space requirements for a specific development proposal will be based on the application of the standards, taking into account the current average household size for Cambridge, the type and size of dwellings proposed in the development and any particular needs identified in neighbourhood or  community plans for the area in which the 
development would take place.  
 7.58 The standards for the different types of open space should be applied in a cumulative way. However, the Council may seek variations in the composition of the open space in order to secure the best outcome for the development and the surrounding area, in particular on smaller, more constrained sites where it is not physically possible to deliver several different types of open spaces on- site. 
 
7.59 Where large windfall sites come forward which have not been accounted for in the Playing Pitch Strategy and the Indoor Sports Facility Strategy, applicants should provide a sports strategy (also known as a facilities development plan) setting out the details of specific facilities to be developed,  the rationale and need for these.  The process will involve Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  201 consultation with Sport England and the relevant National Governing 
Bodies for sport.  
 7.60 For developments generating more than one hectare of outdoor sports provision, outdoor facilities should be accompanied by ancillary facilities (e.g. changing rooms and car parking) proportionate to the size and type of outdoor facility provided. Changing rooms should be large enough to accommodate the ‘peak period’ use of the outdoor facilities concur rently. 
Outdoor sports and ancillary facilities should also be clustered together to minimise maintenance costs and maximise economies of scale to deliver high quality sports facilities.  
 
Policy 69: Protection of sites of biodiversity and geodiversity 
importance  
In determining any planning application affecting a site of biodiversity or 
geodiversity importance, development will be permitted if it will not have an adverse impact on, or lead to the loss of, part or all of a site identified on the Policies Map.  Regard must be had to the international, national or local status and designation of the site and the nature and quality of the site’s intrinsic features, including its rarity.  
 
Where development is permitted, proposals must include measures:  
a. to minimise harm;  
b. to secure achievable mitigation and/or compensatory measures; and  
c. where possible enhance the nature conservation value of the site affected through habitat creation, linkage and management.  
 In exceptional circumstances, where the importance  of the development 
outweighs the need to retain the site, adequate replacement habitat must be provided.  
 Any replacement habitat must be provided before development commences on any proposed area of habitat to be lost.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
7.61 In order to mini mise impacts on biodiversity and geodiversity, paragraph 
117 of the NPPF (2012) states that planning policies should identify and 
map components of the local ecological networks, including the hierarchy of international, national and locally designated sit es of 
importance for biodiversity, wildlife corridors and stepping stones that connect them and areas identified by local partnerships for habitat restoration or creation; and aim to prevent harm to geological conservation interests.  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  202  
7.62 Starting at the top of the hierarchy of sites of biodiversity and geodiversity 
importance, Cambridge does not currently have any sites of European importance for habitats and species.  However, in line with paragraph 118 of the NPPF (2012), any potential Ramsar sites, Special Protection Areas or Special Areas of Conservation would need to be given the same protection as European sites and permission would not normally be granted where there would be an adverse effect on these sites.  Plans or projects which may have a likely si gnificant effect on a European site 
will require appropriate assessment under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010 (as amended).  
 
7.63 Within Cambridge, there are a number of nationally and locally recognised nature conservation sites, which form an important element 
of the character and setting of the city. These sites include two Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), which are designated for their national biodiversity or geodiversity value. SSSIs are statutorily protected by their designation under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006. Natural England will be consulted on any planning application in or adjacent to a SSSI.  The Council will not normally grant permission for any proposal which causes significant harm to a SSSI.  
 7.64 The Council has declared 12 Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) on land that it owns and manages, including a number of the city’s commons.  LNRs are statutorily designated by local authorities under Section 21 of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949. County Wildlife Sites (CWSs) and City Wildlife Sites (CiWSs) also include a number of the city’s commons. They do not have statutory protection. They have been selected as sites of  substantive nature conservation interest, 
against published criteria, as a result of surveys undertaken initially by the local Wildlife Trust for the Council and maintained by the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Environmental Records Centre (CPERC). Other  undesignated green spaces also make up the 
ecological network of sites across the city and would be subject to this policy, if they identified as meeting the criteria for city or county wildlife site status.  
 7.65 The policy will ensure that development would only be supported where it can be adequately demonstrated that proposals will not have an adverse effect on biodiversity; and that, where required, suitable mitigation measures are acceptable and deliverable. In addition, the potential for the enhancement of the site and adjacent habitats should also be explored. Proposals on or adjacent to a site of local conservation importance should not be granted without proper consideration of  the 
potential to enhance the designated site’s biodiversity through enhanced management, habitat creation or the formation of new linkages with adjacent habitat areas.  
 Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  203 7.66 Development on locally protected sites that would have a significant 
adverse impact should only be permitted in exceptional circumstances, and only if it is possible to compensate for the damage caused. Planning proposals for locally designated nature conservation sites must conserve and/or enhance biodiversity. Where development is proposed within, adjoining or which will otherwise affect a locally -designated nature 
conservation site, comprehensive surveys of the historic and existing biodiversity importance, a professional ecological assessment of the impact of the proposed development and details of measures to protect and enhance the habitat or species identified will be required.  
 7.67 Where full protection cannot be satisfactorily achieved, it is for the developer to demonstrate that there is potential to achieve biodiversity of equal worth through appropriate habitat management, enhancement and creation, and relocating flora and/or fauna. The developer must show where, and specify how, this can be achieved and provide proven case studies and a management plan to demonstrate long- term success.  
 7.68 Emphasis should be placed on local habitat action plans (LHAPs) and local species action plans (LSAPs). Where development is permitted, 
planning obligations or conditions will be required to ensure damage to the nature conservation value of the site or feature is kept to a minimum and agreed mitigation and compensatory measures  are implemented.  
  
Policy 70: Protection of priority species and habitats  
 
Development will be permitted which:  
a. protects priority species and habitats; and  
b. enhances habitats and populations of priority species.  
 
Proposals that harm or disturb populations and habitats should:  
c. minimise any ecological harm; and  
d. secure achievable mitigation and/or compensatory measures, 
resulting in either no net loss or a net gain of priority habitat and local populations of priority species.  
 
Where development is  proposed within or adjoining a site hosting priority 
species and habitats, or which will otherwise affect a national priority species or a species listed in the national and Cambridgeshire-specific biodiversity action plans (BAPs), an assessment of the following will be required:  
e. current status of the species population;  
f. the species’ use of the site and other adjacent habitats;  
g. the impact of the proposed development on legally protected species, national and Cambridgeshire- specific BAP species and their 
habitats; and  
h. details of measures to fully protect the species and habitats identified.  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  204  
If significant harm to the population or conservation status of a protected 
species, priority species or priority habitat resulting from a development cannot be avoided,  adequately mitigated, or, as a last resort, 
compensated for, then planning permission will be refused.  
  
Supporting text:  
 
7.69 The Natural Environment and Rural Communities (NERC) Act, which 
came into force in 2006, requires the Secretary of State to publish a list of habitats and species which are of principal importance for the conservation of biodiversity in England. Known as the Section 41 list, this should be used to guide decision makers in implementing their duty under Section 40 of the NERC act to have regard to the conservation of 
biodiversity in England when carrying out their normal functions.  Most of the priority species that occur in or have the potential to colonise Cambridge have also been included in the Cambridgeshire Biodiversity Action Plan.  
 
Table 7.1: Priority habitats and species found within Cambridge  
Priority habitats  
• lowland calcareous grassland  
• lowland meadows  
• wet woodland  
• ancient / and species -rich hedgerows; and lowland mixed 
deciduous woodland  
• open mosaic habitats (often associated with brownfield sites)  
Priority species  
• great crested newt  
• water vole  
• otter 
• common Pipistrelle, Daubenton’s, long -eared and Noctule bats  
• song thrush  
• skylark  
• brown hare  
 The lists above are not exhaustive.  
 Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  205 7.70 The following additional habitats found within Cambridge have also been 
identified as local priorities for action in the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Biodiversity Action Plan:  
• rivers and streams (within Cambridge this would include the River Cam and its tributaries);  
• floodplain grassland (this would include Cambridge’s commons);  
• veteran trees, including pollard willow (particularly along the River Cam);  
• scrub; and  
• drainage ditches and ponds.  
 7.71 Cambridge also holds nationally important populations of a few species, including moon carrot, which is found at the Cherry Hinton Pit SSSI.  
 7.72 Proposals that will potentially affect a protected habitat or species or a species or habitat listed in Cambridgeshire's Biodiversity Action Plans will require sufficient up -front informatio n (listed in criteria e –h of Policy 
70) to assess the impact on local biodiversity.  
 
7.73 The aim of any proposal should be to leave any protected species in situ. 
If this is not possible the species population may be transferred to an alternative location, as long as it can be demonstrated that no harm will occur to the population being moved or to the species and habitats of the receptor site. A management plan must be provided to show how this will be achieved in the long term. Any relocation of species must be completed before any development commences and secured through appropriate planning conditions.  
 7.74 By preventing or mitigating the effects of developments that will directly or indirectly impact upon rare or vulnerable species or habitats, this option will help to conserve threatened biodiversity. This is likely to contribute to the quality of green and open space city -wide, along with 
wider potential benefits from ecosystem service provision. New developments should have regard for and maximise opportunit ies to 
incorporate features that support biodiversity (see Appendix J).  
 
Policy 71: Trees  
Development will not be permitted which involves felling, significant surgery (either now or in the foreseeable future) and potential root damage to trees of amenity or other value, unless there are demonstrable public benefits accruing from the proposal which clearly outweigh the current and future amenity value of the trees.  
 Development proposals should:  
a. preserve, protect and enhance existing trees and hedges that have amenity value as perceived from the public realm;  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  206 b. provide appropriate replacement planting, where felling is proved 
necessary; and  
c. provide sufficient space for trees and other vegetation to mature.  
 Particular consideration should be given to vet eran or ancient trees, as 
defined by Natural England, in order to preserve their historic, ecological and amenity value.  
  
Supporting text:  
7.75 Cambridge has a large number of trees in public open spaces, and on 
private and highway land. To maintain this natural asset, due consideration and protection of existing trees and hedges must be demonstrated.  
 7.76 Trees on or affected by development sites are a material consideration in the determination of applications. They are an important facet of the townscape and landscape and the maintenance of a healthy and species diverse tree cover brings a range of benefits for health, well -being, social 
and microclimate.  
 
7.77 When assessing development close to trees, the health of the trees both in the present and the future should be considered. For example, 
providing habitable rooms close to maturing trees may result in a need for significant surgery to the trees in the future, which would have been avoided if the building had been located to give the tree room to grow at the outs et. 
 7.78 The management of trees requires great care and forethought, therefore a tree management plan should be provided where trees are retained on-site. There are occasions where felling or significant surgery to trees 
is acceptable. In such cases, the amenity value of the tree, its condition and potential life will be weighed against the safety from its removal, the 
protection of other important site features or any more general benefits 
of a new development. When felling is approved, the replanting of an appropriate tree species in the vicinity will normally be required.  
 
7.79 The benefit of trees in the urban environment is now well documented and can be summarised as follows:  
• for the environment, trees can reduce the urban heat island effect and sequester carbon, provide shade and make streets cooler in the summer, increase biodiversity, reduce the effect of flooding, improve air quality, reduce dust particles and reduce traffic noise;  
• for people, trees provide focal points, landmarks and a sense of place. They also have a positive impact on physical and mental well -
being; and  Section Seven: Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge   
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  207 • for the local economy, trees offer benefits through having the 
potential to increase residential and commercial property value by between 7 per cent and 15 per cent by improving the local environment. The economy also benefits through improvements to the environmental performance of buildings due to cost reduction in heating and cooling.  
 
7.80 Space for existing and replacement trees to thrive and mature should be allowed for within developm ents. Streets should be designed to have 
adequate set -backs to buildings to allow for a variation of tree species 
sizes in proportion to the street and the buildings. Opportunities to plant large species trees should be maximised with the use of adequate building set -backs, efficient and combined utilities routes and root cell 
systems for rooting volume.  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  208   
Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  209 Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
8.1 Cambridge acts as an important destination for shopping, tourism, 
cultural, arts and recreational pursuits. Not only is the city one of the most popular destinations in the United Kingdom for tourists, it also serves as a regional destination for retail, arts and other leisure activities. These facilities help provide and maintain a vibrant city and attract and retain students and local people who may want to use them.  
 8.2 At a more local scale, the various district, neighbourhood and local centres distributed around the city provide a range of local services and community facilities that serve the day -to-day needs of residents and 
visitors. 
 8.3 The broad range of services and facilities available mak es an important 
contribution to the vibrant and diverse character of the city and its charm as a place to inhabit and visit.  It is therefore essential that these facilities be given careful consideration with regard to any related development proposal that may affect their provision.  
  
Policy 72: Development and change of use in district, local and 
neighbourhood centres  
 
Within the boundary of district, local and neighbourhood centres, as 
defined on the Policies Map, new A1 (shop) uses will be permitted if  
they are in proportion to the scale and function of the centre.  
 Proposals for other centre uses, as defined in Table 8.1 within this policy will be permitted provided:  
a. they complement the retail function and maintain or add to the vitality, viability and  diversity of the centre;  
b. provision is made for an active frontage, such as a window display, which is in keeping with the character of the shopping area; and  
c. they would not give rise to a detrimental effect, individually or cumulatively, on the character or amenity of the area through smell, litter, noise or traffic problems.  
 
Changes of use from A1 to another centre use (as set out in Table 8.1) will be permitted where the development would satisfy the above criteria and additionally:  
d. in district centres  – the number of properties in A1 use would not 
fall below 55 per cent (measured as a proportion of the total number of units within the ‘A’ use classes in the district centre); and  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  210 e. in local and neighbourhood centres  – an appropriate mix and 
balance of uses is retained which will provide for the day -to-day 
needs of local people.  
 
The loss of centre uses  at ground  floor level to non -centr e uses will not be 
permit ted, unless it is demonst rated tha t the use is no longer viabl e, by 
evidenc e of ac tive marketing f or at least 12 mo nths, sh owing th at the 
premises are not r easonably capable of being used or r edeveloped for a 
centre use.  
 
Reside ntial and stude nt accommoda tion, offi ces and communi ty facilitie s 
are supported on  upper  floors  provided that the use would have a safe 
and convenient access and would not inhibit the func tioning of the gr ound 
floor use. 
 
In district centres, small units should not be joined t ogether to make a 
larger unit unless it can be sho wn tha t this would add to the vitality or 
viabilit y of the cent re. 
 
Table 8.1: Uses suitable on all floors in centres and those not 
suitable at ground floor level in centres  
 
Centre uses (uses suitable on all 
floors in centres)  Non-centre uses (uses 
not suitable at ground 
floor level in centres)  
Shops (A1 uses)  Business uses, including 
offices and research and 
development (B1)  
Financial and professional services (A2 
uses) General industry (B2)  
Cafés and restaurants (A3 uses)  Storage and distribution 
(B8) 
Drinking establishments (A4 uses)  Residential institutions (C2 
and C2a)  
Takeaways (A5 uses)  Residential (C3)  
Hotels (C1 uses)  Houses in multiple 
occupation (C4)  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  211 Non-residential institutions such as 
healthcare, nurseries, schools, libraries 
and places of worship (D1 uses)  Other ‘sui generis’ uses  
Assembly and leisure (D2 uses)   
Certain ‘sui generis’ uses typically found 
in centres, including theatres, nightclubs, amusement arcades, 
launderettes, tattooists, beauty parlours
  
 
Supporting text:  
 
8.4 District centres are important in providing for day -to-day needs close to 
where people live and work. They are the second tier of the centres hierarchy, and are characterised by the range of shops and facilities they offer that would appeal to a larger catchment than local centres. All of the centres have a supermarket or large convenience store and most include other facilities, such as a community centre, church, doctors’ surgery or library. The district centres also include a large range of services, including cafés, restaurants, pubs, takeaways, banks and estate agents.  
 
8.5 Although permission may be granted for the change of use of A1 shops to other uses acceptable in a centre, this is provided that the level of shops does not fall below 55 per cent in the district  centre. This is in 
order to maintain a predominant shopping focus in the district centres, while recognising that there should be flexibility in order to take account of market conditions and to maintain vitality and viability. Applicants should provide evidence with their application to show that the development would not result in the proportion of A1 uses in the district centre falling below 55 per cent. The percentage of A1 units is measured as a proportion of the total number of units falling within the ‘A’ classes (i.e. A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5) within the centre. Change of use to other uses such as residential or other commercial uses such as offices will not be permitted unless there are exceptional circumstances.  
 
8.6 In order to encourage a diversity of uses within the district centres and to maintain their character, the plan resists the joining together of small units, which are often occupied by small independent traders, to make a larger unit. Policies in Section Three of the plan relate to other opportunities for improvement to be made to the Mill Road and Mitcham’s Corner district centres.  
 Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  212 8.7 Local and neighbourhood centres are particularly valuable in providing 
for everyday needs, and need to be protected and enhanced. This network of centres is important in providing shops and facilities that can be accessed by foot and bicycle rather than having to travel by car.  
 
8.8 Greater flexibility is provided in relation to new development and change of use in local and neighbourhood centres, to reflect the fact that a mix of uses is important in these smaller centres. Flexibility is also required in order to take account of market conditions and to maintain vitality and viability of the centres.  
 
8.9 As centres are often surrounded by residential properties, it is important that the potential effects of food and drink uses (use classes A3, A4 and A5), such as restaurants, pubs and takeaways are considered in relation to local amenity. In particular, the cumulative effect of the proposed use with ex isting uses needs to be considered.  
 
Policy 73: Community, sports and leisure facilities  
New facilities  
 
New or enhanced community, sports or leisure facilities will be permitted 
if: 
a. the range, quality and accessibility of facilities are improved;  
b. there is a local need for the facilities; and  
c. the facility is in close proximity to the people it serves.  
 
New city -wide or sub- regional community, sports or leisure facilities 
should also:  
d. be permitted if they are provided in sustainable locations;  
e. comply  with the National Planning Policy Framework’s sequential 
approach
44; 
f. demonstrate the need for the proposal within the catchment area it is expected to serve;  
g. demonstrate that it would not have a negative impact upon the vitality and viability of the city centre, including its evening economy; and  
h. where possible, include in the proposal facilities which are open to the wider community, to enhance both accessibility and the range of facilities available.  
 
Proposals for new and improved sports and leisure facilities will be supported where they improve the range, quality and access to facilities both within Cambridge and, where appropriate, in the sub- region. 
Proposals should have regard to the Playing Pitch Strategy and Indoor Sports Facility Strategy.  This policy is relevant to a wide range of facilities from health clubs that serve parts of the city to leisure and sports 
 
44 Paragraph 24 of the National Planning Policy Framework  (2012)  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  213 provision that serve the city and sub- region, such as a concert hall, 
community sports stadium and sports complex.  In securing a suitable 
location for city -wide or sub- regional facilities, developers will be 
expected to demonstrate use of the sequential test in considering sites 
for development.  
Loss of facilities  
 
The loss of a facility or site that was last in use as a communit y, sports 
or leisure facility will only be permitted if it is demonstrated that:  
i. the facility/site can be replaced within the new development or 
relocated to at least its existing scale, range, quality and accessibility for its users. For leisure uses, it should satisfy peak period need; or  
j. the facility/site is no longer needed.  
 In providing evidence that a facility/site is no longer needed, the guidance in Appendix K of the plan should be adhered to. The redevelopment of school sites for other uses will be permitted only if it can be demonstrated that they are not required in the longer term for continued educational use.  
 
Facilities provided as part of development  
 
Mixed -use development proposals which provide on- site community 
and/or leisure facilities w ill be permitted where these are of a type 
appropriate to the scale of the development and to meeting the needs of 
future residents, employees and visitors.  
 In the case of urban extensions and large- scale regeneration schemes, 
this should be in the form of a new, dedicated community centre and, where necessary, education and childcare facilities. For medium and smaller -scale developments in the city, the facilities required will be at 
the neighbourhood or local level, usually a community house or room . 
 
Supporting text:  
 8.10 For the definition of community facilities, see Table 8.2. Leisure facilities are defined in Table 8.3, with three broad categories: sports, arts and culture, and entertainment. The policy is applicable to existing facilities and sites last used for community, sports or leisure purposes, in order to avoid situations where these facilities are lost through demolition without any planned replacement facility.  
 8.11 Community, sports and leisure facilities/sites perform an important role by stim ulating and supporting social cohesion and interaction. It is 
therefore important that new and replacement facilities support new and existing communities, respectively. These should also facilitate the growth of the city by providing sufficient capacity t o accommodate Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  214 community need and demand. Wider sports and leisure facilities should 
also be considered in appropriate areas of major change or other locations.  
 
8.12 New and replacement community facilities should be, as far as reasonable and where possible, multi- functional.  
 
8.13 As part of plan- making, a process was developed with South 
Cambridgeshire to jointly assess appropriate sites in both areas for a community stadium within the sub- region. No suitable site was identified. 
However, subsequently the Councils have also worked together with Sport England to produce a Playing Pitch Strategy and an Indoor Sports Facilities Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire to 2031. Neither of these strategies assessed the need for a community stadium.  
 
8.14 Proposals for new and replacement facilities will be supported where there is a local need. This need will be demonstrated through a local needs assessment. This is particularly important where existing deficits in community or leisure provision have already been identi fied. The 
relocation of facilities that serve the whole city should be retained within the city (this can include areas within the continuous Cambridge urban area, but outside the city boundary). This should minimise the need for existing facility users to  have to travel beyond the city to access the new 
facility, unless it is demonstrated that a site outside the city has high quality public transport accessibility and will be easily reached by Cambridge’s residents. City and sub- regional scale facilities s hould, at 
the earliest possible planning stage, consider opportunities to include additional community and/or leisure facilities accessible to the public in order to increase the public benefit of such schemes.  Flexible buildings such as community centres  or halls should be designed to accommodate 
as many different community or leisure activities as possible.  This would enable shared use, for example dual use of school halls and sports facilities.  
 
8.15 The requirement in the policy regarding loss of a facility/site over whether the facility is still needed will be tested by:  
• the marketing of the facility/site for a minimum 12 months. Community and sporting, arts/cultural or entertainment leisure facilities/sites should be marketed for a similar category of the facility 
that will be lost (see Table 8.3); and  
• the completion of an independent local needs assessment (funded by the applicant) demonstrating there is no longer a need for the facility/site. This should also include an independent requirements assessmen t (funded by the applicant) detailing how comparable, 
alternative facilities/sites of similar accessibility for its users can satisfy the existing need.  
 8.16 As part of any application involving the loss of a facility/site, developers will be expected to provide adequate evidence regarding:  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  215 • the level of demand from other organisations providing a comparable 
facility/site;  
• a lack of local need; and  
• accessibility to alternative facilities/sites for users, including the capacity of alternative facilities, in order to justify the loss of a 
community facility.  
 8.17 The following information will be required:  
• details of site marketing attempts made to attract other community uses for which the premises are suitable, including details of all offers received; and  
• demonstration of site accessibility to users by all means of transport including foot and cycle; and  
• details of current or most recent use of facilities/sites;  
• evidence of spare capacity or agreement to accommodate displaced users at other equiv alent community/leisure facilities with similar 
accessibility for users. For existing leisure facilities, in the absence of a robust district -wide needs assessment/capacity assessment, the 
applicant will be expected to carry out such an assessment at their  
own cost; and  
• a local survey to establish the level of interest in and viability of the continued use of the premises as a community facility.  
 8.18 New and replacement city -wide and sub- regional facilities will need to 
demonstrate:  
• a need for the proposal within the catchment area they will serve; and, 
• where facilities are located outside the city centre, how these facilities will not have an adverse impact on the city centre.  
 8.19 The conversion of existing community facilities to, or dual use as, performance and other cultural (D2) space, where appropriate, will be 
supported on their merits on a case- by-case basis.  
 
8.20 It is important that when new developments generate the need for community facilities, the need is met by on- site provision, where 
possib le. 
 
8.21 Childcare facilities include nurseries, integrated nursery centres, playgroups, crèches and child- minding networks, whether public or 
private. The provision of such facilities is important to increase economic activity rates, to minimise travel distances, to improve the quality of life of parents and children, and to reduce social exclusion.  
 
8.22 The provision of any community room or café should be marketed
45 for 
these purposes only (agreed in an applicable planning obligation) with any proposed community  enterprise (e.g. a café) linked to the financial 
 
45 Any asking price( s) and, or rental charge(s) should be commensurate to the type and size of the 
community facility.  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  216 support and on- going operation of the community room/space provided. 
This should provide a flexible means of supporting new small -scale 
community spaces.  
 
8.23 Good quality leisure and sport facilities support and encourage people 
to lead healthy lifestyles, raising the quality of life for local residents. Similarly, leisure, art, cultural and entertainment facilities provide a vibrant and culturally diverse range of facilities, not only for local people of diffe rent age groups, compatible with the city’s cultural diversity but 
also for people who live outside Cambridge. These facilities also help attract people to the city as a place to work, study and live.  
 8.24 New leisure entertainment facilities outside the city centre should complement and not compete with the city centre. Therefore, such proposals outside the city centre will require an independent impact assessment (funded by the developer) that assesses the likely impact of any new proposal on the city centre.  Where sports facilities are provided 
through educational development, community use should be secured.  
 
8.25 As part of any planning application involving the loss or replacement of an indoor sports facility, consideration will be given to outputs from Sport England's strategic planning tools such as the Facilities Planning Model 
and the Active Places Power website
46 in assessing the impact of the 
proposed loss. Replacement leisure facilities must comply with the relevant sports design guidance and avoid any net reduction in leisure facilities.  
 
Table 8.2: Definition of community facilities  
 
Community facilities include:  
• Uses in class D147 (non-residential institutions), except university 
teaching accommodation. Core class D1 uses include:  
o the provision of traditional and complementary medical or health services, except for the use of premises ancillary to the home of the consultant;  
o the provision of education;  
o a crèche, day nursery or playgroup;  
o a place of worship or religious instruction;  
o a community centre, public hall or meeting place; and  
o a public library  
• A local retail unit or public house (Note: safeguarded public houses are specifically addressed by Policy 76).  
• The following sub- categories of class C2 (residential institutions):  
o hospitals, residential schools, colleges or training centres; and  
 
46 www.activeplacespower.com  
47 Use Classes Order (as amended)  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  217 o other use s that provide either a community service or a public 
utility such as facilities for the emergency services, public toilets 
and court buildings.  
N.B. The lists of uses are not exhaustive.  
 
Categories not included in the definition:  
• Any facility on the Comm unity Asset Register that is beyond the 
definition of a community facility. The Community Asset Register is 
a list of assets subject to community ‘right -to-bid’ rules and is a 
separate process to the planning process  
• University teaching accommodation, language schools and tutorial colleges, veterinary surgeries  
• Leisure sports and entertainment facilities, including arts and 
cultural facilities such as museums, performance venues and 
theatres  
• Outdoor children’s play areas are addressed by open spaces and recreation policies in Section Seven  
• Specialist housing, including residential care homes and nursing 
homes are dealt with in Section Six  
 
Table 8.3: List of community facility and leisure categories  
 
Category of 
provision  Example uses (not exhaustive). A use may fall 
into more than one category depending on the 
area it serves  
Local  • A community or civic room  
Neighbourhood  • Community house – typically the size of an 
average three- bed house – or community hall  
• Primary school  
• Day nursery  
District  • Public library  
• Primary care facility  
• Community centre and other shared use/services buildings  
• Function room  
• Secondary school  
• Place of worship  
City-wide • Acute health care  
• Civic and court buildings  
• Colleges and universities  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  218 Leisure 
category  Example uses (not exhaustive)  
Leisure sports  Leisure sport facilities allow for supervised, organised 
or competitive sports, primarily indoors. Facilities 
include sports stadia, ice rinks, sports halls, boxing 
centres, badminton and squash courts, swimming 
pools (including outdoor), gymnasiums, indoor 
bowling centres, indoor tennis centres, health and 
fitness centres  
Leisure arts 
and culture  Arts and cultural uses such as concert halls, 
performance venues and theatres, cinemas, ten- pin 
bowling alleys, punting stations, museums and 
galleries  
Leisure 
entertainment  Nightclubs, snooker/pool halls, bowling alleys  
 
  
Policy 74: Education facilities  
 
New or enhanced education facilities will be permitted if:  
a. the scale, range, quality and accessibility of education facilities are 
improved;  
b. they are located in the area they are expected to serve;  
c. they mitigate the impact of any associated residential development; and 
d. they comply with the strategic objectives of the Children’s Services Autho rity. 
 The Council will work with the Children’s Services Authority to provide high quality and convenient local education services in all parts of Cambridge, but particularly in areas of population growth.  
 Developers should engage with the Children’s Services Authority at the earliest opportunity and work cooperatively to ensure the phasing of residential development and appropriate mitigation is identified in a timely manner to ensure appropriate education provision can be secured.  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  219  
Planning permission will be granted for new education facilities in 
locations accessible by walking, cycling and public transport, where this will meet an existing deficiency, and support regeneration or new development.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
8.26 Education in this section relates to early years, primary, secondary and 
further education provision for all children and young people, including those with special educational needs and/or disabled people, where residential elements may form part of the provision. Higher educatio n 
and other types of education such as language schools are not included in this definition of education.  
 8.27 Easy access to good quality educational provision is important for supporting economic growth, developing strong sustainable communities, promoting economic prosperity and sustaining quality of life. It is therefore appropriate for new residential development to contribute towards the cost of education provision, either towards the expansion of existing facilities, or in some cases towards the funding of a new school, through planning obligations and the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) as appropriate. Developers of residential sites should engage with Cambridgeshire County Council, as the Children’s Services Authority, at the earliest opportunity, t o ensure appropriate 
education provision is delivered in a timely manner.  
 
8.28 Cambridgeshire County Council has the statutory duty, established through the Education Act 1996, to secure sufficient state- funded school 
places for all children and young people of statutory school age (5- 16) 
who want one. The Childcare Act 2005 and Education Act 2011 introduced the duty to commission early years provision and post -16 
provision respectively. The Education Act 2011 also changed the County 
Council’s traditional role of providing school places into a commissioning 
role with enhanced emphasis on the County Council working in partnership with a wide variety of education providers.  
 
8.29 To ensure consistency and equity in school place planning across Cambridgeshire, the Count y Council has adopted principles to underpin 
commissioning school places. Although recent legislative and policy changes have resulted in a different approach to education planning, the principles set out below remain appropriate:  
 
a. new schools should provide high quality education provision;  
b. there should be minimal disruption to existing communities as a result of changes in provision;  
c. schools should play a central role in the communities they serve;  Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  220 d. schools should be located, where possible, within the statutory 
walking distance of the communities they serve;  
• 2 miles for primary school age pupils (4– 10 years old); and  
• 3 miles for secondary school age pupils (11– 15 years old); and  
e. Cambridge pupils should be able to attend a school in the city if they so choose.  
 8.30 In terms of primary education, Cambridgeshire County Council has recently expanded a number of existing schools and built two new primary schools, Queen Emma Primary School and Chesterton Primary School, to meet demand from both increased birth rates and new developments. Cambridgeshire County Council continues to work with education providers to identify means of securing the additional places needed to address existing and future basic educational requirements across the city.  
 
8.31 In terms of secondary provision, Cambridgeshire County Council has identified significant pressure on existing secondary school capacity in the city, as a result of recent housing development and demographic changes. Cambridgeshire County Counc il is working with Cambridge’s 
education providers to identify options for increasing capacity in the city up to 2018 with a secondary school in Trumpington scheduled to open in September 2015. From 2018, there is forecast to be further significant pressur e on places. Cambridgeshire County Council will, in partnership 
with existing providers, undertake an extensive review of provision post -
2018 to identify appropriate solutions for securing the additional capacity required.  
 8.32 The Council will work with Cambr idgeshire County Council, as the local 
education authority, to ensure that school places are made available to all new residents in appropriate locations and in a timely manner, including regular partnership reviews of where school places will be needed in the future. Educational facilities will be expected, where 
appropriate and/or possible reflecting Cambridgeshire County Council’s commissioning role, to also include provision for community use, for example through making multi -use facilities accessible to the wider 
community.  
8.33 New education facilities should be located in highly accessible locations with good quality footpaths and cycleways to encourage sustainable travel to and from the school by teachers, parents and pupils.  
   Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  221 Policy 75: Healthcare facilities  
 
New or enhanced healthcare facilities will be permitted if:  
a. the scale, range, quality and accessibility of healthcare facilities 
would be improved;  
b. they are located in the area they are expected to serve; and  
c. where possible and appropriate they are co- located with 
complementary services.  
 
The Council will work with the relevant health organisations to provide high quality and convenient local health services in all parts of Cambridge, but particularly in areas of population growt h. 
 Planning permission will be granted for new primary healthcare facilities in locations accessible by road, by walking, by cycling and by public transport, where this will meet an existing deficiency, or support regeneration or new development.  
 
Support ing text: 
 
8.34 It is essential that the planning process supports the provision of good local healthcare facilities of the right type and in the right locations. The provision and location of community -based, out -of hospital, health- care 
should aim to meet the needs of existing and new residents.  The impact 
of household and student growth should not worsen healthcare provision for existing residents.  Healthcare facilities, for the purposes of this policy, do not include teaching hospitals, which are covered by Policy 43, on university development.  
 8.35 Over recent years, there has been considerable change in the way health care services are delivered, with an ongoing shift away from hospital settings into community based settings, delivering services as close to home as possible. Advancements in medicine and technology have also had considerable impact on the way services are delivered and what can now be delivered outside of hospitals.  
 
8.36 The shift in location and delivery of services also requires more flexibility in planning agreements and the detailed planning and procurement of health facilities. One key principle that should be considered is the co-location of non- NHS community, voluntary sector and commercial 
spaces alongside primary and community care services if their addition accords with the philosophy of care and can improve affordability/accessibility.  
 
8.37 Co-locating services may provide benefits including: a focal point for the 
community, promotion of healthy lifestyles as part of an integrated health Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  222 and community care approach, better connectivity with other services 
and opening up new possibilities for residents, increased building/site usage, the creation of a critical mass of linked services, increased convenience for users, improved funding; and more sustainable transport links. Examples of co- located facilities include those already 
built in Cambourne and in the planning for Northstowe, Cambridge Southern Fringe and North West Cambridge.  
 
Policy 76: Protection of public houses  
 
The loss of a safeguarded public house including its site (listed in 
Appendix C) will only be permitted if it can be demonstrated that:  
a. the public house site is no longer needed within the community as a public house or other form of community facility, in line with t he 
guidance set out in Appendix K of the plan. Applicants should provide evidence that the public house has been marketed for 12 months as a public house, free of tie and for alternative local commercial (A class use) or community facility use, at a market  price following 
independent professional valuation (paid for by the developer) and that there has been no interest in either the freehold or leasehold, either as a public house, restaurant or other use falling within the A use classes or as a community facility falling within D1 use class;  
b. that all reasonable efforts have been made to preserve the facility (including all diversification options explored – and evidence has 
been supplied to illustrate this) but that it has been proven (by an independent ass essment paid for by the developer) that it would not 
be economically viable to retain the building or site for its existing or any other A or D1 class use; and  
c. that it has been otherwise demonstrated that the local community no longer needs the public hous e and alternative provision is available 
in the area.  
 
The loss of any part of a public house, or its curtilage will be permitted if 
it can be demonstrated that:  
d. the viability of the public house use will not be adversely affected, 
sufficient cellarage, beer garden, parking and dining/kitchen areas will remain to retain a viable public house operation; and  
e. the loss including associated development will not detract from the prevailing character and appearance of the area, including where the building is of m erit or has any distinctive architectural features.  
 
Supporting text:  
 8.38 Public houses are an important part of Cambridge’s culture and character, fostering social interaction and local community life, often the Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  223 focal point of a neighbourhood or street. The quality of Cambridge’s 
hostelries is a key part of the city’s quality of life. This underlines that pubs are an important part of the Cambridge economy, not just for the direct and indirect jobs they provide in the pub supplies, food and brewin g industries, but in supporting the city’s main industries and quality 
of life by attracting and providing a meeting place for students, academics, scientists and entrepreneurs, and in attracting office workers, shoppers and tourists.  
 8.39 The Cambridge Public  House Study (2012) identified a relative 
undersupply of pubs in Cambridge compared with the national average and comparable towns; this is most apparent in the suburbs of the city. Pubs provide facilities/space for recreation and leisure activities, including pub quizzes, darts competitions, pool leagues, political and 
academic discussion and debate, live music performances, meetings of local interest groups and community events. Pubs are therefore valued and culturally important institutions that should b e protected. The 
Cambridge Public House Study (2012) recommended a minimum public house capacity of 750 working- age adults within a 400m -catchment 
radius.  
 8.40 The policy adopts a flexible approach, suggested in the 2012 study, allowing pubs to change use to other A class uses, such as shops, professional services and restaurants, and for such uses to change back to pub use where there is a market. This provides flexibility for those pubs struggling to change to alternative business uses, while retaining the vibrancy and use of the site as a local commercial community facility that could be returned to pub use in the future if there were a change in the market.  
 8.41 It is important that public houses are not lost due to deliberate neglect, in particular those of heritage value. In cases where a planning application concerns a heritage asset and there is evidence of deliberate neglect or damage, the deteriorated state of the heritage asset will not be taken into account in any planning decision.  
 8.42 When considering prop osals for the development of part of a pub, its car 
parking areas, dining areas, cellarage or pub gardens, the Council will require supporting evidence explaining how the development proposal will support and not undermine the viability of the pub.  
 8.43 Develo pers will need to provide an independent professional 
assessment (funded by the developer) by a professional Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) valuer with expertise in the licensed leisure sector and who is not also engaged to market the prop erty. Any 
proposals to convert or redevelop a former public house site (listed in Appendix C, designations schedule) subsequently converted to a different class A use to a non- A use, will still be subject to protection.  
 Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  224 8.44 The list of safeguarded public hous e sites will be monitored in the 
Council’s annual monitoring report.  
 
Policy 77: Development and expansion of visitor accommodation  
 
Proposals for high quality visitor accommodation will be supported as 
part of mixed- use schemes at:  
a. Old Press/Mill Lane;  
b. key sites around Parker’s Piece;  
c. land around Cambridge Station and the proposed new Station serving North East Cambridge (see Section Three); and  
d. any large windfall sites that come forward in the city centre during the plan period.  
 
Proposals for high quality visitor accommodation will also be supported in other city centre locations, while larger high quality hotels beyond the city centre may come forward in North West Cambridge and at Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s Hospital).  
 
New visitor accommodation should be located on the frontages of main roads or in areas of mixed- use or within walking distance of bus route 
corridors with good public transport accessibility.  
Supporting text:  
 8.45 A consultancy study has been undertaken, entitled ‘ Cambridge Hotel 
Futures’ April 2012, to assess the supply of and demand for hotel and short -stay accommodation in Cambridge to 2031.  
 8.46 The study shows that there is very strong and continuing market demand for significant new hotel development in Cambridge, particularly in the city centre and on the outskirts of the city. Depending on how st rongly 
the economy grows and the extent to which new hotels create additional demand, Cambridge looks likely to need around 1,500 new hotel bedrooms over the next 20 years to widen the accommodation offer of the city, encourage longer stays and to enhance the competitiveness of the city as a visitor destination.  
 
8.47 These rooms could be delivered as new hotels, as extensions to existing 
hotels, or through the re‐ positioning and redevelopment of existing 
hotels, or indeed as a mixture of the three approaches.  
 
8.48 The Cambridge Hotel Futures Study (as amended) identifies the aim of 
achieving a high quality and distinctive hotel offer in Cambridge city centre in terms of national and international branded 4- star hotels, 
boutique hotels, good quality 3- star hotels and  possibly a 5- star hotel – Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  225 through the upgrading and expansion of existing hotels and the 
conversion of suitable properties. Consequently, the policy seeks to ensure that any proposal is for a hotel of suitably high quality specification to meet the needs identified in the study. This can help ensure that any new hotels are towards the upper end of the spectrum of hotels.  
 
8.49 Visitor accommodation now takes many forms, ranging from traditional hotels, guesthouses and hostels to apart -hotels and serviced 
apartm ents. This policy and Policy 78 applies to visitor accommodation 
within any of these (or similar) formats.  
 
8.50 The accommodation offered at apart -hotels and services apartments can 
take various forms. Some accommodation offered at apart -hotels and 
serviced ap artments display characteristics associated with permanent, 
self-contained housing. Some is more akin to hotels, as a result of the 
type of services they provide, and, as such, may consequently result in different impacts to permanent housing. Apart -hotels  and serviced 
apartments may therefore fall within the C1 Use Class or be a sui generis use, depending on their characteristics, such as (amongst others):  
• presence of on- site staff/management  
• presence of reception, bar and/or restaurant  
• provision of cleaning and administrative services  
• ownership or other tenure of units and/or ability to sell or lease on the open market  
• minimum/maximum lease lengths.  
 8.51 Developers will be required to provide full details of the nature of the accommodation to be provided and the proposed terms of occupation when submitting a planning application for new apart -hotels and serviced 
apartments.  
 
8.52 Where proposals for apart -hotels or serviced apartments are considered 
to fall within C3 use Class proposals or comprise sui generis uses which have the characteristics of a C3 use, such proposals will be assessed via relevant housing policies in the local plan.  
 
8.53 For proposals within the C1 Use Class, or which comprise sui generis uses with the characteristics of a C1 use, those proposals wi ll be 
considered against this policy and other relevant policies of the Plan concerning visitor accommodation. The Council will take steps to ensure that apart -hotel and serviced apartment units approved for use as visitor 
accommodation will not be used for any other purpose. This may include the imposition of conditions to ensure maximum lengths of stay (typically 90 days) and a restriction on return visits.  
 Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  226 Policy 78: Redevelopment or loss of visitor accommodation  
 
Development will not be permitted which would result in the loss of 
existing visitor accommodation (as defined within the supporting text to Policy 77)  unless the use is no longer viable.  
 Applications for change of use will need to demonstrate that:  
a. all reasonable efforts have been made to preserve the facility but it has been proven that it would not be economically viable to retain the visitor accommodation in its current form; and  
b. the property or site has been appropriately marketed for at least 12 months in order to confirm  that there is no interest in the property or 
site for visitor accommodation use.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
8.54 While some of the requirement for new visitor accommodation  in the city 
centre can be met through the repositioning and upgrading of existing 
city centre visitor accommodation, there is likely to be a requirement for further sites or conversion opportunities to fully satisfy the identified market opportunities.  
 8.55 With limited identifiable sites for new- build visitor accommodation 
development in the city centre, the conversion of suitable properties looks likely to provide the most realistic way to deliver the required new visitor accommodation in the city centre.  
 
8.56 However, where the case can be made that the visitor accommodation is not and cannot be made viable with investment, its loss may be acceptable. Evidence would be required, in terms of marketing and viability of existing uses. The preference is for conversion to residential use. 
 
Policy 79: Visitor attractions  
 
Proposals for new visitor attractions within the city centre will be 
supported where they:  
a. complement the existing cultural heritage of the city;  
b. are limited in scale; and 
c. assist the diversification of the attractions on offer, especially to better support the needs of families.  
 
The locations of any new attractions should have good public transport accessibility. Section Eight: Services and local facilities  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  227  
Supporting text:  
 
8.57 Some of the pressures on existing attractions can be eased by the diversification of the attractions on offer where this continues to be related to the cultural heritage and/or interpretation of the city.  
 
8.58 The emphasis in tourism is on continued visitor management, and to extend length of visits, rather than major promotion. While the city would benefit from enhanced provision for families, major theme parks and other national profile leisure developments wi ll not be appropriate in 
Cambridge. There would, however, be potential for enhancing the visitor 
experience as part of a tourism loop running between King’s Parade, Silver Street and along the Backs to the Folk Museum and Kettle’s Yard and then back over Magdalene Bridge, Bridge Street and through the city centre.  
 8.59 Attractions that draw visitors beyond the city centre attractions and encourage the development of alternative attractions throughout the sub- region are also encouraged.  
   Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  228   
 Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  229 Section Nine: Providing the Infrastructure to Support 
Development 
 
9.1 This section focuses on how the local plan contributes to the achievement of sustainable development in terms of how it addresses the challenge of making new development functional and accessible in terms of transport and infrastructure. These policies will help to build on the culture of cycling and walking within the city and help protect and provide good, efficient and sustainable links to key employment centres and transport interchanges. Provision of the required and appropriate infrastructure for Cambridge will also be supported.  
 
9.2 The Council will continue to work closely with Cambridgeshire County Council, as the highways authority, and the local plan has strong links with the County Council’s Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire and the Cambridgeshire Local Transport Plan.  
 
9.3 The local plan strategy, and the joint strategic approach to growth and infrast ructure agreed across Cambridgeshire, ensures that development 
within Cambridge promotes sustainable transport that is safe and accessible for all, while also ensuring that the appropriate infrastructure is in place and the need to travel is reduced. This will ensure that Cambridge remains a compact city with a high quality of life and place.  
 9.4 The growth of Cambridge will create additional demands for physical and social infrastructure, as well as having impacts on the environment. This section of the local  plan sets out the policy approach to delivering the 
infrastructure required to support development. This will include the use of planning obligations and the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) to make improvements to existing infrastructure and provide new facilities.  
 
Policy 80: Supporting sustainable access to development  
 
Development will be supported where it demonstrates that prioritisation of access is by walking, cycling and public transport, and is accessible for all. This will be achieved by:  
a. ensuring major developments on the edge of the city and in the urban extensions are supported by high quality public transport linking them to Cambridge’s city centre and major centres of employment. The public transport links should be within walking and cycling travel distance of the development;  
b. supporting public transport, walking and cycling to, from and within a development by:  
1. giving priority to these modes where there is conflict with cars;   Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  230 2. conveniently linking the development with the surrounding 
walking, cycling and public transport networks;  
3. prioritising networks of public transport, pedestrian and cycle movement so these are the best and safest means of moving around Cambridge. Areas where public transport, pedestrian and cycle movement is difficult or dangerous will be improved and, where possible, have further capacity for these sustainable modes provided;  
4. ensuring accessibility for those with impaired mobility; and  
5. safeguarding existing and proposed routes for walking, cycling, and public  transport, including the Chisholm Trail, from 
development that would prejudice their continued use and/or development. In addition, funding for high quality physical provision of these routes will be required, both within and adjacent to the proposed developments. The proposed routes are identified in Cambridgeshire County Council’s Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire and on Figure 9.1 of this plan.  
  
c. ensuring that any development requiring a new road or road access accords with the f ollowing:  
6. it is designed to give high priority to the needs of pedestrians and cyclists, including their safety;  
7. it restricts through access for general motor traffic where appropriate;  
8. it discourages speeding;  
9. it discourages inappropriate car -based links within the network, 
but encourages non- car based links;  
10. it minimises additional car traffic in the surrounding area; and  
11. there is safe and appropriate access to the adjoining road, pedestrian and cycle networks.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
9.5 Good, easy access to a hi gh quality and efficient transport network is 
essential to support new development and ensure that it is sustainable. 
Cambridge has an existing trend towards sustainable transport, particularly cycling, and the 2011 Census reaffirmed this by highlighting that about 33 per cent of residents in the city cycle to work, the highest 
proportion in the United Kingdom. Increases in walking and public transport use combined with large decreases in the number of single car trips underpin the long- established policy approach to promote 
sustainable modes of travel over that of the private car. However, congestion remains a key issue on many of the city’s roads and the need to push for further modal shift remains imperative, especially as growth in and around the city continues.  
  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  231  
9.6 The Council will work closely with partners, particularly with 
Cambridgeshire County Council as the highways authority, to help promote good access to high quality, sustainable modes of travel at new developments. This is especially key for edge of city developments.  
 
Public transport accessibility  
 
9.7 Public transport, and buses in particular, have a crucial role to play in meeting Cambridge’s transport needs and embedding sustainable travel patterns from an early stage. This is particularly important for development on the city’s edge and in the urban extensions, where key services and employment centres are not often within walking distance of housing.  
 
9.8 Developers will be required to ensure the provision of such services from first occupation of the development for a period of up to five years, where this is a viable option for the development in terms of practicality, convenience and cost. In some instances, the build out rate of development may be longer than five years with a consequential n eed 
to provide bus services for a longer period of time.  
 
9.9 Demand- responsive and community transport provision will also be 
supported where they can be shown to be an appropriate alternative or addition to public transport.  
 Walking and cycling  
 
9.10 Walking and cycling are a high priority, being healthy, affordable and 
sustainable modes of travel. One of the best ways to encourage sustainable modes is to fully consider them at the design stage. Priority and convenience for walking and cycling should be ensured t hrough 
design layout, traffic calming measures, and on- site facilities (see the 
Department for Transport’s Manual for Streets 1 (2007) and 2 (2010)). The needs of all users should be considered as part of a planned approach to inclusive design, with accessibility for pushchairs, wheelchair s and those with mobility or visual impairment, while ensuring 
that conflict between cyclists and pedestrians is designed out.  
 
9.11 The indicative alignment of the Chisholm Trail is shown in Figure 9.1.  
    Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  232 
 Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  233 Land for public tr ansport  
9.12 A successful and high quality public transport network needs to be 
efficient, reliable and attractive. Congestion is a problem in Cambridge, and it is vital for buses to be free from other traffic, where possible, in order for them to deliver on reliability and speed of journey. For this reason, it is important to safeguard land for new public transport infrastructure, such as bus lanes, interchange facilities and junction improvements.  
 
Pedestrian and cycle network  
 
9.13 Increases in walking and cycling within Cambridge are strongly influenced by the expansion of a safe and convenient network of routes. Therefore, new routes on land outside the public highway are identified on the Policies Map.  
 
9.14 Developers will be required to fund high- quality paths, both along the 
identified routes, and any others that may be suitable for accessing the particular development. The design of these paths must accord with the guidance set out in the document Protection and Funding of Routes for the Future Expansion of the City Cycle Network, or its successor documents, and with national guidance as set out in the Department for Transport’s Local Transport Notes. The Council will seek provision that is proportionate to the scale of development being undertak en. 
 
9.15 All paths should conform to established good practice. They should consider wildlife and landscape factors, so that any adverse impact is minimised. They should also be in place by first occupation of the development, so that sustainable travel patterns can be established at an early stage.  
 
New roads  
 
9.16 New roads should make suitable provision for the needs of pedestrians, cyclists and public transport users, as well as cars. This includes measures that make their safety a key priority, including measur es to 
discourage speeding. Any potential negative impact on existing pedestrian and cycle routes must be mitigated.  
 
9.17 Roads providing a new vehicular through route will generally not be supported, as these are likely to attract car traffic from more major roads. However, controlled through access for buses and cycles is encouraged. Where any new through- route for all traffic is proposed, it is important 
that the potential impacts are minimised. The presumption should be that 2m-wide uni -directional cycle la nes – either at the edge of the 
carriageway or set back from the carriageway (but with priority over side roads) – are provided on any new through- route. A suitable quantitative 
assessment of the likely effect of the new road will be essential.  
  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  234 Policy 81:  Mitigating the transport impact of development  
 
Developments will only be permitted where they do not have an 
unacceptable transport impact. Therefore, new development will require:  
a. sufficient information to be supplied with all development proposals that the transport impact can be suitably assessed. This should take 
the form of transport assessments for schemes above the thresholds set in the latest Cambridgeshire County Council guidance;  
b. a travel plan to accompany all major development proposals; and  
c. reasonable and proportionate financial contributions/mitigation measures where necessary to make the transport impact of the development acceptable. This could include investment in infrastructure, services or behavioral change measures to encourage the use of sustainable modes of transport. Such measures should be provided to meet the first or early occupation of a site in order to influence travel behaviour from the outset.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
9.18 New development often brings with it the need for new transport  and 
more pressure on the transport network is a common consequence of 
this.  Any additional strain on the transport network as a result of new development needs to be appropriately assessed by the Council and Cambridgeshire County Council as the highways authority and mitigated.  
 
9.19 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, 2012) states that a transport assessment or transport statement should support all developments that generate significant amounts of movement. This ensures that the full transport impacts of any proposal are assessed and understood, allowing for the appropriate mitigation measures to be implemented.  
 
   Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  235 Transport assessments  
 
9.20 Any proposals must include sufficient information to assess the likely 
impact of development.  A detailed transport assessment or a less detailed transport statement may be required in accordance with the thresholds in Cambridgeshire County Council’s current transport assessment guidelines.  
 
9.21 Where transport assessment of proposed development in Cambridge is required, appropriate prioritised and costed mitigation measures, including delivery plans and timescales, should take effect at agreed points in bringing new development forward. Where an assessment indicates insufficient capacity on the local or strategic road network, the Council and Cambridgeshire County Council are committed to ensuring that effective and appropriate interventions/investment are secured in order to achieve suitable mitigation of the additional transport impacts of the development.  
 
9.22 In areas of the city where traffic congestion and/or pollution from traffic are particularly high, a zero increase or reduction in car traffic through any proposed redevelopment will be sought. This includes the city centre and Newmarket Road.  
 
9.23 Any development that will require regular loading or servicing must avoid causing illegal or dangerous parking, by providing appropriate off -street 
facilities.  
  
Travel plans  
 
9.24 It is important that every opportunity is taken to mitigate the negative transport impacts of a development. Therefore, proposals classed as major development, and those shown to generate a significant amount of movement, will be required to provide a travel plan.  
 
Financial contributions and mitigating measures  
 
9.25 Financ ial contributions will be sought towards schemes approved by the 
City and County Councils for any necessary improvements required as a result of development. The existing conditions on the wider transport network and any increase in demand over and above t he existing use’s 
levels will need to be taken into account.  
 
9.26 These measures will be secured through planning obligations where essential site- specific measures are required and/or through the 
Community Infrastructure Levy. The infrastructure resulting fr om these 
contributions should be provided in a timely manner, to meet the first 
occupation of a site in order to influence travel behaviour from the  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  236 earliest opportunity. For the larger growth area sites, the trigger points 
may vary according to the development phases.  
 
Policy 82: Parking management  
 
Planning permission will not be granted for developments that would be contrary to the parking standards set out in Appendix L.  This includes:  
a. providing no more than the car parking standards for new residential and non- residential development set out in Appendix L, taking into 
account the accessibility of the site to public transport and the nature of the use. In the city centre, and on streets with overnight parking stress, on and off street (non- disabled bay) car parking levels should 
be maintained at current levels for shoppers, residents and workers;  
b. providing at least the cycle parking levels in Appendix L; and  
c. providing at least the disabled and inclusive parking requirements in Appendix L.  
 
Car-free and car -capped development is acceptable in the following 
circumstances: d. where there is good, easily walkable and cyclable access to a district centre or the city centre;  
e. where there is high public transport accessibility; and  
f. where the car -free status of the development can realistically be 
enforced by planning obligations and/or on- street parking controls.  
 
The Council strongly supports contributions to and provision for car clubs at new developments to help reduce the need for private car parking. Electric vehicle charging points or the infrastructure to ensure their future provision should be provided within a development where reasonable and proportionate.  
 
Developments should also provide adequate provision for servicing and public service vehicles.  
 
On-street parking will be managed in partnership with Cambridgeshire 
County Council to ensure the safe passage of cyclists and pedestrians, emergency service access and to reduce nuisance to residents from commuter and shopper parking.  
 
Supporting text:  
Car parking  
 
9.27 New developments will be favoured where they take a holistic, early and 
design- led approach to the management of parking for motor vehicles 
and cycles. Car parking standards are an important means of managing  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  237 traffic levels in and around a development, especially when combined 
with measures to increase access to transport alternatives to the private car.  The Council continues to promote lower levels of private car parking 
in order to help achieve modal shift, particularly for non- residential 
developments w here good, more sustainable transport alternatives such 
as walking, cycling and public transport exist. This will be particularly important in the city centre, where the transport strategy is to increase 
access without a net increase in overall parking lev els (other than 
disabled parking). In addition, on streets with overnight parking stress, the level of additional parking is capped. In both cases, development will have to be car -free or car -capped (see below).  
 
9.28 In accordance with national guidance, the level of car parking provided needs to take into account various local circumstances. This includes its proximity to services accessible by non -car modes, the development 
type and also the impact the development is likely to have on the surrounding network.  Appendix L lists the matters developers need to 
consider when planning for the appropriate levels of car parking to be provided, as well as the levels of parking in terms of ‘no more than’.  
 
9.29 For residential developments, parking should be provided on- plot or, in 
larger developments, in the form of well -designed parking courts or 
‘designed in’ on- street parking, with a presumption in favour of some 
non-allocated parking. (See, Car Parking: What Works Where – Homes 
and Communities Agency, and Manual for Streets 1 and 2). For residential developments where car parking is to be provided in garages, the dimensions of these must accord with the dimensions in Appendix L.  
 
9.30 Car-free and car -capped development, where new on- street permits are 
restricted to existing (not new) residents, is supported by the Council where the development will not impact negatively on the surrounding area by displacing car parking. It is therefore important that where car -
free development is proposed, the appropriate on- street parking 
management is in place, and this will involve strong input from 
Cambridgeshire County Council, as the Local Highways Authority. Suitable, high- quality alternatives to the private car must also be 
available in order for any proposal to be acceptable. Access to shops 
and services close by is required.  
 
9.31 The Council also encourages the provision of car club spaces at new developments, as these are shown to reduce car ownership, especially second car ownership. Similarly, where it is viable to do so, the Council may seek low emission vehicle infrastructure at major new 
developments. This could include, but is not limited to, electric vehicle charging / plug- in points or the infrastructure required to provide this in 
the future.  
 
Cycle parking  
  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  238 9.32 The provision of good, high quality and easily accessible cycle parking 
is important to encourage cycling and also reduce the theft of bikes. Like car parking, cycle parking should be ‘designed in’ to developments from an early stage.  
 
9.33 The Council’s Cycle Parking Guide for New  Residential Developments 
(or any successor document) should be referred to as best practice for providing cycle parking at all new developments. For residential developments where cycle parking is to be provided in garages, the dimensions of these must accord with the dimensions in Appendix L. This appendix also provides information on what is permissible in terms of types of cycle parking at non- residential development.  
 
Policy 83: Aviation development  
  Aviation development at Cambridge Airport will only  be supported where 
it would not have a significant adverse impact on the environment and on residential amenity.  
 
A health impact assessment will be submitted alongside any planning 
application to demonstrate that the potential impacts on health have been considered at the planning and design stage.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
9.34 Cambridge Airport, operated by Marshall, lies within the administrative 
boundaries of both Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council. The area within Cambridge comprises part of the runway and a number of hangars, while the terminal building is within South Cambridgeshire. The airport is a base for general aviation as well as aircraft repair.  
 
9.35 Consideration needs to be given to airport activity and the approach that would apply to any future aviation development proposals coming forward at Cambridge Airport. This is to ensure that any development would not have a significant adverse effect on the environment and residential amenity. While airports have permitted development rights, which mean that some types of development in connection with the provision of services and facilitates do not need planning permission, other proposals do require planning permission. These include the construction or extension of a runway, or a new passenger terminal 
above 500
 sq m or increasing the size of the existing building by 15 per 
cent or more.  
  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  239 9.36 Any further aviation development proposals that fall within the scope of 
this policy will need to be carefully assessed, particularly in terms of impact on noise, air quality, landscape, nature conservation, transport and public safety. It is likely that any planning applications for major works will require an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), to assess the potential significant impacts of the development on the environment.  
 
Policy 84: Telecommunications  
 
Planning permission will be granted for telecommunications development where it can be demonstrated that:  
a. the proposal does not cause significant and irremediable interference with other electrical equipment, air traffic services or instrumentation that is operated in the national interest;  
b. visual impact is minimised through design and location, with equipment sympathetically designed and camouflaged wh ere 
appropriate;  
c. pre-application consultation has been undertaken, particularly where 
a mast is to be installed near a school or college, or within a statutory safeguarding zone surrounding an aerodrome or technical site. The relevant highways authority should be consulted where works are in the highway or in close proximity to the Cambridgeshire Guided Busway; 
d. applications for an addition to an existing mast or base station are accompanied by a statement that self -certifies that the cumulative 
exposure, when operational, will not exceed guidelines set by the International Commission on Non- Ionizing Radiation Protection 
(ICNIRP); and  
e. applications for a new mast or base station are accompanied by evidence that the applicant has explored the possibility of erecting aerials on an existing building, site, mast or other structure and a statement that self- certifies that, when operational, ICNIRP 
guidelines will be met.  
 
Supporting text:  
 
9.37 New communications technology is continually developing and it is 
important that residents and businesses have the best access to new technology, making the most of the resulting lifestyle changes, such as reducing the need to travel. It is important that the Council supports the growth of telecommunications systems while keeping the environmental impact to a minimum. The NPPF  (2012)  supports this approach, noting 
that sites for telecommunications should be kept to a minimum consistent with the efficient operation of the network. Existing sites  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  240 should be used where possible and where new sites are required their 
design should be sympathetic to context.  
 
Policy 85: Infrastructure delivery, planning obligations and the 
Community Infrastructure Levy  
 
Permission will only be granted if it can be demonstrated that there is, or 
will be, sufficient infrastructure capacity to support and meet all the requirements arising from the new development. Where existing infrastructure will be placed under strain due to the impact of new development, improvements to existing infrastructure or compens atory 
provision should be made so that an appropriate level of infrastructure is maintained.  
 Infrastructure provision will reflect the Council’s priorities for infrastructure set out in the Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire Infrastructure Delivery Study and its successor documents. The Council 
will work positively with neighbouring authorities and Cambridgeshire County Council on infrastructure issues, including the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), which the  Council is committed to int roducing 
in 2014. Until the introduction of the CIL, and to a lesser degree thereafter, the Council will continue to use planning obligations under Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 to ensure developer contributions towards necessary infrastructure are maximised.  
 Planning permission for new developments will only be supported/permitted where there are suitable arrangements for the improvement or provision and phasing of infrastructure, services and facilities necessary to make the scheme acceptable in planning terms.  
 Planning obligations and/or a future CIL could be required for the following:  
a. transport infrastructure  
b. public transport  
c. drainage and flood protection  
d. waste recycling facilities  
e. education  
f. healthcare  
g. leisure and recreation facilities  
h. community and social facilities  
i. cultural facilities, including public art  
j. emergency services  
k. green infrastructure  
l. open space  
m. affordable housing  
  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  241 The above list is not exhaustive and there may be scope for requiring 
developer contributions towards a wider range of infrastructure measures. Contributions could also be used to secure ongoing maintenance where this is deemed appropriate.  
 
The introduction of CIL will be accompanied by a review of the Council’s guidance on planning obligations, and will ensure that the range and level of contributions towards local infrastructure needs are kept up to date and maximised in the context of emerging CIL practice and guidance. The guidance on planning obligations will be adopted alongside a CIL charging schedule and a CIL Regulation 123 list.  These documents will clarify what infrastructure types/projects the Council will seek to fund via CIL and what infrastructure types/projects the Council will seek to secure via planning obligations.  
 
Supporting text:  
Infrastructure provision  
 
9.38 The delivery of new or improved infrastructure and services to support new development in a timely and phased manner will be an important element in ensuring the appropriate and sustainable implementation of new growth in Cambridge and its sub- region. It will be important to 
ensure that certain infrastructure is provided before development begins, to safeguard against adverse impacts. To facilitate this, it is important that the local planning authority understands the infrastructure needs and costs early on as part of plan making.  
 
9.39 Planning for infrastructure provision has been, and continues to be, an ongoing process through the development of Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council Infrastructure Delivery  Study 
(IDS) and partnership working with stakeholders. The IDS has been produced in collaboration with South Cambridgeshire District Council. The IDS examines three infrastructure categories: physical (transport, energy, water and drainage, waste); social  (education, health care, 
leisure and recreation, community and social and emergency services); and green (open space). The IDS includes an infrastructure delivery schedule. The intention is to update the IDS and infrastructure delivery schedule on a regul ar basis.  
 
9.40 The IDS provides an overview of infrastructure required to support new development, an overview of who is responsible for delivery, and a broad indication of phasing, costs and funding mechanisms. It will act as a focus for delivery, but should not be seen as a detailed investment programme.  
  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  242 9.41 To aid prioritisation of delivery, the Council has categorised the 
prioritisation of infrastructure in the IDS as critical, necessary and desirable.  
Critical infrastructure  
 
9.42 Critical infrastructure and neces sary infrastructure are both essential to 
support development, but the differing factor between them is the timing of their delivery. Critical infrastructure is largely physical and enabling infrastructure, which must be delivered on time to allow proposed  
development to proceed.  Failure to provide critical infrastructure could result in significant delays to the delivery of development.  
 
Necessary infrastructure  
 
9.43 This infrastructure is required if development is to be achieved in a timely and sustainable manner. Infrastructure in this category is unlikely to prevent physical development in the short term, however failure to invest could lead to delays in the medium term. The most common type of necessary infrastructure is social and community infrastructure such as schools, health facilities and children’s play space. The category has the potential to allow infrastructure prioritisation if funding shortfalls occur.  
 
Desirable infrastructure 
 
9.44 This category has been included so that more aspirational schemes to support sustainable development could be included within the IDS.  
 
Funding infrastructure and services  
 
9.45 Infrastructure provision will be funded through a number of sources. Mainstream funding, such as the Council’s capital programmes, service providers’ investment programmes, and government grants, will 
continue to fund the bulk of infrastructure spending. However, other 
initiatives such as planning obligations and the CIL can provide a substantial resource for locally -determined priorities.  
 
9.46 As part of planning for infrastructure provision, the Council needs to consider the role that developers can play in helping to provide the physical, social and green infrastructure that is required as a result of new growth. When planning permission is granted for new development, the Council can seek contributions from developers towards a range of infrastructure, for e xample, school places, affordable housing and open 
spaces.  
 
9.47 Infrastructure funded by the development industry will occur either through legal agreements known as ‘planning obligations’ or the 
emerging CIL, a tariff -based charge.  
  Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  243 9.48 Planning obligations (Sect ion 106 Agreements or S106) are voluntary 
legal obligations attached to planning applications. A local planning 
authority normally requests a developer to enter into an obligation to mitigate the impacts of the development being proposed. Any S106 planning obligation must be:  
• necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
• directly related to the development; and  
• fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the proposed development.  
 
9.49 The CIL will replace planning obligations for many forms of 
infrastructure, although planning obligations can still be used for site-specific mitigation measures and for affordable housing provision. The 
Government considers that the CIL is a more transparent and simple method of collecting funds for infrastructure to support development than the current system of planning obligations.  
 
9.50 The CIL takes the form of a standardised charge applied per square 
metre of new development. The levy will allow the Council to raise money 
to support development and it will assist the funding of a wide range of infrastructure projects needed as a result of development. CIL rates will 
be set out in a charging schedule. The infrastructure to be funded by CIL 
will be defined alongside the  CIL charging schedule in the Regulation 
123 list. The Council’s infrastructure delivery schedule, which identifies a list of critical, necessary and desirable infrastructure, will form the starting point for the Regulation 123 list.  
 
9.51 The Council needs to strike a balance between the desirability of funding infrastructure from the levy and the potential effect of the levy upon the economic viability of development. A viability assessment has been undertaken by the Council, which will inform the charging schedule and ultimately the amount of CIL  to be charged. The Council seeks to ensure 
that a CIL  charge is identified that is of a sufficient level to provide the 
infrastructure required but not so onerous as to make development unviable.  
 
9.52 A capped 15 per cent proportion of CIL revenue will need to be spent on 
locally -determined infrastructure in areas where development takes 
place. This will rise to 25 per cent for those areas with an adopted neighbourhood plan in place.  
 
9.53 The Council will work with South Cambridgeshire District Council and 
Cambridgeshire County Council to ensure that development is supported by the right infrastructure and that contributions towards infrastructure are collected on an equitable basis.  
 
9.54 With the introduction  of the CIL, S106 Agreements will only be used in 
restricted circumstances. A P lanning Obligations Supplementary 
Planning Document will be prepared about the use of S106 Agreements in the light of CIL approval.  
   Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  244  
       
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  245 Appendix A: The Development plan for Cambridge  
  
A.1 On adoption of this plan, the official statutory development plan for 
Cambridge comprises:  
• Cambridge Local Plan 2018;  
• Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core 
Strategy (July 2011); and Site Specific Proposals Plan (February 2012) Development Plan Documents;  
• Cambridge East Area Action Plan 2008 (excluding policies CE/3 and CE/35 , which are replaced by Policy 13: Cambridge East) ; and  
• North West Cambridge Area Action Plan 2009.  
 
The Cambridge Local Plan 2006 is deleted in its entirety and no longer forms part of the development plan.  
 
A.2 In addition, the following Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) remain as material considerations alongside this Local Plan:  
 
• Old Press/Mill Lane;  
• Eastern Gate Development Framework;  
• Public Art;  
• Affordable Housing*;  
• Sustainable Design and Construction*;  
• Planning Obligations*  
 
The Council intends to prepare new SPDs  on the subjects above marked 
with an asterisk*, to be adopted alongside this local plan or shortly 
thereafter.  
 
A.3 Further SPDs may also come forward to cover site specific proposals or where additional or updated guidance to support either this local plan or national policy is deemed necessary. For example, it is intended that a n 
additional SPD will be pr epared to provide a City Centre Public Realm 
Strategy.  
 
Policies Map  
 
A.4 A Policies Map will be maintained to show strategic allocations and other designated areas. The map will also show allocations that have been adopted as part of the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core Strategy and Minerals and Waste Site Specific Proposals development plan documents (DPDs).  
   Appendix A: The Devleopment plan for Cambridge   
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  246  
Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  247 Appendix B: Proposals Schedule 
 
Residential  
Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
GB1 Land north of 
Worts’ 
Causeway  7.33 Agricultural  200 
dwellings  
27 dph  o Local heritage asset on site  
o Site includes bat roost and county wildlife site  
o Archaeological investigation 
required  
o Con tributions shou ld be made 
towards i mproved c ommunity o New local plan 
allocation  
 
48 Approximate number based on initial assessment in Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA); final number may be greater or smaller 
depending on detailed assessment and detailed design.   
49 Policies in the whole plan must be considered in the development of the sites. However, there are a number of items for each new site that an applic ant 
should be particularly aware of and should consider early when preparing detailed planning proposals. It should not be regarded as an exhaustive list; it is 
purely intended to be helpful in order to highlight known issues.  
50Summary of the status of the site where planning process has progressed, i.e. relationship to 2006 Local Plan, if it has outline planning permission, is under 
construction or has a pending planning application.  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  248 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
facilities  and services in this part 
of the city 
o Access onto Worts’ Causeway51 
o Pedestrian and cycle access to 
local centre in Wulfstan Way to be 
investigated  
GB2 Land south of 
Worts’ 
Causeway  7.7 Agricultural  230 
dwellings  
34 dph  o Archaeological investigation 
required  
o Con tributions shou ld be made 
towards i mproved c ommunity 
facilities  and services  in this part 
of the city 
o Access onto Worts’ Causeway  
o Single access onto Babraham 
Road  
o Retain existing permissive footpath 
on west edge of site  o New local plan 
allocation  
R1 295 Histon 
Road  0.71 Shop, 
education 
centre, squash 
club, garden  32 dwellings  
45 dph  
 o Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Access onto Histon Road, subject 
to detailed testing  o Site 5.17 in the 
Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006.  
 
51 On all sites access is subject to the scheme being acceptable to Cambridgeshire County Council as the highway authority.  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  249 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
o Maintain link to NIAB  
R2 Willowcroft, 
137-143 
Histon Road  1.59 Mixed 
commercial  78 dwellings  
49 dph  o Access onto Histon Road, subject 
to detailed testing  
 o Includes Cambridge 
Local Plan 2006 
allocation 5.07 and 
part new local plan 
allocation (SHLAA 
site CC312)  
R3 City Football 
Ground, 
Milton Road  1.71 Football club 
and parking  138 
dwellings  
81 dph  
 o Abuts the Mitcham’s Corner 
Opportunity Area  
o Capacity analysis of site access 
junctions will be required  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
5.05 
o Planning consent 
granted subject to 
S106 agreement  
R4 Henry Giles 
House, 73- 79 
Chesterton Road  0.78 Offices and 
parking  48 dwellings  
62 dph  o Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Access from Carlyle Road, subject to detailed testing  
o Within the air quality management 
area o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
5.15 
R5 Camfields 
Resource Centre and Oil 
Depot, 137-0.86 Resource 
storage building and oil 
depot  35 dwellings  
41 dph  
 o Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Contamination requires 
remediation and will limit o New local plan 
allocation  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  250 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
139 Ditton 
Walk  development to flats/non -family 
housing without gardens  
o Access onto Ditton Walk, subject to 
detailed testing  
R7 The 
Paddocks, 
347 Cherry 
Hinton Road  2.79 Mixed 
commercial  123 
dwellings  
44 dph  
 o Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Contamination requires 
remediation  
o Access onto Cherry Hinton Road to 
be reviewed carefully given the 
constrained location  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
5.02 
R8 149 Cherry 
Hinton Road & 
Telephone Exchange, Coleridge 
Road  0.76 Commercial 
laundry and 
shop  
telephone exchange  33 dwellings  
43 dph  o Access to Cherry Hinton Road and 
Coleridge Road, subject to detailed testing  o New local plan 
allocation  
R9 Travis 
Perkins, Devonshire 
Road  1.23 Builders’ 
merchant  43 dwellings  
35 dph  o Abuts Mill Road Opportunity Area  
o Open space requirements to reflect location in an area of open space 
deficiency  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
5.09 Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  251 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
o Access on Devonshire Road to be 
reviewed carefully given the 
constrained location  
o Provide room for the Chisholm Trail  
R10 Mill Road 
Depot and 
adjoining 
properties, Mill Road  2.7 Council depot 
and offices, 
community facilities, language 
school and 
garages  167 
dwellings  
62 dph  o Within Mill Road Opportunity Area  
o Contamination requires 
remediation  
o Retain listed library building  
o Open space requirements to reflect location in an area of open space deficiency  
o Potential location for district energy centre  
o Vehicular access to be from Mill 
Road only, subject to detailed 
testing  
o Provide room for the Chisholm Trail  
o Range of housing typologies to be provided across the site  
o The site promoters will be expected 
to prepare a planning and 
development brief for the site, 
demonstrating how development o New local plan 
allocation  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  252 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
will successfully integrate with the 
existing residential area as well as 
addressing the constraints and 
opportunities of the site. Scale, 
massing and density 
considerations in the design and 
disposition of new and existing 
housing will be expected to have 
regard to the character of the 
existing area  
R11 Horizon 
Resource 
Centre, 285 
Coldham’s 
Lane  0.82 Day centre and 
car parking  40 dwellings  
49 dph  o Site will need careful review of 
highway access  
 o New local plan 
allocation  
R12 Ridgeons, 75 
Cromwell 
Road  3.27 Builders’ 
merchant and 
sale of 
household 
decorating etc 
supplies  245 
dwellings  
75 dph  o Contamination requires 
remediation and may limit type of 
housing  
o Open space requirements to reflect location in an area of open space deficiency  
o Primary access onto Cromwell 
Road, subject to detailed testing  o Part of Cambridge 
Local Plan 2006 
allocation 5.14  
o Partly new local plan 
allocation  
 Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  253 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
o Within the air quality management 
area 
o Range of housing typologies to be 
provided across the site  
o The site promoters will be expected 
to prepare a planning and 
development brief for the site 
demonstrating ho w development 
will successfully integrate with the 
existing residential area as well as 
addressing the constraints and 
opportunities of the site. Scale, 
massing and density 
considerations in the design and 
disposition of new and existing 
housing will be ex pected to have 
regard to the character of the 
existing area  
R14 BT telephone 
Exchange and car park, Long Road  2.01 Telephone 
exchange, 
offices and car 
park 76 dwellings  
38 dph  o Access to Long Road, subject to 
detailed testing  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
5.06 
o Part new local plan 
allocation  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  254 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
R16 Cambridge 
Professional 
Development Centre, Foster Road  1.49 Training centre, 
open space 
and car park  67 dwellings  
45 dph  o Site close to the Southern Fringe 
Area of Major Change  
o Access into Foster Road, subject to detailed designs  
o Improved pedestrian and cycle 
links to Clay Farm will be sought  o New local plan 
allocation  
R17 Mount 
Pleasant 
House, Mount 
Pleasant  0.57 Offices and car 
park 270 student 
rooms  o Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Protect the scheduled ancient 
monument on site (Ashwickstone)  
o Important trees on boundary and 
frontage  
o Access onto A1134, Mount 
Pleasant, subject to detailed testing  
o Within the air quality management 
area o New local plan 
allocation  
M4 Police Station, 
Parkside 0.50 Police station  50 dwellings  
102 dph o Access onto Warkworth Street or 
Parkside, subject to detailed testing  
o Within the air quality management 
area o Part of Cambridge 
Local Plan 2006 
allocation 5.12  
R41 Land north of 
Coldham’s 
Lane  1.26 Agricultural  57 dwellings  
45 dph  o Adjacent to land south of 
Coldham’s Lane Area of Major 
Change  o Allocated within the 
Cambridge East AAP 
2008  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  255 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
o Within the airport’s safeguarding 
zone  
o Access to Coldham’s Lane, subject 
to detailed testing  o Local plan re -
allocation  
R42a  Clay Farm, 
south of Long 
Road  60.69  Agricultural  2,250 
dwellings  o Not applicable  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocations 
9.05 & 9.06  
o Approval granted for 
2,250 dwellings and 
supporting 
community facilities  
R42b  Trumpington 
Meadows  
 15.50  Agricultural 
research centre  598 
dwellings  o Not applicable  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
9.08 
o Approval granted for 
598 dwellings  
R42c  Glebe Farm 1  
 8.79 Agricultural  286 
dwellings  o Not applicable  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
9.13 
o Approval granted for 
286 dwellings  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  256 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
R42c  Glebe Farm 2  
 1.00 Agricultural  35 
Dwellings  
45 dph  o Site part of the Southern Fringe 
Area of Major Change  
o Access through current new 
development  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
9.13 
o Local plan re-
allocation  
 
R42d  Bell School, 
Babraham 
Road  7.61 Agricultural and 
playing field  347 
dwellings,  
100 student 
beds  o Not applicable  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
9.12 
o Approval granted for 
347 dwellings and 
100-bed student 
living accommodation  
R43 Land between 
Huntingdon 
Road and 
Histon Road  52.87  Agricultural and 
research centre  1,696 
dwellings  o Not applicable  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
9.03 
o Outline planning 
consent granted 
subject to S.106  
M44 Betjeman 
House  1.17 Offices  B1 (a) and 
B1 (b) 
employment
, 156 o Development adjacent to Grade II* 
historic park and garden at 
Cambridge University Botanic o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 mixed use 
allocation 7.02  
 Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  257 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
dwellings, 
and retail 
uses  Gardens needs careful 
consideration  
o Regard should be had to structures 
on site, which by virtue of their 
character, quality and location, 
make a positive contribution to the 
character and appearance of the 
conservation area  
R45 Land north of 
Newmarket 
Road  1.27 Agricultural  0 o Buffer zone for proposed 
development in South 
Cambridgeshire at north of 
Newmarket Road. Part of 
Cambridge East  o Identified within the 
Cambridge East AAP 
2008  
R47 Land north of 
Teversham 
Drift 31.00  Agricultural and 
airport uses   780 
dwellings  
40 dph  o Surface water flooding requires 
remediation  
o Within the Airport Safeguarding 
Zone  
o Open space requirements to 
reflect location in an area of 
accessible open space deficiency  
o Site will need careful review of 
highway access  o Allocated within the 
Cambridge East AAP 
2008  
o Local Plan re-allocation  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  258 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity48 Provisional issues identified49 Planning status50 
 
o Noise and odour from Airport Fire 
Training Centre, which is adjacent 
to the site  
Mixed use  
Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity52 Provisional issues identified53 Planning status54 
 
M1 379-381 
Milton  Road  2.43 Car 
showrooms 
and garages  95 dwellings 
50 dph  
0.53 ha 
employment  
 o Surface water flooding  requires 
remediation  
o Access onto Milton Road, subject 
to detailed testing  
o Possible encroachment on Anglian 
water pumping station  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
5.04 
o Local Plan re-allocation  
 
 
52 Approximate number based on initial assessment in Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA); final number may be greater or smaller 
depending on detailed assessment and detailed design.   
53 Policies in the whole plan must be considered in the development of the sites. However, there are a number of items for each new site that an applicant 
should be particularly aware of and should consider early when preparing detailed planning proposals. It should not be regarded as an exhaustive list; it is 
purely intended to be helpful in order to highlight known issues.  
54Summary of the status of the site where planning process has progressed, i.e. relationship to 2006 Local Plan, if it has outline planning permission, is under 
construction or has a pending planning application.  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  259 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity52 Provisional issues identified53 Planning status54 
 
M2 Clifton Road 
Area  9.43 Industrial, 
office and 
leisure uses  Maximum 
capacity of 
550 
dwellings at  
a range of 
densities to 
reflect residential character  
2 ha 
employment 
and leisure 
related uses  
 o Site forms the Clifton Road Area of 
Major Change  
o Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Contamination requires remediation  
o Open space requirements to 
reflect location adjacent to an area of open space deficiency  
o Access onto Cherry Hinton Road 
subject to capacity analysis and 
assessment of links into the wider area New local plan 
allocation  
M3 Michael 
Young Centre, Purbeck Road  1.3 Office, 
industrial and 
warehouse 
uses  50 dwellings  
70 dph  
0.5 ha 
employment  o Access from Purbeck Road, which 
is a private road; need for a 
transport strategy  o New local plan 
allocation  
M5 82-88 Hills 
Road and 57-63 Bateman 
Street  0.50 Offices and 
educational  20 dwellings  
Residential 
over 0.5 ha 
employment  o Site within the Hills Road Corridor 
Opportunity Area  
 Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Access from Bateman Street, 
subject to detailed testing; need for 
a transport strategy  
o Within the air quality management 
area o New local plan 
allocation  
o  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  260 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity52 Provisional issues identified53 Planning status54 
 
 
o  
R6 636-656 
Newmarket 
Road, Holy 
Cross Church 
Hall, East 
Barnwell 
Community 
Centre and 
Meadowlands
, Newmarket 
Road  1.01 Community 
facilities and 
mixed  use 
buildings  75 dwellings  
74 dph  
 o Tree preservation orders on site  
o Requires modern replacement of 
community facilities  
o Access onto Barnwell Road or 
Peverel Road, subject to detailed 
testing  
 New local plan 
allocation  
R21 315-349 Mill 
Road and 
Brookfields  2.9 Warehouse 
and health 
facilities  78 dwellings  
60 dph  
Up to 1 ha 
employment floorspace (including healthcare) 
and 0.6 ha 
for up to 270 student 
rooms  o Contamination requires 
remediation  
o Development sensitive to 
conservation of adjacent local heritage asset  
o Access onto Mill Road, subject to 
detailed assessment; other 
accesses to be reviewed  
Within the air quality management area o Part Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
7.12 
o Part new local plan 
re-allocation  
o  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  261 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity52 Provisional issues identified53 Planning status54 
 
M13 West 
Cambridge 
Site 
 66.90  University and 
research 
institutes  Higher 
education, 
research, 
sports, 
shared 
facilities  o Not applicable  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocations 
7.06 
Outline approval 
granted in 1999; 
masterplan agreed 
with University of 
Cambridge for 
250,000 sq m of 
space  
M14 Station Road 
West 8.77 Mixed business 
and railway 
uses  Mixed uses 
including residential, and A and B 
classes and 
other amenities  o Not applicable  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
9.10 
o Outline approval 
2010, number of 
reserved matters 
approved, some 
completions on site  
M15 Cambridge 
Biomedical 
Campus 
(including 
Addenbrooke’
s Hospital)  68.21  Agricultural, 
medical and 
research uses  Medical 
services 
and biomedical research  o Not applicable  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocations 9.02 & 9.09 
o Current outline 
approval allows for:  
• Relocation of 
Papworth Hospital  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  262 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity52 Provisional issues identified53 Planning status54 
 
• NHS and private 
clinical 
development  
• Clinical, 
biomedical and 
biotechnology 
R&D within class 
B1 (b)  
• Sui generis 
medical research 
institutions  
• Related support 
activities  
• Application s
ubmitted for 
energy innovation 
centre  
o Application submitted 
for energy innovation 
centre  
 
 
 Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  263 Employment  
Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity55 Provisional issues identified56 Planning status57 
 
E4 Church End 
Industrial 
Estate, Rosemary 
Lane  5.77 Mixed 
industrial, office and warehouses  5.77 ha  
employment uses  o Access onto Rosemary Lane and 
Church Lane, subject to detailed 
testing  o New local plan 
allocation  
E5 1 and 7 -11 
Hills Road  1.40 Offices  1.40 ha 
employment uses  o Site within the Hills Road Corridor 
Opportunity Area  
o Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Need to discuss transport strategy and assessment to define access; 
must have minimal impact on the 
Ring Road and Hills 
Road/Lensfield Road junction  o New local plan 
allocation  
 
55 Approximate number based on initial assessment in Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA); final number may be greater or smaller 
depending on detailed assessment and detailed design.   
56 Policies in the whole plan must be considered in the development of the sites. However, there are a number of items for each new site that an applicant 
should be particularly aware of and should consider early when preparing detailed planning proposals. It should not be regarded as an exhaustive list; it is 
purely intended to be helpful in order to highlight known issues.  
57Summary of the status of the site where planning process has progressed, i.e. relationship to 2006 Local Plan, if it has outline planning permission, is under 
construction or has a pending planning application.  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  264 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity55 Provisional issues identified56 Planning status57 
 
o Within the air quality management  
area 
o  
GB3 
& 
GB4 Fulbourn 
Road, west 1 
& 2 3.7 Agricultural  3.7 ha 
employment uses  o Sites need to be cut onto the rising 
ground to reflect the approach at 
the Peterhouse Technology Park  
o Site GB3 adjacent to Limekiln 
Close local nature reserve 
o Access to Fulbourn Road through the Technology Park  
o Site GB3 adjacent to Limekiln 
Close local nature reserve 
o Access to Fulbourn Road through 
the Technology Park  o New local plan 
allocation  
 
 Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  265 University  
Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity58 Provisional issues identified59 Planning status60 
 
U1 Old Press/Mill 
Lane  2.00 University of 
Cambridge 
academic and 
administrative 
faculties  Student 
accommodation: Indicative 
capacity of 
350 student 
rooms61;     
up to  
6,000 sq m 
commercial use;  
up to 75 
bedroom o An Opportunity Area and within City 
Centre policy area  
o Surface water flooding requires 
mitigation  
o Known archaeology in the area, 
needs detailed assessment  
o Retain and improve  listed buildings 
and local heritage assets  
o Access can be addressed through 
planning and an appropriate 
transport strategy  
o Within the air quality management 
area o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
7.10 
o Local plan re-allocation  
o Subject of the Old 
Press/Mi ll Lane SPD 
2010  
 
 
58 Approximate number based on initial assessment in Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA); final number may be greater or smaller 
depending on detailed assessment and detailed design.   
59 Policies in the whole plan must be considered in the development of the sites. However, there are a number of items for each new site that an applicant 
should be particularly aware of and should consider early  when preparing detailed planning proposals. It should not be regarded as an exhaustive list; it is 
purely intended to be helpful in order to highlight known issues.  
60Summary of the status of the site where planning process has progressed, i.e. relationship to 2006 Local Plan, if it has outline planning permission, is under 
construction or has a pending planning application.  
61 The indicative capacity of this site is subject to detailed testing, including consideration of the site’s constraints, parti cularly  the historic environment.  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  266 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity58 Provisional issues identified59 Planning status60 
 
hotel and up 
to 1,000 sq 
m other 
uses  
U2 New 
Museums, 
Downing Street  1.97 University of 
Cambridge 
museums and 
faculties  Subject to 
detailed proposals for university -
related uses  o Within City Centre  
o Known archaeology in the area, 
needs detailed assessment  
o Retain and improve listed buildings  
o Vehicle access as existing; 
pedestrian access subject to 
review  
o Within the air quality management 
area o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
7.08 
o Local plan re-allocation  
 
U3 Grange Farm 
off Wilberforce Road  1.22 Uncultivated 
land and a 
tennis court  120 student 
units  o Surface water flood risk would 
require careful mitigation  
o Access arrangements would 
require careful mitigation  
o Site contains features of 
biodiversity importance.  
Development will only be permitted 
where it can be adequately 
demonstrated that proposals will o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
7.09 Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  267 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity58 Provisional issues identified59 Planning status60 
 
not have an adverse impact on 
biodiversity  
Residential Moorings  
Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity62 Provisional issues identified63 Planning status64 
 
RM1  Fen Road  0.98 Green space  Residential 
moorings 
use 
 o Known archaeology in the area, 
needs detailed assessment  
o Vehicular access to be assessed  o Cambridge Local 
Plan 2006 allocation 
3.01 
 
62 Approximate number based on initial assessment in Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA); final number may be greater or smaller 
depending on detailed assessment and detailed design.   
63 Policies in the whole plan must be considered in the development of the sites. However, there are a number of items for each new site that an applican t 
should be particularly aware of and should consider early when preparing detailed planning proposals. It should not be regarded as an exhaustive list; it is 
purely intended to be helpful in order to highlight known issues.  
64Summary of the status of the site where planning process has progressed, i.e. relationship to 2006 Local Plan, if it has outline planning permission, is under 
construction or has a pending planning application.  Appendix B: Proposals Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  268 Site Address  Area 
(ha) Existing uses  Capacity62 Provisional issues identified63 Planning status64 
 
Capacity to 
be 
assessed  o Local  plan re-
allocation  
 
 
 Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  269   
Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  270 Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
C.1 The schedules as listed below are all shown on the Policies Map, except 
for the List of Protected Public Houses.  Other important schedules relevant to planning include listed buildings, scheduled monuments, and registered Parks and Gardens. The maintenance of these schedules is not within the Council’s responsibility, but they can be found by contacting Historic England. Not all Parks and Gardens identified in the Council’s Designation Schedule are included on the national Register of Parks and Gardens. It should be noted that a number of Parks and Gardens also fall within the Council’s Protected Open Space designation as Parks and Gardens.  
Conservation areas (Policy 61)  
ID Conservation Area  Ward(s)  
01 Brooklands  Trumpington  
02 Central  Abbey, Arbury, Castle, East Chesterton, 
Market, Petersfield, Romsey, Trumpington, 
West Chesterton  
03 Chesterton  East Chesterton  
04 Conduit Head Road  Castle  
05 De Freville  West Chesterton  
06 Ferry Lane  East Chesterton  
07 Newnham Croft  Newnham  
08 Southacre  Trumpington  
09 Storey’s Way  Castle  
10 Trumpington  Trumpington  
11 West Cambridge  Castle, Newnham  
SSSIs  
ID SSSI  Ward  
01 Cherry Hinton Pit  Cherry Hinton  
02 Travellers’ Rest Pit  Castle  
 
 Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  271 Local nature reserves (Policy 69)  
ID Local Nature Reserve  Ward  
01 Barnwell East  Abbey  
02 Barnwell West  Abbey  
03 Bramblefields  East Chesterton  
04 Byron’s Pool  Trumpington  
05 Coldham's Common  Abbey  
06 East Pit  Cherry Hinton  
07 Limekiln Close  Cherry Hinton  
08 Logan's Meadow  East Chesterton  
09 Paradise  Newnham  
10 Sheep's Green and Coe Fen  Market, Newnham, Trumpington  
11 Stourbridge Common  Abbey  
12 West Pit  Cherry Hinton  
County wildlife sites (Policy 69)  
ID County Wildlife Site  Ward  
01 Barton Road Pool  Newnham  
02 Cambridge Botanic Gardens  Trumpington  
03 Coe Fen  Market, Trumpington  
04 Coldham's Common  Abbey, Romsey  
05 Coton Path Hedgerow  Newnham  
06 Hedgerows East of M11  Newnham  
07 Lime Kiln Close LNR  Cherry Hinton  
08 Lime Kiln Hill Reservoirs  Cherry Hinton  
09 Netherhall Farm Meadow  Queen Edith’s  
10 Paradise LNR  Newnham  
11 River Cam  Abbey, Arbury, Castle, East Chesterton, 
Newnham, Trumpington, West 
Chesterton  
12 Sheep's Green  Newnham  
13 Skaters' Meadow Group  Newnham  
14 Triangle North of Long Road  Trumpington  
15 Worts’ Causeway RSV  Cherry Hinton  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  272 City wildlife sites (Policy 69)  
ID City Wildlife Site  Ward  
01 Adams Road Sanctuary  Newnham  
02 Ascension Parish Burial Ground  Castle  
03 Barnwell Junction Disused Railway  Abbey  
04 Barnwell Junction Pastures  Abbey  
05 Barnwell Pit  Abbey  
06 Barnwell Road East LNR  Abbey  
07 Barnwell Road West LNR  Abbey  
08 Bentley Road Paddocks  Trumpington  
09 Bin Brook  Castle, Newnham  
10 Bird Sanctuary, Conduit Head  Castle  
11 Cherry Hinton Brook  Cherry Hinton, Coleridge, 
Romsey  
12 Cherry Hinton Churchyard  Cherry Hinton  
13 Cherry Hinton Hall Bird Sanctuary  Cherry Hinton  
14 Cherry Hinton Hall Brook  Cherry Hinton  
15 Clare Wood  Trumpington  
16 Coldham's Brook  Abbey  
17 Coldham's Lane Old Landfill Sites  Cherry Hinton  
18 CU Officer Training Corps Pit  Romsey  
19 Ditton Meadows  Abbey  
20 Drain at Garret Hostel Lane  Castle  
21 Eight Acre Wood and Seven Acre 
Wood  Trumpington  
22 Grantchester Road Plantations  Trumpington  
23 Hedgerow West of Babraham Road  Queen Edith’s  
24 Hobson's Brook Mid  Trumpington  
25 Hobson's Brook South  Trumpington  
26 Hobson's Conduit / Vicar's Brook  Trumpington  
27 Hobson's Conduit North  Trumpington  
28 King's Hedges Hedgerow  King’s Hedges  
29 Lime Kiln Road Verge and Hedge  Queen Edith’s  
30 Little St Mary's Churchyard  Market  
31 Logan's Meadow LNR  East Chesterton  
32 Long Road Plantation  Trumpington  
33 Love Lane Pollards  Cherry Hinton  
34 Lower Vicar's Brook, New Bit and 
Coe Fen Straits  Trumpington  
35 Meadow and Ditch Opposite King's 
College  Newnham  
36 Meadows and Drains  Trumpington  
37 Midsummer Common  Market  
38 Mill Road Cemetery  Petersfield  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  273 ID City Wildlife Site  Ward  
39 Milton Road Hedgerows  East Chesterton  
40 Norman Cement Pits  Coleridge  
41 Old Mill Plantation  Trumpington  
42 Perse Girls' School Reedbed  Trumpington  
43 Red Cross Lane Drain  Queen Edith’s  
44 Scrub East of M11 Verge  Newnham  
45 St Andrew's, Chesterton  East Chesterton  
46 Stourbridge Common  Abbey  
47 Teversham Drift Hedgerow  Cherry Hinton  
48 The Spinney and Hayster Open 
Space  Cherry Hinton  
49 Trinity Meadow  Castle  
50 Trumpington Dismantled Railway  Trumpington  
51 Trumpington Road Woodland  Trumpington  
 
 
Neighbourhood, district and local centres (Policies 6 and 72)  
ID Centre Type  Centre Name  Ward  
01 District Centre  Arbury Court  King’s Hedges  
02 District Centre  Cherry Hinton High Street  Cherry Hinton  
03 District Centre  Histon Road  Arbury  
04 District Centre  Mill Road East  Romsey  
05 District Centre  Mill Road West  Petersfield  
06 District Centre  Mitcham’s Corner  West Chesterton  
07 Local Centre  Arbury Road/Milton Road  West Chesterton  
08 Local Centre  Barnwell Road  Abbey  
09 Local Centre  Cherry Hinton Road East  Coleridge  
10 Local Centre  Cherry Hinton Road West  Coleridge  
11 Local Centre  Hills Road  Petersfield, 
Trumpington  
12 Local Centre  Hills Road/Cherry Hinton 
Road  Coleridge  
13 Local Centre  Newnham Road  Newnham  
14 Local Centre  Trumpington  Trumpington  
15 Local Centre  Station Area (CB1) (centre 
boundaries to be fixed once 
development is complete)  Trumpington  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  274 ID Centre Type  Centre Name  Ward  
16 Local Centre  NIAB 1(centre boundaries to 
be fixed once development is 
complete)  Castle  
17 Local Centre  University of Cambridge’s 
North West Cambridge Site 
(centre boundaries to be fixed 
once development is 
complete)  Castle  
18 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Adkins Corner  Coleridge  
19 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Akeman Street  Arbury  
20 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Campkin Road  King’s Hedges  
21 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Carlton Way  Arbury  
22 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Chesterton High Street  East Chesterton  
23 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Ditton Lane  Abbey  
24 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Fairfax Road   Romsey  
25 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Grantchester Street 
(Newnham)  Newnham  
26 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Green End Road  East Chesterton  
27 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Hawthorn Way  West Chesterton  
28 Neighbourhood 
Centre  King’s Hedges Road  King’s Hedges  
29 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Norfolk Street  Petersfield  
30 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Wulfstan Way  Queen Edith’s  
31 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Victoria Road  Arbury, West 
Chesterton  
32 Neighbourhood 
Centre  Clay Farm (centre boundaries 
to be fixed once development 
is complete)  Trumpington  
 
 
 
 Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  275  
 
 
Protected industrial sites (Policy 41)  
ID Protected Industrial Site  Ward  
01 King’s Hedges Road – Kirkwood 
Road / Kilmaine Estate  King’s Hedges  
02 Ditton Walk (North) – Beadle 
Industrial Estate  Abbey  
03 Mercers Row Industrial Estate  Abbey  
04 College Business Park, Coldham’s 
Lane  Cherry Hinton  
05 Ronald Rolph Court, Wadloes Road  Abbey  
06 Barnwell Business Park and 
Barnwell Drive  Abbey  
07 Coldham’s Lane Business Park, 
Coldham’s Lane  Cherry Hinton  
Protected open space (Policy 67)  
ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
A01 Allotments  Auckland Road 
Allotments  Market  
A02 Allotments  Baldock Way Allotments  Queen Edith’s  
A03 Allotments  Burnside Allotments  Coleridge  
A04 Allotments  Dawes Lane Allotments  Cherry Hinton  
A05 Allotments  Elfleda Road Allotments  Abbey  
A06 Allotments  Fairfax Road Allotments  Romsey  
A07 Allotments  Fanshawe Road 
Allotments  Coleridge  
A08 Allotments  Foster Road Allotments  Trumpington  
A09 Allotments  Empty Common 
Allotments  Trumpington  
A10 Allotments  Holbrook Road 
Allotments  Queen Edith’s  
A11 Allotments  Wenvoe Close 
Allotments and Paddock  Cherry Hinton  
A12 Allotments  Vinery Road Allotments  Romsey  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  276 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
A13 Allotments  New Street Allotments  Abbey  
A14 Allotments  Nuffield Road 
Allotments  East Chesterton  
A15 Allotments  Pakenham Close 
Allotments  East Chesterton  
A16 Allotments  Perne Road Allotments  Coleridge  
A17 Allotments  Stourbridge Grove 
Allotments  Romsey  
A18 Allotments  Bateson Road 
Allotments  West Chesterton  
A21 Allotments  Maple Close Allotments  East Chesterton  
A22 Allotments  Kendal Way Allotments  East Chesterton  
A25 Allotments  Hawthorn Way 
Allotments  West Chesterton  
A26 Allotments  Peverel Road 
Allotments  Abbey  
AGS01  Amenity Green 
Space  Blandford Way Play 
Area  Arbury  
AGS02  Amenity Green 
Space  Brooks Road Play Area  Romsey  
AGS04  Amenity Green 
Space  Ditton Fields Recreation 
Ground  Abbey  
AGS05  Amenity Green 
Space  Donkey Common  Petersfield  
AGS06  Amenity Green 
Space  Dudley Road 
Recreation Ground  Abbey  
AGS07  Amenity Green 
Space  Thorpe Way Play Area  Abbey  
AGS08  Amenity Green 
Space  Green End Road 
Recreation Ground  East Chesterton  
AGS09  Amenity Green 
Space  Montreal Square  Romsey  
AGS11  Amenity Green 
Space  Scotland Road 
Recreation Ground  East Chesterton  
AGS12  Amenity Green 
Space  Peter's Field  Petersfield  
AGS13  Amenity Green 
Space  Nuttings Road Amenity 
Green Space  Romsey  
AGS14  Amenity Green 
Space  Ravensworth Gardens  Petersfield  
AGS15  Amenity Green 
Space  Brownsfield Recreation 
Ground  East Chesterton  
AGS16  Amenity Green 
Space  Campkin Road/St. Kilda 
Avenue  King’s Hedges  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  277 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
AGS18  Amenity Green 
Space  Land at End of Moyne 
Close  King’s Hedges  
AGS19  Amenity Green 
Space  Land West of 43 
Ashvale  King’s Hedges  
AGS20  Amenity Green 
Space  Minerva Way Amenity 
Green Space  King’s Hedges  
AGS21  Amenity Green 
Space  Walker Court Amenity 
Green Space  King’s Hedges  
AGS22  Amenity Green 
Space  College Fields Amenity 
Green Spaces  West Chesterton  
AGS23  Amenity Green 
Space  Southacre Amenity 
Green Space  Trumpington  
AGS25  Amenity Green 
Space  Cripps Court, Selwyn 
College  Newnham  
AGS26  Amenity Green 
Space  Gonville And Caius 
(Finella)  Newnham  
AGS27  Amenity Green 
Space  Ferrars Way Amenity 
Green Space  Arbury  
AGS28  Amenity Green 
Space  Harris Road Amenity 
Green Space  Arbury  
AGS29  Amenity Green 
Space  Anstey Way Amenity 
Green Space  Trumpington  
AGS30  Amenity Green 
Space  Northampton Street 
Amenity Green Space  Castle  
AGS31  Amenity Green 
Space  Davy Road Amenity 
Green Space  Coleridge  
AGS32  Amenity Green 
Space  Fanshawe Road 
Amenity Green Space  Coleridge  
AGS33  Amenity Green 
Space  Silverwood Close 
Amenity Green Space  Abbey  
AGS34  Amenity Green 
Space  Staffordshire Gardens 
Amenit y Green Space  Petersfield  
AGS35  Amenity Green 
Space  Fulbourn Road Amenity 
Green Space  Cherry Hinton  
AGS36  Amenity Green 
Space  Amenity Green Space 
Outside 73- 87 Peverel 
Road  Abbey  
AGS37  Amenity Green 
Space  Amenity Green Space 
Outside 33- 47 Peverel 
Road  Abbey  
AGS38  Amenity Green 
Space  Rawlyn Road Amenity 
Green Space  Abbey  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  278 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
AGS39  Amenity Green 
Space  Jack Warren Green 
Large Amenity Open 
Space  Abbey  
AGS40  Amenity Green 
Space  Jack Warren Green 
Small Amenity Green 
Space  Abbey  
AGS41  Amenity Green 
Space  Queens Meadow 
Amenity Green Space  Cherry Hinton  
AGS42  Amenity Green 
Space  Brooklands Court 
Amenity Green Space  Trumpington  
AGS44  Amenity Green 
Space  Mill Road Amenity 
Green Space  Romsey  
AGS45  Amenity Green 
Space  Harvey Goodwin 
Gardens  Arbury  
AGS46  Amenity Green 
Space  Redfern Close Amenity 
Green Space  Arbury  
AGS47  Amenity Green 
Space  Rustat Avenue Amenity 
Green Space   Coleridge  
AGS48  Amenity Green 
Space  St Matthew's Gardens  Petersfield  
AGS49  Amenity Green 
Space  Mulberry Close Amenity 
Green Space  West Chesterton  
AGS50  Amenity Green 
Space  The Beeches Amenity 
Green Space  West Chesterton  
AGS51  Amenity Green 
Space  Victoria Almshouses 
Allotments and Amenity 
Green Space  West Chesterton  
AGS52  Amenity Green 
Space  Victoria Park  West Chesterton  
AGS53  Amenity Green 
Space  Fazeley House Amenity 
Green Space  West Chesterton  
AGS54  Amenity Green 
Space  Pearl Close Large 
Amenity Green Space  Petersfield  
AGS55  Amenity Green 
Space  Faculty of Education  East Chesterton  
AGS56  Amenity Green 
Space  Ditton Lane Amenity 
Green Space  Abbey  
AGS57  Amenity Green 
Space  Accordia Amenity 
Green Space  Trumpington  
AGS58  Amenity Green 
Space  Sherlock Close Amenity 
Green Space 2  Castle  
AGS59  Amenity Green 
Space  Sherlock Close Amenity 
Green Space 1  Castle  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  279 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
AGS60  Amenity Green 
Space  Westminster College  Castle  
AGS61  Amenity Green 
Space  Pye Meadow  East Chesterton  
AGS62  Amenity Green 
Space  The Pightle and 
Principal’s Lodge  Newnham  
AGS63  Amenity Green 
Space  Fison Road Amenity 
Green Space  Abbey  
AGS64  Amenity Green 
Space  St Mary's Amenity 
Green Space  Trumpington  
AGS65  Amenity Green 
Space  Hanson Court Amenity 
Green Space  King’s Hedges  
AGS66  Amenity Green 
Space  Hughes Hall Amenity 
Green Space  Petersfield  
AGS67  Amenity Green 
Space  Pinehurst  Newnham  
AGS68  Amenity Green 
Space  Borrowdale Amenity 
Green Space  Arbury  
AGS70  Amenity Green 
Space  Carisbrooke Road 
Amenity Green Space  Castle  
AGS71  Amenity Green 
Space  Peverel Road Small 
Amenity Green Space  Abbey  
AGS72  Amenity Green 
Space  Barnwell Road Amenity 
Green Space  Abbey  
AGS73  Amenity Green 
Space  Wadloes Road Amenity 
Green Space  Abbey  
AGS74  Amenity Green 
Space  Hampden Gardens  Romsey  
AGS75  Amenity Green 
Space  Whitehill Close Amenity 
Green Space  Abbey  
AGS76  Amenity Green 
Space  Tiverton Estate Amenity 
Green Spaces  Abbey  
AGS77  Amenity Green 
Space  St Thomas's Square 
Amenity Green Spaces  Coleridge  
AGS78  Amenity Green 
Space  Corrie Road Cut 
Through  Coleridge  
AGS79  Amenity Green 
Space  Abbey House  Coleridge  
AGS80  Amenity Green 
Space  Brother's Place Amenity 
Green Space  Coleridge  
AGS81  Amenity Green 
Space  Derwent Close Amenity 
Green Space  Coleridge  
AGS82  Amenity Green 
Space  Greystoke Road 
Amenity Green Space  Cherry Hinton  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  280 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
AGS83  Amenity Green 
Space  Kelsey Crescent 
Amenity Green Space  Cherry Hinton  
AGS84  Amenity Green 
Space  Ditton Fields Amenity 
Green Space  Abbey  
AGS85  Amenity Green 
Space  Centre for Mathematical 
Sciences  Newnham  
AGS86  Amenity Green 
Space  Cannons Green  Petersfield  
AGS87  Amenity Green 
Space  Northfield Avenue  King’s Hedges  
AGS88  Amenity Green 
Space  Mill Road Cemetery 
Lane  Petersfield  
AGS89  Amenity Green 
Space  Wulfstan Way  Queen Edith’s  
AGS90  Amenity Green 
Space  Nightingale Avenue  Queen Edith’s  
AGS91  Amenity Green 
Space  Alex Wood Road  Arbury  
AGS92  Amenity Green 
Space  Rutland Close  Arbury  
AGS93  Amenity Green 
Space  Petworth Street  Petersfield  
AGS94  Amenity Green 
Space  Verulam Way  Arbury  
AGS95  Amenity Green 
Space  Warren Close  Trumpington  
AGS96  Amenity Green 
Space  Leys School entrance  Trumpington  
AGS97  Amenity Green 
Space  Sedgwick Site  Newnham  
AGS98  Amenity Green 
Space  Kingsway  Arbury  
AGS99  Amenity Green 
Space  Grasmere Gardens  West Chesterton  
AGS100  Amenity Green 
Space  Grantchester Road  Trumpington  
AGS101  Amenity Green 
Space  Topham Way  Arbury  
AGS102  Amenity Green 
Space  Fallowfields  East Chesterton  
AGS103  Amenity Green 
Space  Chesterton Road  East Chesterton  
AGS104  Amenity Green 
Space  Wycliffe Road  Romsey  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  281 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
CEM01  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  Trumpington Church 
Extension Churchyard  Trumpington  
CEM02  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  Trumpington Church 
Cemetery (St Mary & St 
Michael's Church)  Trumpington  
CEM03  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  Newmarket Road 
Cemetery  Abbey  
CEM04  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  Church End Cemetery 
(St Andrew's Church)  Cherry Hinton  
CEM05  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  Histon Road Cemetery  Arbury  
CEM06  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  Mill Road Cemetery  Petersfield  
CEM07  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  St Andrew’s Church 
Cemetery  East Chesterton  
CEM08  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  All Souls Lane 
(Ascension) Cemetery  Castle  
CEM09  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  St Mary the Less 
Churchyard  Market  
CEM10  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  St Giles' Churchyard  Arbury  
CEM11  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  St Peter's Churchyard  Castle  
CEM12  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  St Luke’s Churchyard  Arbury  
CEM13  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  Abbey Church (St 
Andrew -the-less or 
Barnwell Priory)  Abbey  
CEM14  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  St Clement's Church  Market  
CEM15  Cemeteries and 
Churchyards  Church of JC Latter -Day 
Saints  Cherry Hinton  
CIV01  Civic Spaces  War Memorial Square  Abbey  
CIV02  Civic Spaces  Fisher Square  Market  
CIV03  Civic Spaces  Market Place  Market  
CIV04  Civic Spaces  Cambridge Leisure Park  Coleridge  
CIV05  Civic Spaces  Station Road War 
Memorial  Trumpington  
CYP01  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Cameron Road Play 
Area  King’s Hedges  
CYP02  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Beales Way Play Area  King’s Hedges  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  282 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
CYP03  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Ramsden Square Play 
Area  King’s Hedges  
CYP04  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Penarth Place Play 
Area  Newnham  
CYP05  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Play Area Behind 70 -78 
Hazelwood Close  Arbury  
CYP06  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Ainsworth Street Play 
Area  Petersfield  
CYP07  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Ravensworth Gardens 
Toddler Play Area  Petersfield  
CYP08  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Flower Street Play Area  Petersfield  
CYP09  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Shenstone Play area  Petersfield  
CYP10  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  St Thomas' Road Play 
Area  Coleridge  
CYP11  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Gunhild Way Play Area  Queen Edith's  
CYP12  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Peverel Road Play Area  Abbey  
CYP13  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Reilly Way Play Area  Cherry Hinton  
CYP14  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Velos Walk Play Area  Abbey  
CYP15  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Albion Yard Children's 
Play Area  Castle  
CYP16  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Arbury Local Centre 
Play Area  King’s Hedges  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  283 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
CYP17  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Bateson Road Play 
Area  West Chesterton  
CYP18  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Hazelwood Close 
Toddler Play Area  Arbury  
CYP19  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Pearl Close Toddler 
Play Area  East Chesterton  
CYP20  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Hawkins Road 
Children's Play Area  King’s Hedges  
CYP21  Spaces for 
Children  and 
Young People  St Matthew's Primary 
School  Petersfield  
CYP22  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Chestnut Grove 
Recreation Ground  West Chesterton  
CYP23  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Ainsdale Children's Play 
Area  Cherry Hinton  
CYP24  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Holbrook Road 
Children's Play Space  Queen Edith's  
CYP25  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Discovery Way 
Children's Play Space  East Chesterton  
CYP26  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Castle School 
Playground  West Chesterton  
CYP27  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Kathleen Elliot Way 
Children's Play Space  Cherry Hinton  
CYP28  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  River Lane Play Area  Abbey  
CYP29  Spaces for 
Children and 
Young People  Humphreys Road  Arbury  
NAT01  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Bramblefields Local 
Nature Reserve  East Chesterton  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  284 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
NAT02  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Byron's Pool Local 
Nature Reserve  Trumpington  
NAT03  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Limekiln Close Local 
Nature Reserve  Cherry Hinton  
NAT04  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Logans Meadow Local 
Nature Reserve  East Chesterton  
NAT05  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Paradise Nature 
Reserve Newnham  
NAT06  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Sheep’s Green & Coe 
Fen Newnham  
NAT07  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Stourbridge Common  Abbey  
NAT08  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Barnwell Pit (Lake)  Abbey  
NAT09  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Barnwell Jun ction 
Pasture and Disused 
Railway  Abbey  
NAT10  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Ditton Meadows  Abbey  
NAT11  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Spinney – Blue Circle  Coleridge  
NAT12  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Wetland Area (Perse 
School Playing Fields)  Trumpington  
NAT13  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Lynfield Lane  East Chesterton  
NAT14  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  West Pit SSSI (Limekiln 
Caravan Club)  Cherry Hinton  
NAT15  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  East Pit (south of 
Limekiln Close LNR)  Cherry Hinton  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  285 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
NAT16  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Limekiln Hill Reservoirs  Cherry Hinton  
NAT17  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Madingley Rise 
Meadow  Castle  
NAT18  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Barton Road Lake  Newnham  
NAT19  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Meadow Triangle near 
Wilberforce Road and 
Cycle Way  Newnham  
NAT20  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Conduit Head Road 
Lake  Castle  
NAT22  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Adams Road Sanctuary 
(Lake)  Newnham  
NAT23  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  M11 Verge and Scrub 
East of M11  Newnham  
NAT24  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Traveller's Rest Pit 
(SSSI)  Castle  
NAT25  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Netherhall Farm 
Meadow  Queen Edith's  
NAT26  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Meadow & Small Wood 
(Peterhouse) – South of 
Hayster Drive  Cherry Hinton  
NAT28  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Lakes Adjacent to 
Cherry Hinton Brook  Coleridge  
NAT29  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Emmanuel College 
Gardens  Market  
NAT30  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Barnwell East Local 
Nature Reserve  Abbey  
NAT31  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Barnwell West Local 
Nature Reserve  Abbey  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  286 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
NAT32  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Hayster Drive Open 
Space  Cherry Hinton  
NAT33  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Empty Common 
(Copses and Pastures)  Trumpington  
NAT34  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Brookside  Trumpington  
NAT35  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  The Grove  Newnham  
NAT36  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Giant's Grave  Cherry Hinton  
NAT37  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Former Landfill Site 
West of Norman Way  Cherry Hinton  
NAT38  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Former Landfill Site 
East of Norman Way  Cherry Hinton  
NAT39  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  River Cam Residential 
Gardens  East Chesterton  
NAT40  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Disused Railwa y Line 
North of Ronald Rolph 
Court  Abbey  
NAT41  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Cobbetts Corner  Newnham  
NAT42  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Land Between River 
And 7 To 11 Capstan 
Close  East Chesterton  
NAT43  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Land opposite Paradise 
Nature Reserve  Trumpington  
NAT44  Natural and Semi -
natural Green 
Spaces  Coldham's Common  Abbey  
P&G01  Parks and 
Gardens  Alexandra Gardens  Arbury  
P&G02  Parks and 
Gardens  Arbury Town Park  King’s Hedges  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  287 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
P&G03  Parks and 
Gardens  Cherry Hinton Hall  Cherry Hinton  
P&G04  Parks and 
Gardens  Cherry Hinton 
Recreation Ground  Cherry Hinton  
P&G05  Parks and 
Gardens  Chesterton Recreation 
Ground  East Chesterton  
P&G06  Parks and 
Gardens  Christ's Pieces  Market  
P&G07  Parks and 
Gardens  Coleridge Recreation 
Ground  Coleridge  
P&G08  Parks and 
Gardens  Histon Road Recreation 
Ground  Castle  
P&G09  Parks and 
Gardens  Jesus Green  Market  
P&G10  Parks and 
Gardens  King's Hedges 
Recreation Ground  King’s Hedges  
P&G11  Parks and 
Gardens  Lammas Land  Newnham  
P&G12  Parks and 
Gardens  Midsummer Common  Market  
P&G13  Parks and 
Gardens  New Square  Market  
P&G14  Parks and 
Gardens  Nightingale Avenue 
Recreation Ground  Queen Edith's  
P&G15  Parks and 
Gardens  Nun's Way Recreation 
Ground  King’s Hedges  
P&G16  Parks and 
Gardens  Parker's Piece  Market  
P&G17  Parks and 
Gardens  Bell School of 
Language  Queen Edith's  
P&G18  Parks and 
Gardens  Romsey Recreation 
Ground  Romsey  
P&G19  Parks and 
Gardens  St. Albans Road 
Recreation Ground  Arbury  
P&G20  Parks and 
Gardens  St. Matthew's Piece  Petersfield  
P&G21  Parks and 
Gardens  Trumpington Recreation 
Ground (King George V 
Memorial Playing Field)  Trumpington  
P&G23  Parks and 
Gardens  St John's College 
Gardens  Castle  
P&G24  Parks and 
Gardens  Cambridge University 
Observatory  Castle  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  288 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
P&G25  Parks and 
Gardens  Edgecombe Flats 
Green  King’s Hedges  
P&G26  Parks and 
Gardens  Church End Green 
Space  Cherry Hinton  
P&G27  Parks and 
Gardens  Cambridge University 
Botanic Garden  Trumpington  
P&G28  Parks and 
Gardens  Jubilee Gardens  Arbury  
P&G29  Parks and 
Gardens  Magdalene College 
Grounds  Castle  
P&G30  Parks and 
Gardens  Causeway Park  East Chesterton  
P&G31  Parks and 
Gardens  Queens' College  Newnham  
P&G32  Parks and 
Gardens  Trinity College Gardens  Castle  
P&G33  Parks and 
Gardens  Christ's College 
Gardens  Market  
P&G34  Parks and 
Gardens  Peterhouse Gardens  Market  
P&G35  Parks and 
Gardens  King's College  Newnham  
P&G36  Parks and 
Gardens  Pembroke College 
Gardens  Market  
P&G37  Parks and 
Gardens  Ridley Hall Grounds  Newnham  
P&G38  Parks and 
Gardens  Gonville and Caius 
Fellows Garden  Newnham  
P&G39  Parks and 
Gardens  Selwyn College 
Gardens  Newnham  
P&G40  Parks and 
Gardens  Newnham College 
Gardens  Newnham  
P&G41  Parks and 
Gardens  Wychfield  Castle  
P&G42  Parks and 
Gardens  Lucy Cavendish College  Castle  
P&G43  Parks and 
Gardens  Fitzwilliam College 
Gardens  Castle  
P&G44  Parks and 
Gardens  Murray Edwards 
College Gardens  Castle  
P&G45  Parks and 
Gardens  Castle Mound  Castle  
P&G46  Parks and 
Gardens  Homerton College 
Gardens  Queen Edith's  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  289 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
P&G47  Parks and 
Gardens  St Edmund's College 
Gardens  Castle  
P&G48  Parks and 
Gardens  Trinity Hall Gardens  Castle  
P&G49  Parks and 
Gardens  Gonville and Caius 
College Gardens  Castle  
P&G50  Parks and 
Gardens  Clare College Gardens  Newnham  
P&G51  Parks and 
Gardens  Anstey Hall  Trumpington  
P&G52  Parks and 
Gardens  Sidney Sussex College 
Gardens  Market  
P&G53  Parks and 
Gardens  Robinson College 
Gardens  Newnham  
P&G54  Parks and 
Gardens  Trinity College Fellows 
Garden  Castle  
P&G55  Parks and 
Gardens  Trinity College - 
Burrell's Field  Castle  
P&G56  Parks and 
Gardens  Corpus Christi  Market  
P&G57  Parks and 
Gardens  Clare Hall Scholars 
Garden  Newnham  
SPO01  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Barnwell Road 
Recreation Ground  Abbey  
SPO02  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cambridge City Football 
Club West Chesterton  
SPO03  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cambridge Football 
Stadium  Trumpington  
SPO04  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Arbury County Primary 
School  West Chesterton  
SPO05  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cambridge Rugby 
Football Club  Newnham  
SPO06  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cambridge Tennis & 
Hockey Club  Newnham  
SPO07  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cambridge United FC  Abbey  
SPO08  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Chesterton Community 
College  West Chesterton  
SPO10  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Churchill College 
Grounds  Castle  
SPO11  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Clare College Playing 
Fields  Trumpington  
SPO12  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Coleridge Community 
College Playing Fi elds Coleridge  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  290 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
SPO13  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Colville County Primary 
School  Cherry Hinton  
SPO14  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Corpus Christi Playing 
Fields  Newnham  
SPO15  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cambridge University 
Press Playing Fields  Trumpington  
SPO16  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Emmanuel College 
Playing Field  Newnham  
SPO17  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Fawcett Primary School  Trumpington  
SPO18  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Fenners Cricket Ground  Petersfield  
SPO19  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Fitzwilliam College 
Playing Fields  Castle  
SPO20  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Gonville and Caius 
College Playing Fields  Newnham  
SPO21  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Grove Primary School  King’s Hedges  
SPO22  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Hills Road Sport Centre 
(Tennis Courts)  Queen Edith's  
SPO24  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Jesus College  Market  
SPO25  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  King's Hedges County 
Primary School  King’s Hedges  
SPO26  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  King’s College School  Newnham  
SPO27  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Leys School Playing 
Field  Trumpington  
SPO28  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Leys and St Faiths 
Schools Playing Field  Trumpington  
SPO29  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Long Road Sixth Form 
College  Queen Edith's  
SPO30  Outdoor Sports 
Faciliti es Manor Community 
College Playing Fields  King’s Hedges  
SPO31  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Netherhall School 
(South)  Queen Edith's  
SPO32  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Queen Emma Primary 
School  Queen Edith's  
SPO33  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Newnham College 
Playing Field  Newnham  
SPO34  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Newnham Croft Primary 
School  Newnham  
SPO35  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Pembroke, Peterhouse, 
Downing, St. Newnham  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  291 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
Catherine's and Christ's 
Colleges  
SPO36  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Perse Preparatory 
School (Peterhouse 
College)  Trumpington  
SPO37  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Perse School For Boys 
Playing Field  Queen Edith's  
SPO38  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Perse School For Girls 
Playing Field  Trumpington  
SPO39  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Abbey Meadows 
Primary School  Abbey  
SPO40  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Queen Edith Primary 
School  Queen Edith's  
SPO41  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  University Croquet & 
Tennis Club (Cocks & 
Hens Lawn Tennis 
Club)  Newnham  
SPO42  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Spinney County Primary 
School  Cherry Hinton  
SPO43  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  St. Andrews Primary 
School  East Chesterton  
SPO44  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  St Bede's School  Coleridge  
SPO45  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  St Faith's Playing Field  Trumpington  
SPO46  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  St John’s and 
Magdalene Colleges 
Playing Field  Castle  
SPO47  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  St Lawrence Catholic 
Primary School  King’s Hedges  
SPO48  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  St Luke's Primary 
School  Arbury  
SPO49  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  St Mary's School 
Playing Field  Trumpington  
SPO50  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Trinity College Playing 
Field  Newnham  
SPO51  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Trinity Hall Ground  Castle  
SPO52  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  University Athletics 
Track  Newnham  
SPO53  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  University Rugby Club  Newnham  
SPO54  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  University Rugby Club 
Practice Ground  Newnham  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  292 ID Protected Open 
Space Type  Protected Open Space 
Name  Ward  
SPO55  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Chesterton Community 
College Playing Field  West Chesterton  
SPO56  Outdoor  Sports 
Facilities  Milton Road Primary 
School  West Chesterton  
SPO58  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Mayfield Primary School  Castle  
SPO59  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Hills Road Sixth Form 
College Playing Fields /  
Cantabrigian Rugby 
Football Grounds  Queen Edith's  
SPO60  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cambridge Lakes Golf 
Course  Trumpington  
SPO61  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cambridge and County 
Bowling Club  Trumpington  
SPO62  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Perse Preparatory 
School  Trumpington  
SPO63  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Downing College  Market  
SPO65  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Chesterton Bowls Club  East Chesterton  
SPO66  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Trinity College Hockey 
Field  Newnham  
SPO67  Outdoor Sports 
Facilities  Cherry Hinton Infants 
School  Cherry Hinton  
 
List of protected public houses (Policy 76)  
 
While the other sites listed in this appendix are shown on the Policies Map, the 
following list of protected public houses are not shown on the Policies Map. 
ID Pub Site  Address  Ward  
PH001  The Corner House  231 Newmarket Road  Abbey  
PH002  Five Bells  126-128 Newmarket 
Road  Abbey  
PH003  The Seven Stars  249 Newmarket Road  Abbey  
PH004  The Wrestlers  337 Newmarket Road  Abbey  
PH005  (former 
Blackamoors Head)  205 Victoria Road  Arbury  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  293 ID Pub Site  Address  Ward  
PH006  The Carlton Arms  Carlton Way  Arbury  
PH007  The Carpenters 
Arms  182-186 Victoria Road  Arbury  
PH008  The Grapes  19 Histon Road  Arbury  
PH010  Castle Inn  36-38 Castle Street  Castle  
PH011  The Architect  43 Castle Street  Castle  
PH012  The Pickerel Inn  30 Magdalene Street  Castle  
PH013  The Punter  3 Pound Hill  Castle  
PH014  Sir Isaac Newton  84 Castle Street  Castle  
PH015  St Johns Chop 
House  21-24 Northampton 
Street  Castle  
PH016  Travellers Rest  Huntingdon Road  Castle  
PH017  Red Lion  20 Mill End Road  Cherry Hinton  
PH018  Robin Hood  1 Fulbourn Road  Cherry Hinton  
PH020  Rhode Island  15 High Street  Cherry Hinton  
PH021  The Med  Perne Road  Coleridge  
PH022  The Rock  200 Cherry Hinton Road  Coleridge  
PH023  Green Dragon  5 Water Street  East Chesterton  
PH024  The Haymakers  54 High Street  East Chesterton  
PH026  The Golden Hind  355 Milton Road  King’s Hedges  
PH027  The Jenny Wren  80 Campkin Road  King’s Hedges  
PH028  The Ship  Northfield Avenue  King’s Hedges  
PH029  All Bar One  36 St Andrews Street  Market  
PH030  The Anchor  Silver Street  Market  
PH031  (former Ancient 
Druids)  Napier Street  Market  
PH032  The Grain & Hop 
Store  69-73 Regent Street  Market  
PH033  Duke of 
Cambridge  176 East Road  Market  
PH034  Baron Of Beef  19 Bridge Street  Market  
PH035  Baroosh  8 Market Passage  Market  
PH036  The Bath House  3 Bene't Street  Market  
PH037  Navadhanya 
(former Bird in 
Hand)  73 Newmarket Road  Market  
PH038  The Burleigh Arms  9-11 Newmarket Road  Market  
PH039  The Cambridge 
Brew House  1 King Street  Market  
PH040  The Castle  37 St Andrews Street  Market  
PH041  Champion Of The 
Thames  68 King Street  Market  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  294 ID Pub Site  Address  Ward  
PH042  Clarendon Arms  35-36 Clarendon Street  Market  
PH043  Reys (former The 
Cow)  Corn Exchange Street  Market  
PH044  d'Arrys Cookhouse  4 King Street  Market  
PH045  The Eagle  Bene't Street  Market  
PH046  The Elm Tree  Orchard Street  Market  
PH047  The First and Last  18 Melbourne Place  Market  
PH048  Fort St George  Midsummer Common,  Market  
PH049  The Fountain Inn  12 Regent Street  Market  
PH050  The Free Press  7 Prospect Row  Market  
PH051  The Hopbine  11-12 Fair Street  Market  
PH052  King Street Run  86-88 King Street  Market  
PH053  Las Iguanas  Quayside  Market  
PH054  The Maypole  20a Portugal Place  Market  
PH055  The Mill  14 Mill Lane  Market  
PH056  The Mitre  17-18 Bridge Street  Market  
PH057  (former Old 
Orleans)  Miller's Yard, Mill Lane  Market  
PH058  Prince Regent  91 Regent Street  Market  
PH059  Quinns Pub  20 Downing Street  Market  
PH060  The Regal  38-39 St Andrews Street  Market  
PH061  Revolution  3-8 Downing Street  Market  
PH062  (former Slug & 
Lettuce)  34-35 Green Street  Market  
PH063  The Snug  170 East Road  Market  
PH064  St Radegund  129 King Street  Market  
PH065  The Tram Depot  2-5 Dover Street  Market  
PH067  The Granta  14 Newnham Terrace  Newnham  
PH068  The Red Bull  11 Barton Road  Newnham  
PH069  The Alexandra 
Arms  22-24 Gwydir Street  Petersfield  
PH070  The Cambridge 
Blue 85-87 Gwydir Street  Petersfield  
PH071  Devonshire Arms  1 Devonshire Road  Petersfield  
PH072  The Dobblers Inn  184 Sturton Street  Petersfield  
PH073  The Emperor  21 Hills Road  Petersfield  
PH074  The Geldart  1 Ainsworth Street  Petersfield  
PH075  The Great 
Northern  1-3 Station Road  Petersfield  
PH076  Kingston Arms  33 Kingston Street  Petersfield  
PH077  Live And Let Live  40 Mawson Road  Petersfield  Appendix C: Designations Schedule  
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018  295 ID Pub Site  Address  Ward  
PH078  (former 
Locomotive)  44 Mill Road  Petersfield  
PH079  Blue Moon  2 Norfolk Street  Petersfield  
PH080  The Salisbury 
Arms  76 Tenison Road  Petersfield  
PH081  Six Bells  11 Covent Garden  Petersfield  
PH082  The White Swan  109 Mill Road  Petersfield  
PH083  Queen Edith  Wulfstan Way  Queen Edith’s  
PH084  Earl Of 
Beaconsfield  133 Mill Road  Romsey  
PH085  The Brook  25 Brookfields  Romsey  
PH086  The Empress  72 Thoday Street  Romsey  
PH087  The Royal 
Standard  292 Mill Road  Romsey  
PH088  The Alma  26 Russell Court  Trumpington  
PH089  (former Cross 
Keys)  9 Saxon Street  Trumpington  
PH090  Earl Of Derby  129 Hills Road  Trumpington  
PH091  The Flying Pig  106 Hills Road  Trumpington  
PH092  The Green Man  55 High Street  Trumpington  
PH093  The Oak Bistro  6 Lensfield Road  Trumpington  
PH094  Panton Arms  43 Panton Street  Trumpington  
PH095  The Snug  67 Lensfield Road  Trumpington  
PH096  Hudson's Ale 
House  77 High Street  Trumpington  
PH097  The Lord Byron Inn  22 Church Lane  Trumpington  
PH098  (former Volunteer)  60 Trumpington Road  Trumpington  
PH099  The Boathouse  14 Chesterton Road  West Chesterton  
PH100  The Milton Arms  205 Milton Road  West Chesterton  
PH101  The Old Spring  1 Ferry Path  West Chesterton  
PH102  The Portland Arms  129 Chesterton Road  West Chesterton  
PH103  The Tivoli  16 Chesterton Road  West Chesterton  
PH104  The Waterman  32 Chesterton Road  West Chesterton  
PH105  The Pint Shop  10 Peas Hill  Market  
PH106  The Old Bicycle 
Shop  104 Regent Street  Market  
 
  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
296   
Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
297 Appendix D: Southern fringe area development 
framework  
Introduction and purpose  
 
D.1 This appendix is based on the Southern Fringe Area Development 
Framework (ADF) document produced by Cambridge City Council in 2006.  The wording of this appendix is predominantly based on the 2006 document, but updated slightly where it is appropriate to do so.  It has been included in the local plan to reiterate the council's support for the Framework's content (as updated) and to ensure its status is strengthened by virtue of it being included in a local plan.  This appendix will help direct the preparation of future planning applications and the planning  of services and infrastructure. The vision for this area 
is: 
 
‘The vision for the Southern Fringe is to create a distinctive new urban 
extension to the city to meet a range of needs for the Cambridge area, including additional housing close to an existing employment area, new 
employment opportunities, the expansion of clinical facilities and biomedical and biotechnology activities, related higher education and research institutes, and improved access to the countryside. The extension will incorporate open space to serve the residents of the new development, Cambridge City and South Cambridgeshire and opportunities will be taken to enhance amenity, biodiversity and access to the Green Belt.’  
 
D.2 The document is the culmination of extensive consultation, which occurred between October 2003 and November 2005. This consultation 
involved local residents, stakeholders, developers and other interested parties.  
 
D.3 South Cambridgeshire District Council has prepared an Area Action Plan 
(AAP) for the Southern Fringe in respect of land within South 
Cambridgeshire. It is important that this appendix is read in conjunction with the AAP, which provides more detailed policy in respect of Trumpington Meadows for the land with South Cambridgeshire.  
 
D.4 This appendix supports Policy 18  and sets out:  
 
• locations for supportive land uses such as community facilities;  
• a transport and movement network that builds on the broader 
existing and planning transport routes as well as the key routes proposed as part of the emerging individual master plans;  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
298 • an urban design strategy, which will provide the broader guidance 
to the preferred massing, building height, density, streetscape and other details relevant to the Southern Fringe as a whole and to individual sites in particular;  
• requirements for creating a sustainable community; and  
• a strategy for planning obligations.  
 
Figure D.1: Cambridge Southern Fringe’s major development sites  
 
 
 
Principal junctions, Addenbrooke’s Road and parking management  
 
D.5 The development of a transport and movement strategy for the 
Cambridge Southern Fringe relies on the interrelationship of several key 
components. It is important that these components work together, and place sustainability at the heart of the strategy. The components consider ed in this section include: principal road junctions, the 
Addenbrooke’s Road, public transport, and cycle, pedestrian and countryside access.  
 
Principal road junctions  
 
D.6 Principal road junctions within the Southern Fringe will include the following:  
Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
299 • Hauxton Road and Addenbrooke’s Road;  
• Addenbrooke’s Road and Shelford Road;  
• the intersection of the Addenbrooke’s Road within the Showground 
site; 
• the ‘break point’ (public transport/taxi through movement only) within the Clay Farm site; and  
• Long Road and the principal route into Clay Farm.  
 
D.7 Each of the above intersections requires detailed consideration in terms of the orientation and setback of buildings, landscape, signage and pedestrian/cycle crossing points. Cambridgeshire County Council is the authorit y charged with the preparation and/or approval of the detailed 
road designs, and the Council will be working cooperatively with Cambridgeshire County Council to secure a high quality junction for each of the above locations.  
 
Addenbrooke’s Road  
 
D.8 The construction of Addenbrooke’s Road was a major factor in permitting 
improved access to the existing and future facilities on the 
Addenbrooke’s and Cambridge Biomedical Campus. It acts as a primary arterial route connecting the various sites of the Southern Fringe. The road carries high volumes of traffic, which in design terms restricts the number of intersections to relatively few locations, which have been demonstrated through detailed traffic study to be able to accommodate the anticipated traffic. It is important to note that the route does not provide a through route from the west through Addenbrooke’s to Babraham Road.  
 
D.9 In respect of building/development frontage, the road passes through three separate sections: Hauxton to Shelford Road, Shelford Road to Hobson's Conduit, and Hobson's Conduit to Addenbrooke's Hospital. In 
the section between Shelford Road and Hobson's Conduit, the road passes through the Showground site.  
 
  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
300 Addenbrooke’s site traffic and parking management  
 
D.10 Car parking provision for the Addenbrooke’s site will need to be 
determined through a transport strategy and by negotiation. In the light 
of the high level of public transport accessibility to the site, the Council will seek to generally minimise the amount of non- essential car parking  
for all uses within the campus, in order to limit impact as a result of increased traffic. Parking for disabled people provision will need to be provided close to building entrances. Car parking standards for the Addenbrooke’s site will need to comply with standards set out in the local plan.  
 
Public transport networks  
 
D.11 Any strategies for public transport must be led by Cambridgeshire 
County Council, in partnership with the local authorities, bus companies 
and developers. The Council has prepared this appendix to act as a basis for further discussion, negotiation and detailed route planning. The proposed public transport strategy for the Southern Fringe aims to build upon the existing network and to extend and enhance coverage to 
include the development  sites. 
 
D.12 The strategy uses the two transport interchanges at Trumpington Park 
and Ride and Addenbrooke’s Hospital. Opportunities to include more bus 
stops or to review existing provision will be explored to create an efficient and logical network. Trumpington Local Centre should also provide a destination for bus routes, as should proposed ‘nodes’ in the new development areas.  
 
D.13 The aim will be to ensure that there is a series of well -connected and 
high quality pedestrian and cycle routes connecting to the public transport network to help make such modes more attractive than private car trips. This will be realised through ensuring that the majority of development is not more than a five- minute or 400m walk to stops.  
 
Cycling and pedestrian networks  
 
D.14 Each development site within the Southern Fringe will need to have both an individual walking and cycling route plan within the site, as well as a plan demonstrating well -connected routes to other sites and existing 
development, especially to Trumpington. Opportunities exist to complement existing routes and further enhance this provision and Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
301 create better connections with the countryside. It is expected that key 
roads within each development site will be designed to include a separate, or on- road, cycle route.  
 
D.15 All the development sites should be as permeable to cyclists and 
pedestrians as possible. Cyclists can generally be accommodated without any special provision on roads that have been designed to achieve a target speed limit of 20mph. In addition to the road network, 
separate pedestrian/cycle routes will be necessary to link areas of housing to each other and to community facilities. This may be where no direct road route exists or to provide a safer alternative to a busy road. Off-road links can generally be shared by cycles/pedestrians if they are 
at least 3.5m wide.  
 
D.16 However, where the flows are likely to be high, such as main links to schools /shops or other community facilities, segregation by level should be considered. Cycle links that are perceived as being ‘pedestrian surfaces’ should be avoided.  
 
D.17 The National Cycle Route 11 from Shelford needs to link to the 
Addenbrooke's Road, allowing cyclists to travel both to Addenbrooke's 
and towards the Showground site and beyond. Cyclists also need to be able to cross the railway line and link to the proposed cycleway along the 
proposed Cambridgeshire Busway route, possibly across the green corridor. This may require a ‘loop’ for cyclists and pedestrians.  
 
D.18 A route through to Grantchester Road/Church Lane could pr ovide a 
useful route to the City Centre for cyclists. A section of shared use path on the south side of Grantchester Road to a point where visibility is sufficient for a signalised crossing may be required. A route to Hauxton should be provided using the existing bridge over the M11, which could link through the site to a cycleway on the disused railway route, Addenbrooke’s Road, Church End and Grantchester. As well as an internal route, an off -road link at the edge of the site could be considered. 
A ‘leisu re’ route could be provided to run parallel to the road to link the 
development with the path to Byron's Pool local nature reserve.  
 
D.19 In regards to the Bell School site, the most attractive access point for non-car users will be Greenlands, which links through to Addenbrooke's, 
including the bus interchange. A link through the site to the National Cycle Network Route 11 from Great Shelford must be provided, to link with Robinson Way.  
 
D.20 In regards to Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Robinson Way will be an important 
link for cyclists to access Long Road and the rest of the site. Cycle lanes 
(of at least 1.5m) may be necessary unless vehicle speeds will be kept to 20mph by traffic calming, and on- road parking must be prohibited on 
future adopted public roads constructed as part of the Addenbrooke’s 2020 development. The link between Robinson Way and Red Cross Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
302 Lane will require improvements for on- road cyclists to turn right on the 
sharp bend.  
 
Countryside access  
 
D.21 Development of the Cambridge Southern Fringe should contribute 
toward the regional network of public rights of way for vulnerable traffic 
(walkers, cyclists, horse riders and carriage drivers). This will enable better access to the countryside, encourage healthier lifestyles and more sustainable choices of travel between settlements and sites of interest, and ultimately help strengthen the rural economy.  
 
D.22 The upgrading of existing rights of way may be necessary in order to improve access for the wider community. Negotiations with landowners and detailed anal yses will be necessary to determine exact alignments 
of future rights of way.  
Community Facilities  
 
D.23 The village of Trumpington will undergo considerable change in the coming years with the addition of approximately 3,500 homes on land within Cambridge’s ad ministrative boundary. There will also be 
considerable growth due to the development at Addenbrooke’s Hospital. New and existing residents will need services and facilities to support and complement their lives. How services and facilities are arranged and  
located will play an important role in determining the sort of place that Trumpington becomes in the coming years and also how the character of the existing village is preserved. It is important to plan for the future and to set up a structure that allows  the village to evolve while 
maintaining its the positive characteristics.  
 
D.24 The Southern Fringe represents a real opportunity to create an example 
of best practice in sustainable development and consolidate local 
shopping and services in the centre of Trum pington by introducing new 
and complementary uses to those that exist already. The consolidation of the centre seeks to maintain the vitality and viability of existing shops and services and to help ensure the success of new facilities.  
 
D.25 Cambridgeshire County Council guidance indicates a preference for community facilities in central locations to best serve existing and new residents and to use good pedestrian and cycle links. The general presumption is that community facilities should be provided within th e 
existing area of Trumpington. If this is not possible, land will need to be allocated to enable provision in new areas.  
 Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
303 D.26 It is recognised that shops and other related services will form an 
important component of providing for the needs of existing as wel l as 
new residents. local and neighbourhood centres will be provided within the new development areas for the day -to-day service needs of 
residents, such as newsagents. They will not replace the existing services in the centre of the village. Details of th e local centres will be 
determined through the detailed masterplanning of the development areas.  
 
Guiding principles for delivering community facilities in the Southern 
Fringe  
 
D.27 The following principles will help to inform the rationale for community 
facility locations in Trumpington:  
 
• a place that promotes walking and cycling and is near to or on 
public transport routes;  
• development that makes efficient use of land; and  
• services that support and complement each other.  
 
D.28  In terms of creating a more sustainable form of development and 
minimising car trips, it is essential that walking and cycling are seen as viable alternatives to the car. It must however be accepted that car trips will make up a significant proportion of journeys, particularly to the  
primary health care centre, so vehicle access will be a major requirement.  
 
D.29 There are obvious benefits to locating services and facilities in the centre 
of Trumpington. Such locations are well connected to existing public 
transport routes and can be reached on foot within a ten- minute walk 
from most of the village. This links back to the creation of ‘walkable neighbourhoods’, which aim to minimise car -based trips by making 
services and facilities accessible to users via attractive walking and cycling routes. 
 
D.30 Opportunities for co- location of facilities should also be explored in order 
to make more efficient use of available land and to minimise land take. For instance, car parking associated with one facility could also be used by another. Similarly, where facilities are combined in one building, construction and running costs can be reduced. Consideration should also be given to two or three storey buildings to allow for smaller building footprints and reduced land take.  
 Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
304 Community facilities required in the Southern Fringe  
 
D.31 The following facilities have been identified as being needed for 
Trumpington to meet the needs of existing as well as proposed 
development. Feeding into this, the Trumpington Residents’ Association (TRA) produced a document in September  2004, Trumpington – Future 
development of a historically important parish, which articulates their vision for the redevelopment of the Southern Fringe, including details on the types of community facilities required in Trumpington. Required facilities inc lude:  
 
• community centre – with meeting rooms, a kitchen and a youth wing;  
• primary health care centre – the Primary Care Trust set out a 
requirement for a 1,000m sq m surgery with a community pharmacy, dentist and other complementary health services. This should ideally be located in a new building near the existing centre of Trumpington;  
• library/lifelong learning centre – 350 sq m housed in a standalone 
building or space shared with other community uses; and  
• the police require a 300 sq m space to meet the needs of the Southern Fringe. It is considered that this would be best located as part of the community centre, where co- location would provide 
benefits in terms of cost, social interaction and accessibility.  
 
D.32 A survey into the adequacy of provision for faith in Trumpington will be carried out by the developers as a whole to the satisfaction of the Council. Where need is identified that cannot be satisfied by existing places of worship, the developers should make reasonable provision to meet  that need commensurate to the extent that the need is generated 
by the new development. This may take the form of ‘serviced land’ which can only be developed for faith provision or contributions towards the provision of places of worship on such land.  
 
D.33 The preferred option for the location of the community centre and primary 
health care centre in the Southern Fringe has been informed through considerable consultation throughout 2005. Ideally, a location on or near the High Street would be best for any of the required community facilities in Trumpington.  Such a location would be well related to public transport routes, existing shops and services, and would help to achieve a more sustainable location of uses for the future expansion of Trumpington. However,  finding locations for these facilities in the centre of the village 
is problematic. Few sites exist in the centre of Trumpington capable of accommodating the scale of facilities required, e.g. meeting space, hall and recreation uses.  
 
D.34 Cambridgeshire County Council considered two options: the first near the shops on Anstey Way/High Street junction, and the second near to the Waitrose store and the Park and Ride site. The preferred location Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
305 would be somewhere on Trumpington High Street. The King George V 
Playing Fields were discounted after considerable local opposition to 
partial redevelopment of the playing field. The draft area development framework (ADF) of October 2005 asked for feedback on the two options, the Cambridge Professional Development Centre site (Option 1) and land to the rear of Paget Close (Option 2). Further work led to the community facilities to serve the Southern Fringe as a whole being located within the Clay Farm Local Centre.  
 
Timing and delivery of community facilities  
 
D.35 The Council’s  aim is to provide community facilities as early on in the 
development of the Southern Fringe as possible. The planning obligations section of this document provides further details on the mechanisms for the delivery of the required community facilities.  
 
D.36 The timing of the delivery of the community centre and the primary health care centre will also be affected by the need to provide road access to the preferred site. Further work will be needed to determine the feasibility of providing access to the site in the short term and also once the ‘spine’ road, to be constructed as part of the Clay Farm and Showground developments, has been completed.  
 
D.37 The delivery of a community centre and primary health care centre is not just a geographical concern. Residents’ v iews have been equally 
important in creating a sense of ownership and securing support for any proposed scheme.  
Household recycling centre  
 
D.38 The construction and management of the household recycling centre (HRC) is the responsibility of Cambridgeshire County Council. An HRC deals with a variety of household waste not normally collected as part of the usual kerb- side pick up. Cambridgeshire County Council has not yet 
identified a suitable location for an HRC and is still in the process of undertaking a detai led site selection review.   Cambridge City Council 
will work with Cambridgeshire County Council to deliver an HRC serving the south of the city. However, sites within the Southern Fringe itself are not generally supported by the Council for this use.  
 
  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
306 Principal urban design objectives and strategies  
 
D.39 The Southern Fringe developments must be integral to, not separate 
from, the ongoing land use and traffic planning processes. Urban design is important for a host of reasons, but the principal reasons includ e the 
need to:  
 
• articulate a vision of what is proposed;  
• ensure new development has a distinct identity and character;  
• translate written planning policy into a workable spatial strategy; 
and  
• provide a proactive, not reactive, approach to the submission of outline and detailed planning applications.  
 
D.40 The following represent the key objectives for urban design in the Southern Fringe:  
 
• an appreciation of the context, particularly the existing urban grain in Trumpington, the existing landscapes into the green corridor and further south, Hobson's Conduit, and the overall low -density, 
suburban nature of the area;  
• the need to support the existing and build a new sense of community. In particular, the location and arrangement of community facilities, e.g. schools, recreational uses, community centre;  
• ensuring character and identity. Individual design strategies should make clear what type of place will be created and what it will look like, such that it is both inviting and attractive, and at the same time legible in its own way and distinct from existing development;  
• ease of movement. Not all the proposed development sites are easily and readily connected to one another and to existing 
development, and it will be critical to ensure legible, functional and pedestrian/cycle friendly routes throughout the Southern Fringe;  
• attractive streetscapes. This will be achieved through attention to 
detail, e.g. street furniture, lighting, and by creating a sense of enclosure to the streets, e.g. minimising building setbacks and varying building height and materials to create variety and interest;  
• a high quality public realm. Any space where people congregate, move through and recreate should be both inviting and functional. This will require high quality finishes, places for sitting or being active, safe and permeable spaces, and a long- term budget for 
maintenance and replacement/renewal;  
• development proposals should seek to retain existing mature trees 
and vegetation wherever possible and be sensitive to listed 
buildings and their setting;  
• development should provide noise attenuation and measures to minimise light spill where necessary; and Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
307 • innovative housing design will be sought.  
 
D.41 The following key development principles for each site are intended to 
provide more details to help implement the urban design objectives and should be used as the basis for completing the masterplans and reviewing planning applications for the respective sites.  
 
Key development principles – Trumpington Meadows  
 
• Create an attractive and robust edge to the urban area. This should enhance the countryside setting and all local to long- distance views 
of Cambridge. Buildings should front on to the Green Belt, allowing for wide soft -landscaped openings into the Country Park;  
• provide a distinctive entrance to South Cambridge. This should be attractive and striking, while at the same time demonstrating sensitivity t o the prevailing character of Trumpington for which the 
proposed development will also act as a new gateway. Substantial tree planting will be required to mitigate the impact of the Hauxton Road/Addenbrooke’s Road junction from which the site gains vehicul ar access. A landmark building and/or public art feature may 
also be appropriate in this area;  
• strengthen the route along the key pedestrian desire line from Trumpington High Street to the Park and Ride site. Extend this route into the Country Park, by converting the M11 farm access bridge for cycle/pedestrian use;  
• the spine road/principal route should be well defined, be limited to 20mph and allow for safe routes to school (off -road cycle paths). 
Opportunities should be taken to vary the street experience and promote activity by providing a mix of uses, including a central node or ‘square’, a school, playing fields, parkland and frequent entrances and intersecting routes;  
• create a strong central vista focusing on the spire of St Mary and St Michael Parish Church to the north;  
• create an attractive edge around the Park and Ride site, providing some sense of enclosure, overlooking windows/balconies and frequent entry points for paths into the development. Landscaping around the Park and Ride should be generous,  varied and well -
integrated with that of the rest of the development. Planting should provide an optimum level of screening so that residents’ privacy is protected;  
• site entrances should be well -articulated through the built form, with 
good access for pedestrians’  safety, comfort and convenience of crossing. Development should also seek to improve the existing site entrance (adjacent to supermarket) for pedestrian access;  
• maximise opportunities for views of Anstey Hall and garden from the public realm, while protecting and enhancing its setting;  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
308 • building heights will be restricted where they are in proximity to 
existing development. two storeys will be the maximum along the western edge and four storeys along the southern edge facing the M11;  
• flexible uses and easily adaptable buildings will be sought in the north- eastern quarter of the site, to encourage a mix of uses.  
 
Key development principles – Glebe Farm Site  
  
• Contribute positively to the setting of Cambridge, through attractive 
and imaginative archit ectural and landscaping design of the new built 
edge. Buildings should front on to the Addenbrooke’s Road corridor as far as possible;  
• create a green buffer strip on the north side of Addenbrooke’s Road. Include generous landscaping and planting to mitigat e against visual 
intrusion. Integrate sustainable drainage systems within this green edge;  
• create ‘zones of integration’ (see concept diagram) by incorporating existing properties’ frontages into the design of the new development where possible – green spaces offer an effective means of integrating 
new with existing. Care must be taken, however, to allow for an acceptable level of seclusion in and around existing dwellings;  
• create a clear east –west route facilitating movement between the 
Southern Fringe sites either side of Trumpington;  
• create pedestrian and cycle links along existing track from Bishop’s Road, continuing to Hauxton Road and either on or alongside the private road from Exeter Close;  
• provide noise attenuation through a combination of building form and layout, landscaping, speed restrictions and road surfacing along Addenbrooke’s Road;  
• reinforce the built edge at the Hauxton Road/Addenbrooke’s Road 
junction with a maximum building height on this corner of five storeys 
(set back to allow  for tree planting);  
• the scale and massing of development should be sensitive to existing residential areas;  
• consideration should be given to the potential building composition on the west side of Hauxton Road within Trumpington Meadows. Developers are enc ouraged to collaborate to achieve an attractive 
entrance to Cambridge; and  
• gardens should back on to existing gardens to help create secure private spaces.  
 Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
309 Key development principles – Clay Farm and the Showground 
 
• Development proposals need to be sensitive to the key views into the 
site from high ground to the south- east and towards the village, 
particularly the tower of St Mary and St Michael Parish Church on 
Grantchester Road;  
• where the sites meet the Hobson’s Brook corridor, development 
should be sensi tively designed in terms of scale and massing to 
prevent adverse impact on it and the green corridor beyond. A 
generous landscape buffer should be provided in this respect of varying depth of 20m –40m from the building edge;  
• the road network should be designed so that no direct route is created from Shelford Road up to Long Road (possibly using a rising bollard system); 
• the proposed local centre must be well connected into the development areas and form a focus for both the sites to tie them together and con tain a mix of uses required to support local needs;  
• the potential of the existing pedestrian and cycle links should be maximised to create good connections around and across the sites and into the green corridor and the rights of way network and then on into the countryside beyond;  
• development along Addenbrooke’s Road should front on to this road creating an urban street;  
• development should be orientated to address the Cambridgeshire Busway and in particular to offer good surveillance of the proposed Cambri dgeshire Busway stop;  
• development proposals should be well connected into the village to help integrate new development with that which exists already;  
• the scale and massing of development should be sensitive to existing residential areas;  
• buildings and as sociated landscaping should be designed to 
reinforce and articulate key entrances, nodes and routes through the development areas;  
• overall building heights should not exceed three storeys within the site although it may be acceptable to create some four or  five storey 
buildings in places to meet the aspiration of the design principle above;  
• the road network should be designed to achieve reduced vehicle speeds in residential areas;  
• the Council will be investigating the potential for a sustainable housing sch eme on city -owned land at Clay Farm. Such a scheme 
would be seeking to provide an exemplar of best practice with regards to sustainable construction and living.  
 Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
310 Key development principles – Addenbrooke’s 2020 Vision  
 
• Development must not exceed five commercial storeys (plus 
associated plant) along the western and southern boundaries in order 
to minimise the impact on the adjoining countryside. Elsewhere on 
the site it may be acceptable to go up to six commercial storeys (plus 
associated plant) subject  to detailed masterplanning. These heights 
represent maximum overall building heights and will only be acceptable providing they do not cause an unacceptable visual impact on the green corridor and the countryside beyond;  
• development should be orientated to create ‘active frontages’ which 
define streets and spaces;  
• through traffic passing along the Addenbrooke’s Road should not be 
allowed to exit on to Hills Road/Babraham Road to the east. A means of enforcing this control will need to be provided;  
• buildings proposed for the northern part of the site should be organised to form a clear central hub for the development;  
• the Cambridgeshire Busway will enter the site from the western boundary and a stop should be provided in the central hub as well as at other agreed locations through the Addenbrooke’s site. The aim should be to make public transport an attractive and viable alternative to the private car;  
• land to the south is safeguarded until after 2016 for future clinical development and research uses;  
• connect ions across the green corridor for all modes of transport to 
Trumpington should be maximised; and  
• proposals should seek to integrate new and old development through a comprehensive design approach.  
 
Key development principles – Bell Language School Site  
 
D.42 Encompassing an area of approximately 7.61 ha, the development site 
lies immediately south of Addenbrooke’s Hospital and west of Babraham 
Road (A1307). Existing residential properties of Greenlands and Babraham Road are located on the northern and south- eastern 
boundaries. Additional adjacent land uses include the grounds of the Bell Language School to the northeast and open countryside beyond the southern and western boundaries. The site consists of essentially one large field, which is almost entirely encl osed by mature perimeter 
vegetation. The southern and western boundaries are designated as city wildlife sites in which a permissive footpath also follows these boundaries. Owing largely to the mature vegetation, views within the site are almost entirely enclosed, except to the south, where White Hill, Clarke’s Hill and the Gog Magog Hills can been seen on the horizon. Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
311 Adjacent land uses are in the most part screened, however the University 
Laboratories (Forvie Site) and Addenbrooke’s Hospital largely domin ate 
views north.  
 
Existing site constraints / challenges:  
 
• existing residential properties to the south- east (Babraham Road) 
and north (Greenlands) constrain the scale and massing of any 
proposed new development;  
• the southern and western boundaries are designated as city wildlife 
sites; 
• the need for an emergency vehicle access only route though 
Greenlands;  
• vehicle access to the site is constrained to one entrance point only; and 
• the morphology of the site presents challenges in terms of built form.  
 
Opportunities:  
 
• create an attractive edge to the southern part of the city, which is 
sensitive to the adjacent rural landscape and existing residential properties;  
• contribute to the wider nature conservation and biodiversity of the Southern Fringe;  
• provide access and facilitate links to the proposed cycle/ pedestrian route and open countryside beyond; and  
• provide northern pedestrian and cycle routes to create links with Addenbrooke’s Hospital and the City Centre.  
    
Key development principles:  
 
• A network of convenient and safe routes should be provided 
throughout the site and to adjacent areas, facilitating links with Addenbrooke’s, public transport nodes, the City Centre and the wider countryside;  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
312 • provision of two direct pedestrian/cycle routes north of the site, 
through Greenlands (subject to legal access) and at the north- west 
corner through to Addenbrooke’s;  
• access to the proposed national cycle route should be provided at the western part of the site and be fully connected to routes throughout the development;  
• provision of an emergency vehicle only access though Greenlands (subject to legal access);  
• vehicle speeds throughout the development should be kept to a minimum and the exploration of vehicle calming methods through high quality design is encouraged;  
• a series of green spaces should be created throughout the development that are well overlooked and fully integrated with pedestrian/cycle networks;  
• a green buffer area should be provided adjacent to Greenlands to encourage integration and help mitigate the impact of development;  
• retention and enhancement of the existing mature parameter vegetation to be encouraged where practicable, in particular development must be sensitive to the southern and western boundaries of the site, whi ch are designated city wildlife sites;  
• balancing ponds need to be provided within the site and the design of these should be explored to maximise nature conservation and biodiversity.  
• buildings should be orientated to define edges and streets;  
• development proposals will be expected to respond to the existing 
development that bounds the site;  
• development located at the south- eastern part of the site will be 
typically two to three storeys in height;  
• a taller building height of typically two and a half to four  storeys could 
be accommodated at the western part of the site;  
• development must be sympathetic to the rural edge, with a maximum building height of two and a half storeys along the southern boundary; and 
• key views exist south from the Greenlands towards W hite Hill, Clark’s 
Hill and the Gog Magog Hills. Design should seek to respond positively to this key view and developers are encouraged to explore how this can be retained.  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
313 Figure D.2   Composite plan illustrating key development principles  
 
Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
314 Planning obligations  
 
D.43 The process for evolving a detailed strategy for planning obligation 
requirements is complex, entailing the involvement of key stakeholders, 
including Cambridgeshire County Council, South Cambridgeshire District Council, other infrastructure/service providers such as primary and secondary healthcare providers, as well as various council departments, and work is continuing on this. As requirements are clarified in more detail and locations are finalised, the schedule of planning obligation requirements will be updated further. In some cases, it may take co nsiderable time, with individual planning proposals having 
to be worked up in more detail or further technical investigations having to be carried out before the precise requirements can be fully detailed and costed. For this reason, the planning obligatio ns in the revised 
schedule (see below) have been divided into two sections, for known and unknown requirements.  
 
D.44 An initial assessment has been carried out in relation to general costings 
and apportionment of the planning obligations requirements between the different components of the Southern Fringe developments.  
 
D.45 It must be emphasised that the schedule of requirements is not 
comprehensive and not final. Further detailed site- specific planning 
obligation requirements may be identified at a later stage, during the process of negotiation on individual worked- up proposals.  
 
Phasing strategy  
 
D.46 An overall phasing strategy will need to be developed in partnership with 
developers, Cambridgeshire County Council and South Cambridgeshire 
Distric t Council. The Southern Fringe will be developed over many years 
and so infrastructure, road capacities, delivery of facilities and financing will need to inform the timing of delivery.  
    Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
315 Schedule of Planning Obligations     
Known Legal 
agreement/  
Conditions  Unknown Legal agreement/  
Conditions  
1. Extension to existing Fawcett Primary School 
in the form of financial contributions  Legal agreement  21. Land, capital and revenue support contributions 
towards provision of Guided Bus services.  Legal agreement  
2. Land for and financial contributions towards 
provision of primary school on Trumpington 
Meadows (1FE) (1.5 hectares)  Legal agreement  22. Financia l contributions towards provision of 
conventional bus services  Legal agreement  
3. Land for and financial contributions towards 
provision of primary school and possibly a ‘children’s centre’ on Showground site (2FE) (2.3 
hectares)  Legal agreement  23. Financial contributions towards Southern Corridor 
Area Transport Plan strategic schemes  Legal agreement  
4. Land for and financial contributions towards 
provision of secondary school. Approximately half of total costs to be sought for this  Legal agreement  24. Site specific transport/highways improvement 
schemes (details of precise requirements will evolve during the negotiation process on individual, worked-
up proposals)  Legal agreement and/or 
conditions  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
316 Schedule of Planning Obligations     
Known Legal 
agreement/  
Conditions  Unknown Legal agreement/  
Conditions  
5. Sixth form provision – in the form of financial 
contributions (the facilities will be provided 
elsewhere)  Legal agreement  25. Green trav el plans – details of requirements to be 
confirmed as individual proposals evolve  Legal agreement or 
condition  
6. Land for (350 sq m) and financial contributions 
towards provision of library/lifelong learning centre with community facilities  Legal agreeme nt 26. Cycling/pedestrian/equestrian route 
improvements/linkages, including financial contributions towards these where applicable.  Legal agreement and/or 
conditions  
7. Financial contributions towards provision of a 
children’s centre (to be linked to a primary school) 
– further details yet to be confirmed  Legal agreement  27. Incorporation of SuDS – specific requirements to 
be confirmed at a later date  Legal agreement or 
conditions  
8. Financial contributions for provision of 
Addenbrooke’s Road  Legal agreement  28. Ecological survey and monitoring, including tree 
survey – requirements will vary from site to site and 
may include financial contributions towards specific 
projects  Legal agreement and/or 
conditions  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
317 Schedule of Planning Obligations     
Known Legal 
agreement/  
Conditions  Unknown Legal agreement/  
Conditions  
9. Financial contributions towards provision of 
Cambridgeshire  
Busway  Legal agreement  29. Biodiversity strategy – requirements will vary from 
site to site and may include financial contributions 
towards specific projects  Legal  agreement and/or 
conditions  
10. Land for and financial contributions towards 
provision of household waste recycling centre (1 hectare) – location yet to be confirmed  Legal agreement  30. Renewable energy strategy – further details yet 
to be confirmed  Legal agreement and/or 
conditions  
11. Land for and financial contributions towards 
bulking up/waste transfer facility (I hectare) – location and further details yet to be confirmed  Legal agreement  31. Sustainability strategy – further details yet to be 
confirmed  Conditions  
12. Affordable Ho using  Legal agreement  32. Landscape strategy – requirements will vary from 
site to site  Conditions  
13. 1 x 40 place extra care home development -
location and further details of requirements yet to 
be confirmed  Legal agreement  33. Provision of or financia l contributions towards 
public realm improvements – requirements will vary 
from site to site  Legal agreement  
14. Land and/or financial contributions towards 
provision of strategic open space (48.8 hectares)  Legal agreement  34. Archaeology – requirements will vary from site to 
site but may include surveys and investigations, 
watching briefs  Conditions  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
318 Schedule of Planning Obligations     
Known Legal 
agreement/  
Conditions  Unknown Legal agreement/  
Conditions  
15. Financial contributions towards provision of 
countryside access/rights of way  Legal agreement  35. Design and conservation –design guides and 
provision of conservation enhancements –
requirements will vary from site to site  Conditions  
16. Land and/or finan cial contributions as 
appropriate towards provision of formal (7.8 
hectares minimum) and informal open space 
(15.8 hectares minimum), playspace (2.64 hectares minimum, including toddler, local and neighbourhood facilities), allotments (3.5 hectares) sports  and leisure facilities, including:  
a. an artificial turf football pitch,  
b. 4 grass football pitches,  
c. improvements to existing rugby facilities,  
d. shared use kick -about space,  
e. tennis courts/multi -use games areas (3 
groups of three),  
f. improvements to existing bowling green on King George V playing fields or provision of new facility  Legal agreement and 
conditions  36. Public art –the Council’s normal requirement is 
public art to the value of 1% of the capital 
construction costs - specific requirements will vary 
from site to site. Further details of requirements yet to 
be confirmed  Legal 
agreement/and/or 
conditions  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
319 Schedule of Planning Obligations     
Known Legal 
agreement/  
Conditions  Unknown Legal agreement/  
Conditions  
g. hockey facilities  
h. new sports hall, improvements to existing 
swimming facilities or contributions towards a new city -wide facility – locations and further 
details yet to be confirmed and contributions are subject to final agreed housing figures which are also subject to change  
17. Land and/or financial contributions towards 
provision of community facilities to include:  
a. health care centre incorporating doctors 
surgery, pharmacy and dentist  
b. health care facilities within schools  
c. new community centre  
d. improvement to existing community facilities in Trumpington  
e. youth facilities  
f.  locations and any other additional 
requirements yet to be confirmed such as 
faith provision.  Legal agreement and 
conditions  37. Construction strategy  Conditions  Appendix D: Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
320 Schedule of Planning Obligations     
Known Legal 
agreement/  
Conditions  Unknown Legal agreement/  
Conditions  
18. Land for police station (300sq m  Legal agreement    
19. Utilities – delivery programme fo r strategic 
utilities and land for provision of new electricity 
sub-station  Conditions    
20. Sprinkler systems in residential units  Conditions    
 
  Appendix E: Roof extensions design guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
321   
Appendix E: Roof extensions design guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
322 Appendix E: Roof extensions design guide  
 
Context  
 
E.1 In Cambridge the supply of housing is limited and house prices are high. 
Increasingly, people are trying to meet their need for additional accommodation by extending their existing houses, rather than moving elsewhere. Roof extensions are a popular way of providing more accommodation.  
 
E.2 Roof extensions, however, can pose a considerable design challenge, both architecturally and structurally. In the past, Cambridge has seen many of its rooflines spoilt by inappropriate development, some of which has been carried out without the need for planning permission. This guidance aims to strike the right balance between the needs of the individual householder and the importance of maintaining and improving Cambridge’s unique built environment – in particular its ‘roofscape’.  
 
E.3 The Council encourages householders, designers and architects to seek to extend houses so as to create attractive and interesting solutions, which will enhance the domestic architecture of the city.  
 
Design principles  
 
E.4 This appendix aims to provide general design principles for the design of the most common forms of roof extension. It seeks to promote good quality design appropriate to its setting and context. It adopts a flexible approach, encouraging innovation and creativity by designers. The guidance is relevant  for roof developments in all parts of the city, whether 
in a conservation area or outside.  
 
Massing and proportion 
 
E.5  Roof extensions should relate well to the proportions, roof form and 
massing of the existing house and neighbouring properties. They must be appropriate in size, scale and proportion to the existing house and adjoining properties and must not be so large as to dominate the existing roof or to overwhelm their immediate setting. New roof extensions will be expected to relate well to existing l ocal roof forms – but this does not Appendix E: Roof extensions design guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
323 necessarily mean copying existing forms, as innovative design of high 
quality is to be welcomed.  
 
E.6 Proposals for roof extensions are unlikely to be acceptable where they:  
 
• perpetuate forms of existing, but poorly designed roof extensions in 
particular; or  
• are insensitively designed large ‘box type’ roof extensions which 
show little respect for the existing roofline or for the scale, design and proportions of the existing property and its neighbours.  
 
Materials and detailin g 
 
E.7 The choice of materials should reflect or complement the character of the existing roof, the rest of the property and the immediate area. Materials that are appropriate for the age and style of the existing property will usually be the most appropriate. However, there may be circumstances in which complementary and contrasting materials may be acceptable, particularly where a more innovative or unconventional design approach is being taken. Whatever the approach, materials must be of high quality.  
 
E.8 Where appropriate, the designer should use details reflecting those of the main house to add character to the roof extension. Features of the existing building, such as chimneys and parapet walls, should not be removed or hidden by the new extension where these are a key part of 
the architecture and their removal would be to the detriment of the overall design. Rain water goods and soil and vent pipes should be properly integrated and not disfigure the building.  
 
Windows  
 
E.9 The style of windows to be used in the roof extension should be influenced by the design, proportion and arrangement of existing windows in the building. The alignment and arrangement of new windows should also be considered and their relationship with the existing windows treated carefully. A less regulated approach to window design may be acceptable for more innovative or unconventional extensions, provided that they maintain or enhance the character of the existing building and the surrounding area. The visual impact of rooflights can often be reduced by using types that lie flush with the roof 
slope.  Building Regulations requirements are also an important consideration, as windows and rooflights are often used as means of escape.  Appendix E: Roof extensions design guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
324  
Impact on the roof  
 
E.10 The ridge line, especially of terraced properties or groups of similar 
buildings, is an important part of the character of houses and streets. Roof extensions that raise the height of the ridge will normally not be supported unless the street already lacks uniform roof heights or the ridge of the roof is not visible from the street. In exceptional cases it may 
be appropriate to project above the ridge, when it can be demonstrated that this would create a feature that enhances the streetscene.  
 
Overlooking and loss of privacy  
 
E.11 Roof extensions that give rise to significant additional overlooking of neighbouring property will not be supported. In assessing the degree of overlooking, factors such as the size, scale and orientation of the existing house, extent of existing outbuildings and ga rden curtilage will be taken 
into account.  
 
E.12 Roof extensions that incorporate high- level roof terraces or other areas 
capable of being used for sitting out will normally not be supported unless they are designed to mitigate the potential for overlooking.  
 
Environmental impact and energy saving  
 
E.13 The Council is keen to support development that minimises environmental impact. The use of sustainable materials which are appropriate to their context and designs and which take advantage of passive or active solar energy is therefore encouraged.  
 
Common forms of roof extension  
 
E.14 The following section offers general advice in relation to a number of common scenarios.  
 Appendix E: Roof extensions design guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
325 Front roof slope  
 
E.15 Roof extensions on front roof slopes facing roads always require 
planning permission. The plan contains policies that not only address the impact of development on the specific site and its surroundings but also consider the impact on townscape.  
 
E.16 The design principles contained in this guidance are particularly important in relation to roof extensions in such prominent locations. A key consideration will be the nature of the form and appearance of the existing roofscape.  
 
E.17 New roof extensions on highly visible and unaltered roof planes will generally be resisted. Front roof extensions may be acceptable where front roof planes have already been altered sensitively, or where the rhythm of the existing roof planes is less regular.  
 
Rear roof slope – visible in public realm  
 
E.18 The degree of visibility of the rear roof slope varies considerably; however, it is common for rear elevations of houses to be visible from areas of public open space, public roads and car parks. As a general rule, the more visible a roof is from public areas, the more important it will be for it to be well designed. The degree of public visibility will 
influence the assessment of impact in each case.  
 
E.19 Rear roof extensions that are not highly visible from public areas will be assessed on the basis of their impact on the house and its immediate surroundings.  
 
Rear roof slope – only visible from other gardens  
 
E.20 Rear roof slopes that are only visible from surrounding gardens still matter, as these have an impact on the amenity of the neighbouring houses. It is just as important for such roof extensions to relate well to the proportions, roof forms and massing of the existing house and its neighbours as elsewhere. However, in these circumstances a more flexible approach may be acceptable, depending on the individual circumstances. There may be situations in which extensions to the rear roof slope of a less conventional style are appropriate.  
 Appendix E: Roof extensions design guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
326 Side roof slope  
 
E.21 Dormer windows to the side elevations of hipped- roofed, semi -detached 
houses are common and often combined with rear roof extensions. Roof 
extensions of this type are usually visible from the public highway and therefore have the capacity to affect the townscape. There is a potential for this type of roof extension to upset the balanced appearance of semi -
detached houses. Therefore, if there is an opportunity to carry out a joint 
scheme with your neighbour, it should be taken. In order to minimise this impact, it is recommended that side dormers should be of minimum size and should be designed to retain the eaves line so as not to compromise the ridge line of the  hipped roof.  
  Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
327   
Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
328 Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline 
 
 Introduction 
 
F.1 Cambridge has a distinctive skyline that combines towers, turrets, 
chimneys and spires with large trees. Famous buildings, such as King’s 
College Chapel, and St John’s College Chapel are treasured landmarks, with the view of King’s College from The Backs forming perhaps the best known view of Cambridge.  
 
F.2 Cambridge’s modest scale and relatively flat topography  limit the number 
of vantage points offering city -wide panoramas. However, there are a 
number of long- distance views from the south- east, south -west, and 
west, as well as from other parts of the city’s Green Belt. The overall character of the city’s skylin e is one of relatively few taller buildings that 
emerge as ‘incidents’ above the prevailing lower buildings and trees. In addition to the more discrete ‘incidents’, there are the clusters of large-scale buildings at Addenbrooke’s Hospital and Cambridge Air port that 
are juxtaposed against the suburbs and rural edge of the city.  
 
F.3 Two publications on the subject of tall buildings in Cambridge reveal that 
concerns about the overall scale of new buildings in the city are not a recent phenomenon. Cambridge Planning Proposals: A report to Cambridgeshire County Council, by William Holford and Myles Wright (1950), suggested that building height limits be imposed near the centre of Cambridge with a maximum height limit of 55 feet (approximately 17m). Dreaming Spires and Teeming Towers: The Character of Cambridge, by Thomas Sharp (1963), was a report examining the 
character and scale of the centre of Cambridge with the objective of 
serving as a guide for developers and the council at the time. The author advocated restraint and caution in dealing with any proposals for tall buildings within the centre of the city.  
 
F.4 Cambridge has not experienced pressure for exceptionally tall structures 
as in larger cities such as London, Birmingham and Manchester. However, it does face pressure for buildings that, at between five and ten residential storeys are taller than the prevailing built form across the city. 
 
F.5 This guidance is intended to provide clarity over the interpretation of 
Policy 60: Tall buildings and the skyline in Cambridge. It provides a 
robust set of criteria to assist in assessing the likely impact of a proposed tall building (or buildings). Overall, this guidance has the purpose of ensuring that the overall character and qualities of the Cambridge skyline Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
329 should  be maintained and where appropriate enhanced as the city 
continues to grow and develop into the future.  
 
Aims and objectives  
 
F.6 The overall aims are to:  
 
• maintain the character and quality of the Cambridge skyline;  
• ensure that tall buildings, as defined in this guidance, which break 
the established skyline are well considered and appropriate to their 
context;  
• support only new buildings which are appropriate to their context and contribute positively to both near and distant views; and  
• provide clarity to the public and the development industry about the expectations of the Council when considering tall buildings.  
 
F.7 Based on this vision and with these overall aims in mind, the specific 
objectives of the guidance in this appendix will be to:  
 
• provide a definition  of ‘tall buildings’ for Cambridge;  
• set out the existing baseline situation in relation to the landscape and 
townscape character of Cambridge;  
• identify key views from around and within the city;  
• provide assessment criteria to articulate Policy 60 and explain terminology; and  
• provide the basis for positive engagement of members, stakeholders and the public to achieve support for the guidance.  
 
Definition of tall buildings and skyline  
 
F.8 The Guidance on Tall Buildings Advice Note published in December 
2015 by Historic England states:  
 
“What might be considered a tall building will vary according to the nature of the local area. A ten- storey building in a mainly two- storey 
neighbourhood will be thought of as a tall building by those affected, whereas in the centre of a large city it may not.”  
 
F.9 In the Cambridge context, a tall building shall be defined as:  
 
“Any structure that breaks the existing skyline and/or is significantly taller than the surrounding built form.”  
 Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
330 When will these guidelines be applied?  
 
F.10 An appraisal of the existing characteristics of the Cambridge skyline is 
set out below.  On the basis of that information:  
 
i) Within the historic core, as identified on Figure F.1, building 
proposals of six storeys or more (assuming a flat roof with no 
rooftop plant and a height of 19m above ground level) would automatically trigger the need to address the criteria set out within the guidance. However, dependent on the exact location within the historic core, buildings of four to six storeys may also need to be evaluated against the assessment criteria herein, due to proximity 
to heritage assets and potential impacts on key views.  
 ii) Within the suburbs, buildings of four storeys and above (assuming a flat roof with no rooftop plant and a height of 13m above ground level) will automatically trigger the need to address the criteria set out within the guidance.  
  Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
331 Figure F.1 Cambridge Historic Core Area  
 
 
 
 
Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
332 The characteristics of the Cambridge skyline 
 
F.11 The existing characteristics of the Cambridge skyline need to be 
understood if the essential qualities of the city are going to be maintained 
into the future. Skylines of cities evolve and change over time in response to increasing urban expansion and renewal. The Cambridge skyline has undergone just such a process incrementally and over a comparatively long time period.  
 
F.12 Trees form an important element in the modern Cambridge skyline, 
within both the historic core and the suburbs. Many of the elevated views of the city from the rural hinterland and from Castle Mound show a city of trees with scattered spires and towers emerging above an established tree line.  
 
F.13 Within the historic core, there is a great variety of rooflines, articulated 
by spires, cupolas, chimneys and towers. The predominantly narrow plot widths help give the historic core variety, notably along King’s Parade, where five storey buildings are juxtaposed against three storey buildings. Above the roofline of ‘town’ buildings, emerge the taller , ecclesiastical 
college and university buildings. The level of enclosure created by relatively tall buildings and narrow streets does mean that some of the taller buildings have remained visually discrete. Figure F.2 identifies existing landmark buildings  in Cambridge.  
 
F.14 Beyond the historic core, the prevailing height of residential buildings is 
generally two storeys with some more substantial three storey Victorian and Edwardian buildings on the main approach roads. Chimneys and subtle variations in roof heights create variety. Elsewhere, the low -
density residential areas to the west of the historic core generally lack any prominent, focal buildings with trees, rather than the built form, generally defining the skyline. There are some exceptions within this  part 
of the city including prominent university buildings, most notably the tall tower of the university library.  
 
F.15 Large areas of the outer post -war suburbs, notably the eastern (east of 
the railway line) and southern sections of the city, contain buildings that are predominantly two storeys. The notable exceptions to this are the Addenbrooke’s Hospital and the hangars at Cambridge Airport, which feature very prominently in local and distant views from the south and east.  Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
333  
Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
334  
Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
335  Topography and geology  
 
F.16 One of the most important characteristics of Cambridge is the 
relationship between the rural setting of the city within a partial ‘bowl’ of 
generally low -lying landscape with higher ground to the south- east, 
south and west and low -lying fen and clay lands to the north and east.  
 
F.17 The built environment of the city occupies a level area of land generally 
between 5m and 15m AOD (Above Ordnance Datum). Discrete areas of land above 20m AOD lie around Castle Hill, to the north of the River Cam and at the West Cambridge site. Castle Mound, a man- made structure 
which forms part of Castle Hill, rises up to approximately 32m AOD, and affords the only significant panoramic view within the city not taken from a building. To the south- east lies a chalk ridge including the high point of 
the Gog Magog Hills, rising to 74m AOD.  
 
 Open spaces in the city and the River Cam  
 
F.18 The setting of the city has been preserved by the surrounding Green Belt, 
including the many ‘green fingers’ that extend into the city. The historic 
core has al so been preserved by the substantial areas of open space 
which encircle it following the River Cam, including The Backs, Midsummer Common, Jesus Green, Sheep’s Green and Coe Fen, and Parker’s Piece. In addition to the linear green spaces, a number of other  
key open spaces which encircle the city’s historic core such as Parker’s Piece, Christ’s Pieces and the Cambridge University Botanic Garden.  
 
 Viewpoint analysis – overview  
 
F.19 The generally level topography of the city and its environs results in 
limited vantage points to enable views of the whole city skyline. 
However, there are still some good vantage points around the city. The Cambridge Landscape Character Assessment (2003) notes the importance of distant views from the south, south- west and west. Figure 
F.3 shows both the topography of Cambridge and the surrounding area and identifies key strategic viewpoints.  
   Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
336 Long to medium distance views towards Cambridge  
 
F.20 Views from the rural hinterland of Cambridge from both elevated and 
level views of the spires and towers in the historic core are limited and 
generally distant.  
 a. Views from the south- east:  
• From the south- east of the city, panoramic views are 
afforded from the following locations around the Gog Magog Hills and Magog Down (associated wi th 
Wandlebury Country Park) and elevated land to the south-east of Cherry Hinton. The view from the junction of Shelford Road/Worts’ Causeway and the Harcamlow Way is one of the few viewpoints where a panorama is afforded that takes in both Addenbrooke’s Hospital, the City Centre and the hangars at Cambridge Airport;  
• Little Trees Hill, Magog Down;  
• junction of Shelford Road and Harcamlow Way; and  
• Limekiln Road lay -by. 
 b. Views from the east:  
• south of Teversham from Airport Way  
 
c. Views from the north -east and north:  
• Stourbridge Common;  
• Ditton Meadows south of Fen Ditton;  
• River Cam towpath south of Baits Bite Lock; and  
• view from the junction of the A10 and A14.  
 d. Views from the west:  
• Madingley Road (intermittently);  
• Red Meadow Hill – open panora mic views of the city are 
afforded from Red Meadow Hill within Coton Countryside Reserve;  
• Barton Road, east of the junction 12 of the M11;  
• Coton footpath, and  
• M11 between junction 12 and junction 13. 
 e. Views from the south- west and south:  
• Grantchester Road;  
• Grantchester Meadows; and  
• Hauxton Road, north of junction 11 of the M11.  
 Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
337 Local or short distance views  
 
F.21 While it is relatively simple to create a list of a limited number of 
distant/long range views of the city, being able to fix a lis t of local views 
within the city is clearly dependent on the location and scale of a 
proposed tall building. Local views must be considered on a case- by-
case basis as part of the pre- application process. In and around the city 
core, key local views from and across the following open spaces are likely to be important:  
 
• Parker’s Piece;  
• Jesus Green;  
• Midsummer Common;  
• Coe Fen;  
• Sheep’s Green;  
• Lammas Land;  
• College grounds within the Backs;  
• Stourbridge Common;  
• Coldham’s Common.  
 
F.22 The following elevated city views may also need to be assessed 
dependent on site location and the scale of proposals:  
 
• Hills Road railway bridge looking towards town;  
• Coldham’s Lane railway bridge;  
• Carter cycle bridge;  
• Mill Road railway bridge;  
• Elizabeth Way bridge;  
• Long Road bridge;  
• Grand Arcade car park;  
• Grafton East car park;  
• Queen Anne Terrace car park;  
• Park Street car park;  
• Castle Mound;  
• Church of St Mary the Great.  
 
F.23 Applications for tall buildings should carefully consider other local views 
on key approach roads. Applicat ions for tall buildings also need to 
assess relevant key views from footpaths along the river corridor within the city which do not fall within the commons or The Backs, such as areas around Riverside.  
 F.24 It is possible to attach a degree of weight to those views that relate to the 
buildings, landscapes and settings, and particularly listed buildings and their settings, conservation areas, etc. Views of the historic core and the key buildings within the core are therefore particularly important to protect. In  this case, distant views of the historic core from Red Meadow Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
338 Hill, Lime Kiln Hill, and the Gogs are especially important, as are more 
localised views of the historic core from Castle Mound, The Backs, and open spaces within and around the historic core. The views from open spaces within the city to the historic core are very important and arguably the most important views by the very nature of their inherent openness. Other views of particular note include those experienced from the south-west of the city . 
 
Assessment criteria – overview  
 
F.25 The assessment criteria outlined on the following pages are intended to 
help provide a framework for informing a detailed, evidence- based 
process to help address the policy requirements in Policy 60. The criteria are widely used in similar guidance, policies and strategies across the country and should, if properly understood and applied, provide an objective, factual and realistic portrayal of proposals for tall buildings.  
 
F.26 Applicants need to work through the assessment criteria as they consider 
proposals for buildings that can be considered ‘tall’ and which are likely to impact on the Cambridge skyline. Ultimately, applicants need to submit a document that addresses all of the assessment criteria as part of the design and access statement or heritage impact assessment. As 
part of any planning application for a new tall building, applicants will be expected to provide a clear justification for building tall within the design and access statement accompanying the  application.  
 
F.27 Submissions for planning applications involving tall buildings will need to 
include written and illustrative material which provides the evidence-base and policy justification for the proposed building(s). Planning applications for alterations to existing tall buildings which result in major changes to their external appearance will also need to use the assessment criteria identified in this guidance.  
 
F.28 Planning applications for tall buildings, as defined in this guidance, need 
to take consideration of, and make reference to, where appropriate, other policy, guidance and documents that are also relevant to the preparation and assessment of an application.  
 
 Criterion a: Location, setting and context  
 
F.29 The relationship of the proposed building,  or buildings, to the surrounding 
context needs to be carefully examined. A townscape, landscape and Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
339 urban design appraisal needs to be prepared which analyses features 
such as:  
 
• topography;  
• townscape and landscape types and character areas;  
• site history ( see Criterion b);  
• movement and access patterns;  
• scale, height and massing of surrounding buildings and set backs 
of buildings;  
• urban grain – noting typical plot sizes and the rhythm of the street;  
• prevailing architectural language;  
• land use;  
• areas of open space;  
• listed buildings and conservation areas (see Criterion b);  
• city gateways and nodes;  
• local and long distance views and vistas and local landmarks; and  
• opportunities and constraints.  
 
F.30 Preliminary site and context appraisal work needs to be used to inform 
pre-application discussions with the Council and to inform the final 
proposals.  
 
F.31 Tall buildings have the potential to act as positive landmarks that aid 
legibility and make it easier for people to orientate themselves around the city. Appropriate ‘conditions’ for a tall building could, for example, include local nodes, key city street junctions, the ends of important vistas, and in and around principal transport junctions. However, this approach would not generally be appropriate within the Historic Core due to the higher level of sensitivity in this area resulting from the presence of a significant number of heritage assets.  
 
F.32 Policy 37 of the plan identifies the Cambridge Airport Public Safety Zone 
and Airport Safeguarding Zone restrictions. Developers of tall buildings should contact Cambridge Airport at pre- application stage to discuss the 
effect safeguarding restrictions may have on the maximum height of the buildings.  
 
F.33 In summary, applicants must demonstrate, by means of a visual 
assessment or appraisal with supporting visualisations and illustrations, how the proposal will sit within the existing landscape and townscape and describe the impact the development will have within the local and wider context. The exact methodology will be dependent on the scale and location of the application.  
 
  
  Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
340 Criterion b: Impact on the historic environment  
 
F.34 Applicants need to refer to the Cambridge Historic Core Appraisal; the 
various current conservation area appraisals and suburbs and 
approaches studies for Cambridge. These documents provide detailed 
assessments of the parts of the city in respect of history, urban form, character, key buildings and views, among others. Any applicatio n that 
results in potential harm  to heritage assets needs to be accompanied by 
a separate heritage statement or address such issues within the design and access statement, dependent on the scale of the impact.  
 
F.35 In summary, tall building proposals which have the potential to impact on 
the setting and significance of heritage assets will need to demonstrate and quantify the impact on the heritage asset, be it a listed building, scheduled monument, conservation area, registered historic park and garden and non- designated heritage assets, including but not limited to 
buildings of local interest.  
 
 Criterion c: Scale, massing and architectural quality  
 
F.36 The appropriate scale and massing of buildings is an important 
consideration in achieving the good integration o f new buildings within 
established urban areas and the wider landscape. An understanding of 
the surrounding context, as required in Policy 55 of the Cambridge Local Plan, is an important step in achieving appropriately scaled buildings.  
 
F.37 Tall buildings are frequently constructed to serve as memorable, 
landmark features and the silhouette of such buildings is therefore of critical importance. As noted already, the Cambridge skyline is typified by slender ‘incidents’, such as church spires punctuating the sky line. 
Consideration needs to be given to the articulation of the building and the creation of shadow lines to provide interest and relief to facades.  
 
F.38 In addition to the overall massing of a building, the quality of a scheme 
can be significantly affected by how roof top plant and telecommunications facilities are integrated.  
 
F.39 New tall buildings need to make reference to their surroundings through 
their details and materials. Tall buildings and their materials need to be of the highest quality and sensitive to site context. Building materials should be similar or sympathetic to the surroundings or provide contrast through thoughtful juxtaposition of materials. Particular attention should be given to roofing materials and plant.  
 Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
341 F.40 In summary, applicants will need to demonstrate through drawings, 
sections, models, computer -generated images (CGIs) etc., the design 
rationale of the building and how the form, materials and silhouette of 
the building will deliver a high quality addition to the city which wi ll 
respond positively to the local context and skyline. A clear building massing strategy will need to be prepared as part of the design process and be included within the applicant’s design and access statement.  
 
 Criterion d: Amenity and microclimate  
 
F.41 Tall buildings should be good neighbours. Careful consideration must be 
given to the design of any new tall building to ensure neighbouring properties are not adversely affected due to the loss of aspect, outlook or privacy (overlooking), loss of daylight and sunlight to adjacent properties, overshadowing of gardens, and the public realm,  noise, or 
any other relevant amenity.  
 
F.42 Tall buildings have the potential to adversely impact on the microclimate 
of the surrounding public realm through the diversion of wind and the effects of overshadowing and loss of daylight and sunlight. In many cases, these impacts can be successfully mitigated through both careful positioning of the building(s) and detailed building form and design.  
 
F.43 Critical to an understanding of potential impacts from a tall building are 
detailed and accurate wind and shadow studies. Shadow studies need to be prepared that assess the impacts of overshadowing of buildings at different times of day and throughout the seasons. Initial shadow studies can be undertaken using SketchUp™ models as part of pre- application 
discussions. Some schemes may require a formal daylight and sunlight study; this requirement will be considered on a case- by-case basis. 
Public and private open spaces and amenity areas shall not be in shadow for significant amounts of time of the day/year. For reasons of environmental health, wind studies may also be required in order to assess potential impacts of localised increases in wind speed and/or channelling of wind.  
 
F.44 In summary, proposals for buildings defined as ‘tall’ in this guidance will 
need to demonstrate the impacts of the proposal on neighbouring properties and open space and be designed to minimise any potential negative impacts. Key matters to address will include overshadowing, loss of daylight/ sunlight, overlooking, wind, and resulting heat islands or glare. The exact methodology of assessment will be agreed as part of the pre- application process and be proportionate and reasonable, driven 
by the scheme’s relative scale and its location.  
 Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
342  Criterion e: Public realm  
 
F.45 The design of space around buildings is crucial in the creation of a good 
public realm. Tall buildings need to be sensitively located so that they 
relate well to the space around them. The edges  of the public realm need 
to be well defined by active uses with open or glazed ground floor façades that create activity throughout the day and help to ‘animate’ the public realm. Mixing uses within larger buildings can help to generate activity throughout the day and into the evening and provide activity and surveillance of the public realm.  
 
F.46 The public realm around tall buildings needs to be proportionate to the 
building, attractive, safe, appropriately landscaped, well lit and comfortable to sit in or pass through, and needs to link to surrounding public realm in a seamless manner.  
 
F.47 In summary, applicants will need to provide sufficient information through 
the use of detailed illustrations and drawings of the proposed public realm around a tall building showing both the detail pertaining to the application site but also how the new public realm on the site relates to the wider streetscape/wider public realm and ensures a sense of human scale at street level.  
 Process and technical requirements  
 F.48 The following sets out the likely process for agreeing key views and 
assessment of impact for tall buildings that are identified as having the potential to impact on the skyline of Cambridge.  
 
• A preliminary contextual appraisal of the area shall be undertaken.  
This needs to identify the characteristics of the area, including building heights, building materials and details, key views, land use, building typologies, landmarks, movement patterns and nodal spaces, etc. The extent of these studies should be proport ionate to 
the scale of the scheme and the relative sensitivity of its location.  
• Presentation by applicant of details in respect of scale and massing and overall design strategy. Depending on the nature of the proposal, this stage may trigger consideration of the need for an environmental impact assessment (EIA).  
• Initial assessment of proposals by the Council with initial response and opportunity to review preliminary key viewpoints put forward by the applicant.  
• Applicant to prepare a formal list of key view s based on advice in 
this guidance and identify on a base map. The list of key views will be checked and agreed with the Council.  Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
343 • Applicant to prepare digital modelling (at a draft stage) to show 
possible impact on key views. This should take the form of a basic 
massing model in SketchUp (or similar) and should be set within a digital terrain model.  
 
 Digital visualisation techniques  
 
F.49 The use of 3D digital modelling and visualisation by applicants for tall 
buildings is strongly encouraged at pre- application  discussions with 
applicants. As part of the planning process, developers may produce 3D computer models of their scheme to illustrate the scale and massing of proposed development.  
 
F.50 Where 3D computer models are made available to the council, these 
need to be produced in a format compatible with SketchUp or AutoCAD 
(.dwg or .dxf). Models need to be at the correct scale (1:1), location, elevation and orientation according to Ordnance Survey data, including a reference point of existing nearby buildings. At t he pre- application 
stage, 3D models need to show the basic form of the building with proposed roof forms and any stepped/staggered elevations, and overhangs or defining architectural elements.  
  
 Assessing visual impact  
 
F.51 Where buildings of a particularly large scale and massing are proposed 
or where schemes are proposed within a particularly sensitive location, a full landscape and visual impact assessment as part of an EIA will be required (subject to the appropriate screening process as laid  out in EU 
legislation). The landscape and visual impact assessment needs to be prepared in accordance with the following guidelines:  
 
• Guidelines for Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment (Third Edition) published by the Landscape Institute and the Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (2013)  
• Landscape Character Assessment Guidance for England and Scotland’. The Countryside Agency/ Scottish Natural Heritage (2002)  
 F.52 Illustrations of any proposal must include a range of clear and accurate 
drawings and images, including photomontages, and CGIs, in order to depict the three- dimensional qualities of the proposal. They must also be 
capable of being easily understood for the purposes of stakeholder and public consultation. The production and display of a scale model may Appendix F: Tall buildings and the Skyline  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
344 also be helpful in assessing the impact, either positive or negative, of a 
proposal. Illustrations and models must show neighbouring existing buildings, the surrounding streetscape and the historic context. For larger buildings, or those proposed within particularly sensitive locations, a night -time assessment may be expected with accompanying CGIs. 
Applicants will need to take account of the potential cumulative impact of other approved tall building applications within close proximity to their development sites.  
 
F.53 Consideration must be given to the visual impact of any proposal from 
key distant and localised views, including from adjacent streets and open spaces. 
 
 Verifiable photomontages  
 
F.54 Some tall building applications will require ‘verifiable photomontages’ as 
part of the submitted planning application documents. The number and 
location of these viewpoints will need to be determined during the pre-application process. The views will typically include a mix of wireframes  
and fully rendered images. While best practice in relation to the production of verifiable images is constantly changing and being refined, applicants need to follow recommendations within Guidelines for Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment (Third Editi on), published by 
the Landscape Institute and the Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment, and their advice note, Photography and Photomontage in Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment (01/11). Verified images need to demonstrate a clear audit  trail which allows the images to be 
verified by an independent third party. In circumstances where proposed tall buildings are adjacent to large areas of open space, winter views will be expected.  
  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
345   
Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
346 Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
G.1 Linked to Policy 62, local heritage assets, the Council maintains a list of local heritage assets, including buildings of local interest.  This list may be updated from time to time.  
 
G.2 A local heritage asset is one that is not already statutorily listed, but is of significant architectural interest within the context of Cambridge. An asset may be included on the list for its architectural qualities alone, or because it has additional historical or social interest. Assets may be important in the social, political, industrial, economic or architectural history of Cambridge (for example, meeting places, social venues, places of entertainment, banks, places of worship, factories, almshouses, workhouses, transp ort-related buildings) or have a strong 
connection with a notable person.  
 
G.3 The following criteria define significant interest for the purpose of the list. An asset may fulfil one or more of the criteria:  
 
a. age and integrity – any building dating from before 1840 which 
exists in a style, form and construction similar to the original;  
b. architectural quality – very high quality design and use of materials, 
and strong aesthetic appeal;  
c. architectural style – typical or rare surviving examples of particular 
architectural styles, building materials or building forms;  
d. well-known architect – high quality work of notable architects, local 
or otherwise;  
e. innovation – show considerable innovation in the use of materials 
or techniques, or very early examples of styles  that became popular 
later;  
f. group or streetscene value – contribute to a terrace, square, 
crescent or other group of buildings planned as a whole. Make a significant contribution to the streetscape, because of uniformity or contrast, or because they enclose or define an area or create a view. Groups of buildings that together fulfil one of the other criteria, architectural or historic;  
g. landmark value – landmarks in the streetscene, whether because 
of size, height, architectural style, unusual building mater ials, a 
specific feature or any other reason;  
h. historic interest – assets may also be included on the list if they are 
of substantial historic interest, provided they are also of architectural/design interest;  
i. designed landscapes - relating to the interest  attached to locally 
important designed landscapes, parks and gardens.  
  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
347 List of local heritage assets  
 
G.4 This document is correct at time of publishing. It is not a definitive list as alterations may occur at any time.  
 
 Street  Building Name or Number  
Abbey Walk  Nos. 33 to 38 (consecutive)  
Adams Road  Nos. 4 and 6  
All Souls Lane  Mortuary Chapel of All Souls  
Auckland Road  Nos. 10 to 15 (consecutive)  
Barton Road  Nos. 28 to 30 (even)  
Nos. 37 to 41 (odd)  
No. 49  
No. 88  
No. 96  
Maitland House  
St Mark’s Church  
Beaulands Close  Jesus College Boathouse  
St Catharine’s College Boathouse  
Trinity First and Third Boathouse  
Bene’t Street  No. 1  
Birdwood Road  St Bede’s Secondary School  
Bridge Street  Nos. 5 to 7 (consecutive)  
No. 20  
Nos. 33 and 33A  
Nos. 34 to 37 (consecutive)  
No. 67a  
Brooklands Avenue  University Bowls Club  
No. 18, Wyndhams House  
Nos. 20 and 22  
No. 22a, Elmhurst  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
348  Street  Building Name or Number  
Brookside  Nos. 2 to 19 (consecutive)  
Nos. 20 to 22 (consecutive)  
Brunswick Gardens  Denmore Lodge  
Brunswick Terrace  Nos. 1 to 9 (odd)  
Brunswick Walk  Nos. 11 to 14 (consecutive)  
Buckingham Road  Blackfriars  
Castle Street  Nos. 4 to 8 (consecutive)  
Nos. 68 and 70  
Chapel Street,  
Chesterton  Church Hall and No. 6  
Chaucer Road  No. 2, Woodlands  
No. 5, St Rhadegund’s  
No. 6, Dalberg  
Former Coach House to No. 6  
No. 8, Willowbrook  
No. 9, Edwinstowe  
No. 10, York House  
No. 11, Dalreagh  
No. 12, Thursley  
No. 17, Claife  
Nos. 19, Harefield, and 21, St Guthlac’s 
Southmead  
No. 23, Upwater Lodge  
No. 26a, Upwater Cottage  
Cheddars Lane  Pumping Station and Manager’s House  
Cherry Hinton Road  No. 91  
Chesterton Road  No. 12  
No. 129, Portland Arms  Nos. 187 and 189  
Church End,  No. 121, Wroxton House  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
349  Street  Building Name or Number  
Cherry Hinton  
Church Lane,  
Trumpington  Nos. 17 to 19 (consecutive)  
Church Rate Walk  Nos. 1 to 3 (consecutive)  
Church Street,  
Chesterton  Pye Terrace  
Clarendon Street  Nos. 1 to 8 (consecutive)  
No. 9  
Nos. 10 to 19 (consecutive)  
Nos. 23 to 27 (consecutive)  
No. 29  
No. 30 to 34 (consecutive)  
Clarkson Road  No. 15  
No. 17  
Coe Fen  Hodson’s Summerhouse  
Coldham’s Lane  No. 101, The Weigh House  
Collier Road  Ruskin Building and former Gymnasium, Anglia 
Ruskin University  
Nos. 1 to 13 (odd)  
No. 23  
Nos. 25 to 39 (odd)  
Conduit Head Road  Clements End  
Conduit Rise  
Ditton Walk  The Old Maltings  
Downing College  Baker, and Scott Buildings and Chapel  
Downing Place  Former Music School  
Earl Street  Nos. 2 to 30 (even)  
Nos. 7 to 37 (odd)  
Eden Court  Nos. 1 to 8 (consecutive)  
Eden Street  No. 68  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
350  Street  Building Name or Number  
Elm Street  No. 1 to 8 consecutive  
Emmanuel Road  No.1  
No. 4 and 5  
Nos. 13 to 16  
Nos. 18 and 19  
Cambridge Unitarian Memorial Church  
Fair Street  Nos. 7 to 10 (consecutive)  
Nos. 13 and 14  
Fen Causeway  The Leys School, North Block  
Old Boiler House, University Engineering 
Department  
Causewayside  
Ferry Lane  Nos. 2 to 4 (even)  
Fitzwilliam Road  Nos. 3 to 9 (odd)  
Garret Hostel Lane  Railings  
George IV Street  No. 18  
Gonville Place  Gonville Place Hotel  
Grafton Street  Nos. 4 to 7 (consecutive)  
No. 11, Jubilee Hall  
Grange Road  Nos. 5 and 7  
No. 11  
No. 12, Lady Margaret Convent  
No. 19  
No. 50, St Martin’s  
No. 58  
Grange Court and Manor Court, Pinehurst  
Real Tennis Court  
Grantchester Road  No. 50  
Grantchester Road, 
Trumpington  Nos. 2 to 8 (even)  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
351  Street  Building Name or Number  
Grantchester Street  Paradise House  
Green Street  Nos. 8 and 9  
Nos. 40 and 41  
Guest Road  Nos. 1 to 23 (odd)  
Gwydir Street  The Bath House  
Former Dales Brewery  
Harvey Road  No. 6  
Haymarket Road  Nos. 1 to 8 (consecutive)  
Hemingford Road  Romsey Mill  
Herschel Road  Nos. 5a and 5b  
High Street, Cherry 
Hinton  No. 43, Lloyds Bank  
The Parish Room  
High Street, 
Chesterton  Bells Corn Depot  
Nos. 42 to 46 (even)  
High Street, 
Trumpington  No. 19, Cromwell House  
No. 45, Alpha Cottage  
No. 50, The Red House  
No. 75, Village Hall  
Nos. 79 to 81 (odd)  
No. 83  
No. 87  
Nos. 91 to 93 (odd)  
Nos. 105 to 107 (odd)  
Hills Road  No. 41  
Claremont  
Nos. 55 to 59 (odd)  
Nos. 63 to 99 (odd), Eastbourne Terrace  
Nos. 101 to 123 (odd), College Terrace  
No. 125  
The Earl of Derby  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
352  Street  Building Name or Number  
Hills Road Sixth Form College and Lodge  
No. 175  
Nos. 185 to 189 (odd)  
No. 256  
Hobson Street  Nos. 40 to 44 (even)  
No. 21, Former Central Cinema  
Howes Place  Nos. 1 to 14 (consecutive)  
Huntingdon Road  NIAB  
No. 3, The Rectory, Murray Edwards College  
No. 130  
No. 136  
No. 138, Neale House  
No. 141, Wayside  Nos. 143 to 145 (odd)  
No. 162  
No. 171 to 173 (odd)  
No. 183  
Wychfield  
Hurst Park Avenue  Nos. 2 and 4  
Jesus Lane  Nos. 5 to 7 (odd)  
No. 18  
No. 46  
Nos. 64 to 72 (consecutive)  
John Street  Between 17 and 18, The Old Stables  
King Street  Nos. 105 to 113 (odd)  
New Court, Christ’s College  
Latham Road  No. 1, Strathmore  
No. 3, Newlands  
No. 5, Gransett  
No. 8A, Southacre Lodge  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
353  Street  Building Name or Number  
No. 9 Dormers  
No. 11, Meads  
No. 14, Ulleskelf  
No. 15, Whitsunden  
No. 16  
No. 17, Marienhaus  
Laundress Lane  Dept of Land Economy Library & Centre for South 
Asian Studies  
Lensfield Road  Nos. 20 to 58 (even)   
Nos. 59 to 65 (odd)  
Long Road  No. 102, Friarswood  
Nos. 127 to 133 (odd), Mill Cottages  
Long Road Sixth Form College  
Mackenzie Road  Nos. 1 to 5 (odd)  
Madingley Road  No. 3  
No. 12, Eterholm  
Magdalene Street  Benson & Mallory Court, Magdalene College  
Maid’s Causeway  No. 2  
Nos. 24 to 30 (even)  
No. 64, Grafton House  
Mansel Way  Church of the Good Shepherd, Arbury  
Market Hill  Nos. 1 to 3 (consecutive)  
Nos. 6 to 8 (consecutive)  
No. 15  
Nos. 30 to 33 (consecutive), King’s College Market Hostel  
Market Passage  Baroosh Bar  
Market Street  Nos. 3 to 9 (consecutive)  
Mill Lane  Stuart House  
Miller’s Yard  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
354  Street  Building Name or Number  
Mill Road  Nos. 32 to 34 (even)  
No. 84  
No. 90a, Lloyds Bank  
Nos. 92a to 104a (even)  
Nos. 126 to 134 (even)  
Ditchburn Place  
No. 175  
Nos. 184 to 186 (even)  
No. 191  
No. 206  
No. 212  
No. 228  
No. 238a  
St Philip’s Church  
No. 242, St Philip’s Vicarage  
No. 274, Romsey House  
Nos. 288 to 290 (even), Royal Standar d  
Brookfields Hospital  
Mill Road Baptist Church  
Romsey Town Labour Club  
The Salisbury Club  
Sally Ann’s  
St Barnabas Church  
Mill Road Cemetery  Headstones, memorials and boundary wall  
Mill End Road, Cherry 
Hinton  No. 24  
Millington Road  No. 3  
No. 6  
Nos. 7 to 11 (odd)  
No. 19  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
355  Street  Building Name or Number  
No. 27  
Nos. 32 to 33 (consecutive)  
Nos. 35 to 36 (consecutive)  
Milton Road  Nos. 9 to 19 (odd)  
No. 241  
The Golden Hind Public House  
Mortimer Road  Nos. 1 to 8 (consecutive)  
Mount Pleasant  No. 18  
Bene’t House  
New Museum Site  Annexe to Mond Laboratory  
Newmarket Road  Nos. 3 to 7 (odd)  
No. 20  
No. 43  
No. 114  
Rose and Crown Public House  
Barnwell Junction Station Platform Building  
Cemetery Lodge and Chapel  
Newnham Path  Nos. 1 to 4 (consecutive)  
Newnham Road  Newnham House  
Nos. 26 to 30 (even)  
No. 32  
No. 40  
Newnham Terrace  Nos. 1 to 4 (consecutive)  
Nos. 9 to 12 (consecutive)  
Newnham Walk  Principal’s Lodge  
Norfolk Street  St Matthews School  
Northampton Street  The Punter  
North Terrace  Nos. 1 to 6 (consecutive), Brunswick Cottages  
Orchard Street  Nos. 17 to 21 (consecutive)  
Nos. 23 to 41 (consecutive)  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
356  Street  Building Name or Number  
Owlstone Road  Owlstone Croft Lodge  
Panton Street  No. 26  
No. 32  
Nos. 42 to 48 (even)  
Park Parade  Nos. 1 to 28 (consecutive)  
Park Street  Nos. 11 to 16 (consecutive)  
Parkside  Police Station Buildings  
Parkside Community College  
Pembroke Street  No. 2  
No. 13  
Laboratories  
Petty Cury  Nos. 24 to 27 (consecutive)  
Nos. 35 to 38 (consecutive)  
Portugal Place  Nos. 1 to 7 (consecutive)  
No. 15  
Nos. 19 to 22a (consecutive)  
Portugal Street  Nos. 1 to 11 (odd)  
Nos. 4 to 10 (even)  
Pound Hill  St Giles School  
Pretoria Road  Peterhouse Boathouse  
Prospect Row  Adjacent to No. 1  
Nos. 4 to 8 (consecutive)  
Riverside  Engineer’s House  
Ross Street  St Philip’s Infant School  
Round Church Street  Nos. 13 and 14  
St Andrew’s Road, 
Chesterton  Building D, Simoco Site  
St Andrew’s Street  Nos. 9 to 11 (consecutive)  
No. 38, The Castle Public House  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
357  Street  Building Name or Number  
The Regal and The Arts Picturehouse  
St Barnabas Road  Nos. 20 to 62 (even)  
Nos. 11A to 51 (odd)  
No. 59, Former Vicarage  
No. 61, St Barnabas Church Hall  
The Old School, Rear of St Barnabas Church  
St John’s Road  Nos. 1 to 22 (consecutive)  
St Mary’s Passage  No. 3  
St Peter’s Street  Nos. 18 and 18a  
St Philip’s Road  No. 21, Argyle Villa  
Selwyn Gardens  Nos. 1 to 3 (consecutive)  
Nos. 5 and 6  
No. 8  
Seymour Street  Waters Almshouses  
Shaftesbury Road  No. 4, Shaftesbury House  
Short Street  Nos. 5 and 6  
Sidney Street  No. 22  
Nos. 26 to 30 (consecutive)  
Nos. 41 to 45 (consecutive)  
Nos. 50 to 54 (consecutive)  
Nos. 57 to 60 (consecutive)  
Silver Street  The Anchor Public House  
Erasmus Building, Queens’ College  
Station Road  Nos. 1 to 7 (odd)  
Nos. 9 to 15 (odd), Arundel Villas  
No. 17, St Andrews  
Nos. 19 to 29, Salisbury Villas  
Concrete wall outside Nos. 9 to 29  
Sleeperz Hotel  
Foster  Mills  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
358  Street  Building Name or Number  
Statue of Ceres outside former Spiller’s 
Laboratory  
Nos. 32 to 38 (even), Wilton Terrace  
Rear of Station Road  Crane base on Triangle site  
Storey’s Way  No. 25  
No. 34  
No. 44  
No. 52  
Strangeways Road  No. 4  
Summerfield  Nos. 3 to 12 (consecutive)  
Sylvester Road  No. 2  
Tenison Road  No. 23  
Salvation Army Citadel  
Bolton’s Warehouse  
No. 67  
Nos. 83 to 91 (odd)  
Tennis Court Road  Sir William Harvey Building, Downing Site  
Thompson’s Lane  Nos. 1 to 14 (consecutive), Richmond Terrace  
Nos. 32 to 35 (consecutive)  
La Mimosa  
Trinity Hall  Boulton House  
Junior Common Room  
Trumpington Road  The Old Mill House  
Trumpington Street  Emmanuel Church Hall  
Fen Court, Peterhouse  
Hobson Building, St Catharine’s College  
Woodlark Building, St Catharine’s College  
Victoria Road  Nos. 45 to 47 (odd)  
Nos. 188 to 194 (even)  Appendix G: Local heritage assets criteria and list  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
359  Street  Building Name or Number  
Nos. 239 to 241 (odd)  
Victoria Street  No. 1, Victoria House  
Nos. 2 to 7 (consecutive)  
No. 8, Grantham House  
Nos. 9 to 22 (consecutive)  No. 23, Marlborough House  
No. 24  
No. 25, Chesterfield House  
Warkworth Street  Nos. 1 to 26 (consecutive)  
Nos. 34 to 42 (consecutive)  
Warkworth Terrace  Nos. 51 to 59 (consecutive)  
West Road  No. 23  
Wilberforce Road  No. 1, Youngman House  
No. 19  
Emmanuel College Sports Pavilion  
Willis Road  No. 25, Sinclair Building, Anglia Ruskin University  
Nos. 2 to 16 (even)  
Nos. 1 to 23 (odd)  
Wollaston Road  Nos. 1 and 2  
Worts’ Causeway  Netherhall Farm  
Young Street  Ragged School  
   Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
360   
Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
361 Appendix H: Shopfront design guide  
 
H.1 Good quality shopfronts help support attractive and inviting streets.  
Cambridge has a wide variety of existing shopfronts, some dating back centuries in the historic core and others built more recently. The objective of the guide is to help interpret and implement Policy 64 and help deliver high quality shopfronts, which will support high quality streetscapes across the city.  
 
H.2 The guide addresses:  
 
• shopfront design;  
• advertisements, signs, canopies and blinds; and  
• sho pfront security.  
 
The principles will apply to shops and other commercial premises such 
as offices, banks, pubs and restaurants.  
 
Shopfront design 
 
H.3 This section sets out some basic design principles for shopfronts throughout the city, giving guidance on how shopfronts can be restored, better shopfronts installed, and on designing shopfronts as part of a new building. The guide is not intended to constrain good, modern designs. Well thought -out, imaginative solutions will always be welcomed.  
 Figure H.1: Shopfront design features  
 
 
Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
362 H.4 Key elements to good shopfront design include:  
 
a. respecting the character of the existing building and its neighbours;  
b. reinforcing the local identity of the area and/or creating a sense of 
place;  
c. adding visual interest to the street without detracting from other buildings;  
d. using special features, finishes and details to draw people's attention and make the shopfront memorable;  
e. having a clear identity not a mixture of styles;  
f. avoiding blank frontages and deep fascias; 
g. conserving historic buildings and features, as these give the city character;  
h. visually separating shopfronts on adjacent buildings of differing types, or following the existing pattern of appropriate adjoining shopfronts on buildings of similar st yle; 
i. following the proportions of the rest of the building and providing a visual support for upper floors;  
j. keeping designs simple, even if elements within the shopfronts are elaborate;  
k. emphasising the form of the shopfront by using different planes to create areas of shadow;  
l. clearly defining the entrance;  
m. creating independent access to upper floors if in different use;  
n. provide easy access for disabled people, the elderly and people with pushchairs;  
o. integrating signs, lighting and security measures within the design of the shopfront;  
p. employing a competent designer and using high quality materials and craftsmen; and  
q. adapting company 'house styles' to suit the character of the local area and building, avoiding arbitrary repetition or stretching of logos.  
 
H.5 Sust ainable alterations include:  
 
• reusing existing materials and ensuring timber is from sustainably managed plantations;  
• minimising heat loss and solar gain by modifying the glazing, thereby reducing energy consumption on heating and air conditioning; and  
• usi ng materials which do not consume large amounts of energy or 
pollute the atmosphere in their manufacture, e.g. natural paints and wood stains, and using timber rather than plastics and aluminium.  
 
Repairing and restoring traditional shopfronts  
 Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
363 H.6 Traditionally designed, pre- war shopfronts make a great contribution to 
the character of the city. Their removal from listed buildings or traditional 
buildings in conservation areas will not be allowed unless they are totally beyond repair.  
 
H.7 Usually some element of an original shopfront remains, though it can often be hidden by later additions. For example, old fascias often lie beneath modern box fascias, and pilasters and console brackets were often boxed in as fashions changed, or at the first sign of rot. These features can easily be uncovered, and Cambridge is fortunate to have several local firms and craftsmen skilled in the restoration of traditional features.  
 
H.8 If elements of a shopfront have been removed, there are a number of 
ways to find clues to their original design. Old photographs and plans are 
the most obvious source. In Victorian times particularly, rows of shops were often built speculatively, so neighbouring properties may have some of the original details. By the middle of the 19th century, 'pattern books' were very common. These were catalogues of building products and contained shopfront designs that could be bought 'off -the-peg'.  
 
H.9 In line with Policy 64 of the plan, the Council will not nor mally permit the 
removal of all or part of a shopfront from a listed building, or a traditional building in a conservation area, if the existing shopfront is contemporary with the original building, appropriate to the building, or is of architectural or historic interest in its own right. Accordingly, permission for replacement shopfronts in listed buildings or traditional buildings in conservation areas will normally be permitted only if the existing shopfront is inappropriate to the building or area; if its replacement would improve the character of the building; or if the existing shopfront is beyond repair and little evidence of the original design remains.  
 
Installing new shopfronts in existing buildings  
 
H.10 This section deals with the replacement of shopfronts in existing 
buildings, and applies when the existing shopfront is inappropriate or beyond repair.  
 
H.11 In some instances, it may be appropriate for early shopfront designs to be recreated when there is clear proof of the original shopfront’s design, 
or the design is appropriate to the age and style of the building. This approach may be sensible if, for example, just one shopfront has been lost from a row of identical shops. There may, however, be cases where the building has been altered since the original shopfront was removed, and it may not now be structurally or visually appropriate to recreate the original shopfront.  Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
364  
H.12 New shopfronts in existing buildings should respect the proportions, 
scale, vertical or horizontal emphasis, materials, and type and amount of decoration on the original building. Appropriately designed and proportioned new shopfronts should use high quality materials. Inaccurate replicas of traditional styles are not encouraged.  
 
Access  
 
H.13 If installing a level access would involve the loss of important features 
on an historic building, other alternatives such as handrails should be considere d to help ambulant disabled people. Any changes to access 
arrangements should take account of the needs of people with sight or hearing difficulties by avoiding obstacles on footpaths, making the entrance clear, and avoiding the use of doors that open outwards across a footpath. If a shop has a sales area capable of holding more than 50 people (customers and staff), doors should open outwards. Recessing the doors is the usual way of dealing with this; otherwise guardrails would be needed, and these are not usually acceptable on public footpaths.  
 
Advertisements and signs  
 
H.14 This section gives advice on the types of advertisement that will be 
acceptable in Cambridge. Signage should always be designed for specific buildings with corporate images adapted to suit different types of building and situation.  
 
Fascia signs  
 
H.15 Policies 64 and 65 of the plan encourage signs that respect the character 
of the building and area as a whole. In achieving this requirement, it is advised that fascia signs should not extend t hrough more than one 
adjacent shop unit. Additionally, signs should not remove, hide or destroy the proportions or architectural features of the building.  
 
H.16 Signs that squeeze up against or cover the sills of the first -floor windows, 
or are so long that console brackets have to be removed, or so deep or thick that the proportions of the console brackets and cornice will be lost or look out of proportion, are unlikely to be supported. The size of the fascia should therefore be dictated by the features of the rest of the building.  Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
365  
H.17 It is important to use materials that respect those of the original building. 
Usually, the fascia will be constructed of the same materials as the rest of the shopfront. In ‘traditional’ shopfronts (up to around 1940) they will gener ally be of timber, though coloured glass or tiles were sometimes 
used. In some cases, the whole shopfront may be of stone or marble. High quality materials, if used sensitively, can be successful on both modern and traditional buildings. Plastics, modern c ladding materials 
and aluminium will rarely be appropriate on listed buildings, in conservation areas or on traditional buildings.  
H.18 Lettering size, materials and typefaces should be appropriate to the building. On traditional buildings with timber fascias, sign writing directly on to the fascia board or individually mounted letters will usually be appropriate. The latter should also be used where the fascia is of masonry. The size of the letters should be in proportion to the depth of the fascia. They should not fill the entire fascia. The typeface should be 
appropriate to the character of the building, and the text should be restricted to the proprietor's name, the nature of the business and the shop number, not the brand names of goods for sale.  
 
H.19 Colours that are out of character with the building or area will be 
discouraged. While the desire to use corporate colour schemes is 
understood, the rigid application of modern colours can be at odds with the character of traditional buildings. In such cases, shopke epers will be 
encouraged to restrict their corporate colours to the lettering and detail only, rather than covering the entire fascia.  
 
H.20 In special cases, alternative forms of signage will be considered. On buildings without shopfronts, letters mounted indi vidually to the wall, 
name boards, lettering directly on to the glass, or signs hung behind the shop window may be appropriate, depending on the character of the building. Where the upper floors have a different use to the ground, lettering on the glass is  likely to be the only form of sign acceptable 
above ground floor. This can be supplemented by a small sign at the ground floor entrance door to the upper floor(s). Individually mounted letters are usually appropriate on buildings not originally designed as shops. When illumination is necessary, they can often be discreetly halo-lit. 
 
Hanging signs  
 
H.21 The principles described in the section on fascia signs also apply to 
hanging signs. In addition, the following points should be considered:  
 
• there should not be more than one hanging sign on each elevation 
with a shopfront; and  Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
366 • hanging signs are usually best positioned at ground- floor fascia 
level.  
 
H.22 On many traditional shopfronts, the console brackets were designed to accommodate a support for a hanging sign. On some of Cambridge's 
traditional buildings, signs above ground- floor level will be more 
appropriate to avoid interfering with architectural features or to maintain the building's symmetry and proportions. This is also true where signs would be so low as to be a danger to passers -by. As a general rule, the 
bottom part of the sign should be at least 2.4m above pavement level, and the sign should not be within 1m of the kerb edge. If above the carriageway, a sign would need to be at least 5.1m above ground level.  
H.23 The maximum size of a hanging sign will be dictated by the appropriate fascia depth. The materials of construction and letter sizes and types should respect the character of the building and be of similar character to the fascia sign.  
 
H.24 Illuminated  box, hanging or projecting signs are unlikely to be approved 
on listed buildings, in a conservation area or on feature buildings, 
because the proportions are too clumsy for traditional buildings. Banner signs will not be approved as permanent signage.  
 
H.25 Three-dimensional signs relating to goods or services supplied will be 
encouraged. These were common in Victorian times because many 
people were illiterate. Such signs can look appropriate today, as can more individualistic signs which can add a touch of humour or art to the street.  
 
H.26 Existing brackets for hanging signs should be reused where they are of 
an appropriate design and in a suitable position on the building. The design of new brackets should be appropriate to the shopfront and kept relatively simple . 
 
Illumination  
 
H.27 Illumination of signs on listed buildings and in conservation areas will be 
restricted to those buildings which are open in the evenings and at night, and conditions will be attached to ensure that signs are only lit when the premises are open.  Only shops such as chemists, and restaurants, 
cafes, pubs, off -licences and places of entertainment will normally be 
granted consent for illuminated signs.  
 
H.28 On buildings where illuminated signs are acceptable, the light source 
should be discreet and not interfere with architectural features or 
proportions of the sign or building.  
 Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
367 H.29 Illuminated box fascias will not be acceptable. Strip lights that fit within 
the cornice or architrave; individually -lit lettering; and a small number 
(two on m ost shopfronts, three on very wide frontages) of slim, elegant 
spotlights can be successful. On hanging signs, the illumination should be discreetly attached to the bracket. Large spotlights, swan- necks or 
heavy canopy lights bolted on to the top of hanging signs will not normally be acceptable.  
 
H.30 In residential areas, the degree of illumination should be kept to a minimum. Additionally, the light level should be relatively subdued and 
constant.  
 
Blinds and canopies  
 
H.31 Many traditional shopfronts (especially those dating from the Victorian 
era) had canvas blinds built into them. The housing for these was 
incorporated into the cornice or occasionally the architrave of the shopfront. The purpose of these was to protect customers from the weather and to shelter any goods displayed outside.  
 
H.32 Modern awnings seldom provide much shelter. They are often of bright 
colours, wet -look materials and have decorated borders. Furthermore, 
they are usually supplementary advertising, and are rarely retracted. For these reasons, blinds and awnings will not be appropriate on listed buildings, or buildings in conservation areas, unless they can be accommodated without damage to the character of the building, and relate well to existing detailing.  
 
H.33 Where original blind boxes survive, there is unlikely to be any objection 
to the reinstatement of a traditional blind. In shopfronts without a blind 
housing, installing a blind box is likely to cause damage to original fabric of the building, or loss of architectural features, and is unlikely to be acceptable. Blinds which cannot be retracted are unlikely to be acceptable on traditional buildings. When open, the blind should be more than 1m from the kerb edge, and the lowest part should be as a rule at least 2.4m above pavement level.  
 
Shopfr ont security – getting the balance right  
 
H.34 People need to feel that their environment is safe and secure. This is 
particularly true for shop owners who need to satisfy their own peace of mind and their insurers. The best protection an area can have is to increase the numbers of people living in shopping areas and using the streets at all hours. The police acknowledge the importance of this Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
368 ‘natural surveillance’. To support this, the Council has installed CCTV 
cameras in some locations. The Council will also continue to work with Cambridgeshire County Council to improve street lighting and with local people to improve the city’s night -time environment.  
 
H.35 Shop owners often see solid external shutters as the best protection 
against vandalism and theft. These can give the impression that crime is rife and stop people using the area when the shops are closed. However, the creation of a fortress -like atmosphere can be self -defeating.  Solid 
roller shutters can have an adverse environmental effect, giving an area a ‘dead’ appearance and contributing towards the creation of a hostile 
environment. Some shops will need shutters, but a balance must be struck between the need for security and the quality of the environment.  
 
H.36 The Council encourages shopkeepers to use security measures which 
will not affect or will improve the area’s appearance. Using appropriate internal and external lighting, reducing temptation by taking valuable stock out of the window at night, removing rubbish outside shops which can be used to br eak windows, letting out rooms above shops, and 
installing alarms and internal video cameras to protect stock can all significantly reduce the likelihood of crime.  
 
H.37 When considering planning applications for shop alterations, the Council expects shop owner s to use the least visually intrusive security 
measures which meet their needs. Solid shutters are not the only way to 
combat crime. This appendix, therefore, sets out when different measures will be acceptable and how to install them in a sympathetic way.  
 
Table H.1: When will security measures be acceptable?  
       
 
 
Listed 
buildings  Conservation 
area where 
CCTV 
operates  Other 
conservation 
area Elsewhere  See 
paragraph 
in text  Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
369 Laminated 
glass  a (see 
key 
below)     H.38  
Reduce glazing b c c c H.39 –40 
Internal screen  a    H.41  
Internal grille  a    H.42 –43 
Timber shutter  d d d d H.44  
External 
demountable 
grille  e e f f H.45  
External roller 
grille  e e f f H.46  
External roller 
shutter  e e e e H.47  
Gate  d d d d H.48  
 Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
370 Key to Table H.1  
a Likely to need listed building consent. Only acceptable when no features of 
architectural or historic interest are affected.  
b Listed building consent needed. Unlikely to be acceptable if historic fabric is 
removed or altered, unless the existing shopfront is of no historic interest, and 
alterations would improve the appearance of the building.  
c May need planning permission depending on degree of alteration. Unlikely to 
be acceptable on traditional buildings.  
d Will need planning permission, and listed building consent on listed buildings. 
Will only be approved if there is an historical precedent and the design is 
appropriate.  
e Only acceptable in exceptional cases. Will always need planning permission, 
and listed building consent on listed buildings. Installation must be supported 
by written statement from police and insurance company (see paragraphs 
H.51 –52) 
f Planning permission needed. Design must relate to elements of the shopfront. 
Installation must be  supported by written statement from police and insurance 
company (see paragraphs H.51– 52). 
 
Altering the glazing  
 
H.38 Laminated glass can be effective against window breakages and theft. 
Different thicknesses of glass are available for different situations. It can often be fitted without any effect on the appearance of the shopfront if the frames are strong enough. The main drawback is that when damaged, the outer sheet of glass can craze. If the shopfront has slender mullions and glazing bars (common in many  old buildings), these may 
need to be strengthened to take the size and weight of laminated glass and this is unlikely to be acceptable on listed buildings. Sometimes the old glass may be of interest and so its replacement may not be desirable. Anti-shatter film holds glass together when it is broken. While this is not 
as effective as laminated glass, it may slow down intruders and so prevent opportunist theft from the window.  
 
Reducing the area of glazing  
 
H.39 Reducing the amount of glazing, or dividing the window into smaller 
panes can also be effective. Windows divided with reinforced glazing bars can prevent access to the building. Smaller panes are also cheaper to replace if broken. However, dividing the windows up will only be acceptable if the resulting appearance is appropriate to the character of the whole building, and is unlikely to be approved on listed buildings unless the shopfront is of little interest.  
 Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
371 H.40 Large areas of plate glass which run almost to the floor are easy to 
damage and expensive to replace. Installing a stallriser reduces the area of glass, makes it harder to kick, and is a good defence against ram -
raids.  
Internal screens  
 
H.41 Internal screens can be fitted behind the window display. They are very 
effective in stopping intruders getting into the main part of the shop, especially where there are bay - or bow -windows. When purpose- made, 
they can be an attractive part of the shop’s decoration. They can be permanent or demountable , but being internal cannot prevent damage to the windows, or theft of the window display. In listed buildings they are often the best solution, although care is needed to retain intact any internal features of interest, such as panelling.  
 
Internal grilles  
 
H.42 Internal grilles can be of the roller type, and so need a housing for the 
coil. This can be fitted behind the window display (as with a screen). If 
fitted closer to the glass, the coil housing should not be seen from outside. This can be done by fitting it within an existing false ceiling, within the window soffit, or by using darkened glass in the transom windows.  
 
H.43 All grilles need runners. These should be painted to match the rest of the shop. Care is needed to avoid damage to internal features, especially in 
listed buildings.  
 
Timber shutters  
 
H.44 Solid timber shutters were probably the earliest measures used to protect shopfronts, though none are thought to survive in Cambridge. If 
evidence can be found to guide the design of accurate replicas, it may be appropriate to reinstate these on listed and other traditional buildings. 
Shutters need to be light enough to be moved by shop workers, and daytime storage space will be needed for them.
 
 
External demountable grilles  
 Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
372 H.45 Demountable grilles are normally made of steel mesh. They are taken 
down when the shop opens, and manhandled into place and padlocked when closed. They allow views into the shop, but can look ugly and may therefore have to justified. Such grilles should:  
 
• be finished in a colour appropriate to the shop;  
• be stored out of sight in the shop during the day;  
• consist of a separate grille for each display window; and  
• provide simple and unobtrusive locking mechanisms.  
 
External roller grilles  
 
H.46 A range of styles of external roller grilles is available, but all have 
horizontal patterns, which seldom suit the character of traditional 
buildings. Justification for the fitting of such shutters may be required, and the following criteria must be met:  
 • the fascia, stallriser and pilasters will not be covered by the grille runners for the grilles will  be fitted to pilasters or glazing bars and 
painted to match;  
• the coil housing will be concealed behind the fascia or fitted flush beneath it and painted to match;  
• the grille will be finished in a colour appropriate to the rest of the shop; and  
• the coil housing or guides must not damage or hide any important architectural features of the shopfront.  
 
External roller shutters 
 
H.47 Solid external roller shutters give buildings a dead and hostile 
appearance when closed. They do not allow views into the shop, and do not allow surveillance by the emergency services. Solid roller shutters will only be approved if it can be shown that no other form of protection will be adequate (see paragraphs H.51– 52). Shutters incorporating clear 
perspex panels arranged in a pattern which reflects the vertical emphasis of buildings are preferred. Fixing solid external shutters should be carried out as detailed above for grilles. Shutters should be painted in a colour appropriate to the rest of the shop.  
 
Gates  
 Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
373 H.48 Decorative gates were often used during Victorian times to prevent 
people loitering in recessed doorways, though they should not enclose or open over the highway. They are usually made of iron and are available in a variety of styles. They can be a good way of protecting doorways if the style and colour suits the rest of the building and the 
gates, guides and locks are not obtrusive when the gates are open.  
 
Protection against ram -raids  
 
H.49 Adequate protection against ram -raiding can normally be achieved by a 
combination of measures to strengthen the shopfront, without using solid 
external shutters. For example, building a stallriser with a steel or block frame, subdividing the glazing and door, strengthening both the frame and glass, or installing a sturdy screen behind the window display.  
 
H.50 Outside the shop, street furniture can be positioned to stop vehicles getting near to the shop. Cambridgeshire County Council’s (as highway 
authority) permission is needed to put bollards, or any other obstacle on a highway or footpath, and this will only be considered where there is a risk of ram -raids. If you want to install bollards or any other external 
features, consider the needs of the visually impaired, wheelchair users and people with prams when siting them. Telescopic bollards which  can 
be retracted back into the ground during the day should be used. Radical measures to protect against ram -raiding will need justification (see 
paragraphs H.51– 52). Measures which adversely affect the architectural 
or historic interest of a listed building or the appearance of a building in a conservation area are unlikely to be acceptable.  
 
Justification for external shutters and grilles  
 
H.51 The Council recognises that in some cases exceptional security 
measures are needed if the shopkeeper is to retain their livelihood. 
However, as the appearance of external grilles or shutters often harms the character of the individual building or the area as a whole, their installation must be fully justified and supported by the police and insurance company. This justi fication will need to:  
 
• explain the particular problem, and describe other forms of protection which have been used, and why they have not worked;  
• include a letter from the insurance company identifying previous incidents, and setting out what measures are needed to safeguard against future incidents;  
• include a letter from the police which identifies previous incidents and sets out what measures are felt appropriate to protect the Appendix H: Shopfront Design Guide  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
374 property; and  
• explain how you will reduce the visual impact of the security 
measures (see above sections and seek advice from Planning Services). 
 
H.52 The Council recommends that in these exceptional cases, a meeting is 
set up at the earliest possible opportunity with the shopkeeper, representatives of the insurance company  and police, and Planning 
Services before an application is submitted.  
  Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
375   
Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
376 Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
Criteria to assess open space  
 
I.1 The criteria have been developed to determine if open spaces are 
important for environmental reasons, recreational reasons or both. There are separate sets of criteria relating to the environmental and recreational importance. Sites are judged against both of these to determine whether they should be protected for environmental 
importance, recreational importance, or both. In order to be considered worthy of protection they need to fulfil at least one of the criteria. The questions under each criterion are used to assess which si tes meet that 
criterion.  
 
Criteria for environmental importance  
 
a. Does the site make a major contribution to the setting, character, 
structure and the environmental quality of the city?  
b. Does the site make a major contribution to the character and environmen tal quality of the local area?  
c. Does the site contribute to the wildlife value and biodiversity of the city? 
 
If yes to any of these, the site is worthy of protection for environmental 
reasons.  
Criteria for recreational importance  
 
d. Does the site make a major contribution to the recreational resources of the city?  
e. Does the site make a major contribution to the recreational resources of the local area?  
 
If yes to either of these, the site is worthy of protection for recreational reasons.  
 Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
377 Questions used  to assess whether open space meets the criteria for 
environmental importance  
 
a. Does the site make a major contribution to the setting, character, 
structure and the environmental quality of the city?  
i. Does it make a major contribution to the setting of Cambridge?  
ii. Does it have positive landscape features and/or a sense of place sufficient for it to make a major contribution to the character of the city?  
iii. Is the site an important green break in the urban framework?  
iv. Does it have significant histor ical, cultural or known 
archaeological interest? 
 
b. Does the site make a major contribution to the character and environmental quality of the local area?  
i. Does it have positive features such as streams, trees, hedgerows or meadowlands which give it a sense of place sufficient to make a major contribution to the character of the local area?  
ii. Is it an important green break in the framework of the local area?  
iii. Does it form part of a network of open spaces in the local area?  
iv. Is it enjoyed visually on a daily basis from public places (e.g. footpaths, vantage points)?  
v. Does it have local historical or cultural interest?  
 
c. Does the site contribute to the wildlife value and biodiversity of the city? 
i. Does it have any nature conservation designation?  
ii. Is it adjacent to or an important link to sites with nature conservation designation?  
iii. Does it contain important habitats or species sufficient to make it worthy of consideration for any nature conservation designation?  
iv. Is it an important wildlife oasis in an are a with limited wildlife 
value?  
 
Questions used to assess whether open space meets the criteria for 
recreational importance  
 
Recreational resources include land for formal pitch sports, play areas, 
kick-about areas, informal open spaces used for walking, cy cling, 
picnic, play, kite flying, nature appreciation etc, and allotments.  
 Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
378 d. Does the site make a major contribution to the recreational 
resources of the city as a whole58? 
i. Is it of a size, quality and accessibility such that people would 
travel to use it for recreational purposes, no matter where they live, work or study in the city?  
ii. Is it an important part of the network of significant recreational open spaces?  
iii. Is it part of the sports provision which help to meet demand from people throughout the city, no matter where they live, work or 
study? 
 
e. Does the site make a major contribution to the recreational 
resources of the local area
59? 
i. Is it of a size and accessibility such that people who live, work or 
study in the local area do or  could use it for recreational 
purposes?   
ii. Is it an important part of the network and hierarchy of recreational facilities in the local area?  
iii. Is it a significant linkage between recreational areas?  
 
Providing open space facilities  
 
I.2 Policy 68 requires that all residential developments should contribute to the provision of open space and recreation sites/facilities in accordance 
with the council’s Open Space and Recreation Standards, the Playing Pitch Strategy and the Indoor Sports Facility Strategy. The Counc il’s 
Open Space and Recreation Strategy provides further detail on the justification for these standards and includes guidance on accessibility and quality. Table I.1 sets out the standards for different types of open space and recreation provision. They apply to all schemes for new residential developments and the requirement is based on the net number of residents accommodated in the new development.  
 
I.3 The Playing Pitch Strategy and Indoor Sports Facility Strategy take into account planned growth to 2031.  However, there will be instances where large windfall sites come forward which have not been accounted for in the strategies. Where this is the case, applicants should provide a sports strategy (also known as a facilities development plan) setting o ut 
 
58 Recreational resources of the city include playing fields used by colleges or sports clubs, 
school playing fields which are also used by sports clubs, and commons and other recreation 
grounds which people would go out of their way to visit.  
59 Recreational resources of the local area include playing fields which are well related to their 
users. This could include playing fields which are part of a college site or school playing fields.  Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
379 the details of specific facilities to be developed, the rationale and need 
for these. The process will involve consultation with Sport England and the relevant National Governing Bodies for sport.  
 
Table I.1: Open space and recreation standards  
 
Type of 
open space  Definition  Standard  CIL+ Onsite or 
S106+ 
Outdoor 
sports 
facilities  Playing 
pitches, courts and 
greens  1.2 hectares 
per 1,000 people  No Yes 
Indoor sports 
provision  Formal 
provision such as sports halls and swimming pools  1 sports hall 
for 13,000 
people  
1 swimming 
pool for 50,000 
people  Yes No 
Provision for 
children and teenagers  Equipped 
children’s play areas and outdoor youth 
provision  0.3 hectares 
per 1,000 people  No Yes 
Informal 
open space  Informal 
provision, including recrea tion 
grounds, parks, natural 
greensp aces 
and, in town 
centr es or 
urban 
locations, 
usabl e, high 
quality, 
public hard 
surfaces  2.2 hectares 
per 1,000 people  No Yes Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
380 Allotments  Allotments  0.4 hectares 
per 1,000 
people  No Yes 
 + Indicative, and subject to the adoption of the Community Infrastructure Levy and associated 
Regulation 123 list  
Outdoor sports facilities  
 
I.4 The 1.2 hectares per 1,000 people standard is an amalgamation of 
standards for different sports, based on team generation rates and current provision. This comprises:  
outdoor pitches for football, hockey, cricket and rugby: 1.1 hectares per 1,000 people;  
tennis courts /multi -use games areas (MUGAs) / bowling greens: 0.1 
hectares per 1,000 people.  
 
Outdoor pitches, including Artificial Turf Pitches (ATP)  
 
I.5 This standard is based on the findings of the latest Cambridge and South 
Cambridgeshire Playing Pitch Strategy.  The standard is indicative. The delivery of on- site outdoor playing pitches should be made with regard 
to the most recently adopted Playing Pitch Strategy.  Artificial turf pitches will also meet other needs, including football training.  Floodlighting is essential on public artificial turf pitches, and changing rooms, toilets and storage should be provided.  
 
Tennis courts/MUGAs/Bowling Greens  
 
I.6 The provision of outdoor community tennis courts should be on a multi -
court basis, which helps facilitate the development of clubs. MUGA sites 
should vary in form based on local need.  Bowling greens should consider providing ancillary facilities to support play and competitions. Provision for all types of outdoor sports areas should be well related in geographical terms to the population it is intended to serve and is best located in areas which are also the focus for other sports and recreational activity . 
 Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
381 Indoor sports  
 
I.7 The main components of formal indoor facilities are swimming pools and sports halls. The standard consists of:  
• one swimming pool for every 50,000 people; and  
• one sports hall for every 13,000 people.  
 
Provision for children and teenagers  
 
I.8 Provision for children and teenagers includes: a local area for play and informal recreation (LAP); a locally equipped or landscaped area for play 
and informal recreation (LEAP); a neighbourhood equipped area for play and informal recreation (NEAP); and a social space for young people (aged 12 and over) to meet (Youth Space). Table I.2 overleaf explains the playspace typology in more detail.  
 Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
382 Table I.2: Playspace typology  
 
Local area for play 
(LAP)  Locally equipped/ 
landscaped area 
for play (LEAP)  Neighbourhood equipped/ 
landscaped area for play 
(NEAP)  Youth space  
Description  • A landscaped 
space including 
engaging play 
features for young 
children, and places 
for carers to sit and 
talk 
• Landscaping may 
include raised beds 
with fruit -bearing 
vegetation  
• No formal 
supervision  • A landscaped 
space with 
landscaping and 
equipment so that 
children aged from 
birth to 11 can play 
and be physically 
active and they and their car
ers can sit 
and talk  
• Flexible use  
• No formal 
supervision  • A varied natural space with 
secluded and open areas, 
landscaping and equipment so that children aged from birth to 11 can play and be physically 
active and they and their 
carers can sit and talk, with some youth facilities  
• Flexible use  
• May include youth space 
• May be supervised  • Social spaces for young 
people aged 12 and over 
to meet, hang out and 
take part in informal sport 
or physical recreational 
activities  
• No formal supervision  
Minimum  
activity area  100 sq m  400 sq m  1,000 sq m  200 sq m  Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
383 Buffer zone60 5m 10m 30m 10–50m61 
Catchment 
area (straight 
line distance)  60m 240m  600m  600m  
Age group 0-5 0-12 All ages  13+ 
Examples of 
facilities  • Landscaping  
• Climbable objects  
• Fixed equipment  
• Seating for carers  
• Raised surfaces  
• Sand and water 
feature (if possible)  • Landscaping to 
create natural feel, 
including changes 
of level equipment, 
integrated into the 
landscaping, that 
allows children to 
swing, slide and 
climb  
• Multi -games/ball 
walls  
• Kickabout area  
• Basketball nets  
• Seating area away 
from equipment  • Landscaping to create natural 
feel, including changes of level 
equipment, integrated into the 
landscaping, that allows 
children to swing, slide and 
climb  
• Seating area away from 
equipment  
• Bike, skate and skateboard 
facilities  
• Kickabout area  
• Basketball nets  
• Sand if possible  
• Hard surface area if possible 
• Water feature if possible  • Space and facilities for 
informal sport or 
recreation activity (e.g. 
multi- ball court, 
basketball court, climbing walls or boulders, multi -
use games area (MUGA), 
wheeled sports area, 
skatepark or BMX track, 
traversing wall, climbing 
boulders, exercise trails, 
outdoor exercise 
equipment)  
• Seating areas on the 
edge of the activity space  
 
60 Minimum depth from edge of activity area to boundary of nearest residential property  
61 Between 10 –5m, depending on context from the frontages of residential, retail, educational or leisure property, or within 50m of main routes through open space. Avoid 
locations where noise will cause disturbance.  Appendix I: Open space and recreation standards  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
384 • Sand (if possible)  • Shelter plus basketball net, 
small wheeled facility or 
climbing wall/ boulder for 
young people  • Youth shelter  
• Landscaping  
Location  • Residential areas 
including housing 
estates  
• Pocket parks  
• Public squares  
• Home zones  • Residential areas 
including housing 
estates  
• Local parks  • Larger residential areas and 
housing estates  
• Local parks  
• District parks  
• School playgrounds  • Larger residential areas 
and housing estates  
• Adjacent to community 
facilities  
• Local parks  
• District parks  
• Town centres  
 APPENDIX I: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION STANDARDS  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
385 Allotments  
 
I.9 This reflects existing provision. Provision for new allotments should be 
made in the existing built -up area of the city and for urban extensions. 
Where new residential development is brought forward in the existing built-up area of the city, it  is recognised that it would be difficult to achieve 
full provision against the standards in a densely developed area. In the absence of sufficient land for new allotments, monies should be paid towards the enhancement of existing allotment sites. The Council may also seek to identify land which might be brought forward for new allotments in areas of deficiency.  
 
When the standards should be applied  
 
I.10 The standards are applicable to all new residential units created as a result of development, regardless of whether they result from new -build 
or conversions. Certain types of housing will not always need to meet 
the full standard, as shown in Table I.3.  
 
  APPENDIX I: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION STANDARDS  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
386 Table I.3: Application of the standards  
 Market 
and 
Affordable 
Housing Retirement 
housing +  Non-
family 
student 
housing Family 
student 
housing 
Outdoor 
sports 
facilities  Full 
provision  Full 
provision  Full 
provision *  Full 
provision *  
Provision for 
children and 
teenagers  Full 
provision #  No 
provision  No 
provision  Full 
provision **  
Informal open 
space  Full 
provision  Full 
provision  Full 
provision 
** Full 
provision **  
Indoor sports 
provision  Full 
provision  Full 
provision  Full 
provision *  Full 
provision *  
Allotments  Full 
provision  Full 
provision  No 
provision  No 
provision  
 
# Provision for children and teenagers will not be sought for those parts of 
developments consisting of one bedroom units.  
+ Retirement housing is any accommodation in class C3 where there is an age 
restriction of over 55. The standards do not apply to nursing homes within class C2.  
* Full provision will not be sought if the accommodation is directly linked to a college or 
university by a Section 106 agreement and it can be shown that adequate provision of 
outdoor or indoor sports facilities is made by that college or university.  
** Full provision will not be sought if the development is on a college campus and it can 
be shown that adequate appropriate open space is provided by the college such that students are unlikely to make significant use of other informal open space.  
 
I.11 The open space requirement for other specialist housing will be 
considered on its merits, taking into account the needs arising from that 
development. When considering how to apply the standards, consideration should first be given to how much provision can be made APPENDIX I: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION STANDARDS  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
387 on site for each type of open space. Guidelines for this are set out in the 
current Open Space and Recreation Strategy.  
 
I.12 For each type of open space or recreation provision, the following 
factors should be taken into account:  
 a. the size and character of the proposed development;  
b. townscape considerations;  
c. its location in relation to adjacent housing and existing open space; 
and 
d. opportunities for creating or improving open space and recreation provision nearby.  
 
I.13 The standards are based on specific types of open space. 
However, consideration should be given to including other types of open space and recreation provision and these could help to meet the standards. The maintenance of any open space provided by developers should be secured through the Section 106 agreement for the site.  
 
How the standards should be applied  
 
I.14 The amount of land required to meet the standard is calculated 
for each type of open space or sports provision. This is done by calculating the number of new residents arising from the develop ment 
using the number of bedrooms in each unit as a guide. The number of people will be taken from the information provided in the design and access statement for the application. The indicative number of residents will have been provided in order to meet the requirements of Policy 50, Residential space standards. For student housing and houses in multiple occupation, the number of people to be accommodated will be used.  
 
Assessing areas of deficiency  
 
I.15 The Open Space and Recreational Strategy identifies exi sting 
deficiencies in the provision of open space in each ward and how these could be overcome. It also identifies deficiencies in access to LAPs, LEAPs and NEAPs based upon the assessment list in Table I.4: 
Assessing areas of deficiency.  
 
  APPENDIX I: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION STANDARDS  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
388 Table I.4: Ass essing areas of deficiency  
Type  Local area 
for play 
(LAP)  Locally 
equipped/ 
landscaped 
area for play 
(LEAP)  Neighbourhood 
equipped/ 
landscaped area 
for play (NEAP)  Youth 
space  
What 
counts as 
an existing 
space for 
play?  • Small age -
appropriate 
equipped play area  
• Public open spaces with potential for informal play • Age 
appropriate equipped play area 
• Public open spaces with potential for informal play  
• Kickabout areas  
• Adventure 
playgrounds  • Adventure 
Playgrounds  
• Sport or recreation space that is open 
access (e.g. ball court, basketball court, multi -use 
games area  
• Skatepark or bike park  
• Trim trails  • Youth 
space where young people can meet and socialise  
Catchment 
area62  60m 240m  600m  600m  
Actual 
walking  
distance63  100m  400m  800m  800m  
  
I.16 Sites that generate demand for children’s playspaces in areas of 
identified need should maximise on- site provision. Similarly, 
development sites in wards with above average ward population densities should maximise on- site provision.  
 
Maintenance of on- site provision  
 
I.17 It should be noted that in respect of any open space provided on-
site as part of a development, arrangements will need to be made for its 
maintenance and management. This will normally involve the payment 
 
62 Straight line distance.  
63 Taking into account barriers to movement.  APPENDIX I: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION STANDARDS  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
389 of a commuted sum to the Council based on the cost of maintenance 
and management for a period of 12 years, following its adoption.  
  APPENDIX I: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION STANDARDS  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
390  
 
  
Appendix J: Biodiversity  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
391 Appendix J: Biodiversity  
Provision for biodiversity in new development  
 
J.1 Development proposals vary widely in size and design, and their individual circumstances will determine which types of 
biodiversity action are most applicable. Developers should seek professional guidance to identify existing biodiversity asset s 
and the po tential to enhance these as part of the development and future management of the site.  
 
J.2 Biodiversity opportunities within the built fabric are particularly valuable in the city environment. Actions that should be incorporated to conserve and enhance key species that rely on nesting and roosting opportunities within buildings are outlined in Table J.1. Provision of artificial sites is required due to the lack of opportunities in modern building design. The reduction in available sites is implicated in the decline of many of these species.  
 
Table J.1: Making provision for biodiversity in new developments  
Species  Actions  Numbers  Notes  
Common 
Swift Apus 
apus  Install internal or 
external boxes at 
soffit / eaves level  1 in 5 buildings 
Ideally grouped  • Any two storey building or above. Proximity of existing colony reinforces need 
for new nest sites  
• Minimum 5m above ground level with unimpeded flight lines  
• Norther ly or well- shaded aspect; avoid southerly elevations and immediate 
vicinity of windows  
• Ideally group boxes on same or adjacent building  Appendix J: Biodiversity  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
392 Species  Actions  Numbers  Notes  
• Broadcasting calls during breeding season increases likelihood of occupation, 
consider this on community buildings  
House 
Sparrow 
Passer 
domesticus  Install internal or 
external boxes at 
soffit / eaves level  1 in 5 buildings 
Ideally grouped  • Buildings within close foraging range of natural open space  
• At least 2m above ground level with nearby roofs or vegetation for perching  
• North or easterly aspect, avoid southern elevations  
• Prefer nesting in loose groups (10 –20 pairs), boxes can be adjacent, ideally in 
groups of 6 or more  
Starling 
Sturnus vulgaris  Install internal or 
external boxes at soffit / eaves level  1 in 20 buildings  • Buildings within close foraging range of natural open space  
• At least 2m above ground level with nearby roofs or vegetation for perching  
• North or easterly aspect, avoid southern elevations  
• Ideally install a group of nests each 1.5m apart  
Black 
Redstart 
Phoenicuru
s ochruros   Provide green or 
brown roofs with 
nearby open-
fronted boxes  1 in 50 buildings  • Seek specialist advice on site suitability  
• Need insect -rich urban environments  
• Include piles of aggregate, deadwood and water features, where possible 
Swallow 
Hirundo rustica  Create purpose -
built ledges or install pre -formed 
nest cups inside buildings  1 in 50 buildings  • Open -sided building within close proximity to natural green space, ideally near 
grazing animals and water such as the Cambridge commons  
• Need to be near principal nesting material, which is mud collected from 
puddles, ponds or slow moving water  
• Avoid situation where droppings might be a nuisance e.g. a car port, porch  Appendix J: Biodiversity  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
393 Species  Actions  Numbers  Notes  
House 
martin 
Delichon 
urbica  Install pre -cast 
nest cup to 
encourage 
establishment of 
natural nests  1 in 20 buildings  • Buildings with wide soffits within close proximity to natural green space  
• >5m and avoid southerly elevations  
• Need to be near principal nesting material which is mud collected from 
puddles, ponds or  slow moving water  
• Avoid fixing over doors or windows  
Robin and 
wren  Install open -
fronted boxes  1 in 5 buildings  • Need access to public or private open space, including gardens  
• Can be inside open- fronted structures or on wall within trellis and climber  
Great Tit 
and Blue Tit  Hole or open -
fronted box. Install external 
boxes on building 
or outbuilding  1 in 5 buildings  • Need access to public or private open space, including gardens  
• Avoid direct sunlight, prevailing window and immediate areas of cove r that 
could conceal predators, especially cats  
• 1.5–3m above ground level with nearby roofs or vegetation for perching  
• Can also use existing mature trees  
Barn owl   
Tyto alba  Install box in barn 
or roof void  As appropriate  • Only on the city edge with direct access to long grass, hedgerows and 
watercourses for hunting  
• Seek specialist advice on site suitability regarding risk of road collisions and 
disturbance  Appendix J: Biodiversity  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
394 Species  Actions  Numbers  Notes  
Kestrel     
Falco 
innunculus  Install open -
fronted box on appropriate 
building  As appropriate  • > 15m tall building, undisturbed roofs  
• Ideally on the city edge or adjacent to large natural green space with direct 
access to long grass, hedgerows and watercourses for hunting  
Peregrine 
Falco 
peregrinus  Install shallow 
tray on tall building  As appropriat e • >20m north or north east orientation, away from human disturbance and 
prevailing winds  
• Ideally include a nesting substrate such as pea shingle  
• Seek specialist advice on site suitability  
Crevice -
dwelling bats, 
including 
common 
pipistrelle; 
soprano 
pipistrelle; 
and Create spaces 
behind wall cladding  
Install integral boxes  
Create sandwich boards with 1-
inch gap to place 
inside the roof 1 in 5 buildings  • Can crawl into smallest spaces although areas of about 1 sq m mo st useful for 
summer maternity roosts  
• 2- 7m above ground level  
• Maternity roosts need warmth and are best situated on a southerly or western 
aspect. Male roosts and winter hibernation roosts are best situated on a 
northerly aspect  
• Materials for roosts should  be rough (for grip), non- toxic or corrosive, with no 
risk of entanglement  
• Access should not be lit by artificial lighting  
• Maintain or enhance linear features in the nearby landscape, including 
woodland edges and hedgerows  Appendix J: Biodiversity  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
395 Species  Actions  Numbers  Notes  
whiskered 
bat void, against 
battens  
Roof -void 
dwelling 
bats, including 
noctule, 
serotine, 
Daubenton’
s and 
barbastelle  Leave timber 
joists and beams 
exposed  
Install access 
points under the 
eaves or make 
hole in roof tiles  1 in 10 buildings  • Entry point should be 2 -7m above ground level  
• Maternity roosts need warmth and are best situated on a southerly or western 
aspect. Male roosts and winter hibernation roosts are best situated on a 
northerly aspect  
• Materials for roosts should be rough for grip, non- toxic or corrosive, with no 
risk of entanglement  
• Access should not be lit by artificial lighting  
• Maintain or enhance linear features in the nearby landscape, including 
woodland edges and hedgerows  
Bats that 
need internal 
flight, 
including 
brown long-Keep roof space 
untrussed to allow 
flight  1 in 20 buildings  • Entry point should be >2m  
• Untrussed roof space should be generally inaccessible  
• Internal dimension should be approximately 2 –2.8m (height) x 5m (width) x 5m 
(length)  
• Maintain or enhance linear features in the nearby landscape, including 
woodland edges and hedgerows  Appendix J: Biodiversity  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
396 Species  Actions  Numbers  Notes  
eared and 
Natterer’s  
 
  Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
397   
Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
398 Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and 
viability appraisal  
 
New facilities  
 
K.1 Local need should be evidenced with a local needs assessment to 
establish the demand for the proposed facility.  
 
New city -wide or sub -regional facilities  
 
K.2 New city -wide or sub- regional community or leisure facilities should be 
located in accordance with the national64 sequential test. Proposals for 
these, often large -scale facilities, will need to  demonstrate a high level 
of need and support from the area it will serve. Developers will be 
expected to provide:  
 
a. adequate evidence of city/regional need and support; and  
b. demonstration of site accessibility to users by all means of transport including foot and cycle; and  
c. details of how other uses, including other community activities could be incorporated into the proposal to enhance both access and range of facilities available; and  
d. demonstration of the use of the national sequential test in considering sites for development will be required.  
 
Loss of facilities  
 
K.3 Proposals for either replacement or relocated facilities should demonstrate:  
 
a. equal or improved site accessibility to users by all means of transport including foot and cycle; and  
b. sufficient spare capacity or agreement to accommodate displaced 
users at other equivalent community/leisure facilities with similar accessibility for users. For existing leisure facilities, in the absence of a robust district -wide needs assessment/capacity as sessment, 
 
64 National Planning Policy Framework  (2012), Paragraph 24  Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
399 applicants will be expected to carry out such an assessment at their 
own cost; and  
c. through local consultation, the level of interest in and viability of the continued use of the premises as a community/leisure facility.  
 
K.4 The reference to ‘peak period’ refers to the expected busiest period of operation for the particular type of leisure facility.  For example, for indoor sports facilities and outdoor floodlit all -weather pitches, the peak period 
is usually defined as weekday evenings and at the weekend. For nightclubs this would be Friday and Saturday evenings from 10pm until closing time.  
 
K.5 Any marketing exercise relating to facility or site should follow the appropriate marketing strategy requirements. Community and sporting, arts/cultural or enter tainment leisure facilities should be marketed for a 
similar category of the facility that will be lost. In order to demonstrate that a facility (excluding a public house or public house site) is no longer needed, the facility and site should be marketed according to the marketing strategy requirements listed below.  
 
K.6 While economic viability may apply to commercial leisure facilities, there 
are some leisure facilities/uses that are supported by external funding 
and their on- going operations do not rely on being commercially 
profitable, such as a theatre or a public swimming pool. Facilities and uses that are not run as a commercial operation and rely on external funding will therefore be exempt from the marketing requirement as this will not provide an appropriate means of testing viability, given their reliance on external funding/subsidies.  
 
K.7 Proposals involving the loss of a public house site should demonstrate:  
 a. the public house site has been marketed according to the marketing strategy requirements listed below;  
b. how all reasonable diversification efforts have been considered under Public House Viability Appraisals listed below; and  
c. the local community no longer needs the public house and alternative provision is available in the area by following the guidance under Public House Community Consultation and Catchment Assessment listed below.  
 
Marketing strategy requirements for all facilities and sites, including 
public house sites  
 
K.8 Developers should note the following generic requirements of any 
marketing requirement for a facility or site and the specific requirements 
for specific uses/sites:  Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
400 a. details shall be provided of the company/person who carried out the 
marketing exercise;  
b. the marketing process should last for at least 12 months, unless a focused marketing strategy has been pre- agreed in writing with the 
local planning authority, in which case only six months is required;  
c. the facility/site should be marketed for the existing or most recent use and not under a generic ‘all options’ use;  
d. unless previously agreed in writing with the council as a local planning authority, the marketing exercise should be sufficiently thorough and use all available forms of advertising media and therefore include as a minimum:  
1. a ‘for sale/for rent’ signboard; 
2. advertisements
65 in the local press;  
3. advertisements2 in appropriate trade/charity/leisure 
magazines/journals;  
4. advertisements2 on appropriate trade/charity/leisure websites;  
5. advertisements2 through national and local estate agents 
(including their websites); and  
6. a targeted mail shot or email to an agreed list of potential purchasers.  
Evidence of all sales literature (and in the case of a signboard, dated photographs) will be required.  
e. copies  of all details of approaches and offers should be provided 
together with full reasons as to why any offer has not been accepted;  
f. any attempts to sell the business at a price which reflects its current use should relate to the business in its entirety, and not to parts of 
it, for example the buildings without the associated garden or car park.  
 
 
Specific requirements corresponding to site/land use  
 
Specialist housing 
 
K.9 The asking price/rental charge should be pre- agreed in writing with the 
local planning authority following independent valuation (funded by the 
developer) by a professional Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors 
(RICS) valuer with expertise in the specialist housing sector and who is not engaged to market the property.  
 
 
65 Adverts should contain a similar amount of detail as a property listing by an es tate agent. Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
401 K.10 Specialist  housing can take different forms as indicated in paragraph 
6.16, and it is important that the marketing exercise is not restricted to 
only one form of specialist housing. Consequently, the marketing exercise should be aimed at potential occupiers being from any one of the forms of development detailed in paragraph 6.16.  
 
 
 
Community facilities (not public houses/public house sites)  
 
K.11 The asking price/rental charge
66 should be pre- agreed in writing with the 
local planning authority following independent valuation (funded by the 
developer) by a professional Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) valuer with expertise in the community facilities sector and who is not engaged to market the property.  
 
K.12 Given the range of uses that could be considered as a community facility, 
it is important that the site is marketed for equivalent community facilities that the site could support. Buildings/sites should therefore be marketed for community facilities appropriate to the category of community facility. For example, a neighbourhood (category) facility such as a retail unit should be marketed as a retail unit as well as other neighbourhood community facilities such as a small -scale community or civic rooms. A 
district facility such as a crèche should be marketed as a crèche and other district community facilities such as a dentist or veterinary practice. More than one type of facility may fall into more than one category within the hierarchy.  The type of community facilities included in any marketing campaign should be pre- agreed in writing with the local planning 
authority.  
 
K.13 The provision of any community room or café should be marketed
67 for 
these purposes only (agreed in an applicable planning obligation) with any proposed community enterprise (e.g. a café) linked to the financial support and on- going operation of the community room/space provided. 
This should provide a flexible means of supporting new small -scale 
community spaces.  
 
 
66 The asking price(s) should be based on the valuation of the site based upon its most recent 
use or, in the circumstance of new community facilities, should be commensurate to the type 
and size of the community facility. Any asking rental charge(s) should be commensurate to the type and size of the community facility.  
67 Any asking price(s) and, or rental charge(s) should be commensurate to the type and size of 
the community facility.  Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
402 Public houses/public house sites  
 
K.14 The asking price68 should be pre- agreed in writing with the local planning 
authority following independent valuation (funded by the developer) by a 
professional RICS valuer with expertise in the licensed leisure sector and who is not engaged to market the property.  
 
K.15 Both freehold and leasehold options should be made available without restrictive covenants that would otherwise prevent re- use as a public 
house such that other pub operators, breweries, local businesses or community groups wishing to take over the premises and trade it as a pub are not excluded.  
 
K.16 As part of the community consultation exercise (refer to Public House 
Community Catchments and Consultation), members of the public are to 
be informed about the marketing strategy and allowed the opportunity to put together their own bid.  
 
Leisure sites  
 
K.17 The asking price
69 should be pre- agreed in writing with the local planning 
authority following independent valuation (funded by the developer) by a 
professional RICS valuer with expertise in the leisure sector and who is not engaged to market the property.  
 
K.18 Leisure venues or sites should be marketed for D2 leisure use and sui generis uses that are comparable to the original leisure use (sporting, arts/cultural or entertainment). For example, squash courts should be marketed for D2 leisure use and other leisure sports facilities, including its original sports use. A nightclub venue should be marketed for D2 leisure use and leisure entertainment facilities, including its original nightclub use.  
 
Public house viability appraisals  
 
 
68 The asking price(s) should be based on the valuation of the site as a trading pub without tie. 
Although the pub site should be marketed as a site for a pub, or alternative A and D1 class 
uses, it is considered unreasonable to ask for a valuation to agree a price for such a wide range of uses.  
69 The asking price(s)  should be based on the valuation of the site based upon its most recent 
use. Although the site should be marketed as a site for its most recent use, D2 leisure or comparable sui generis uses, it is considered unreasonable to ask for a valuation to agree a  
price for such a wide range of uses.  Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
403 K.19 Develo pers should note the following in terms of the provision of data to 
help the local authority determine whether the public house is no longer 
economically viable as a commercial community facility:  
a. a commercial viability study should accompany any application for redevelopment or change of use;  
b. as a part of this study, evidence is required in the form of at least the last three trading years of audited accounts;  
c. all reasonable efforts have been made to preserve the public house (including all diversification options explored) and evidence 
supplied to illustrate that it would not be economically viable to retain the building or site for its existing or any other ‘A’ use class.  Examples of the initiatives or proposals that could be explored are as follows:  
 
1. adding a kitchen and serving food with or without a dining area, or improving the existing food offer;  
2. making the pub, garden, food offer more ‘family -friendly’;  
3. providing events and entertainment, such as quiz nights, amplified or non- amplified live music , comedy/cabaret nights;  
4. hiring rooms out or otherwise providing a venue for local 
meetings, community groups, businesses, youth groups, 
children’s day nurseries;  
5. provision of bed and breakfast or other guest accommodation;  
6. the setting up of a micro- brewer y; 
7. sharing the premises with other businesses;  
8. providing smoking shelters;  
9. providing tourist accommodation on upper floors (i.e. a bed 
and breakfast option);  
10. providing a local shop or services (such as a post office) in 
part or all of the premises;  
11. alterin g opening hours; and  
12. offering take- away food and off -licence services.  
 Note: that this list is not exhaustive and not all ideas will apply to every public house. Diversification should initially focus on ways to retain the public house use before changing the site to alternative ‘A’ uses.
 
 
d. details should also be provided of any changes to the public house in the period that corresponds with the trading information plus 1 year beforehand (so 4 years in total) that may have impacted on the business. For example:  
 
13. did the opening hours alter so that the pub opened less often 
or less frequently?  
14. were any facilities (e.g. kitchen, darts board, pool table etc) 
removed or regular events (e.g. quiz) cancelled?  
15. was space for meetings redeveloped or were any local groups 
told they could no longer use the space?  
 Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
404 Note that this list is not exhaustive and the local planning authority may 
seek evidence through standard community consultation procedures.  
 e. The local planning authority will require evidence that demonst rates 
that the public house has been operated positively, i.e. that it has not been run poorly to facilitate redevelopment. Applicants should be aware that local people/customers will provide anecdotal evidence in response to neighbourhood consultations on any 
planning application submission;  
f. with regard to the evidence mentioned in respect of diversification options, changes to the public house and how it has been operated, the local planning authority will require written evidence. This could take the for m of a statutory declaration undertaken by the 
owner/manager (or a written report) together with supporting documents such as letters from customers/suppliers/staff, invoices for works carried out, dated photographs to allow a comparison of facilities.  
  
 
Public house community consultation and catchment assessment  
 
K.20 Applicants should note the following in terms of carrying out community 
consultation as part of an independent local needs assessment. The 
consultation exercise should:  
 a. take all reasonable steps to notify all residents, businesses and 
residents’ associations (in order to take account of employees who might visit the pub) within a 400m radius of the public house site about the relevant proposal;  
b. gather all the opinions and comments  of all consultees on the loss 
of the existing or former public house facility. The results of this exercise shall be submitted to the local planning authority as part of the application submission; and  
c. complete the consultation at least six months before any related planning application is formally submitted.  
 All reasonable steps would include local advertisement, provision of a 
site notice, and a letter drop to all addresses within a 400 metre radius 
of the site.  
 
K.21 Developers are required to carry out an assessment of the needs of the 
local community for community facilities to show that the existing or 
former public house is no longer needed and whether adequate alternative provision is available in the area to provide at least one pub per 750 working age adults within a 400m catchment radius.  Appendix K: Marketing, local needs assessment and viability appraisal  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
405   Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
406   
Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
407 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
Car parking standards 
 
L.1 T he standar ds set  here define the  maximum le vels (referred to as ‘no 
more tha n’) of car par king th at the C ounci l, as a local planning authori ty, 
will permit f or various types of de velopmen t in differen t areas of the city. 
These lev els should not be exc eeded but m ay be r educ ed wher e lower 
car use can r easonably be expected. T he exception is par king for 
disabled people, which is a minimum standard . Under the Equality Act , 
it is the r esponsibili ty of si te occupiers to ensu re that adequat e pro vision 
is made for the needs of disabled peopl e. 
 
L.2 C ar parking standar ds are defined  for most  uses . Howev er, for some 
land use types  where t ranspor t patterns are difficult  to gener alise ( for 
instanc e hospitals)  parking pro vision will be approv ed on meri t, on the 
basis of a tr anspor t assessme nt. 
 
L.3 S ome developme nts may have an exceptional  need for vehicle par king 
in addition to that specified  in the  standards . Such additional par king may 
be necessar y whe re the re will be shift-w orking staf f, for exampl e. 
 
L.4 W hen a si te is r edeveloped which has an existing authorised lev el of car 
parking much higher than  that specified  in the f ollowing standards, the 
planning a uthori ty may consider all owing a level of car  parking for the  
redev elopme nt that is higher than the  standa rds, on the c ondition that 
parking is sig nifica ntly reduced from the p revious level. 
 
L
.5 W here refer ence is made to staff number s, this relates to the typical 
number of  staff working at the same tim e. Floor area is gr oss i nternal  
floor ar ea as  measur ed in the RICS C ode of Measur ing Practice. 
 
Local circumstances  
 L.6 T he impac t of new dev elopme nt on the sur rounding st reets and t ranspor t 
netw ork should be c onsidered. As such , this option r equires de velopers 
to accou nt for the f ollowing when pr oposing the lev el of car par king for a 
site: 
 
• the location of the development, in terms of whether the site has convenient walkability and cyclability to the City Centre and Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
408 local/district centres, and whether or not it has high public 
transport accessibil ity; 
• the type of development (fringe site, infill site etc) – i.e. infill sites 
are much more likely to be located in areas with existing travel patterns, behaviours and existing controls, and may be less flexible;  
• the style of development (houses, flats etc) – evidence shows that 
houses have higher car ownership than flats, even if they have the same number of habitable rooms; and  
• for developments requiring a transport assessment*, it should be demonstrated that the level of parking proposed is consistent with the recommendations of this transport assessment.  
 
*The need for a transport assessment or transport statement should accord to the thresholds in the current County Council Transport Assessment Guide and/or the advice of the County Council.   
 
Dwellings (C3 use class) 
 
L.7 In addition to the parking rations set out in Table L.1 below, provision should be made for visitors at the ratio of one space for every four units. Overall parking should be a mixture, with some parking allocated (to specific dwellings) and some parking provided as unallocated – particularly visitor parking and any parking above one space per dwelling (see Manual for Streets for advice on design). Allocated parking should be marked appropriately.  
 
L.8 New developments do not qualify for residents’ parking per mits within an 
existing on- street parking scheme – they are ‘car capped’.  
 
Table L.1: Dwellings (C3 use class)  
 
Dwelling 
size 
 Inside 
controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled parking zone  
Up to 2 
bedrooms  No more than 1 
space per 
dwelling  No more than a mean of 1.5 
spaces per dwelling  
3 or more 
bedrooms  
 No more than 1 
space per 
dwelling  No less than a mean of 0.5 spaces 
per dwelling, up to a maximum of 2 
spaces per dwelling  Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
409 Other residential uses  
Table L.2: Hotels and guesthouses (C1 use class) 
 
Type of 
development  Inside controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled 
parking zone  
Hotels and 
guesthouses  1 space for every 10 
reside nts, 1 spa ce for 
every 2 members  of 
staff 
 1 spa ce for every 8 
reside nts, 1 space f or 
every 2 members  of 
staff 
Both inside and outside controlled parking zone:  
 
• O ff-street coach par king to be co nveniently loc ated in relation to 
developme nts of 40 or mor e bed rooms 
 
• W here there are r ooms  specifically  designed f or disabled people, 
parking for disabled people of at least 1 spac e for each room so 
designed should be pro vided 
 
Table L.3: Specialist housing  
 
Type of 
development  Inside controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled 
parking zone  
Nursing homes  1 space for every 10 
reside nts, 1 spa ce for 
every 2 members  of 
staff  
• Provision must be made for ambulance parking  
 1 spa ce for every 8 
reside nts, 1 spa ce for 
every 2 members  of 
staff  
• Provision must be made for ambulance parking  
Retirement 
homes / sheltered 
housing  1 space for every 6 
units, 1 space for every 
2 members  of staf f 
 1 space for every 4 
units, 1 space for every 
2 members  of staf f 
 
 
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
410 Table L.4: Student housing (C2 use class)  
 
Type of 
development  Inside controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled 
parking zone  
Student 
residential 
accommodation where proctorial control or alternative control on car parking exists  
 1 spa ce for every 10 
bed spaces . A pick-up 
and drop- off area could 
also be included if appropriate to the 
particular p roposed 
development  
 1 spac e for every 
reside nt warden/ staf f 
 Where there are r ooms  
specifically  designed f or 
disabled people, par king 
for disabled people of at 
least 1 spac e for each 
such r oom should be 
provided 
 
 1 spa ce for every 10 
bed spaces . A pick-up 
and drop- off area could 
also be included if appropriate to the 
particular p roposed 
development  
 1 spac e for every 
reside nt warden/ staf f 
 Where there are r ooms  
specifically  designed f or 
disabled people, par king 
for disabled people of at 
least 1 spac e for each 
such r oom should be 
provided 
 
Student 
reside ntial 
accommod ation 
where proct orial 
contr ol does not 
exist or whe re 
contr ol exists but 
the dev elopme nt 
will house confer ence 
deleg ates 
 1 spa ce for every 5 bed 
spaces 
 1 spac e for every 
reside nt warden/ staf f 
 Where there are r ooms  
specifically  designed f or 
disabled people, parking 
for disabled people of at 
least 1 spac e for each 
such r oom should be 
provided. Contr ols will 
be necessary t o limit 
use of car par king 
outside conference 
times 
 
 1 spa ce for every 3 bed 
spaces 
 1 spac e for every 
reside nt warden/ staf f 
 Where there are r ooms  
specifically  designed f or 
disabled people, parking 
for disabled people of at 
least 1 spac e for each 
such r oom should be 
provided. Contr ols will 
be necessary t o limit 
use of car par king 
outside conference 
times 
 
  Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
411  
  Table L.5: Other residential institutions (C2 use class)  
 
Type of 
development  Inside controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled 
parking zone  
Residential 
schools, college or training centre  
 1 space for every 3 non-
resident staff plus 1 space per resident warden/staff  
 Where there are rooms 
specifically designed for 
disabled people, parking 
for disabled people of at 
least 1 space for each 
room so designed 
should be provided  On merit  
 
Where there are rooms 
specifi cally designed for 
disabled people, parking for disabled people of at 
least 1 space for each 
room so designed 
should be provided  
Hospitals  On merit  
 On merit  
Retail, culture, leisure and sports uses  
 
L.9 Limit ed car par king will be allow ed in the contr olled parking zone (CPZ) 
for these t ypes of uses , no net additional parking in the city centr e. 
Access will primarily r ely on public t ransport , cycling and walking. C ar 
journey s will be a ccommodat ed th rough public par king, including Park 
and Ride. 
 
L.10 Outside the CPZ, tr anspor t assessmen ts will pla y a key r ole in 
determining the optimal lev el of car par king, in par ticular for mi xed-use 
developme nts and r etail parks wher e linked trips mig ht lead t o a lev el of 
parking bel ow the plan’s standards. 
 
L.11 Where r easonable and pr oportionate, pic king up and  dropping off poi nts 
for taxis and minibuses  will need t o be pro vided. 
 
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
412 Table L.6: Retail, culture, leisure and sports uses  
 
Use 
 Inside controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled 
parking zone  
Food retail (A1 
use class)  
 Disabled car par king 
only 1 space for every 50 sq 
m Gross Floor Area up to 
1,400 sq m  and 1 per 18 
sq m  thereafter, 
including disabled car 
parking 
 
Non-food retail 
(A1 use class)  Disabled car par king 
only 1 space for every 50 sq 
m Gross Floor Area,  
including disabled car parking. 
 
Financial and 
professional 
services ( A2 use 
class) 1 space for every 100 sq 
m Gross Floor Area  to 
include cus tomer 
parking, plus disabled 
car par king 
 1 space for every 40 sq 
m Gross Floor Area, 
including disabled car parking 
Restau rants 
(A3), pubs/bars 
(A4) and f ood 
and drink takeaw ays (A5) 1 spa ce for proprie tor 
resident  1 space for every 20 sq 
m drinking/ dining ar ea, 
including disabled car parking. 1 spac e for 
propriet or when r esident  
 
Museum s, 
exhibition 
venues  
 Disabled only  On merit  
Sports and 
recreational 
facilitie s, 
swimming b aths 1 space for every 3 staff 
plus disabled car parking 2 spaces for every 3 
staff, plus 1 spac e for 
every 4 se ats, including 
disabled car par king 
 
Cinema  Disabled and 1 spa ce 
for every 2 staff  1 spa ce for every 5 
seats , including disabled 
car par king 
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
413 Use 
 Inside controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled 
parking zone  
Stadia  Disabled car par king 
only 1 spa ce for every 15 
seats , including disabled 
car par king 
 
Places of 
assembly 
includin g, 
theatres, 
auditoria and 
concer t halls 
(D2), night clubs  
 Disabled car par king 
and 1 spac e for every 2 
staff 1 spa ce for every 4 
seats , including disabled 
and staff car parking 
Places of 
worship  1 space per 100 sq m  
floor area, plus disabled 
car par king 1 spa ce for every 8 
seats , including disabled 
car par king 
 
Public halls/ 
communi ty 
centr es 1 space per 100 sq m  
floor area, plus disabled 
car par king 1 space per 20 sq m  of 
public space , including 
disabled car par king 
 
 
Business uses (B use class)  
 
L.12 Limit ed car par king will be allow ed in the contr olled parking zone (CPZ) 
for these t ypes of use s, no net additional parking in the City Centr e. 
Access will primarily r ely on public t ransport , cycling and walking. C ar 
journey s will be a ccommodat ed th rough public par king, including Park 
and Ride. 
 
Table L.7: Business uses (B use class)  
 
Type of 
Development  Inside controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled 
parking zone  
Offices, gene ral 
indust ry 1 space per 100 sq m  
Gross Floor Area plus 
disabled car par king 1 space per 40 sq m 
Gross Floor Area, Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
414 including disabled car 
parking 
 
Storage 1 space per 300 sq m  
Gross Floor Area plus 
disabled car par king 1 space per 100 sq m 
Gross Floor Area, 
including disabled car 
parking 
 
 
Table L.8: Non -residential institutions (D1 use class)  
 
Type of 
Development  Inside controlled 
parking zone  Outside controlled 
parking zone  
Clinics and 
surgeries  1 spa ce for every 2 
professional members  of 
staff, plus  1 spac e per 
consulting room 1 spa ce for every 
professional member  of 
staff, plus  2 spac es per 
consulting room 
 
Non-reside ntial 
schools  1 space for every 3 staff  2 spaces for every 3 
staff 
 
Non-reside ntial 
higher and further 
educ ation 
 1 space for every 4 staff  2 spaces for every 3 
staff 
Crèches  1 space for every 3 staff  2 spaces for every 3 
staff 
 
 
Parking f or disabled  people  and those  with mobility difficulties  
 
L.13 Developme nts should pro vide at least one a ccessible  on- or off -street 
car par king b ay designated for Blue Badge holder s, even if no gener al 
parking is p rovided. For any developme nt pro viding off -street par king, at 
least two b ays desi gnated for Blue Badge holders  should be pro vided. 
The British S tandards I nstitution, in its documen t Desig n of buildings and 
its App roaches to meet the needs of disabled people – Code of prac tice 
(BS 8300:2009), pro vides advi ce on the number of desi gnated Blue 
Badge b ays that should be pro vided at various dev elopments . This is 
shown in the table overleaf.  
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
415 L.14 As these standar ds are based on a percen tage of the total number of 
parking bay s, ca reful assessme nt will be needed whe re maximum or  ‘no 
more tha n’ parking standar ds a re reache d, to ensur e th at these 
percen tages make adequat e pro vision for disabled peopl e. T he 
appropriate number will var y with the si ze, nature and location of the 
development , the le vels of on- and off -street par king and the accessibility 
of the local ar ea. H owever , desi gnated par king spac es should be 
provided for each disabled empl oyee and for other disabled people 
visiting the building. 
 
L.15 The si ze and dimensions of the bay s for Blue Badge holders should 
accord with those in M anual for Streets 1 and 2.  
 
 
       Table L.9: Bays for Blue Badge holders  (Designated Blue Badge 
parking bays as recommended in BS 8300:2009)  
Building 
type Provision from 
the outset  Provision from 
the outset  Future 
provision  
 
General 
provision  Number of 
spaces* f or each 
empl oyee who is   
a disabled motorist 
 Number of spa ces* 
for visiting disabled 
motorists  Number of 
enlar ged 
standar d 
spaces** 
Workplaces 1 spa ce 5 per cent of the 
total capaci ty 
 A further 5 per 
cent of the total 
capaci ty 
Shoppin g, 
recreation 
and leisur e 
facilities  1 spa ce 6 per cent of the 
total capaci ty A further 4 per 
cent of the total 
capaci ty 
Railway 
buildings  1 spa ce 5 per cent of the 
total capaci ty A further 5 per 
cent of the total 
capaci ty Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
416 Building 
type Provision from 
the outset  Provision from 
the outset  Future 
provision  
 
Religious 
buildings 
and 
crematoria 2 spaces or 6 per 
cent, whichev er 
is the greater 2 spaces or 6 per 
cent, whichev er is 
the greater A further 4 per 
cent of the total 
capaci ty 
 
Sports 
facilities  Determined 
according to the 
usage of the 
sports facili ty*** Determined 
according to the 
usage of the spor ts 
facility*** Determined 
according to the 
usage of the 
sports facili ty*** 
 * Parking spaces designat ed for use by disabled people should be 2.4m  wide 
by 4.8m  long with a zone 1.2m
 wide provided betw een designat ed spaces  and 
at the rear outside the  traffic zone, to enable  a disabled  driver or passen ger to 
get in or out of a vehicle  and access the boot safely. 
 ** Enlarged standard spaces  3.6m  wide by 6m long that can be adapt ed to be 
parking spaces design ated for
 use b y disabled people to reflect chan ges in 
local popul ation needs  and all ow for flexibility  of provision  in the futur e, as w ell 
as being able t o be used by parents with young childr en. 
 *** Further d etailed  guidance on  parking provision f or sports f acilities  can be 
found in the  Sport England publi cation Accessible Sports  Facilities  2010.  
 
 
Cycle parking standards (for both residential and non- residential)  
 
L.16 Cycle parking should:  
 
• avoid being located in the basement unless it can be shown to be 
convenient and easy to use, with ramps of a gradient of no more than 1 in 4 on both sides of any stepped access.  Any basement cycle parking must also provide alternative parking on the ground floor for less able users and those with non- standard cycles; and  
• reference to staff or students should be taken to mean the peak number expected to be on the s ite at any one time.  
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
417 L.17 All cycle parking should minimise conflicts between cycles, motor 
vehicles and pedestrians. Short -stay cycle parking, e.g. for visitors or 
shoppers, should be located as close as possible to the main entrances of buildings (no more than 10 metres) and should be subject to natural surveillance. For larger developments, covered cycle parking should be considered.  
 
L.18 Some fl exibilit y is applied to applic ations of the standards , in the  
following instances: 
 
• where strict adherence to the standards for a mixed- use site is 
likely to result in duplication of provision; and  
• for the historic core area of the city, where constraints may make 
application of the standards difficult for change of use or refurbishment.  
 
Vertical or semi -vertical cycle racks are not acceptable.  
 
L.19 Sheffield stands are the preferred option, but the use of high- low and 
two-tier/ double stacker racks will be considered on a case- by-case basis 
for non- residential and large student developments.  A minimum of 20% 
of the cycl e parking spaces required should be Sheffield stands for less 
able users and those with non- standard cycles.  
 
L.20 High-low racks should be a minimum of 400mm between centres at 90 
degrees and 500- 600mm between centres at 45 degrees. Any such 
stands must allow for cycles fitted with baskets and require as little lifting 
as possible. They must be of a design that supports the front wheel of cycles and allows the frame of the cycle to be locked to the rack.  
 
L.21 Two tier/ double stacker racks must be designed to allow  the frame of 
the cycle to be locked to the rack and accommodate cycles with baskets. An aisle width of 2,500mm is required to enable the cycle to be turned and loaded easily.  
 
L.22 As with Sheffield stands, drawings and illustrative dimensions to guide the implementation of high- low and two tier/ double decker/double 
stacker stands can be found in the Council’s Cycle Parking Guide for New Residential Developments (and any successor document).  
 
L.23 In instances where part of a site with a known shortfall in cycle  parking 
is redeveloped, provision in excess of the standards will be strongly recommended.  
 
Residential cycle parking  
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
418 L.24 Cycle parking should accord with the Council’s Cycle Parking Guide for 
New Residential Developments. It should:  
 
• be located in a purpose- built area at the front of the house or 
within a garage (appropriate garage dimensions are shown in this 
appendix);  
• only be located within a rear garden if locating it at the front of the house is shown to not be in keeping with the character of the surro unding area, and there is no garage provision; and  
• be at least as convenient as the car parking provided.  
 
Table L.10: Dwellings and other residential uses - cycle parking standards  
  
Use  
 Minimum standard  
Reside ntial 
dwellings  1 spa ce per bed room up to 3 bed room d wellings  
 Then 3 spaces for 4 bedr oom dw elling s, 4 spa ces 
for 5 bedr oom d wellings e tc 
 Visitor cycle par king n ext to main  entrances to 
blocks of fl ats 
 Visitor cycle parking in the form of a wall ring/bar  or 
Sheffield stand  at the front of individual  houses  
must be provided  where cy cle parking p rovision is 
located in the back gar den 
 
Guesthouses 
and hot els 2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff  
 2 spaces f or every 10 bedr ooms (minimum 2 
spaces)  
Outside the Ci ty Centre , this should include spac e 
for cycle hi re 
Nursing homes  2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff  
 1 visi tor spac e for every 6 reside nts (minimum 2 
spaces) 
 
Retirement 
homes/shel tered 
housing  2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff  
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
419 Use  
 Minimum standard  
1 space for every 6 reside nts. 1 visitor space for 
every 6 r eside nts (minimum 2 spa ces) 
 
Student 
reside ntial 
accommod ation, 
reside ntial 
school s, college 
or training centre 1 spa ce per 2 bedspa ces within City Centre 
 
2 spac es per 3 bedspa ces f or the rest of the city  
 1 space for every 3 members  of staff 
 1 visi tor spac e per 5 bedspac es 
 
Hospitals  2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff  
 2 visi tor spac es per c onsulting/t reatment room  
 1 visi tor spac e for every 6 bedspac es 
 
Non-residential use cycle parking standards 
 
L.25 Cycle parking non- residential development should : 
 
• reflect the design and dimensions for cycle parking established in 
the Council’s Cycle Parking Guide for New Residential Developments;  
• include parking for employees and students in a convenient and 
covered location, subject to natural surveillance. A proportion of the cycle parking (minimum of 20%) should be provided within a secure location.  
• access to cycle parking should be as close as is practical to staf f 
entrances, and closer than non- disabled staff car parking;  
 
L.26 In instanc es whe re part of a si te with a kno wn sho rtfall in cy cle par king 
is redevelope d, provision in excess of the standar ds will be st rongly 
recommende d. 
 
 
 
Table L.11: Non -residential cycle parking standards  Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
420 Retail, culture, leisure and sports uses  
 
Use  Minimum Standard  
Food retail  2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff and 1 short 
stay space per 25 sq m in  the City Centr e or M ill 
Road distri ct centres. 
 
For the rest of the city, 2 spaces for every 5 
members  of staff and 1 visit or space per 50 sq m 
up to 1,500 sq m, ther eafter 1 spac e per 100 sq m  
 
Non-food retail  As above 
 
Financial and 
professional services 
 2 spaces per 5  members of staff  and some visi tor 
parking (on merit)  
 
Food and drinks  2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff  
 1 shor t stay spa ce for every 10 sq m  of dining ar ea 
in the his toric core ar ea 
 1 short stay space for every 15 sq m for the rest of the city  
 
Museums, 
Exhibitions Venues  2 space for every 5 members  of staff  
 Some visi tor par king on merit  
 
Sports and 
recreational facilities and swimming baths  2 space for every 5 members  of staff  
 1 short stay spa ce for every 25 sq m  net floor a rea 
or 1 shor t stay spa ce for every 10 sq m  of pool 
area and 1 f or every 15 se ats provided for 
spectat ors 
 
Places of 
assembly, including: cinema, theatres, stadia, auditoria and concert halls  
 2 space for every 5 members  of staff  
 1 shor t stay spa ce for every 4 se ats 
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
421 Use  Minimum Standard  
Place of 
worship, public 
halls and community centres  
 1 sho rt stay spa ce for every 4 se ats 
 
Business uses  
Use  Minimum Standard  
Offices 2 spaces for every 5 members of staff or  1 per 30 
sq m G ross Floor Area (whiche ver is gr eater) 
 
Some visi tor par king on merit  
 
General indust ry 1 space for every 3 members  of staff  
 Some visi tor par king on merit  
 
Storage and 
other B use classes 
 On merit  
 
 
Non-residential institutions  
Use  Minimum Standard  
Clinics and 
surgeries  2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff 
 
2 short stay spaces per consulting r oom 
 
Non-residential 
schools 2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff  
 
Cycle spa ces t o be pro vided for 50 per cent of 
prima ry school child ren to include a s cooter 
parking area, and 75 per cent  of secondary school  
children 
Some visit or parking 
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
422 Use  Minimum Standard  
Non-residential 
higher  
and further 
education  
 2 for every 5 members of  staff 
 Cycle par king for 70 per cent of studen ts based on 
anticipated peak number of stude nts on si te at any 
one time  
 
Crèches and 
nurseries  
 2 spaces for every 5 members  of staff  
 1 visi tor spac e per 5 childr en 
 An area to be pro vided for the par king of car go 
bicycles/tr ailers  
 
 
Garage dimensions  
 
L.27 Where car and cycle parking (and bin storage) at new residential 
developments is proposed to be provided in garages, the dimensions of the garages must accord with the dimensions set out in Figure L.1 overleaf.  
 
 Appendix L: Car and cycle parking requirements  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
423 Figure L.1: Garage dimensions
 
Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
424   
Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
425 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
M.1 The role and importance of monitoring has long been recognised by the 
council as a vital part of the plan- making and review process. It enables 
feedback on the performance of policies and the physical effects the y 
have on the city. Monitoring will be crucial to the successful delivery and implementation of the Cambridge Local Plan 2018, enabling the development of a comprehensive evidence base, which will in turn inform the preparation of policy documents. Monitor ing will also provide 
a feedback loop mechanism, giving information about policy performance and highlighting policies that need to be replaced/amended.  
 
M.2 All policies will be monitored by counting how many times they have been used to inform decision making. Meetings will be held with Development Management to discuss if the usage of these policies appears reasonable and correct. Any potential policy implementation issues will also be discussed. The Council will work towards implementing effective solutions  to address any policy ambiguity, issues 
or misuse.  
 
M.3 The following policies listed in the tables below have additional specific monitoring requirements to that mentioned above as more comprehensive data can be found to assess policy implementation. The indicators and triggers have been selected based on their 
appropriateness and the availability of the data. Indicators should be measured at the appropriate level for the policy and measured at a reasonable interval to allow for comprehensive monitoring. Wher e there 
may be issues obtaining the data at present (due to the need to create a new dataset), it is expected that this data will become available as soon as practicably possible. All indicators and progress of the policies will be monitored and recorded annually through the council’s Annual 
Monitoring Report.  
 
M.4 The monitoring and implementation framework for the Cambridge Local 
Plan 2018 is outlined in the tables below. For each policy identified, the table sets out:  
• Risks:  Identifies the risks if the policy is not delivered;  
• What action will be taken?:   In each case the council will review the 
circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as identified within the text;  
• Purpose:   Illustrates what the policy is trying to achieve;  
• Delivery mechanism/partners:   Clarifies how the policy will be 
delivered and identifies any key partners or agencies that will be involved in the implementation of this policy;   Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
426 • Target/Trigger:   Identifies a target and trigger that will instigate the 
revie w of the policy and the implementation of the aforementioned 
actions; dates reflect the end of monitoring years;  
• Data Source, Frequency of Monitoring:  Demonstrates how the 
policy will be monitored, how often the indicators will be monitored and by what m ethodology.  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
427 Section Two – The Spatial Strategy  
Policy 2 – Spatial strategy for the location of employment development 
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• Pressure for new development outside urban area, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and the city centre.  
• Lack of joint working between key stakeholders to develop identified employment locations.  
What actio n will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
• Seeking further engagement with developers and agents and other landowners, review supply of employment land 
across the city to see if overall target can be achieved.  
 Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring 
Ensuring employment 
proposals are focused on the 
urban area, Areas of Major Change, opportunity areas and the city centre.  Through the 
development management process and working with relevant partners, such as the universities and the  
Local Enterprise Partnership.  • Target: To deliver an increase of at least 12 
hectares of employment land.  
 Trigger: A net decrease in employment land based upon a five year period working back from the current financial monitoring year.  
  
• Target: To deliver a net increase of 22,100 jobs in the Cambridge Local Authority Area between 2011 and 2031.  
 
• Trigger: Lack of progress towards increase of 22,100 jobs to 2031 based on an annual trajectory of 1,105 jobs per annum plus or minus 20%.  
 • Monitored annually 
using business completions and commitments data produced by the Research & Monitoring Team at Cam bridgeshire County 
Council.  
 
• These figures will be taken from NOMIS employee jobs and jobs density.  
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
428 Section Two – The Spatial Strategy  
Policy 3 – Spatial strategy for the location of residential development  
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• Pressure for new development outside designated areas for housing (outside the urban area).  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Seeking further engagement with developers and agents and other landowners to bring forward housing sites.  
Reviewing housing land supply including housing targets and allocations.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
429 Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partne
rs  Target/Trigger  
 Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring residential proposals 
are developed in urban areas 
in particular on the allocated housing sites including sites released from the Cambridge  
Green Belt at Worts’ Causeway.  
 
Ensuring residential proposals 
are delivered consistent with development strategy for Greater Cambridge.  Through the development management process.  
• Target: To deliver a net increase 
of 14,000 residential units in Cambridge between 2011 and 2031.   Housing trajectory to 
demonstrate that this can be achieved.  
 Trigger: Inability to demonstrate through the hous ing trajectory the 
delivery of 14,000 residential units between 2011 and 2031.  
 
• Target: To demonstrate a five year supply of housing land (plus relevant buffer) jointly with South Cambridgeshire District Council. Housing trajectory and accompanying five ye ar supply 
calculations to show whether this can be demonstrated.  
 • Monitored annually via the 
Council’s joint annual housing trajectory using housing 
completions and commitments data produced by the Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Counci l, 
and using housing trajectory questionnaires completed by landowners, developers or agents.  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
430 Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partne
rs  Target/Trigger  
 Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
   
Trigger: Inability to demonstrate a 
five year supply of housing land (plus relevant buffer) jointly with South Cambridgeshire District Council.  
 
• Target: To focus development within Cambridge, on the edge of Cambridge, at new settlements and within the more sustainable 
villages in South Cambridgeshire 
categorised as Rural Centres and Minor Rural Centres.  
 
Trigger: Contextual indicator, to provide in formation on the 
implementation of the development strategy against the development sequence, to inform 
the local plan review.   
• Monitored annually using housing completions for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire produced by Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Council.  
 
 
• Data on dwellings completed in the countryside (outside of development frameworks) should identify rural exception sites, ‘five year supply’ sites and Neighbourhood Plan allocations separately from other dwellings completed in the countryside.  
 
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
431  
Section Two – The Spatial Strategy  
Policy 4 – The Cambridge Green Belt  
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• Pressure for new development in the Green Belt.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and agents and other landowners to identify why developers are not 
choosing to develop on brownfield land.  
• Review housing and employment land supply.  
• Review the development management process.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partne
rs  Target/Trigger  
 Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring proposals comply with the 
Green Belt policy in the National 
Planning Policy Framework (2012).  Through the 
development management process.  • Target: To restrict inappropriate 
development in the Green Belt unless 
very special circumstances have been accepted that outweigh any harm caused.  
 
Trigger: One or more inappropriate 
developments permitted within the Green 
Belt in a year without very special 
circumstances having been justified.  • Data compiled annually using information submitted with planning applications and committee or delegated reports. Analysis 
of completions and commitments data for 
housing, business, retail and other uses produced by the Research & Monitoring 
Team at Cambridgeshire County Council. 
 
 
 
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
432 Section Two – The Spatial Strategy  
Policy 5 – Strategic transport infrastructure  
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• Pressure for new development that fails to adequately promote and support sustainable forms of transportation.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and agents, Cambridgeshire County Council and Greater Cambridge 
Partnership.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring the delivery of suitable 
local and strategic transport 
schemes and greater pedestrian and cycle prioritisation.  
 Ensuring sustainable transport and 
access to major employers, 
education and research clusters, hospitals, schools and colleges.  
 Supp orting the Transport Strategy 
for Cambridge and South 
Cambridgeshire and ensuring that 
growth is linked to the proposed city ‐
wide 20mph zone.  Through the development 
management process and 
partnership working with relevant partners.  • Target: To increase the proportion of 
journeys made by car, public transport, taxi, delivery vehicles and cycles.  
 
Trigger: Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the implementation of the development strategy against the development sequence, to inform the local plan 
review.  
 
• Target: To deliver schemes in the Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire (TSCSC), the 
Local Transport Plan (LTP) (or 
successor documents) and City Deal Projects.  
 • Annually, for monitoring purposes only. 
Data compiled using Cambridgeshire County Council’s Annual Traffic Monitoring Report. Data is only recorded 
for one specific day during the year and 
therefore cannot provide an accurate picture of traffic flow and volume throughout the year.    
  
 
• Annually, data obtained from 
Cambridgeshire County Council by monitoring of their Transport 
Infrastructure Projects Programme and 
the TSCSC and LTP. For monitoring 
purposes only.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
433 Trigger: Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of the development 
strategy against the development sequence, to inform the local plan 
review.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
434 Section Two – The Spatial Strategy  
Policy 6 – Hierarchy of centres and retail capacity  
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• Non-delivery of comparison retail floorspace in the City Centre.  
What action will be taken?  
• Early engagement with developers and stakeholders. Revisit Development Management usage of policy. Consider 
need for provision of retail floorspace after 2022.  
•  
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
To ensure that retail and other town 
centre uses are being developed in 
centres and that developments are appropriate to the scale, character and function of the centre.  
 
Retail developments proposed outside 
centres must be subject to a retail 
impact assessment, where the proposed gross floorspace is greater than 2,500 sqm. A retail impact assessment may be required below this 
threshold where a proposal could have 
a cumulative impact or an impact on the role or health of nearby centres within the catchment of the proposal.  
 Through the development 
management process.  • Target: To increase retail 
floorspace in the city from 2011 to 2022 by 14,141 sqm (net).  
 
Trigger: No progress towards a net increase in retail floorspace of 14,141 sqm, or net loss of retail floorspace.  • Data monitored annually by recording the 
net increase in retail floorspace in the city 
from 1 April 2011 to current year measured against progress towards an 
increase of 14,141 square metres of net 
retail floorspace (by type) by 31 March 2022. Data to be evidenced using business completions and commitments data provided by the County Council’s Research and Monitoring Team.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
435 Meeting identified capacity for 
comparison retail floorspace in the City 
Centre.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
436 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 10 – The City Centre  
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• That developments in and outside the City  Centre could have a detrimental effect on the vitality and vibrancy of the 
City Centre.  
What action will be taken?  
• Early engagement with developers and stakeholders.  
•  
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that development has a 
positive effect on the vitality and 
vibrancy of the City Centre.  Through the development 
management process and partnership working with relevant partners.  • Target: Production of Spaces and 
Movement Supplementary Planning Document.  
 
Trigger: Spaces and Movement Supplementary Planning Document not adopted, or no progress towards adoption of the SPD by 31 
March 2019.  • To be evidenced through the completed 
SPD and relevant committee as noted in the Council’s Annual Monitoring Report. Further targets to be derived and 
monitored through the SPD.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
437 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 11 – Development in the City Centre Primary Shopping Area  
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• Pressure for new development that fails to support the vibrancy and vitality of the City Centre Primary Shopping Area.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and stakeholders.  
•  
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that development has a 
positive effect on the City Centre 
Primary Shopping Area.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Retention of 70% A1 uses 
on primary shopping frontage unless adequate justification can be evidenced.  
 Trigger: The proportion of retail (A1) uses in the primary shopping frontage falls below 70%.  
 
• Target: Retention of 50% A1 uses 
on secondary shopping frontage 
unless adequate justification can be evidenced.  
 
Trigger: The proportion of retail (A1) uses in the secondary 
shopping frontage falls below 50 %.  • Monitored through the assessment of 
planning applications and through the Council’s occasional shopping survey.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
438 Section Th ree - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 12 – Fitzroy/Burleigh Street/Grafton Area of Major Change  
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• Non-delivery and delays in implementation.  
What action will be taken?  
• Discuss with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
•  
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development  by 2022 to 
ensure that the Council meets its retail 
floorspace target set out in Policy 6, of which this site makes up a significant element.  Through the development 
management process and the submission of the relevant planning applications.  • Target: Delivery of up to 12,000 
sqm of retail floorspace.  
 Trigger: Lack of progress towards 
completed development by 31 
March 2022 will trigger a review.  
 
• Target: To produce the Grafton 
Area  Supplementary Planning 
Document,  
 
Trigger: Grafton Area Supplementary Planning Document 
not adopted, or no progress 
towards adoption of the SPD by 31 
March 2019.  • Monitored annually using the 
Council’s retail completions and commitments data produced by the Research & Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County Council.  
 
 
• To be evidenced through the 
completed SPD and relevant 
committee reports to be reported in the Council’s Annual Monitoring Report. Further targets to be derived and monitored through the SPD.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
439 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 13 – Cambridge East  
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Adoption of Cambridge 
East - Land North of Cherry Hinton 
Supplementary Planning Document 
by 31 March 2019.  
 Trigger: No adoption or progress towards adoption of Cambridge East - Land North of Cherry Hinton 
Supplementary Planning Document by 31 March 2019.  
 
• Target: Delivery of allocation R47 as specified by the Cambridge East 
- Land North of Cherry Hinton SPD 
for approximately 780 residential 
units.  
 • Progress on delivery of SPD evidenced 
through relevant committee reports  
  
 
    
• Monitored via data compiled using (i) 
planning applications and their 
committee or delegated reports, (ii) housing, business, retail and other use 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Council, and (iii) the housing trajectory including the questionnaires completed 
by landowners, developers or agents.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
440 Trigger: Lack of p rogress in 
comparison with annually 
published housing trajectory.  
 
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
441 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site spe cific proposals   
Policy 15 – Cambridge Northern Fringe East and new railway station Area of Major Change  
Risks: 
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Adoption of Cambridge 
Northern Fringe East Area Action 
Plan.  
 
Trigger: Lack of Progress against agreed Local Development 
Scheme.  • Review annually. Progress on delivery 
of Area Action Plan evidenced through relevant committee reports.  
 
 
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
442 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 16 – South of Coldham’s Lane  
Risks: 
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Adoption of South of 
Coldham’s Lane masterplan before 
a planning application is submitted.  
 
Trigger: Masterplan not adopted by 
31 March  
2021.  
 
• Target: Delivery of urban country 
park and appropriate development 
as defined in the masterplan.  
 Trigger: Delay in delivery contrary 
to the masterplan.  
 • Review annually. Completion of the 
masterplan will  be evidenced through 
its adoption.  
  
  
• To be evidenced through the completed 
masterplan and reported annually in the 
Council’s Annual Monitoring Report using business and residential completions and commitments data provided by the County Council’s 
Research and Monitoring Team.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
443 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 17 – Cambridge Biomedical Campus (including Addenbrooke’s Hospital)  
Risks: 
• Non-delivery.  
What action will b e taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Delivery of allocation M15 
as specified by the consented 
planning application (06/0796/OUT) and completion of the 
development. Target of up to 60,000 sqm of clinical research and treatment (D1) 130,000 sqm of biomedical and biotech research and development (B1(b)) 25,000 sqm of either clinical research and 
treatment (D1) or higher education 
or sui  generis medical research 
institute uses.  
 Trigger: Lack of substantial 
progress towards this target by 31 
March 2021 will trigger a review policy.  
 • These figures will be monitored using 
business completions and commitments data produced by the Research & Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County Council.  
 
   Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
444  
Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 18 – Southern Fringe Areas of Major Change  
Risks: 
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Progress towards housing 
provision as identified in Policy 18 
and allocations R42 a, b, c and d, 
which includes up to 2,250 dwellings at Clay Farm; up to 600 at Trumpington Meadows; 286 at Glebe Farm and up to 347 at the Bell School Site.  
 
Trigger : Lack of Progress of 
allocations R42 a, b, c and d in comparison with annually published 
housing trajectory.  • These figures will be monitored via the 
Council’s annual housing trajectory 
using housing completions and 
commitments data produced by the Researc h & Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County Council, and using housing trajectory questionnaires completed by landowners, developers 
or agents.  
 
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
445 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 19 – West Cambridge Area of Major Change  
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Approval of West 
Cambridge masterplan/outline 
planning permission by 31 March 2019.  
 Trigger: Masterplan/outline planning permission not approved, 
or close to approval by 31 March 
2019.  
 
• Target: Delivery of allocation M13 
as defined in the masterplan/outline 
planning permission.  
 Trigger: Delay in delivery contrary to masterplan/outline planning 
permission deadlines.  
 • Review annually. Completion of the 
masterplan/approval of outline planning 
permission will be evidenced through its adoption or approval of planning permission and the relevant Council committees.  
 
 
• To be evidenced through the completed 
masterplan/outline planning permission 
and reported annually in the Council’s 
Annual Monitoring Report using business and residential completions and commitments data provided by the 
County Council’s Research and Monitoring Team.  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
446 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 20 – Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road Area of Major Change  
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Progress towards housing 
provision as identified in Policy 20 
and allocation R43 for up to 1,780 dwellings.  
 
Trigger: Lack of progress of allocation R43 in comparison with annually published housing trajectory.  • Monitored via data compiled using (i) 
planning applications and their committee or delegated reports, (ii) housing, business, retail and other use 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Council, and (iii) the housing trajectory including the questionnaires completed 
by landowners, deve lopers or agents.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
447 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 21 – Station Areas West and Clifton Road Area of Major Change  
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Progress towards mixed 
use development and principal land 
uses as identified in Policy 21 for allocations Station Area West (1) 
and (2) (allocations M14 and M44) 
and Clifton Road Area (allocation M2).  
 Trigger: No progress towards submission of planning application 
for allocation M2 before 31 March 
2020.  
 
Trigger: Non delivery of/or no progress towards completion of 
331 residential units in comparison 
with annually published housing trajectory. Further monitoring of 
business and additional residen tial • These figures will be monitored via the 
Council’s annual housing trajectory using housing completions and commitments data produced by the 
Research & Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County Council, and using housing trajectory questionnaires completed by landowners, developers or agents.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
448 development through the approval 
of relevant planning applications for 
sites M44 and M14.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
449 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 22 – Mitcham’s Corner Opportunity Area  
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that any projects which help 
deliver coordinated streetscape and 
public realm improvements are feasible, properly funded, effective and done to a high quality to help reinforce a strong sense of place for the area.  Through the development 
management process and through careful coordination of any transport analysis, design and project management of 
proposals.  • Target: Adoption of Mitcham’s 
Corner Development Framework 
SPD before a planning application is submitted.  
 Trigger: Development Framework SPD not adopted by 31 March 2019.  
 
• Target: Progress towards housing 
provision as identified in Policy 22 
and allocat ion R4 for approximately 
48 dwellings.  
 
Trigger: Lack of progress in 
comparison with annually published 
housing trajectory.  
 • Review annually. Completion of the 
Development Framework SPD will be evidenced through its adoption and the relevant Council commi ttee. 
   
• These figures will be monitored via the 
Council’s annual housing trajectory 
using housing completions and commitments data produced by the Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Council, and using housing trajectory questionnaires 
completed by landowners, developers or agents.  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
450   Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
451 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 23 – Eastern Gate Opportunity Area  
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
Update the Eastern Gate Supplementary Planning Document.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the 
development 
management process.  • Target: To redevelop the identified 
‘Potential Development Sites’ and improve the Eastern Gate Opportunity 
Area through the implementation of key 
projects as illustrated within Policy 23 (figure 3.9).  
 
Trigger: No progress towards the submission of a relevant planning 
application on any of the ‘Potential 
Development Sites’ by 31 March 2021.  • To be reported annually in the Council’s 
Annual Monitoring Report using 
business and residential completions 
and commitments data provided by the 
County Council’s Research and Monitoring Team to illustrate new completed and improved developments as set out in the Council’s Eastern Gate SPD.  
    Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
452 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 24 – Mill Road Opportunity Area 
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What acti on will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development. Discussions with 
Development Management to understand and address any issues pertaining to shop unit amalgamation  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of Monitoring  
Delivery of Local Plan allocations R10, 
R21 and R9 and a series of coordinated 
streetscape and public realm improvements.  
 Through the 
development management process.  • Target: Adoption of Mill Road Depot 
Planning and Development Brief SPD before a planning application is submitted.  
 
Trigger: Planning and Development 
Brief SPD not adopted or close to adoption by 31 March 2019.  
 
• Progress towards housing provision 
as identified in Policy 24 and 
allocations R10 (for approximately 167 dwellings), R21 (for approximately 128 dwellings and up to 
1 hectare employment floorspace) 
and R9 (for up to 49 dwellings).   
Trigger: Lack of progress in 
comparison with annually published housing trajectory.  
 
 • Review annually. Completion of the 
Planning and Development Brief SPD will be evidenced through its adoption.  
  
 
  
• These figures will be monitored via the 
Council’s annual housing trajectory using 
housing completions and commitments data produced by the Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Council, and using housing 
trajectory questionnaires completed by  
landowners, developers or agents.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
453 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 25 – Cambridge Railway Station, Hills Road Corridor to the City Centre Opportunity Area  
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that any projects which help 
deliver coordinated streetscape and 
public realm improvements are feasible, properly funded, effective and done to a high quality to help reinforce a strong sense of place for the area.  Through the development 
management process and through careful coordination of any transport analysis, design and project management of 
proposals.  • Target: Progress towards 
development of sites M5 (20 
residential units over 0.5 ha of 
employment) and E5 (1.4ha of 
employment uses) as identified in 
Policy 25.  
 
Trigger: Lack of progress in 
comparison with annually 
published housing trajectory.  • To be reported annually in the Council’s 
Annual Monitoring Report using business and residential completions and commitments data provided by the 
County Council’s Research and 
Monitoring Team.  
 
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
454 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 26– Old Press/Mill Lane Opportunity Area  
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development, or alternatively review the 
masterplan  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that high quality development 
comes forward which will help reinforce 
a strong sense of place for the area and 
makes public realm and accessibility 
improvements.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Approval of Old Press/Mill 
Lane masterplan/outline planning permission by 31 March 2021.  
 Trigger: Masterplan/outline planning permission not approved, or close to approval by 31 March 
2021.  
 
• Target: Delivery of Old Press/Mill Lane as defined in t he 
masterplan/outline planning 
permission and SPD.  
 
Trigger: Delay in delivery contrary to the masterplan/outline planning 
permission.  • Review annually. Completion of the 
masterplan/approval of outline planning permission will be evidenced through its adopt ion or approval of planning 
permission.  
  
 
• To be evidenced through the completed 
masterplan/outline planning permission 
and reported annually in the Council’s 
Annual Monitoring Report using completions and commitments data provided by the County Council’s Research and Monitoring Team.  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
455 Section Three - City Centre, Areas of Major Change, Opportunity Areas and site specific proposals  
Policy 27 – Site specific development opportunities 
Risks:  
• Non-delivery.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
Discussion with stakeholders to identify issues and seek to resolve to bring forward development.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Delivery of the development.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Progress of GB1 & 2 
towards the housing targets of 200 
and 230 residential units.  
 Trigger: Lack of progress in 
comparison with annually published housing trajectory   
 
• Progress of GB3 & 4 towards the identified employment floorspace target of 25,193 sqm by the end of 
the plan period.  
 
Trigger: No progress towards the 
submission of relevant planning 
applications by 31 March 2021.  • To be reported annually in the 
Council’s Annual Monitoring Report using business and residential completions and commitments data provided by the County Council’s Research and Monitoring Team and using housing tr ajectory 
questionnaires completed by landowners, developers or agents.  
 
 
 
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
456 Section Four - Responding to climate change and managing resources  
Policy 27 – Carbon reduction, community energy networks, sustainable design and construction and water 
use 
Risks:  
• Developments (and the residents of new developments) are more vulnerable to the predicted impacts of our changing 
climate (e.g. higher temperatures, extreme weather events, flooding) if they are not designed to be resilient to these impact s 
• Continued increase in carbon emissions from new developments, exacerbating climate change  
• Increase in fuel and water poverty amongst Cambridge residents  
What action will be taken?  
• Engage with developers at an early stage in the design of new developments to ensure that the principles of 
sustainable design and construction are integrated  
• Development of further supplementary guidance and case studies of best practice  
 
Purpose  Delivery mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
How to ensure that the 
principles of sustainable 
design and construction are integrated into the 
design of new 
developments.  
 
How to ensure that all new 
developments are designed to help minimise 
carbon reductions and Through the development management 
process through the submission of the 
following documents:  
• submission of a Sustainability 
Statement as part of the design and 
access statement;  
• submission of BREEAM pre-
assessments;  
• Interim and Final BREEAM certification to be submitted to the 
local planning authority in order to discharge conditions;  
 • Target: An increase in the number of 
non-residential completions (where 
applicable) delivered at BREEAM ‘very good’/’excellent’ and maximum credits for water consumption.  
 Trigger: 50% or more non- compliant 
permissions.  
 
• Target: That all new dwellings permitted will be designed to achieve 
water consumption levels of 110 
litres per person per day or less  • Annually , via the creation of a 
BREEAM spreadsheet to track all non-residential applications 
through to discharge of condition.  
 
  
 
 
• Annual ly, via a BREEAM 
spreadsheet to track all non-
residential applications through to 
discharge of condition.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
457 Purpose  Delivery mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
reduce potable water 
consumption.   
 
• submission of an energy strategy 
demonstrating energy and carbon 
savings and how these have been achieved using the hierarchical approach;  
• submission of water efficiency 
specification/water efficiency 
calculator to demonstrate compliance 
with water efficiency requirements.   
 Trigger: One or more residential completions that fail to achieve 110 litres per person per day water 
consumption.  
  
  
The following information would need to be submitted alongside any applications that fall 
within the Strategic District Heating Area:  
• Plans showing the pipe route and 
connection point to the wider network;  
• High level technical specification to enable compatibility to be checked;  
• Date of implementation and 
connection;  
• Details of financial contribution;  
• Feasibility and viability assessments; and 
• Energy Statement demonstrating 
carbon and energy savings.   
• Target: Production of Sustainable 
Design and Construction SPD 
including water efficiency guidance.  
 
Trigger: Sustainable Design and 
Construction SPD not adopted or no progress towards adoption of the SPD by 31 March 2019.  
 
• Target: Connection of all schemes 
located within the strategic district 
heating area to district heating where available.  
Trigger: If by 31 March 2021 the policy has not lead to the development of district heating 
networks the policy will be reviewed.    
• To be evidenced through the 
adoption of the SPD and relevant 
committee as noted in the Council’s Annual Monitoring 
Report. Further targets to be 
derived and monitored through the SPD.  
   
• Annually monitoring the installation 
of CHP district heating networks 
through the monitoring of planning 
applications.  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
458  
 
    
Section Four - Responding to climate change and managing resources  
Policy 31 – Integrated water management and the water cycle  
Risks:  
• If surface water runoff from new developments is not managed in an integrated way, the risk of surface water flooding 
will increase, both to the development itself and neighbouring properties/properties downstream of the development.  
• Pollutants in surface water run- off from new developments could enter rivers and other watercourses, damaging the 
ecology of those watercourses. Groundwater supplies could also become contaminated.  
Wha t action will be taken?  
• Early engagement with developers to ensure that the principles of an integrated surface water management are 
embedded into all development proposals.  
• Development of further supplementary guidance and case studies of best practice.  
Purpose  Delivery mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
To ensure that an 
integrated approach to surface water management is applied to all development proposals in order that flood risk is not 
increased elsewhere.  Applica nts will be required to submit a 
drainage strategy as part of their planning 
application, outlining their approach.  • Target: The adoption of a Flooding 
and Water SPD which will enforce the requirement for developers to 
submit a drainage strategy by 31 
March 2019.  
 Trigger: Non adoption or no progress towards the adoption of the Flooding and Water SPD by 31 March 2019.  
 • Review annually. Completion of 
the SPD will be evidenced through its adoption and the 
relevant Council committees.  
 
  
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
459 Purpose  Delivery mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
• Target: No planning permissions 
granted where the Environment 
Agency initially objected on water 
quality grounds without appropriate conditions.  
   
Trigger: One or more developments granted planning permission in a year against the advice of the Environment Agency, without 
appropriate conditions.  • Data to be collected annually 
from the Environment Agency’s 
dataset:  Environment Agency 
objections to planning on the basis of water quality and information submitted with planning applications, delegated reports and conditions imposed 
on planning permissions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
460  
 
 
 
Section Four - Responding to climate change and managing resources  
Policy 32 – Flood risk  
Risks:  
• Development could be at risk of flooding if it is located in an area defined as being at risk of flooding by the 
Environment Agency.  
• New development could increase the risk of flooding to areas and properties downstream of the development.  
What action will be taken?  
• Early engagement with developers to ensure that flood risk is appropr iately dealt with.  
• Development of further supplementary guidance and case studies of best practice.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
To ensure that new developments are 
not at risk of flooding and do not 
increase the risk of flooding to areas 
and properties downstream of the 
development.  Applicants will be required 
to submit an appropriate flood risk assessment as 
part of their planning 
application, outlining their approach.  • Target: No planning permissions 
granted where the Environment Agency initially objected on flooding  grounds without appropriate conditions and / or submission of a satisfactory flood 
risk assessment.  
 • Data to be collected annually from the 
Environment Agency’s dataset: 
Environment Agency objections to planning on the basis of flood risk and information submitted with planning applications, delegated reports and 
conditions imposed on planning 
permissions.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
461 • Trigger:  One or more 
developments granted planning 
permission in a year against the 
advice of the Environment Agency, without appropriate conditions or a 
satisfactory flood risk assessment.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
462 Section Four - Responding to climate change and managing resources  
Policy 36 – Air quality, odour and dust  
Risks:  
• Continuing degradation of air quality in Cambridge has the potential to cause significant public health issues.  
What action will be taken?  
• Early engagement with developers to ensure that development has the potential to impact on air quality mitigates any 
impact.  
• Development of further supplementary guidance.  
•  
Purpose  Delivery mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
The need to ensure that 
new development 
proposals do not have a detrimental impact on air quality or cause additional pollution from odour and 
dust.  Developers of sites that are sensitive to 
pollution, and located close to existing air 
polluting or fume/odour generating sources will be required to submit a relevant assessment which shows the impact upon their development.  
 Developers of sites that include sources of air 
pollution, including dust, fumes and odour will be required to submit a relevant assessment which shows the impact of their development.  
 
Developers of major sites, or sites within or 
adjac ent to an air quality management area 
would be required to submit a dust risk assessment/management and/or an air 
quality assessment.  • Target: To improve air quality 
especially within Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA).  
 
• Trigger: Action would be triggered by 
an increase in air pollution within an AQMA and/or the designation of new 
Air Quality Management Areas.  
 • Annually through the Air Quality 
Progress Report for Cambridge 
City Council in fulfilment of Part IV of the Environment  Act 1995 
(Local Air Quality Management).  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
463 Section Five – Supporting the Cambridge economy  
Policy 40 – Development and expansion of bus iness space  
Risks:  
• This policy replaces the long- standing policy of Selective Management of the Economy. The previous policy sought to 
restrict the occupation of new employment land to hi -tech businesses or businesses that served the local area, to ensure  
that there was sufficient land for the Cambridge Phenomenon to continue to flourish. Evidence is such that this is no longer 
needed, as there is a plentiful supply of land for research and development. However, when this restriction is removed will this c ontinue to be the case, also will there continue to be the space for businesses that serve the hi -tech cluster?   
• Any change of such a fundamental policy is likely to have consequences, the full implications of which cannot be 
foreseen now. For example, will the lifting of restrictions increase the rents on business space, harming entrants to the market?  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the change in policy through an in- depth study of the Cambridge economy.  
• Discussion with developers and stakeholders.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
How to best support the Cambridge 
economy.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Increase in business 
floorspace by 70,000 sqm (net).  
 
• Trigger: No progress towards a net 
increase of 70,000 sqm meters of business floorspace, or net loss of 
retail floorspace.  • Data monitored annually by recording 
the increase in business floorspace in 
the city from 1 April 2011 to current year 
measured against progress towards an increase of 70,000 sqm of net business floorspace (by type) to 2031. Data to be evidenced using business completions and commitments data prov ided by 
Cambridgeshire County Council’s 
Research and Monitoring Team.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
464 Data will include B1 (a), B1 (b), B1(c), 
B2, B8 uses.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
465 Section Five – Supporting the Cambridge economy 
Policy 41 –Protection of business space  
Risks:  
• Allowing the loss of too much business space, such that it harms the local economy.  
• The policy being too strict such that sites are left empty and unused. N.B. care must be taken when considering this 
as it may be a function of other effects (e.g. the national economy) and not the policy . 
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and agents.  
• Review circumstances that led to trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include review DM 
processes, and review relevant parts of the Local Plan.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
How to best support the Cambridge 
economy: ensure there is a sufficient 
supply of employment land.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: To limit  the amount of 
employment land lost to non-employment uses.  
 
Trigger: Loss of 2 or more hectares of employment land to non-
employment uses in a year.  • Data to be evidenced using business 
completions and commitments data provided by Cambridgeshire County Council’s Research and Monitoring Team. Data will include B1 (a), B1 (b), B1(c), B2, B8 uses.  
   Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
466 Section Five – Supporting the Cambridge economy 
Policy 43 – University development  
Risks:  
• Insufficient supply of land to support the growth of the universities.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with the universities.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Supporting the growth of the 
Universities in Cambridge.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: To progress development 
of specific sites mentioned in the 
policy including New Museums, Mill Lane/Old Press, Eastern 
Gateway or near East Road, 
West Cambridge and Cambridge Biomedical Campus against the relevant SPDs or planning permissions.   
 
Trigger: A lack of progress 
towards meeting SPD criteria within the plan period will trigger a review as will a lapse in planning permission.  
 
• Target: To ensure there is sufficient land to support the growth of the Universities.  
 • Annually, d ata to be evidenced using D1 
completions and commitments. Data provided by Cambridgeshire County Council’s Research and Monitoring 
Team.  
 
   
 
  
• For monitoring purposes only. Data may 
be incomplete and will therefore not 
provide an accurate picture of University faculty growth during the plan period. Analysis of policy usage and discussions with development management may raise issues that require further evidence 
gathering/discussion with the 
Universities.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
467  
Section Six - Providing a balanced supply of housing  
Policy 45 – Affordable housing and dwelling mix  
Risks:  
• Lack of delivery of affordable housing  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the policy approach and seek further engagement with developers and agents including further consideration 
of development viability in Cambridge.  
• Review financial contributions within the Affordable Housing SPD.  
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Supporting the delivery of a range of 
affordable housing.  
 
Developments should include a 
balanced mix of dwelling sizes 
(measured by number of bedrooms), 
types and tenures to meet future household needs in Cambridge.  Through the development management process, with input  on viability and type 
of housing provided by Strategic Housing and Planning Policy officers.  • Target: To deliver affordable 
housing on developments as set out in Policy 45 (and below) unless 
viability issues can be 
demonstrated.    
• 10% on 2 - 9 units (net)  
• 25% on 10- 14 units (net)  
• 40% on 15 or more units (net)  
 Trigger: One or more developments that fail to provide affordable housing as set out in the policy in one year.  
 
• Target: To deliver a mix of housing 
to meet the needs of different 
groups in the community.  Monitored annually using housing 
completions and commitments data produced by the Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Council.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
468 Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
 
Trigger: Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of the policy.  
 
 
 .  
• Target: To increase the delivery of 
affordable housing to respond to 
the high level of need identified.  
 
Trigger: Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of the policy.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
469  
 
 
 
Section Six - Providing a balanced supply of housing  
Policy 46 – Development of student housing  
Risks:  
• Student accommodation is delivered in excess of the recognised need.  
What action will be taken?  
• Review the policy approach and seek further engagement with developers, universities and colleges.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Supporting the delivery of high quality 
student accommodation with no 
adverse impacts on the surrounding 
area Through the development 
management process  • Target: To ensure student 
accommodation built meets the 
specific needs of a named institution or institutions.  
 
Trigger: Amount completed of 
student accommodation exceeds 
recognised need of 3,104 to 2026 as guided by the Assessment of Student Housing Demand and Supply for Cambridge City Council 
or successor document.  • Data obtained annually from student 
accommodation completions and commitments data produced annually by Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Council.  
 
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
470  
 
 
 
 
Section Six - Providing a balanced supply of housing  
Policy 49 – Provision for Gypsies and Travellers  
Risks:  
• No provision of permanent or transit pitches or emergency stopping places for Gypsies and Travellers is made.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with neighbouring authorities, review evidence of need and engage with Gypsies and 
Travellers, developers and agents.  
• Review the circumstances that led to the trigger being met, and then take action as appropriate which may include:  
• Review Development Management processes.  
•     Review Needs Assessment  
•     Review of the Local Plan.  
•     Consider undertaking co- operation with other local authorities, including through duty to co- operate  
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Supporting the development of pitch 
provision for Gypsies and Travellers 
where there is an identified need.  
 
Meeting the needs of those that meet 
the planning definition of Gypsies and Through the development 
management process and through engagement with 
neighbouring authorities.  • Target: To monitor the number of 
caravans on unauthorised Gypsy & 
Travel lers sites.  
 • Annually, using the National caravan 
count which is carried out in January and July each year.  
  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
471 Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Travellers and those that do not meet 
the definition but can demonstrate a 
cultural need for caravan accommodation.  Trigger: Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of the policy.  
 
• Target: Sufficient sites coming forward to meet identified needs of 
those that meet the planning definition of Gypsies and Travellers 
and those that do not meet the 
definition but can demonstrate a 
cultural need for caravan 
accommodation.  
 
Trigger: Insufficient sites coming forward to meet identified needs of 
those that meet the planning definition of gypsies and travellers 
and those that do not meet the 
definition but can demonstrate a cultural need for caravan 
accommodation, assessed against 
the GTAA and ongoing monitoring 
by the local housing authority.   
 
• Count of the number of pitches delivered in the monitoring year taken from completions data produced by 
Cambridgeshire County Council’s 
Research and Monitoring Team.  
 
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
472 Section Six - Providing a balanced supply of housing  
Policy 52 – Protecti ng garden land and the subdivision of existing dwelling plots  
Risks:  
• Sustained numbers of approved applications lead to the loss of significant amounts of amenity space, with associated 
negative impacts on biodiversity and quality of life etc.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek early engagement with developers and agents.  
•  
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Supports residential development on 
garden land only where applications 
meet specific criteri a. Through the development 
management process  • Target: To ensure no subdivision of 
existing dwelling plots in order to provide further residential accommodation.  
 
Trigger: Subdivision of one or more existing plots unless justified through the specified criteria within 
Policy 52.  • These figures will be monitored via 
the Council’s annual housing trajectory using housing completions and commitments data produced by 
the Research & Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County Council.  
   Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
473 Section Six - Providing a balanced supply of housing  
Policy 54 – Residential moorings  
Risks:  
• Sustained applications which lead to adverse impacts on amenity.  
• Lack of provision for residential moorings.  
What action will be taken?  
• Early engagement with the residential boaters, Conservators of the River Cam and the Council’s Streets and Open 
Spaces Service.  
 
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Supports the development of residential 
moorings, subject to the fulfilment of criteria.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: Delivery of allocation RM1 
as specified in Appendix B of the 
Cambridge Local Plan 2014.  
 
Trigger: No delivery of or progress 
towards the completion of residential moorings by 31 March 2026.  
 • Monitored using (i) planning 
applications and committee  or 
delegated reports, and (ii) housing completions and commitments produced by Research & Monitoring Team at Cambridgeshire County Council.  
   Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
474 Section Seven – Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Policy 62 – Local heritage assets  
Risks:  
• Loss of /harm to assets,  
What action will be taken?  
• Consider Article 4 directions. Promotion of list.  
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Do decisions reflect the policy with 
regard to alteration or demolition?    
 Delivered through 
decisions on development 
applications by Members/Officers.  • Target: To retain local heritage 
assets.  
 Trigger: Any loss of a local heritage 
asset.  • Monitored annually and reported in the 
Council’s Annual Monitoring Report 
using the Council’s own dataset.  
 
   
 
      
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
475  
  Section Seven – Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Policy 67 – Protection of open space  
Risks:  
• Pressure for University and other institutions to expand overrides protection of protected open spaces.  
• Value of protected open spaces is overridden by value of development proposals by Planning Inspectorate on appeal.  
What action will be taken?  
• Continue to vigorously defend protected open spaces and seek alternative solution through design to minimise loss of 
protected open space.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that social and environmental 
gains are sought jointly and 
simultaneously through the planning 
system.  By taking a positive approach 
to decision making that reflects the presumption in favour of 
sustainable development contained in the NPPF (2012).  • Target: Retention of protected 
open space within the Local Authority area unless appropriate mitigation can be implemented or justified.  
 
Trigger: Net loss of protected open spaces unless appropriate mitigation can be implemented or adequately 
justified.  • To be monitored every four to five years 
through the update of the Open Space and Recreation data/Appendix C. Open space will be assessed by quantum and type.  
 
• Additional specific strategies for different types of open spaces may also be commissioned on a four to five year 
basis.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
476  
     
Section Seven – Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Policy 68 – Open space and recreation provision through new development  
Risks:  
• Proposals that generate a contribution for open space provision fail to provide on- site open space provision especially 
in areas with an identified deficiency in public open space.  
What action will be taken?  
• Provide robust policy reason for residential proposals providing on- site provision, especially in areas with an identifi ed 
deficiency in public open space.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that social and environmental 
gains are sought jointly and 
simultaneously through the planning system.  By taking a posit ive approach 
to decision- making that reflects 
the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the NPPF (2012).  
 
Specific delivery mechanism: 
adopted Open Space and Recreation Standards,  
adopted Open Space and 
Recreation Strategy.  • Target: Net gain of protected 
open spaces through new development.  
 Trigger: No net gain of open space through new developments.  • To be monitored every four to five years 
through the update of the Open Space and Recreation data/Appendix C. Open 
space will be assessed by quantum and 
type.  
 
• Additional specific strategies for 
different types of open spaces may also 
be commissioned on a four to five year basis.  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
477 Section Seven – Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Policy 69 – Protection of biodiversity and geodiversity importance  
Risks:  
• Proposals granted planning consent that have an adverse effect on a site of local nature conservation importance.  
• Proposals fail to take account of specific delivery documents related to sites of local nature conservation importance.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and agents.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that environmental gains are 
sought jointly and simultaneously 
through the planning system.  By taking a positive 
approach to decision making that reflects the presumption in favour of 
sustainable development 
contained in the NPPF (2012).  
 Specific delivery 
mechanism: adopted 
Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy,  
national and local habitat action plans (LHAPs) and national and local species 
action plans (LSAPs).  • Target: No loss in the areas of local 
nature conservation importance as a result of new development where no mitigation has been provided.  
 Trigger: Loss of areas of local nature importance as a result of 
new development where no 
mitigation has been provided.  • Data obtained annually from the 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Environmental Records Centre and includes loss of areas of biodiversity importance by type e.g. Local Nature Reserves, County Wildlife Sites and City Wildlife Sites in hectares.  
   Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
478 Section Seven – Protecting and enhancing the character of Cambridge  
Policy 70 – Protection of priority species and habitats  
Risks:  
• Proposals granted planning consent that have an adverse effect on priority species and habitats.  
• Proposals fail to take account of specific delivery documents related to the protection of priority species and habitats.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and agents.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that environmental gains are 
sought jointly and simultaneously 
through the planning system.  By taking a positive approach 
to decision- making that 
reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the 
NPPF (2012).  
 
Specific delivery mechanism: adopted Cambridgeshire Local Biodiversity Action Plans.  • Target: No loss of land within 
SSSI as a result of new 
development where no mitigation 
has been provided. No 
deterioration of SSSI as a result of new development.  
 Trigger: One or more new developments completed in a 
year within or adversely affecting 
a SSSI where no mitigation has been prov ided.  
 • Data obtained annually from the 
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Environmental Records Centre by 
hectares.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
479 Section Eight – Services and local facilities  
Policy 72 – Development and change of use in district, local and neighbourhood centres  
Risks (that the policy will not be delivered):  
• Pressure for new development that fails to support the vibrancy and vitality of the district, local and neighbourhood 
centres.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and agent.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that the district, local and 
neighbourhood centres remain healthy 
with a suitable mix of uses and few 
vacancies.  
 Through the development 
management process.  • Target: To ensure that the 
proportion of retail (A1) uses 
in the district centres does not fall below 55%. Retention of an appropriate balance and mix of uses within Local and Neighbourhood Centres.  
 
Trigger: The proportion of retail (A1) uses in the district 
centre falls below 55%.  • The health and composition of local and 
neighbourhood centres will be monitored through the assessment of planning applications and through the Council’s occasional shopping survey.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
480 Section Eight – Services and local facilities  
Policy 73 – Community, sports and leisure facilities  
Risks:  
• Limited opportunities for replacement facilities to provide either better or comparable facilities in highly accessible 
areas.  
• Pressure for ‘quick win’ developments.  
• Clarity and quality of evidence required for proposals that involve the loss of a facility.  
• Lack of commitment from applicants to deliver a usable community space.  
What action will be taken?  
• Ensure requirements for any replacement or proposed loss of a facility are clarified at the pre- application stage.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that economic, social and 
environmental gains are sought jointly 
and simultaneously through the 
planning system.  By taking a positive approach 
to decision- making that 
reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development contained in the NPPF (2012).  • Target: To deliver new types of 
community and/ or leisure facilities.  
 
Trigger: Contextual indicator, to provide information on the 
implementation of the policy.  
  • Given the varied use classes of 
community facilities, the change in net floorspace for D1 and sui generis uses that fulfil a community or leisure use role will be monitored annually using 
completions and commitments data 
produced by the Research & Monitori ng 
Team at Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
481 Section Eight – Services and local facilities  
Policy 76 – Protection of public houses  
Risks:  
• Pressure for ‘quick win’ developments  
• Clarity and quality of evidence required for proposals that involve the loss of a public house.  
• Limited awareness of incremental proposals affecting the long- term viability of a public house.  
What action will be taken?  
• Ensure requirements for any on- site developments or proposed loss of a facility are clarified at the pre- application 
stage.  
 
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring that economic, social and 
environmental gains are sought jointly and simultaneously through the planning system.  By taking a positive approach 
to decision- making that 
reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development contained in the 
NPPF (2012).  • Target: To retain public houses 
identified within Appendix C of 
the Cambridge Local Plan.  
 
Trigger: Loss of one or more 
public houses from the safeguarded list where 
justification has not been 
provided as set out in Appendix 
K of the Cambridge Local Plan.  • Monitor and update the list of 
safeguarded sites biennially (Appendix 
C of the Cambridge Local Plan, 2018) 
through local s urvey.  
   Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
482 Section Eight – Services and local facilities  
Policy 77 – Development and expansion of visitor accommodation  
Risks:  
• Hotel needs not met (possible given the competition for land in Cambridge).  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and agents.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Support the growth of hotels to meet 
needs.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target:  Development of up to 
1,500 additional bedspaces, 
as identified in the Cambridge 
Hotel Futures Study or 
successor document.  
 Trigger: Lack of progress towards target, or oversupply of additional bedspaces in 
comparison to identified 
target.  
 
• Monit or the location of new 
hotels in line with the identified locations set out in Policy 77 and the requirements of National Town Centre Policy (NPPF 
2012, paragraph 24).  
 • Annually monitor the increase in hotel 
accommodation by number of rooms, 
through a count of policy usage and an 
analysis of the associated planning 
applications.  
    
• Annually, for monitoring purposes only 
to inform new evidence base creation.  
 Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
483 Section Eight – Services and local facilities  
Policy 78 – Redevelopment or loss of visitor accommodation  
Risks:  
• Allowing the significant loss of hotels, such that it fails to support tourism in Cambridge.  
• The policy being too strict, such that sites are left empty and unused. N.B. care must be taken when considering this, 
as it may be a function of other effects (e.g. the national economy) and not the policy.  
What action will be taken?  
• Seek further engagement with developers and agents.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data S ource, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
How to best support the Cambridge 
tourist economy: ensure there is a 
sufficient supply of hotels.  Through the development 
management process.  • Target: To protect the loss of 
hotel accommodation.  
 Trigger: Net loss of hotel 
accommodation over a five year 
period.  
 • Annually monitor the net increase in 
hotel accommodation by number of rooms, through a count of policy usage and analysis of the associated planning 
applications. To be reported in the 
Council’s Annual Monitoring Report.  
 
  Appendix M: Monitoring and implementation  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
484 Section Nine – Providing infrastructure to support development  
Policy 85 – Infrastructure delivery, planning obligations and the Community Infrastructure Levy  
Risks:  
• That the infrastructure necessary to support development is not being provided and provided in a timely fashion  
What action will be taken?  
• Negotiation with developers, review of SPD/charging schedule.  
 
Purpose  Delivery 
mechanism/partners  Target/Trigger  Data Source, Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Ensuring the timely provision of 
infrastructure alongside new 
development.  Planning obligations SPD.  
 
Community Infrastructure Levy 
Regulations 2010 (as 
amended).  
 Cambridge Community Infrastructure Levy Charging Schedule.  
 • Target: to secure sufficient 
infrastructure capacity to support and meet all the requirements arising from the new development.  
 
Trigger: Contextual indicator, 
to provide information on the 
implementation of the policy.  • Annually for monitoring purposes only. 
Information on the process of collecting and spending developer contributions is available on the Council’s website.  
• Requirements for the implementation 
and monitoring of CIL are detailed in 
the CIL Regulations.  Once Cambridge City Council has adopted a CIL Charging Schedule, information 
on the collection and spending of 
monies will be included in the Annual 
Monitoring Report.  
 
  Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
485   
Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
486 Appendix N: Five Year Housing Land Supply  
 
N.1 Five-year housing land supply will be calculated using the Liverpool 
methodology, which has been determined as appropriate for Cambridge 
and South Cambridgeshire and which spreads any shortfall in supply at the point of calculation over the remainder of the plan period. A 20% buffer is also included in response to historic levels of delivery.  
 
N.2 The methodology for calculating five- year housing land supply is set out 
in figure N1 below:  
 
Figure N1: Methodology for Calculating Five -Year Supply  
(a) Housing requirement 
in the plan period  Net number of new homes required in the plan 
period (2011 to 2031) as set out in Policy S/5 of the 
South Cambridgeshire Local Plan and Policy 3 of 
the Cambridge Local Plan.  
(b) Completions so far in 
the plan period  Net number of new homes completed so far in the 
plan period, as set out in the Annual Monitoring 
Report.   
(c ) Number of dwellings 
left to deliver in the plan 
period (= a - b)  Calculated by subtracting the net number of homes 
completed so far in the plan period from the housing 
requirement.  
(d) Number of years of 
plan period left  Number of years of the plan period left in which to 
deliver the housing requirement.  
(e) Annualised average 
requirement for the 
remainder of the plan 
period (= c ÷ d)  Calcula ted by dividing the number of dwellings left 
to deliver by the number of years of the plan period left.  
(f) Five year supply 
requirement (= e x 5)  The requirement to meet in the next five year period. 
Calculated by multiplying the annualised average 
requirement by five.  
(g) 20% buffer to be 
added to the five year 
supply requirement (= f x 
0.2) A 20% buffer in addition to the five year supply 
requirement should be added in response to historic levels of delivery  
(h) Five year supply 
requirement with 20% 
buffer (= f + g)  Five year supply requirement plus 20% buffer, 
against which predicted housing supply is 
assessed.  
(i) Number of dwellings 
predicted to be completed in the five year period  Net number of new home s predicted to be 
completed in the five year period, as set out in the 
housing trajectory published in the Annual 
Monitoring Report.  
(j) Five year supply (= i ÷ 
h x 5)  Calculated by dividing the number of dwellings 
predicted to be completed in the five y ear period by Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
487 the five year supply requirement with the 20% 
buffer, and then multiplying by five.  
 
N.3 Figures N2 and N3 below summarise the housing land supply position 
for South Cambridgeshire and Cambridge individually and jointly as at November 2017 for the five- year periods 2017- 2022 and 2018- 2023, as 
contained in the Annual Monitoring Reports 2017. The Councils both individually and jointly demonstrate a five year housing land supply using the methodology above. The Council’s five year supply will be published each year in their Annual Monitoring Reports. These should be consulted for the most up to date position on housing supply.  
 
Figure N2: Five -Year Housing Land Supply Position at November 2017 
for 2017- 2022  
 
Cambridge  South 
Cambridge -
shire   Cambridge & 
South 
Cambridge -
shire  
(a) Housing requirement 
2011 to 2031  14,000  19,500  33,500  
(b) Completions up to 31 
March 2017  4,932  3,970  8,902  
(c ) Number of dwellings 
left to deliver in the plan 
period (= a - b)  9,068  15,530  24,598  
(d) Number of years of 
plan period left  14 14 14 
(e) Annualised average 
requirement for the 
remainder of the plan 
period (= c ÷ d)  648 1,109  1,757  Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
488  
Cambridge  South 
Cambridge -
shire   Cambridge & 
South 
Cambridge -
shire  
(f) Five year supply 
requirement (= e x 5)  3,239  5,546  8,785  
(g) 20% buffer to be added 
to the five year supply 
requirement (= f x 0.2)  648 1,109  1,757  
(h) Five year supply 
requirement with 20% 
buffer (= f + g)  3,886  6,656  10,542  
(i) Number of dwellings 
predicted to be completed 
in the five year period (1 
April 2017 to 31 March 
2022)  4,201  7,235  11,436  
(j) Five year supply (= i ÷ h 
x 5)  5.4 5.4 5.4 
Source: Cambridge Annual Monitoring Report 2017 and South 
Cambridgeshire Annual Monitoring Report 2017  
 Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
489 Figure N3: Five -Year Housing Land Supply Position at November 2017 
for 2018- 2023  
 
Cambridge  South 
Cambr idge-
shire   Cambridge & 
South 
Cambridge -
shire  
(a) Housing requirement 
2011 to 2031  14,000  19,500  33,500  
(b) Completions up to 31 
March 2018  6,267  4,629  10,896  
(c ) Number of dwellings 
left to deliver in the plan 
period (= a - b) 7,733  14,871  22,604  
(d) Number of years of 
plan period left  13 13 13 
(e) Annualised average 
requirement for the 
remainder of the plan 
period (= c ÷ d)  595 1,144  1,739  
(f) Five year supply 
requirement (= e x 5)  2,974  5,720  8,694  
(g) 20% buffer to be added 
to the five year supply 
requirement (= f x 0.2)  595 1,144  1,739  
(h) Five year supply 
requirement with 20% 
buffer (= f + g)  3,569  6,864  10,433  
(i) Number of dwellings 
predicted to be completed 
in the five year period (1 3,874  8,197  12,071  Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
490  
Cambridge  South 
Cambr idge-
shire   Cambridge & 
South 
Cambridge -
shire  
April 2018 to 31 March 
2023)  
(j) Five year supply (= i ÷ h 
x 5) 5.4 6.0 5.8 
Source: Cambridge Annual Monitoring Report 2017 and South 
Cambridgeshire Annual Monitoring Report 2017  
 
N.4 Figure N4 below shows that it is anticipated that based on the housing 
trajectory as at November 2017 it is anticipated that there will be a rolling five-year housing land supply continuing for the remainder of the plan 
period. The housing supply data will be updated annually and published in the Annual Monitoring Report.  
  Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
491 Figure N4: Rolling Five Year Supply  
 
20
17-
20
22 2018
-
2023  2019
-
2024  2020
-
2025  2021
-
2026  2022
-
2027  2023
-
2028  2024
-
2029  2025
-
2030  2026
-
2031  
Cambridge  5.4 5.4 6.0 6.2 6.2 6.2 5.8 5.3 5.3 5.5 
South 
Cambridges
hire 5.4 6.0 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.9 7.7 8.9 11.4 
Cambridge 
& South Cambridges
hire 5.4 5.8 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.8 7.6 9.1 
Source: Cambridge Annual Monitoring Report 2017 and South 
Cambridgeshire Annual Monitoring Report 2017  
N.5 Figure N5 below shows past and projected completions for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire over the plan period (2011/12 to 2030/31). In 
total, the plans must make provision for a minimum of 33,500 homes over this period, which is represented in the graph by the black ‘plan’ line (the combined annual housing requirement of 1,675 net homes). It also includes a ‘manage’ line, which shows the outstanding balance of completions relative to cumulative delivery.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
492 Figure N5: Past and Projected completions 2011/12 to 2030/31  
 
N.6 Figure N6 below provides a summary of the broad distribution and main 
sources of supply of the housing provision set out in the plans.  
 
Figure N6: Distribution and supply of housing provision  
Actual Completions  
 
2011/
12 - 
2015/16 2016/17-
2020/
21 2021/22-
2025/
26 2026/27-
2030/
31 
Post 
2031  Totals  
Cambridge  3,754  1,178  - -  - 4,932  
South Cambridgeshire  3,427  543 - - - 3,970  
 
Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
493 Cambridge Urban Area  
 
2011/
12 - 
2015/16 2016/17-
2020/
21 2021/22-
2025/
26 2026/27-
2030/
31 
Post 
2031  Totals  
Cambridge  - existing 
allocations   - 226 304 289 0 819 
Cambridge  - new 
allocations  - 131 613 579 0 1,323  
South Cambridgeshire - 
existing allocations   - 42 105 0 0 147 
 
Cambridge Fringe Sites  
 
2011/
12 - 
2015/16 2016/17-
2020/
21 2021/22-
2025/
26 2026/27-
2030/
31 
Post 
2031  Totals  
Cambridge  - existing 
allocations   - 2,227  2,595  521 0 5,343  
Cambridge  - new 
allocations   - 190 240 0 0 430 
South Cambridgeshire - 
existing allocations   - 894 1,879  1,378  250 4,151  
 Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
494 New Settlements  
 
2011/
12 - 
2015/16 2016/17-
2020/
21 2021/22-
2025/
26 2026/27-
2030/
31 
Post 
2031  Totals  
South Cambridgeshire - 
existing allocations   - 703 1,250  1,250  6,78
4 3,203  
South Cambridgeshire - 
new allocations   - 0 1,660  2,000  8,84
0 3,660  
 
Rural Area  
 
2011/
12 - 
2015/16 2016/17-
2020/
21 2021/22-
2025/
26 2026/27-
2030/
31 
Post 
2031  Totals  
South Cambridgeshire - 
existing allocations   - 522 100 53 0 675 
South Cambridgeshire - 
new allocations   - 674 1,185  750 935 2,609  
 Appendix N: Five year housing land supply  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
495 Unallocated Sites with Planning Permission or Resolution to Grant 
Planning Permission  
 
2011/
12 - 
2015/
16 2016/
17-
2020/21 2021/
22-
2025/26 2026/
27-
2030/31 Post 
2031  Total
s 
Cambridge   - 313 40 0 0 353 
South Cambridgeshire   - 2,608  613 0 0 3,221  
 
Windfall Allowance  
 
2011/
12 - 
2015/16 2016/17-
2020/
21 2021/22-
2025/
26 2026/27-
2030/
31 
Post 
2031  Total
s 
Cambridge   - 123 553 618 0 1,294  
South Cambridgeshire   - 50 900 1,000  0 1,950  
   7,181  10,42
4 12,03
7 8,438  16,8
09 38,08
0 
  
N.7 For more details on the individual sites that comprise the above joint 
housing trajectory, please refer to the latest Annual Monitoring Report 
for each authority.  
  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
496 Glossary of Terms 
 
Term  Definition  
Area Action 
Plan (AAP)  A local development document setting out policy and 
proposals for a specific area. The document establishes an 
overall vision, identifies key issues and sets out the principles 
for an area of change.  
Affordable 
housing Housing provided for people whose i ncome levels mean they 
cannot access suitable market properties to rent or buy locally to meet their housing needs. It includes social rented, 
affordable rented and intermediate housing.  
Affordable housing should:  
• meet the needs of eligible households inc luding 
availability at a cost low enough for them to afford, 
determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices; and  
• include provision for the home to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households or, if these restrictions are lifted, for the subsidy to be 
recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.  
Affordable 
rented housing  Rented housing provided by local authorities and private 
registered providers of social housing to households that are 
eligible for social rented housing. Affordable rent is subject to 
rent controls that require a rent of no more than 80 per cent of 
the local market rent (including service charges, where 
applicable).  
 
From April 2012, most new homes funded by government 
grant have to be offered at affordable rents, to generate 
funding for further new affordable housing. Some existing Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
497 Term  Definition  
social rent homes may also be converted to affordable rents in 
agreement with the Homes and Communities Agency.  
Air quality 
management 
area (AQMA)  Since December 1997, each local authority in the United 
Kingdom has been carrying out a review and assessment of air quality in their area. This involves measuring air pollution 
and trying to predict how it will change in the next few years. 
The aim of the review is to make sure that the national air 
quality objectives will be achieved throughout the UK by the 
relevant deadlines. These objectives have been put in place 
to protect people's health and the environment.  
 If a local authority finds any places where the objectives are 
not likely to be achieved, it must declare an air quality 
management area there. This area could be just one or two 
streets, or it could be much bigger. If an AQMA is designated, 
the local authority will then put together a plan to improve t he 
air quality – a local air quality action plan. (Source: 
http://aqma.defra.gov.uk/)  
Allowable 
solutions 
framework  Part of the definition of zero carbon development includes the 
concept that after delivering a certain level of CO2 reduction on-site, known as carbon compliance, developers can then 
choose to offset remaining emissions through a range of measures known as ‘allowable solutions’. One of these 
possible measures is that developers would have the choice 
to pay into a Community Energy Fund (CEF)
70, which is then 
used to invest in energy efficiency and renewable and low carbon energy projects in Cambridgeshire, with an emphasis 
placed on community benefit.  
 
 
70 Element Energy (2012).  Cambridgeshire Community Energy Fund.  Stage 2 Final Report.  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
498 Term  Definition  
Work is currently underway to investigate the potential of 
developing a Cambridgeshire CEF, l inked to the national 
allowable solutions framework, which would require the 
development of a policy mechanism to enable collection of 
funds. The setting up of such a fund would require agreement 
across all local authorities in Cambridgeshire, and appropri ate 
governance arrangements would need to be developed.  
Areas of Major 
Change (AMC)  Parts of Cambridge where considerable change is anticipated 
at some stage during the life of the plan period (2014– 2031). 
Any changes to these areas will be masterplanned.  
Building 
Research 
Establishment 
(BRE)  BRE is a UK charity dedicated specifically to research and 
education in the built environment.  
Building 
Research 
Establishment 
Environmental 
Assessment 
Method 
(BREEAM)  BREEAM is a set of standards for measuring the  
environmental performance of a range of new and existing building types. It covers energy and water performance, 
construction materials, waste, ecology, pollution and health. 
Under this scheme, buildings that meet the standards are 
rated either ‘pass’, ‘good’, ‘very good’, ‘excellent’ or 
‘outstanding’.  
Buildings of 
local interest (BLI)  Buildings of local interest have been designated because of 
their architectural merit and, in some cases, their historical associations. The aim of the list is to safeguard the buildings 
and to ensure that repairs, alterations and extensions are 
sympathetic to their character. Cambridge has over 1,000 
BLIs. 
Cambridgeshir
e and Peterborough Provided the framework for the District Councils’ preparation 
of detailed local development frameworks or local plans, up to 
2016.  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
499 Term  Definition  
Structure Plan 
2003  
Cambridge 
Cluster  Refers to the 1,400+ technology, biotechnology, services 
providers and support companies and organisations 
comprising more than 40,000 people employed by these in 
the Cambridge region.  
Cambridge 
Phenomenon  Refers to the large number of high technology companies in 
and around Cambridge; first described by Segal Quince and 
Partners.  
Carbon 
footprint  A measure of the impact our activities have on the 
environment and, in particular, climate change. It relates to the amount of greenhouse gases produced in our day -to-day 
lives through burning fossil fuels for electricity, heating, transportation etc.  
Chalk hills  Chalk hills occur to the south and south east of Cambridge 
extending from the south of Addenbrooke’s eastwards towards 
Newmarket. The chalk hills form part of the East Anglian 
Heights and are an extension of the chalklands running north 
from the Chiltern Hills.  The arrival into Cambridge from the 
chalk hills to the  south -east, dropping down from the higher 
land, allows for expansive views across the city.  The hills are gently rounded and rolling, reaching 74 metres above sea level 
at Wandlebury.  The springs that occur at the junction of the 
chalk and clay, such as at Nine Wells are an important habitat, 
and the dry valleys of the chalk are important landscape 
features.  The fields are large, enclosed by generally very 
closely maintained low thorn hedges with few hedgerow trees.  
Shelter belts, often of beech, and h ill top copses are an 
important feature of this landscape, the latter often acting as 
reference points.  The roads tend to be straight and towards Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
500 Term  Definition  
Cambridge run across the contours, thus commanding some 
excellent panoramic views of the city and its environs. 
City Centre  The City Centre is the historic, cultural and retail centre of 
Cambridge.  Two main shopping areas can be found within the 
City Centre: the Historic Core and the Fitzroy/Burleigh 
Street/Grafton area.  The boundary of the City Centre is defi ned 
on the Policies Map.  
City wildlife 
site (CiWS) A non -statutory designation for sites of nature conservation 
interest within an urban environment.  
Climate 
change 
adaptation Initiatives and measures to reduce the vulnerability of natural 
and human syst ems to actual or predicted climate change 
effects.  
Climate 
change 
mitigation  Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate 
system, primarily through reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  
Clinical 
commissioning 
group (CCG)  A CCG is a statutory body representing groups of GPs 
responsible for designing local health services in England. 
Every GP practice will need to be a member of a CCG.  
Cluster  Concentrations of companies in related activities, recognisable 
suppliers, service providers  and institutions, which are 
cooperating, competing and collaborating to build competitive 
advantage, often across traditional sector boundaries. Such 
concentrations often depend on access to specialist skills and infrastructure within a specific area.  
Community 
facilities  See Table 8.2 for specific details.  
Community 
Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  CIL is a new levy that local authorities in England and Wales 
can choose to charge on new developments in their area. In 
areas where CIL is in force, landowners and developers must 
pay the levy to the local Council.  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
501 Term  Definition  
CIL charges, set by the local Council, are based on the size 
and type of the new development. The money raised can be 
used to support development by funding infrastructure that the 
Council, local communit y and neighbourhoods would like.  
Conservation 
areas  Areas identified by the Council, which have special 
architectural or historic interest, which makes them worth 
protecting and improving.  
County wildlife 
site (CWS) A non -statutory designation for sites of county significance for 
wildlife.  
Development 
plan Includes adopted local plans, minerals and waste plans, 
neighbourhood plans and the London Plan and is defined in the 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (Section 38).  
Design and 
access 
statement 
(DAS)  A short report which may accompany and support a planning 
application. The report should explain the design principles and 
concepts that have been applied to particular aspects of the 
proposal – these are the amount, layout, scale, landscaping 
and appearance of the development.  
District centre  A group of shops, separate from the town centre, usually 
containing at least one food supermarket or superstore, and 
non-retail services such as banks, building societies and 
restaurants; boundaries are defined on the Policies Map.  
District heat 
networks  District heating is a system for distributing heat generated in a 
centralised location for residential and commercial heating 
requirements. The heat is often obtained from a co- generation 
plant burning fossil fuels but increasingly biomass, although 
heat-only boiler stations, geothermal heating and central solar 
heating are also used, as well as nuclear power.  
East of 
England Plan  The name given to the regional spatial strategy for the East of 
England. The East of England Plan, published in May 2008, 
sets out the regional strategy (RSS) for the East of England Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
502 Term  Definition  
region.  However, the Government revoked the East of 
England Plan in January 2013.  
Employment 
land review  A document which:  
• examines existing guidance, policies and requirements;  
• takes stock of existing employment provision;  
• assesses future requirements based on an analysis of 
past trends, future forecasts and discussions with existing employers and stakeholders;  
• identifies a new portfolio of potential employment sites 
on land with the most potential for sustainable development; and  
• identifies existing employment sites that could be 
released for other forms of development.  
Environmental 
Impact 
Assessment 
(EIA) An EIA assesse s the environmental implications of an 
individual development. It also allows a planning authority a 
means of ensuring that it can take account of the 
environmental implications of individual developments in its 
decisions on planning applications. The EIA Regulations 
relate to a European Union Directive (Directive 85/337/EEC 
as amended).  
Extra care 
housing Extra care provides self -contained housing, but with other 
facilities provided on- site where people can receive care and 
support but still retain their independence, as opposed to residential care homes where occupants do not have their 
own tenure or ‘own front door’.  
Flood zone 1 – 
low probability  This zone comprises land assessed as having a less than 1 in 
1,000 annual probability of river or sea flooding (<0.1 per cent).
71 
Flood zone 2 – 
medium 
probability  This zone comprises land assessed as having between a 1 in 
100 and 1 in 1,000 annual probability of river flooding (1 per cent – 0.1 per cent), or between a 1 in 200 and 1 in 1,000 
 
71 Technical Guidance to the National Planning Policy Framework  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
503 Term  Definition  
annual probabilit y of sea flooding (0.5 per cent – 0.1 per cent) 
in any year.2 
Flood zone 3a 
– high 
probability  This zone comprises land assessed as having a 1 in 100 or 
greater annual probability of river flooding (>1 per cent), or a 1 
in 200 or greater annual probability of flooding from the sea 
(>0.5 per cent) in any year. 2 
Flood zone 3b 
– functional 
floodplain This zone comprises land where water has to flow or be 
stored in times of flood.2 
Fluvial 
flooding Fluvial flooding occurs when rivers overflow and burst their 
banks.  
Fuel poverty  Households are considered to be in fuel poverty when they 
have to spend more than 10 per cent of their household 
income on fuel to keep their home in a ‘satisfactory’ condition.  
Geodiversity  The natural range (diversity) o f geological features (rocks, 
minerals, fossils, structures), geomorphological features 
(landforms and processes) and soil features that make up the 
landscape. (Source: Naturenet)  
Grade I listed 
building Buildings of exceptional interest, sometimes consid ered to be 
internationally important.  
Grade II* listed 
building Important buildings of more than special interest.  
Grade II listed 
building Nationally important buildings of special interest  
Green Belt  A statutory designation made for the purposes of: checking 
the unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas; preventing 
neighbouring towns from merging into each other; assisting in 
safeguarding the countryside from encroachment; preserving 
the setting and special character of historic towns and 
assisting in urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
504 Term  Definition  
of derelict and other urban land. Specific Green Belt purposes 
have been set out for Cambridge.  
Geodiversity  The natural range (diversity) of geological features (rocks, 
minerals, fossils, st ructures), geomorphological features 
(landforms and processes) and soil features that make up the 
landscape. (Source: Naturenet)  
Gross internal 
floor area 
(GIFA)  Is defined (by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors) as 
the floor area contained within the building measured to the internal face of the external walls.  
Green 
infrastructure  Consists of multi -functional networks of protected open space, 
woodlands, wildlife habitat, parks, registered commons and villages and town greens, nature reserves, waterways and 
bodies of water, historic parks and gardens and historic 
landscapes. Different aspects of green infrastructure provide 
recreational and/or cultural experiences, while supporting and enhancing biodiversity and geodiversity, enhancing air and/or 
water quality and enriching the quality of life of local 
communities.  
Green roofs  The roof of a building which is partially or completely covered 
with plants, which is generally believed to assist in reducing surface water run- off from buildings, enhance biodiversity, 
reduce the visual impact of a building (in some locations) and affect the heat retention of a building. They can be further 
classified as either intensive or extensive. Intensive green 
roofs are those made up of lush vegetation and based on  a 
relatively nutrient rich deep substrate. They are principally 
designed to provide amenity. Extensive green roofs normally 
have a shallow growing medium and are designed to be 
relatively self -sustaining.  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
505 Term  Definition  
Health impact 
assessment 
(HIA)  A health impact assessment is a tool to appraise both positive 
(e.g. creation of new jobs)  and negative (e.g. generation of 
pollution) impacts on the different affected subgroups of the 
population that might result from the development. Public  
participation is considered a major component of the process. 
It usually assesses a policy or proposal that does not have 
health improvement as a primary objective. The 
implementation of the development may result in intended 
objectives being met but may also result in consequences that 
are unintended and unanticipated. These unintended effects 
may be good or bad for people’s health. An HIA is usually 
forward -looking (prospective) and done at a time when it is 
possible to change the proposed development if necessary, e.g. at th e masterplanning stage.  
Heritage asset  A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified 
as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in 
planning decisions because of its heritage interest. Heritage 
asset is a term that includes  designated heritage assets, listed 
buildings, world heritage sites, conservation areas, scheduled monuments, protected wreck sites, registered parks and 
gardens and battlefields) and non- designated assets which 
are identified by the local planning authori ty.  Non -designated 
heritage assets include sites of archaeological interest, 
buildings, structures or features of local heritage interest listed 
by, or fulfilling criteria for listing by the local planning authority.  
High quality 
hotel  A high quality hot el is a full service hotel that has a high 
specification and offers a range of services and facilities. 
These will generally include a restaurant and bar, leisure 
facilities and function /conference/banqueting facilities. 
Smaller, independent high quality hotels may not have the full Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
506 Term  Definition  
offer of larger hotels, however they compensate for this with a 
distinctive style and service. Such hotels will tend to be 3- to 
5-star or boutique hotels, see the Cambridge Hotel Futures 
study for more detail.  
Historic core  The historic core of Cambridge is part of the large Central 
Conservation Area, which is one of eleven conservation areas 
in Cambridge.  The current boundaries of the historic core can 
be found in Appendix F of the Local Plan and in the Council’s 
Historic Co re Conservation Area Appraisal.  
Homes and 
Communities 
Agency (HCA)  The national housing and regeneration agency for England 
and, since April 2012, the regulator for social housing providers. The HCA provides grant funding for new affordable 
housing and to improve existing social housing, and provides 
advice and support to partners in delivering new housing and new communities.  
Hi-tech or high 
technology 
industry  Activities including production in fields which include 
biotechnology, chemicals, consultancy research and development, computer components and hardware, computer 
software, electronic systems and products, information 
technology, instrumentation, new materials technology, 
telecommunications, other forms of new manufacturing 
process or fields of research and other development which 
may be regarded as high technology uses.
 
Historic 
environment  All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction 
between people and places through tine, including all 
surviving physical remains of past human ac tivity, whether 
visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and planted or managed flora. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
Houses in 
multiple An HMO, depending on the number of occupants, is classed 
as either:  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
507 Term  Definition  
occupation 
(HMO)  • a small HMO – this is a shared dwelling house which is 
occupied by between three and six unrelated individuals 
who share basic amenities such as a kitchen or bathroom. This falls into use class C4 under the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 2010; or  
• a larger HMO – This is when there are more than six 
unrelated individuals sharing basic amenities such as a kitchen or bathroom. This falls into the sui generis class under the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) 
Order 2010.  
Hydro -
morphology  This is a term used in river basin managements to describe 
the combination of hydrological and geomorphological 
(structural) processes and attributes of rivers, lakes, estuaries 
and coastal waters.  
International 
Commission 
on Non-
Ionizing 
Radiation 
Protectio n 
(ICNIRP)  ICNIRP is a publicly -funded body of independent scientific 
experts focused on addressing the possible adverse effects 
on human health of exposure to non- ionising radiation.  
Intermediate 
housing Homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above s ocial rent, 
but below market levels, and which meet the criteria for 
affordable housing (above). These can include shared equity 
(shared ownership and equity loans), other low -cost homes 
for sale and intermediate rent, but not affordable rented housing.  
Integrated 
water 
management  This is the coordinated development and management of 
water, land and related resources in order to maximise the resultant economic and social welfare in an equitable manner 
without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosys tems. It 
considers the multiple benefits that can be derived from the Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
508 Term  Definition  
management of water such as biodiversity enhancement and 
climate change adaptation.  
Knowledge -
based 
economy  An expression coined to describe trends towards greater 
dependence on knowledge, information and high skill levels, and the increasing need for ready access to all of these by the 
business and public sectors. (Source: OECD)  
Landfill sites  Landfill sites were originally small, informal and uncontrolled 
tips used by local authorities or industry for the disposal of 
waste.  As urban sites became scarcer, larger sites were 
developed towards the edge of towns and cities. The Report 
of the Working Party on Refuse Disposal (DOE 1971) defined 
controlled landfilling as ‘the deposit and compacting of waste 
on land in shallow layers, and covering the exposed surfaces 
with inert material.’  
Prior to the 1970s, the majority of landfill sites had little or no engineering control of waste beyond that provided by the local 
topography and geology.  However, the introduction of the 
Deposit of Poisonous Waste Act 1972 and Control of Pollution 
Act 1974 introduced regulation of landfill.  Modern landfills are 
regulated under the Landfill Directive 1999 and the Landfill 
Regulations 2010.  
Landsca pe 
scale  Refers to a variety of different types of landscapes and 
ecosystems, regardless of administrative boundaries.  
Landscape 
scale 
biodiversity 
enhancement  Refers to large -scale projects, the principal aim of which is to 
link together existing habitats by improving the ecological 
quality of the wider farmed and urban landscapes.  
Leadership in 
Energy and A voluntary environmental certification system developed by 
the U.S. Green Building Council, covering design, Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
509 Term  Definition  
Environmental 
Design (LEED)  constructio n, operation and maintenance. It is a competitor to 
the BRE environmental assessment method (BREEAM).  
Leisure 
facilities  Refers to leisure sports, arts and culture and entertainment 
facilities. See Table 8.3 for specific details.  
Lifetime 
Homes 
Standard72 This is a widely -used national standard, which uses technical 
advice to ensure that the spaces and features in new homes can readily meet the needs of most people, including those 
with reduced mobility.  
Listed 
buildings  A building or structure of special architectural or historic 
interest and included in a list, approved by the Secretary of State. The owner must get listed building consent to carry out 
alterations that would affect its character.
 
Local centre  A cluster of shops and other community  facilities that satisfy 
local needs and are accessible on foot. Usually comprising a 
newsagent, a general grocery store, a sub- post office and 
occasionally other facilities such as a pharmacy, a public house and a hairdresser. Boundaries indicated on the Policies 
Map.  
Local 
development 
framework 
(LDF)  A suite of planning -related documents that guide development 
within the administrative area they relate to.  
Local heritage 
asset  A building, structure or feature of local heritage interest listed 
by, or fulfilling criteria for listing by the local planning authority.  
Local plan  Sets out policies to guide the future development of 
Cambridge. It also sets out where future development will take 
place, and identifies land for new housing, community 
facilities, shops and employment. In addition, the local plan 
 
72 www.lifetimehomes.org.uk  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
510 Term  Definition  
identifies land to be protected from development, such as the 
Green Belt and open space. It is the key document used to 
determine planning applications for new development in the 
city. 
Local nature 
reserve (LNR)  Reserves with wildlife or geological features that are of special 
interest locally.  
Major 
developments  Major development is defined in the Town and Country 
Planning (Development Management) (England) Order (2010) 
as ten or more dwellings or a site area of 0.5 hectare or more 
where the number of dwellings is unknown, or the provision of 
a building where the floorspace is 1,000 sq m or more, or 
where development is carried out on a site having an area of 
1 hectare or more.  
Masterplan  A masterplan describes how proposals for a site will be 
implemented. The level of detail required in a masterplan will 
vary according to the scale at which the masterplan is 
produced.  
Microgeneratio
n A term used for the generation of low carbon or renewable 
energy at a micro scale. The primary source of current renewable microgeneration is solar energy (photovoltaic cells 
for electricity generation and solar thermal panels for the 
generation of hot water). Other technologies include micro 
wind turbines, micro hydro, micro combined heat and power 
(CHP), heat pumps and small -scale biomass.  
Mixed use 
developments  Development compri sing two or more uses as part of the 
same scheme (e.g. shops on the ground floor and residential 
flats above). This could apply at a variety of scales from 
individual buildings, to a street, to a new neighbourhood or 
urban extension.  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
511 Term  Definition  
Mobilising 
Local Ener gy 
Investment 
(MLEI) A project with the aim of attracting more energy investment 
and infrastructure delivery into Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough.  
Neighbourhoo
d centre  Centres of six or fewer retail units, or where the units are 
scattered along a road or embedded within residential areas, 
which serve a limited local catchment and perform more of a 
neighbourhood function. Boundaries are defined on the 
Policies Map.  
Natural 
Environment 
and Rural 
Communities 
(NERC)  The Natural Environment and Rural Communities (NERC) Act 
2006 requires the Secretary of State to publish a list of habitats and species which are of principal importance for the 
conservation of biodiversity in England. Known as the Section 
41 list, this should be used to guide decision makers in 
implementing their duty under Section 40 of the NERC Act to 
have regard to the conservation of biodiversity in England 
when carrying out their normal functions.  
NIAB  National Institute of Agricultural Botany  
National 
Planning 
Policy 
Framework 
(NPPF)  This document sets out national planning policies for England 
and the Government’s requirements for the Planning System. The policies in the NPPF (2012) must be taken into account 
when preparing Local Plans.  
Open space  Areas of land not b uilt on and water bodies such as rivers and 
lakes, regardless of ownership and access. These areas include parks and gardens; natural and semi -natural green 
spaces; green corridors; outdoor sports facilities; amenity green space; teenagers’ and children’s play areas; allotments 
and community gardens; cemeteries and churchyards; 
accessible countryside in urban fringe areas and civic spaces.  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
512 Term  Definition  
Opportunity 
Areas  Specific areas in the city where improvements to the local 
character and identity could be achieved.  
Passivhaus 
Standard  Passivhaus or 'Passive House' is an energy performance 
standard based upon excellent thermal performance, 
exceptional airtightness with mechanical ventilation.  
Pluvial 
flooding Surface water accumulating from the result of intense ra infall.  
Policies Map  Map, which forms part of the local plan, showing all 
designations and site allocations.  
Priority 
species  An animal or plant identified as being of particular 
conservation concern.  
Protected open 
spaces  Areas of land protected by Policy 67 of the Cambridge Local 
Plan 2018. These include: allotments, amenity green spaces, cemeteries, churchyards, civic spaces, areas specifically for 
children and young people, natural and semi -natural green 
spaces, outdoor sports facilities, parks and gardens.  
Public open 
spaces  Any land laid out as a public garden or used for the purposes 
of public recreation. This means space which has unimpeded public access, and which is of a suitable size and nature for 
sport, active or passive recr eation or children and teenagers’ 
play. Private or shared amenity areas, for example in a development of flats, or buffer landscaped areas are not 
included as public open space. This definition relates to both 
open space provided within a development, and when 
considering the provision of existing open space.  
Public realm  Public realm relates to all those parts of the built environment 
where the public has free access. It encompasses: all streets, squares, and other rights of way, whether predominantly in 
residential, commercial or community/civic uses; the open 
spaces and parks; and the ‘public/private’ spaces where Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
513 Term  Definition  
public access is unrestricted (at least during daylight hours). It 
includes the interfaces with key internal and private spaces to 
which the public normally has free access. (Source: ODPM in 
Living Places: Caring for Quality (January 2004).  
Public Safety 
Zones  Areas of land at the ends of the runways at airports, within 
which development is restricted in order to minimise the 
number of people on the ground at risk in the event of an 
aircraft crash on take- off or landing.  
Regional 
spatial strategy 
(RSS)  RSS were regional level planning frameworks for regions of 
England. They were intended to provide a framework for private investment and public sector planning. Please refer to 
East of England Plan above for more details.  
S106  A binding legal agreement requiring a developer or landowner 
to provide or contribute towards facilities, infrastructure or other measures, in order for planning permission to be 
granted. Planning obligations are normally secured under 
Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.  
Safeguarding 
zones  These zones place restrictions on development height. While 
not currently shown on the Policies Map, they are used as constraints when considering planning applications. 
Developed by Marshall, they represent areas of the city where 
the take- off and landing of aircraft could give rise to additional 
risk of aircraft accident over the built -up area.  
Scheduled 
monument/ scheduled 
ancient 
monument  Archaeological sites, buried deposits or structures of national 
importance by virtue of their historic, architectural, traditional or archaeological interest. The Secretary of State for Culture, 
Media and Sport schedules them under the National Heritage 
Act 1983.
 
Selective 
management Whereby employment uses that have an essential need for a 
Cambridge location or provide a service for the local Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
514 Term  Definition  
of the 
economy  population are given positive support. This ensures that the 
limited supply of land in Cambridge is reserved for businesses 
that support the Cambridge economy.  
Shared 
ownership  A form of intermediate tenure low c ost home ownership 
housing. Homes in which the occupier owns a share of the 
equity and pays rent on the remaining share.  
Strategic 
housing land 
availability 
assessment 
(SHLAA)  This document assesses the amount of land that might be 
available for new housing in the city over the next 20 years. The SHLAA identifies sites that may have potential for new 
housing, estimates approximately how many homes could be 
built on these sites and suggests a time frame for when these 
sites could become available. It is a technical document, 
which forms part of the evidence base supporting the review 
of the local plan and has been prepared in accordance with 
national and best practice guidance.  
Strategic 
housing 
market 
assessment 
(SHMA)  This document for the Cambridge sub -region draws on a 
number of data sources and has been developed with a range of partners. It assesses the housing needs of the sub- region 
as well as each district and helps to inform the scale and mix of housing and the range of tenures that are required t o meet 
the need.  
Skyline  An outline of land and buildings defined against the sky: the 
skyline of the city.  
Social housing  Housing let at lower than market rents to people in housing 
need. It includes social rent, affordable rent and intermediate 
housing tenures and is usually provided by not -for profit 
organisations including housing associations and Councils.  
Social rented  Rented housing owned by local authorities and private 
registered providers, for which guideline target rents are determined through the national rent regime. It may also be Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
515 Term  Definition  
owned by other persons and provided under equivalent rental 
arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local authority 
or with the Homes and Communities Agency.  
Spatial 
strategy  This is a long -term plan that outlines the vision for an area, 
what type of development is needed and where that 
development should best be located.  
Specialist 
housing Developed with particular groups of people in mind such as 
older people (including the frail elderly and those with 
dementia), people with physical and sensory disabilities, those 
with learning difficulties or acquired brain injury, young people 
at risk, people with alcohol or drug dependency, and those 
requiring refuge from harassment and violence, and others 
who may, for a variety of reasons, be excluded from the local 
community. Examples may range from a small scheme of 
cluster flats with additional facilities for support staff, to much 
larger extra care schemes enabling older people to live in their 
own self -contained accommodation but with care and support 
on-site. 
 
This definition also includes the provision of housing that may 
be designed in a particular way or has staff office or staff 
night -time facilities when staff are needed to support the 
peopl e who are living in the housing.  
Specialist 
schools  Includes language schools, secretarial and tutorial colleges, 
pre-university foundation courses, crammer schools and 
tutorial colleges.  
Starter Homes 
Exception 
Sites  The Government’s exception site poli cy enables applications 
for development for Starter Homes on under -used or unviable 
industrial and commercial land that has not been currently 
identified for housing. Suitable sites are likely to be underused Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
516 Term  Definition  
or no longer viable for commercial or industria l purposes, but 
with remediation and infrastructure costs that are not too great 
so as to render Starter Homes financially unviable.  
 The types and sizes of site suitable for Starter Homes are 
likely to vary across the country, and will reflect the pattern of 
existing and former industrial and commercial use as well as local market conditions. Land in both public and private 
ownership can be considered.  
Student 
accommodatio
n Purpose -built communal residential accommodation for 
students.  
Supplementary 
Planning 
Document 
(SPD)  A planning document that may be taken into account as a 
material consideration in making planning decisions such as 
determining planning applications.  
Sustainable 
drainage systems 
(SuDs) Development normally reduces t he amount of water that can 
infiltrate into the ground and increases surface water run- off 
due to the amount of hard surfacing used. Sustainable drainage systems control surface water run- off by mimicking 
natural drainage processes through the use of surface water storage areas, flow limiting devices and the use of infiltration 
areas or soakaways.  
Sustainable 
modes of 
transport  Sustainable modes of transport include walking, cycling and 
public transport.  
The Backs  The Backs is an area to the east of Queen’s Road where 
several colleges of the University back on to the River Cam, their grounds covering both banks of the river. The name The 
Backs refers to the backs of the colleges.
 Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
517 Term  Definition  
Topography  The arrangement of the n atural and artificial physical features 
of an area.  
Travel plan  A travel plan is a package of measures to encourage people 
(such as staff, students or residents) to use alternatives to 
single -occupancy car -use. Typically, the plan will include 
initiatives  such as car sharing, discounted public transport 
tickets, cycle parking or a personalised plan for your journey.  
Urban heat 
island effect  Describes the increased temperature of urban air compared 
with rural surroundings. The term ‘heat island’ is used 
because warmer city air lies in a ‘sea’ of cooler rural air.  
Urban grain  The combined pattern and arrangement of streets, green 
infrastructure and plots. It covers elements such as the design character, building size, scale, height and form.  
Use classes 
order  The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 
(as amended) puts uses of land and buildings into various 
categories known as use classes. More detail on what types 
of uses fall within each use class is set out below.  
 Planning permission is not needed when both the present and 
proposed uses fall within the same class. For example, a 
greengrocer’s shop could be changed to a shoe shop without 
permission as these uses both fall within use class A1. 
However any physical changes associated with a 
development may still require planning permission.  
 The General Permitted Development Order also allows some 
changes from one use class to another without the need for planning permission. For example, a restaurant (class A3) 
could be changed to a s hop (A1) or an estate agent (A2) as Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
518 Term  Definition  
the use classes order allows this type of change to occur 
without requiring planning permission.  
Use class A1  Shops  
e.g. retail sale of goods, post office, sale of tickets, travel 
agency, sandwich bar, hairdressing, dry  cleaners, funeral 
directors, hire shops, internet café.  
Use class A2  Financial and professional services  
e.g. betting offices, professional services (other than health or medical services), banks, estate and employment agencies.  
Use class A3  Restaurants and cafés  
Establishments where the primary purpose is the sale of food and drink for consumption on the premises.  
Use class A4  Drinking establishments  
e.g. public houses, wine bars (not nightclubs).  
Use class A5  Hot food takeaway  
Establishments where the primary purpose is the sale of hot 
food for consumption off the premises.  
Use class B1  Business  
Split into three sub- categories:  
a) offices, other than a use within class A2 (financial services);  
b) research and development of products or processes; and  
c) light industry  
Use class B2  General industry  
Use for the carrying out of an industrial process other than 
one falling in class B1.  
Use class B8  Storage and distribution  
Use for storage or distribution centre.  
Use class C1  Hotels  
e.g. hotels, boarding houses and guest houses where no 
significant element of care is provided.  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
519 Term  Definition  
Use class C2  Residential institutions  
e.g. hospitals, nursing home or residential school, college or 
training centre where they provide residential acco mmodation 
and care to people in need of care (other than those within C3, dwelling houses).  
Use class C2A  Secure residential institutions  
e.g. prisons, young offenders institutions, military barracks.  
Use class C3  Dwelling houses  
Use as a dwelling house (whether or not a main residence). 
Split into three sub- categories:  
a) houses occupied by a single person or by people regarded as forming a single household;  
b) houses occupied by not more than six residents living together as a single hous ehold where care is provided for 
residents; and  
c) houses occupied by not more than six residents living 
together as a single household where no care is provided to 
residents (other than use within class C4)  
Use class C4  Houses in multiple occupation  
Hous es occupied by between three and six unrelated 
individuals as their only or main residence.  
N.B. Large HMOs (more than six people) are unclassified, 
therefore sui generic.  
Use class D1  Non-residential institutions  
e.g. clinics, the provision of any medical or health service, 
crèches and day nurseries, day centres, provision of 
education, art galleries, museums, libraries public halls, 
places of worship, law courts.  
Use class D2  Assembly and leisure  Glossary of terms:  
 
 
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
520 Term  Definition  
e.g. cinemas, music or concert halls, bingo halls, dance halls 
(not nightclubs), gyms and swimming baths, sports arenas 
that do not involve motorised vehicles or fire arms.  
Use class – sui 
generis  Sui generis – unclassified  
These uses do not fall into a use class and therefore require 
permission for a change of use (with the one exception of a 
casino, which can change to class D2)  
e.g. large HMOs, theatres, casinos, amusement arcades, 
funfairs, laundrettes, sales of fuel, sale or display of motor 
vehicles, taxi or car hire, scrapyards, hostels, nightclubs, 
waste disposal installation, casinos, retail warehouse clubs 
(i.e. where membership cards are needed).  
‘Vernacular’ 
buildings  Is a category of architecture based on localised needs and 
construction materials, and reflecting local traditions.  
Visual 
pollution Unattractive and man -made visual elements of a vista. Visual 
pollution is an aesthetic issue, referring to the impacts of 
pollution that impair one's ability to enjoy a vista or view. 
Advertising signs, satellite dishes and street furniture are 
among the things that can contribute to visual pollution.  
Walkable 
(neighbourhood) Areas typically based on 400m (five -minute walking time) 
catchments. The Urban Design Compendium (2000) Paragraph 3.1.2 describes the principles of ‘The Walkable 
Neighbourhood’, describing what facilities should be within a 
five- and ten -minute walk from home.  
 
 
  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
521 Bibliography  
 
Aecom (2011). East of England Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Capacity 
Study  
Anglia Ruskin University (March 2009). Cambridge Campus Redevelopment, 
Masterplan Revision B  
Anglia Ruskin University (13 April 2012). Anglia Ruskin University Hostel 
Provision Table  
Arup (2013).  Cambridge City Centre Capacity Study  
AtisReal (2006).  Cambridge Northern Fringe (East) Financial viability and 
feasibility assessment  
Barry Shaw (2013).  Cambridge Northern Fringe (East) workshop notes  
Bartlett K et al. (2002) Consumer Choice in Housing: The beginnings of a 
housebuyer revolt, Joseph Rowntree Foundation  
BRE (2012).  Good Practice Guidance: Sustainable Design and Construction  
BRE (July 2012). Assessing the health benefits of Lifetime Homes  
BRE (July 2012). Modelling the current and potential accessibility of the housing 
stock 
Britis h Waterways (2011). Guidance for Development of new Residential Mooring 
Sites (England and Wales)  
Buglife – The Invertebrate Conservation Trust (2009). Planning for Brownfield 
Biodiversity: A Best Practice Guide  
Building Cost Information Service (July 20 12). Assessing the cost of Lifetime 
Homes Standards  
Buncefield Major Incident Investigation Board (2008). The Buncefield 
Investigation: Final Report of the Major Incident Investigation Board  
CABE (2005). What home buyers want: Attitudes and decision maki ng among 
consumers  
Cambridge City Council (1983). Specialist Schools and Colleges in Cambridge  
Cambridge City Council (2002). Inner Green Belt Boundary Study 2002  
Cambridge City Council (2003). Mitcham’s Corner Area Strategic Planning and 
Development Brief  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
522 Cambridge City Council (2003). Cambridge Landscape Character Assessment  
Cambridge City Council (2004). The Station Area Development Framework  
Cambridge City Council (2005). Cambridge City Wildlife Site Survey  
Cambridge City Council (2 005). Cambridge City Wildlife Site Register 2005  
Cambridge City Council (2005). Report to Community Development and Leisure 
Scrutiny Committee 24/03/2005 on River Moorings  
Cambridge City Council (2006). Cambridge City Council Nature Conservation 
Strategy  
Cambridge City Council (2006). Cambridge Local Plan 2006  
Cambridge City Council (2006). Cambridge Nature Conservation Strategy  
Cambridge City Council (2006). Historic Core Area Appraisal  
Cambridge City Council (2006). River Mooring Policy  
Cambridge City Council (2006). Southern Fringe Area Development Framework  
Cambridge City Council (2007). Sustainable Design and Construction SPD  
Cambridge City Council (2007). Cambridge Sustainable Community Strategy  
Cambridge City Council (2007). Repor t to Community Services Scrutiny 
Committee 18/01/2007 on Review of Moorings Policy  
Cambridge City Council (2008). Affordable Housing SPD  
Cambridge City Council (2008). Air Quality in Cambridge. Developers Guide  
Cambridge City Council (2008). Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan  
Cambridge City Council (2008). Employment Land Review  
Cambridge City Council (2008). Affordable Housing SPD  
Cambridge City Council (2008). Cambridge Climate Change Strategy and Action 
Plan 2008- 2012  
Cambridge City Council (2009). Advice Note – Deleted Local Plan Policies  
Cambridge City Council (2009). Cambridge Sports Strategy 2009 – 2013  
Cambridge City Council (2009). Climate Change Risk Assessment and 
Management Plan  
Cambridge City Council (2009) . Developing Affordable Housing Policy Guide  
Cambridge City Council (2009). North West Cambridge Area Action Plan Adopted  
Cambridge City Council (2009). Private Sector Housing Condition Survey  
Cambridge City Council (2010). Cambridge Parks – Managing th e City’s Asset 
2010 to 2014  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
523 Cambridge City Council (2010). Cycle Parking Guide for new residential 
developments  
Cambridge City Council (2010). Old Press/Mill Lane SPD  
Cambridge City Council (2010). Public Art Supplementary Planning Document  
Cambridge City Council (2011). Eastern Gate Development Framework  
Cambridge City Council (2011). Open Space and Recreation Strategy 2011  
Cambridge City Council (2011). Report to Community Services Scrutiny 
Committee 12/01/2011 on Riverside – Riparian Own ership and Mooring  
Cambridge City Council (2011/2012). Shopping Survey  
Cambridge City Council (2012). Cambridge Local Plan Towards 2031. Issues and 
Options Report (including representations to this document)  
Cambridge City Council (2012). Cambridge Loca l Plan Towards 2031: Technical 
Background Document. Gypsy and Traveller Provision in Cambridge – Site 
Assessment 
Cambridge City Council (2012). Employment Land Review Update  
Cambridge City Council (2012). Guidance for the application of Policy 3/13 (Tall  
Buildings and the Skyline) of the Cambridge Local Plan (2006)  
Cambridge City Council (2012). Housing Strategy 2012 –2015  
Cambridge City Council (2012). Interim Planning Policy Guidance on the 
Protection of Public Houses in the City of Cambridge  
Cambridge City Council (2012). Local Leisure Facilities Survey  
Cambridge City Council (2013). Cambridge Local Plan Towards 2031. Issues and 
Options 2 (Part 1 and Part 2 Documents and representations to these documents)  
Cambridge City Council (2013). Camb ridge Retail and Leisure Study Update  
Cambridge City Council (2013). Employment Land Review Update  
Cambridge City Council (2013). Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  
Cambridge City Council (December 2012). Inner Green Belt Boundary Study  
Cam bridge City Council (May 2012). Inner Green Belt Appraisal  
Cambridge City Council (November 2006). Nature Conservation Strategy  
Cambridge City Council (Undated). Boat Mooring Map, available at 
https://www.cambridge.gov.uk/boat -mooring- map  
Cambridge Cit y Council (various dates). Conservation Area Appraisals  
Cambridge City Council (various dates). Suburbs and Approaches Studies  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
524 Cambridge City Council (various dates). Urban Design Briefs  
Cambridge City Council and Cambridgeshire County Council (2009). Project 
Cambridge: Connecting the Station to the City Centre  
Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council (2011). 
Informal Planning Policy Guidance on Foodstore Provision in North West 
Cambridge  
Cambridge City Council and the University of Cambridge Estates Management 
and Building Service (2009). Old Press/Mill Lane Supplementary Planning 
Document Options Appraisal Summary Report  
Cambridge City Council Contaminated Land database and historic maps/aerial 
photographs  
Cambridge City Council land ownership information. Property Services, 
Cambridge City Council 
Cambridge City Council. Local List of Heritage Assets  
Cambridge City Council. Older People’s Housing Strategy 2009 –2014  
Cambridge Water Company (2010). Water Resources Ma nagement Plan  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2004). Cambridge Northern Fringe Traffic 
Assessment 
Cambridgeshire County Council (2006). Cambridge Sub -Region Traveller 
Accommodation Needs Assessment  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2007). Cambridgeshire Design Guide for Streets 
and the Public Realm  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2008). Cambridgeshire Local Biodiversity Action 
Plan 
Cambridgeshire County Council (2011).  Cambridgeshire Local Transport Plan 3  
Cambridgeshire County Council ( 2011). Cambridgeshire and Peterborough 
Minerals and Waste Core Strategy  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2011). Cambridge Sub -regional Gypsy and 
Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment (GTANA)  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2011). Cambridgeshire and Peterborough 
Minerals and Waste Core Strategy  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2011). Cambridgeshire Local Economic 
Assessment Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
525 Cambridgeshire County Council (2011). Commissioning Strategy for Extra Care 
Sheltered Housing in Cambridgeshir e 2011– 15 
Cambridgeshire County Council (2011). Housing Development in Cambridgeshire  
2001– 2011  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2011). The Supporting People Commissioning 
Strategy 2011 –2015.  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2012). RECAP Waste Management Design 
Guide Supplementary Planning Document.  
Cambridgeshire County Council (2012). Draft Transport Strategy for Cambridge 
and South Cambridgeshire 
Cambridgeshire County Council (2013). Survey of Specialist Schools  
Cambridgeshire County Counc il (July 2012). Census 2011: Cambridgeshire 
Snapshot  
Cambridgeshire County Council (various dates). Traffic Monitoring reports  
Cambridgeshire County Council. Cambridgeshire Historic Environment Record  
Cambridgeshire County Council. Joint Strategic Needs  Assessment, available at: 
http://www.cambridgeshirejsna.org.uk/  
Cambridgeshire Flood Risk Management Partnership (2011). The Surface Water 
Management Plan for Cambridge  
Cambridgeshire Horizons (2006). An Arts and Culture Strategy for the Cambridge 
Sub-Region  
Cambridgeshire Horizons (2006). Balanced and Mixed Communities: A Good 
Practice Guide  
Cambridgeshire Horizons (2008). A Major Sports Facilities Strategy for the 
Cambridge Sub- Region 
Cambridgeshire Horizons (2008). Cambridgeshire Quality Charter for Growth  
Cambridgeshire Horizons (2011). Green Infrastructure Strategy for 
Cambridgeshire  
Cambridgeshire Horizons. Cambridge Water Cycle Strategy Phase 1 (2008) and 
Phase 2 (2011)  
Camco (2012). Cambridgeshire Renewables Infrastructure Framewor k – Baseline 
Data, Opportunities and Constraints  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
526 Chartered Institution of Highways and Transportation (2012). Guidance Note: 
Residential Parking  
CIBSE (2002). Guide to Building Services for Historic Buildings. Sustainable 
services for traditional buildings  
Collaboration with the County’s Children and Young People's Services  
Collaboration with the NHS Property Company and the Cambridgeshire 
Association to Commission Health (CATCH) local commissioning group  
Committee on Climate Change – Adaptation Sub -Committee (2012). Climate 
Change – is the UK preparing for flooding and water scarcity?  
Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations 1999 (COMAH)  
DEFRA (2012). UK Climate Change Risk Assessment  
Department for Communities and Local Government Circular 08/2010. Changes 
to Planning Regulations for Dwellinghouses and Houses in Multiple Occupation  
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2006). Natural Environment 
and Rural Communities Act 2006; Section 41 of the Natural Environment and 
Rural Communities (NERC) Act 2006 – Habitats and Species of Principal 
Importance in England List, available at http://ukbars.defra.gov.uk/archive/news/details.asp?X=45 under Lists of Habitats 
and Species – August and November 2010  
Department for Environm ent, Food and Rural Affairs (2010). Lawson Report: 
Making Space for Nature: A review of England’s Wildlife Sites and Ecological 
Network  
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011). Draft National 
Standards for Sustainable Drainage Systems: Designing, constructing, operating 
and maintaining drainage for surface runoff  
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011). The Natural Choice: 
securing the value of nature  
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2012). UK Biodiv ersity 
Action Plan (1992– 2012)  
Department for Transport (2005). Smarter Choices: Changing the way we travel  
Department for Transport (2007). Manual for Streets 1 and 2  
Department for Transport (2008). Building Sustainable Transport into New 
Developments  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
527 Department for Transport (2008). Research into the Use and Effectiveness of 
Maximum Parking Standards  
Department for Transport (2009). The Role of Soft Measures in Influencing 
Patronage Growth and Modal Split in the Bus Market in England  
Department for Transport (2010). The Effects of Smarter Choice Programmes in 
the Sustainable Travel Towns  
Department for Transport (2011). Creating growth, cutting carbon: making 
sustainable local transport happen  
Department for Transport (2013). The Avi ation Policy Framework  
Department for Transport Circular 01/2010. Control of development in Airport 
Public Safety Zones  
Department for Communities and Local Government (2006). Good Practice Guide 
On Planning For Tourism  
Department for Communities and Lo cal Government (2007). Residential Car 
Parking Research  
Department for Communities and Local Government (2008). Guidance on the 
permeable surfacing of front gardens  
Department for Communities and Local Government (2012). 2012 Consultation on 
changes to the Building Regulations in England. Section two – Part L 
(Conservation of fuel and power)  
Department for Communities and Local Government (2012). Planning policy for 
Traveller sites  
Department for Communities and Local Government Circular 04/00: Planning 
Controls for Hazardous Substances  
Department for Communities and Local Government. Part L of the Building 
Regulations  
Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions (2000). By Design. 
Urban design in the planning system: towards better  practice  
Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions (2000). Our towns 
and cities: the future – delivering an urban renaissance  
Dixon Searle (2013). Cambridge City Council Local Plan – Community 
Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
528 Dixon Searle (2013). Cambridge City Council Local Plan – SHLAA and Potential 
Site Allocations High Level Viability Assessment  
Dixon Searle (2013). Student Accommodation – Affordable Housing Financial 
Contributions Viability  
Dixon Searle (2013) Small Sites Affordable Housing Viability  
East of England Tourism (2007). Volume and Value Study for Cambridge City  
EFL Services Ltd Survey (1992). English Language Students in Cambridge  
Element Energy (2010).  Decarbonising Cambridge: A renewable and low carbon 
energy study for Cambridge City Council  
Element Energy (2010). Scoping Report: Feasibility of a Carbon Offset 
Mechanism for Cambridgeshire 
Element Energy, The Landscape Partnership & Manches (2012). Cam bridgeshire 
Community Energy Fund Stage 2 Final Report  
English Heritage (2011). Energy Efficiency and Historic Buildings. Application of 
Part L of the Building Regulations to historic and traditionally constructed buildings  
English Heritage/CABE (2007). Guidance on Tall Buildings  
Environment Agency (2009). Anglian River Basin Management Plan  
Environment Agency (2010). Great Ouse Catchment Flood Management Plan  
Environment Agency (2011). Erosion Risk Management Strategy for England  
Environmental Protec tion Strategies Ltd (May 2013). Environmental Assessment 
Report, Coldham's Lane Lakes  
Greater Cambridge Partnership (2007). Greater Cambridge and Peterborough 
Tourism Strategy and Action Plan  
Greater London Authority (2008). Living roofs and walls techni cal report: 
supporting London Plan Policy  
Greater London Authority (2009). London Housing Design Guide  
Greater London Authority (July 2011). The London Plan  
GVA Grimley (2008). Cambridge Sub -Region Retail Study, Vol. One: Report and 
Plans  
GVA Grimley (2010). Draft London Housing Design Guide: Cost and delivery 
impact assessment, pre‐ publication draft, London Development Agency  
GVA Grimley (2012). Cambridge Public House Study  
GVA Grimley (2013). Cambridge Retail and Leisure Study Update  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
529 GVA G rimley (2013). Retail and Leisure Study Update  
Habinteg (July 2012). Lifetime Homes technical forum  
Habinteg Housing Association and London South Bank University (2010). Mind 
the Step: An estimation of housing needs among wheelchair users in England  
Habinteg/JRF (2003). Lifetime Homes: Living well together – achieving 
sustainable flexible homes in higher density neighbourhoods  
HATC Ltd (March 2010). Room to swing a cat? The Amount and Use of Space in 
New Dwellings in London and the South East  
Housing Corporation (2007). Design and Quality Standards  
HM Government (2004, incorporating 2010 amendments), Building Regulations 
Part M – Access to and Use of Buildings  
HM Government (2005).  Securing the Future: delivering the UK sustainable 
development strategy  
HM Government (2006). Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act  
HM Government (2012). National Planning Policy Framework  
HM Government (various dates). Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as 
amended)  
Homes and Communities Agency (2006).  Car Parking: What works where  
Hotel Solutions (2012). Cambridge Hotel Futures Study  
Housing Act 1985, Part X. Overcrowding – 326 The Space Standards, Table II  
Hunt Thomson Architects (July 2012). Design of Lifetime Homes  
LDA (2002). Cambridge Green Belt Study  
Levitt Bernstein (2009). Impact on Site Density of Lifetime Homes  
Levitt Bernstein (July 2012). Analysis of distribution of housing typologies in Public 
and Private Sector and typical compatibility with the Lifetime Homes Standard  
Mott MacDonald (March 1999). Blue Circle Site, Coldham's Lane: Review of 
Health, Safety and Environmental Hazards  
MRUK research for Cambridge City Council (2013). Research into House in 
Multiple Occupation in Cambridge – Research Findings  
National HMO Lobby ( 2008). Balanced communities and studentification: 
Problems and solutions  
National Urban Forestry Unit (2005). Trees Matter! Bringing lasting benefits to 
people in towns  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
530 Natural England (2009). Green Infrastructure Guidance  
Office of National Statistics.  Census 2011  
Peter Brett Associates (2012). Draft Cambridge City and South Cambridgeshire 
Joint Infrastructure Delivery Study (2012)  
Planning Inspectorate (2012). Oxford City Council Core Strategy Inspectors 
Report  
South Cambridgeshire District Council (2008). Cambridge Southern Fringe Area 
Action Plan  
South Cambridgeshire District Council (2012) Local Plan: Issues and Options 
Report.  
South Cambridgeshire District Council (2012). Climate Works for South 
Cambridgeshire District Council (2012). Merton Rule Study  
South Cambridgeshire District Council and Cambridge City Council (2008). 
Cambridge East Area Action Plan  
SQW (2009). Cambridgeshire Development Study  
SQW (2011). Cambridge Cluster Study 2011  
The Cambridgeshire Together Board. Cambridgeshire Vision: County -wide 
Sustainable Community Strategy 2007– 2021  
The National Affordable Homes Agency (published Map 2007 and updated April 
2008) 721 Housing Quality Indicators (HQI) Form, Version 4 (for NAHP 08‐ 11) 
Thorpe, S. (2006) 2nd Editi on Wheelchair Housing Design Guide.  
Tourism South East (2010). Economic Impact Of Tourism Cambridge City Results  
University of Cambridge Planning and Resource Allocation Office. Student 
Statistics 2011 –12 
University of Cambridge College Bursars Committee (April 2012). Survey of 
student housing need  
UK Climate Projections (UKCPO9)  
University of Cambridge (2002). Masterplan for the West Cambridge Site  
University of Cambridge (2004). Masterplan Review for the West Cambridge Site  
University of Ca mbridge (2008). Housing Needs Study (submitted as part of the 
North West Cambridge Area Action Plan examination)  
University of Cambridge (2011). North West Cambridge Key Worker Housing 
Statement  Bibliography  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
531 University of Cambridge (2012). West Cambridge: Prepared fo r Cambridge City 
Council: April 2012  
University of Cambridge Estate Management and Building Services (2007). Estate 
Strategy 2007  
Urban Design Compendium (Volumes 1 and 2)  
WSP (2010). Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment 
Zero Carbon Hub (2009). Defining a fabric energy efficiency standard for zero 
carbon homes. Task Group Recommendations  
Zero Carbon Hub (2011). Allowable Solutions for Tomorrow’s New Homes  
Zero Carbon Hub (2011). Carbon compliance: Setting an appropriate limit for zero 
carbon new homes. Findings and Recommendations  
Zero Carbon Hub (2012). Allowable Solutions. Evaluating Opportunities and 
Priorities  
Cambridge University Hospitals Strategic Masterplan – Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus (2010)  
The C ambridge Sub -region Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2008 updates)  
The Cambridge Sub -region Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2013)  Acknowledgements  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
532 Acknowledgements  
 
Section  Photograph Title  Photographer  
Section One – About 
Cambridge  View from Limekiln Hill  Brian Human  
Section Two  - The Spatial 
Strategy  Cambridge  Cambridge City Council  
Section Three - City 
Centre, Areas of Major 
Change, Opportunity Areas 
and site specific proposals  Abode, Clay Farm  Janine Richardson  
Section Four - Responding 
to Climate Change and 
Managing Resources  Sustainable Drainage at 
Addenbrooke’s  Brian Human  
Section Five - Supporting 
the Cambridge Economy  Medical Research 
Council - Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology  Brian Human  
Section Six - Maintaining a 
Balanced Supply of 
Housing  Accordia  Brian Human  
Section Seven - Protecting 
and Enhancing the 
Character of Cambridge  St John’s College  Brian Human  
Section Eight - Services 
and Local Facilities  The Junction, 
Cambridge  Bruce Waller  
Section Nine - Providing 
Infrastructure to Support 
Development  Cambridgeshire Guided 
Busway  Bruce Waller  
Appendix A - The 
Development Plan For 
Cambridge  Public Art  Brian Human  
Appendix B - Proposals 
Schedule  Kaleidoscope, 
Clarendon Road Bruce Waller  
Appendix C - Designations 
Schedule  Mill Road Cemetery  Bruce Waller  
Appendix D - Southern 
Fringe Area Development 
Framework  From Rear of Shelford 
Road Planning Services, 
Cambridge City Council 
Appendix E  - Roof 
Extensions Design Guide  Roof Extension  Susan Smith  
Appendix F - Tall Buildings 
and The Skyline  Cambridge Fire Station  Brian Human  Acknowledgements  
 
Cambridge Local Plan 2018   
533 Appendix G  - Local 
Heritage Assets Criteria 
and List  Local Heritage Asset  Brian Human  
Appendix H - Shopfront 
Design Guide  Magdalene Street  Bruce Waller  
Appendix I - Open Space 
and Recreation Standards  Romsey Recreation 
Ground  Brian Human  
Appendix J - Biodiversity  Lammas Land  Brian Human  
Appendix K - Marketing, 
Local Needs Assessment 
and Viability Appraisal  The Earl of Derby  Bruce Waller  
Appendix L  - Car and 
Cycle Parking Standards  Cambridge Leisure Park  Brian Human  
Appendix M - Monitoring 
and Implementation  Mill Road  Brian Human  
Appendix N – Five-Year 
Housing Land Supply  Shaftesbury Road  Bruce Waller  
 
 