Item No.  8. 1
Report of: Head of Economic
Prosperity
Contact Officer: Sushil Birdi /
Heidi Hollins
Contact Number :01543 464326
Portfolio Leader: District &High Street
Development
Key Decision: Yes
Report Track: Cabinet : 25/08/22
Council :07/09/22
Cabinet
25August 2022
Cannock Chase Local Plan 2018 -2039: Regulation 19 Consultation
1 Purpose of Report
1.1 Topresent Cabinet with the summaries of all the representations received to the
previous consultation on the Preferred Options document that have not been
previously reported.
1.2 To present the Cannock Chase Local Plan pre -submission consultation document
for approval and to seek authority to publicly consult on the document in line with
the legal requirements and in line with the Council’s adopted Statement of
Community Involvement 202 2.
1.3 To set out the next steps in the Local plan review .
2 Recomm endation(s)
2.1 That Cabinet note the summaries of the feedback received on the Cannock Chase
Local PlanReview Preferred Options consultation. (Appendix A )
2.2 That Cabinet recommends to Council that it approves the Cannock Chase Local
Plan 2018 -2039 document as the Council’s policy for planning for the future of the
District for the period 2018 -2039.
2.3 That Cabinet approves publish ingthe Cannock Chase District Local Plan
Regulation 19 document (Appendix B) and Site -Specific Policies (Appendix C)
together with the Policies Map and other supporting documents and evidence
base documents for a minimum of 6-week consultation period the strategy for
which will be carried out in line with the council’s adopted Statement of Community
Involvement 20 22Item No.  8. 2
2.4 That Cabinet authorise sthe Head of Economic Prosperity ,in consultation with the
Portfolio Leader for Dist rict and High Street Development ,to make any non -
substantive changes considered necessary to the document prior to it being
published and agree the arrangements for consultation.
2.5 That Cabinet agrees to delegate the finalisation of the Site Specific Policies
(Appendix C) within the Cannock Chase District Local Plan Regul ation 19
document and Policies Map and accompanying documentation to include
Integrated Impact Assessment, Draft Infrastructure Delivery Plan ,Development
Capacity Study 2022, Cannock Chase Retail and Town Centre Uses Study
Update 2022, Cannock Chase Viab ility Assessment 2022, Open Spaces
Assessment 2022 to the Head of Economic Prosperity in consultation with the
Portfolio Leader for District and High Street Development .
2.6 That Cabinet agreestodelegate finalisation of the Five Ways Transport Modelling
and Air Quality Impact 2022 and Review of Green Space Network , currently being
revised, to the Head of Economic Prosperity in consultation with the Portfolio
Leader for District and High Street Development
2.7 That Cabinet agrees to delegate fin alisation of the dates for a six-week
consultation period and details of the consultation to the Head of Economic
Prosperity in consultation with the Portfolio Leader for District and High Street
Development .
3 Key Issues and Reasons for Recommendations
Key Issues
3.1 The consultation responses summarised at Appendix A to this report were omitted
from being reported as summaries alongside the representations to the Preferred
Options on 16thDecember 2021 .Whilst the y are noted in the key issues and
report detail and the points they raise were reported in the body of their report
alongside the other representations, the summaries of the representations were
notattached at the Appendix .They are attached herewith to enable Cabinet to
note them as per recommendation of Cabinet meeting 16thDecember 2021 .
3.2 The report seeks authority to consult on the pre -submission version of the new
Local Plan and supporting documents and new evidence .This consultation will
be in accordance with R egulation 19 of the Town an dCountry (Lo cal Planning)
(England) Regulations 2012, it is a statutory stage in the process of producing a
Local Plan.TheLocal Planconsultation document is included as Appendix Band
forms the Council ’spolicy for planning for the future of the District for the period
2018 -2039 .The Local Plan establish esthe council’s position regarding cross
boundary strategic matters and willguide the Council’s input into other plans .This
is a statutory consultation stage and therepresentations which are received are
required to be forwarded to an independently appointed Inspector for
consideration on the soundness of the Plan.
3.3 The Local Plan evidence base has been further updated and a number of
supporting documents arebeing completed and will be published at the time of
the consultation.Item No.  8. 3
3.4 The consultation requirements are set out in the Council’s adopted Statement of
Community Involvement and are required to take place for a minimum period of 6
weeks .It is anticip ated consultation will commence in September 2022 and run
through October .
Reasons for Recommendations
3.5 The current Local Plan (Part 1) was adopted in 2014 .Work ceased on Local Plan
(Part 2) following Council resolution (21st February 2018) to enable a full review
of the Local Plan to proceed that would incorporate both Part 1 and Part 2 in a
new Local Plan.
3.6 The Greater Birmingham and Black Country Housing Market Area (GBBCHMA)
housing shortfall had emerged during this period, requiring cons ideration across
the entire Housing Market Area .In order to start to address the shortfall, Local
Plans needed to align to a longer timeframe and test development scenarios that
could potentially meet the shortfall over the plan period.
3.7 The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 (as
amended) introduce a statutory requirement, under Regulation 10A, that from 6
April 2018 Local Planning Authorities (LPAs) must review their Local Plan within
five years of the date of adopt ion.The Local Plan Review commenced in 2018
and considerable evidence has been commissioned and non -statutory stages
have subsequently been completed.
3.8 The Local Development Scheme 202 2sets out a timetable to adopt a new Local
Plan timeline based on the current National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF).
3.9 The Council needs to show how it has considered the representations and that
the consultation was in conformity with its Statement of Community Involvement
and the provisions of Regulation 19 of the Town and Country Planning (Local
Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 .Thedocument and the changes made to
the document are outlined in the report detail section .The Council is require d to
produce a consultation statement to show how the Council has involved its
residents and key stakeholders and how this has shaped the Plan and send this
to the Inspector in due course .
3.10 Provision of land to meet the employment needs of Cannock Di strict at the Wes t
Midlands Interchange reduces the need to release land for employment within the
district boundary impacting upon the accessibility to jobs locally .The spatial
strategy for Cannock Chase district needs to deliver sustainable development in
accordance with its spatial priorities and this requires a balance to be achieved
between the employment provision and housing provision in the local plan .As
there is a need to protect the Green Belt and our environmental assets for the
longer term and to enable a region wide solution to the housing shortfall to be
found.
4 Relationship to Corporate Priorities
4.1 This report supports the Council’s Corporate Priorities as follows:
i. Priority 1 -Economic Prosperity -attract investment to develop the District ’s
economy, rejuvenate our town centresItem No.  8. 4
ii. Priority 2 -Health and Wellbeing -provide opportunities for residents to lead
healthy and active lifestyles and recognise the importance of mental health
andwellbeing .
iii. Priority 3 -The Community -ensure our communities are well designed,
accessible, and inclusive environments.
5 Report Detail
5.1 The Local Plan (Part 1) was adopted in June 2014, spanning the period 2006 to
2028. It provided a strategy for growth and environmental protection in the District
setting out the scale, quantum and distribution of development and policies for
delivery .Section 1 incorporates the Core Strategy and Section 2 formed the
Rugeley Town Centre Area Action Plan .Council resolved to a review of the Local
Plan that would need to reflect changing circumstances at a national level with a
new National Planning Policy Framework, and at a regional level with the shortfall
in housing across the Greater Birmingham and Black Country Housing Market
Area (GBBCHMA) .This is the next stage in the progression of the new Local Plan
to adoption.
5.2 Together with the Local Devel opment Scheme 202 2to 2024 the Local Plan will
consist of The Waste Local Plan for Staffordshire and Stoke -on-Trent (2010 -
2026), adopted by Staffordshire County Council and Stoke -on-Trent City Council
on 22nd March 2013 and the Minerals Local Plan for St affordshire (2015 -2030),
adopted by Staffordshire County Council on the 16th of February 2017 .These
documents as well as Neighbourhood Plans prepared by Parish Councils will set
out the policies and principles against which planning applications are assessed
and determined.
5.3 The evidence has led to very recent changes in the Local Plan allocations and
consequently other areas of evidence require updating to reflect the current
position. The finalised Reg 19 document and finalised evidence base documents
will be available on t he Planning Policy pages of the Council website for the six -
week consultation period.
Duty to Cooperate and GBBCHMA
5.4 The Council has a legal duty to have regular communication with Duty to Co -
operate (DTC) partners on matters regarding the Local Plan.It is also good
practice to meet with DTC partners as part of the regular communication that takes
place between statutory bodies to discuss areas of joint working such as cross
boundary and cross topic issues.
5.5 In February 2018, the Strategic Gr owth Study (SGS –produced by GL Hearn /
Wood) was published .This study provided an update on the overall housing needs
across the housing market area and the shortfall in supply .It provided an analysis
of the potential options for addressing this shor tfall.
5.6 The study considered all evidence on housing need and supply as of 31st March
2017 and identified a cumulative total shortfall of around 60,900 dwellings across
the Housing Market Area (HMA) up to 2036 .A position statement (issued in
Septembe r 2018) from the GBBCHMA authorities provided an update on housing
supply which indicated some additional capacity may be available (circa 6,000Item No.  8. 5
dwellings) .However, a significant shortfall up to 2036 still remains.
5.7 In terms of options for addressing the housing supply shortfall, the SGS considered
the following: · Potential additional urban supply from increasing densities and/or
identifying additional urban site opportunities; · Proportionate dispersal area
options -this would involve smaller urban e xtensions (500 -2,500 dwellings;
Strategic development area options including larger urban extensions (1,500 -
7,500 dwellings); employment -led strategic development (housing developments
of 1,500 -7,500 dwellings alongside employment developments); and new
settlements (10,000+ dwellings). Potential additional urban supply from increasing
densities and/or identifying additional urban site opportunities.
5.8 The study identified that the potential additional urban supply across the HMA
would not be sufficient t o address the shortfall .Therefore, consideration would
need to be given to the other options, as outlined above .These options were
considered across the GBBCHMA taking in Green Belt and non -Green Belt
locations .The study applied a series of stages of analysis to recommend a refined
list of 11 options (‘areas of search for strategic development’) for local authorities
to test through their Local Plans .It recommends that these should be considered
in the first instance, alongside options for potential additional urban supply and
proportionate dispersal, or smaller urban extensions.
5.9 For Cannock Chase District, the study identifies an area of ‘proportionate dispersal’
within which small urban extensions (500 -2,500 dwellings) could be considered .
This is identified as being in ‘the vicinity of Cannock, Great Wyrley, Burntwood,
Brownhills and Aldridge’ .As the study notes, further testing via Local Plans using
more detailed evidence at the local level is required to determine if these options
are feasible and appropriate, for example local Green Belt assessment findings
and local infrastructure assessments .The study does not identify any ‘areas for
strategic development’ within Cannock Chase District (on the refined list of 11
options ).
5.10 The Strategic Growth Study offers a consistent independent assessment of the
potential capacity of all fourteen authorities to accommodate the housing needs of
the GBBCHMA .The Strategic Growth Study recommendations imply that
Cannock Chase Distri ct should consider accommodating a minimum of 500
dwellings over the plan period to contribute to the shortfall.
5.11If other authorities in the GBBCHMA were to take the approach of seeking to
accommodate the minimum capacity implied by the Strategic Grow th Study for
their respective local areas, then the housing shortfall up to 2036 would be met .
This suggested approach is consistent with that suggested in the South
Staffordshire Local Plan Review Issues and Options consultation
(September/October 2018).
5.12Given that other ‘reasonable alternatives’ also have to be tested, the Council will
need to consider other growth figures over and above the minimum proposed by
the strategic growth study. The Strategic Growth Study advises a ‘proportionate
dispersal ’ (small urban extensions) approach for this district .This option covers a
range of 500 homes to 2,500 homes over the plan period .It could therefore be
concluded that the minimum of 500 certainly needs to be tested (as set out in
paragraphs 5.20 and 5. 21), but that the Council also needs to test the upper end
of that range of 2,500 homes, and a figure between the two, being 1,500 homes .Item No.  8. 6
South Staffordshire District Council are following a similar approach .
5.13The SHLAA and ELAA alongside the Urban Capacity Study, Green Belt
Assessment and other evidence documents have been used to carry out a robust
assessment of development potential within the district .The assessment has
identified sites that are the most sustainable locations for developm ent based on
the information available at this time.
5.14A number of authorities have identified additional housing to help meet this
shortfall. Our neighbouring authorities of South Staffordshire and Lichfield, who
share the Greater Birmingham and Black Country Housing Market Area
(GBBCHMA) are proposing an additional provision for up to 4,000 and 2,665
homes respectively through their Local Plans .These proposals include sites being
released from the Green Belt to help meet the shortfall .Our other nei ghbouring
authority is Stafford Borough, and they are not part of the GBBCHMA.
5.15At present the Association of Black Country Authorities (ABCA) are preparing a
joint Local plan for the areas of Walsall, Sandwell, Wolverhampton, and Dudley .
Studies unde rtaken by ABCA have identified a dwelling shortfall of 29,260 between
2019 -2038 .ABCA has formally requested the authorities that share their housing
market, including Cannock Chase District to assist in meeting their unmet housing
needs.
5.16Discussions with other members of the GBBCHMA and our neighbouring
authorities will continue to ascertain whether they could accommodate some of the
shortfall identified .Included within the NPPF (paragraph 137c) is a requirement
for discussions about whether neighb ouring authorities could accommodate some
of the identified need for development. AStatement of Common Ground is
currently being prepared to reflect the progress against the identified housing
shortfalls within the HMA and further work required.
5.17South Staffordshire have formally asked if we are able to assist with the unmet
housing need of the GBHMA and if we can provide sufficient land to enable them
to reduce their proposed Local Plan Review housing target, they also advised that
their evidence is indicating that ‘South Staffordshire will need to release further
Green Belt land through the Local Plan Review in order to meet its own needs and
to make a proportionate contribution to the GBHMA’s unmet housing needs.’
5.18Lichfield District Council wrote to us advising that they were certain that in order
for them to deliver their spatial strategy and make a contribution to the wider
housing needs arising from the GBBCHMA they would not be able to
accommodate all of the identified housing need on sus tainable sites outside of the
Green Belt. Lichfield therefore wrote to their neighbouring authorities to ascertain
if there were any ‘sustainable non -green belt sites or areas, in neighbouring
authorities which meet your spatial strategy and which could be brought forward to
meet Lichfield District Council’s housing needs .Lichfield District Council are
further advanced in the plan making process than ourselves and have resolved to
submit their plan to the Secretary of State for consideration .Their local plan does
include removal of land from the Green Belt for residential development.
5.19In response we advised that it was highly unlikely that Cannock’s housing and
employment needs could be met in the urban area and that we wished to explore
whether neighbouring authorities were in a position to assist Cannock Chase inItem No.  8. 7
meeting its own needs prior to the consideration of other options in the district. As
the plan progresses Statements of Common Ground will be necessary to establish
the final position, however it is evident that our neighbouring authorities will be
unable to assist in addressi ng our housing shortfall .As plans in Stafford, South
Staffordshire and the Black Country are still being prepared it is appropriate to
support their plan making which could include sustainable cross boundary
solutions.
5.20 Further SoCG’s will be progre ssed with Duty to Co -operate partners ,Local
Authorities, County Council and other prescribed bodies to support the Cannock
Chase Local Plan.
EVIDENCE BASE
5.21 An extensive evidence base is being comp iled to support the Local Plan and
policies contained within in.Further documents will be published to support the
pre-submission consultation .These include open space assessment, viability
assessment, Infrastructure Delivery Plan ,Development Capacity Study 2022,
Cannock Chase retail and town centre uses study update 2022, Five Ways
Transport Modelling and Air Quality Impact 2022 and Review of Green Space
Network .There are some areas which will undergo further analysis such as the
Strategic Environmen tal Assessment, Equality Impact Assessment and Health
Impact Assessment amongst others.
SPATIAL STRATEGY
5.22 The spatial strategy seeks to deliver the spatial priorities:
Cannock Chase District will meet the development needs arising from the district,
plan for our future needs and provide a contribution towards the Housing Market
Area shortfall .To meet these needs development will focus on:
Re-using of brownfield land
Supporting existing settlements and characteristics
Assisting in the rejuv enation of town centres
Ensuring infrastructure delivery to support growth
Safeguarding natural and historic assets
Assisting in the delivery of the Council’s ambition to be net zero carbon by
2030, ahead of the Government’s target date of 2050.
5.23The d istrict has experienced a period of growth with areas such as Kingswood
Lakeside and Mill Green designer outlet village and substantial areas of housing
being built. The plan period is proposed to be extended and will now be for the
period 2018 -2039.
5.24The strategy proposes the delivery of 66hectares of employment land and the
provision of a minimum of 5,930 dwellings that includes a 500dwelling contribution
to the shortfall within the HMA .The overall housing supply proposes to incorporate
a flexibility allowance to ensure the district has a 5 -year supply of housing land
throughout the plan period.Item No.  8. 8
5.25The spatial strategy requires the release of land from the Green Belt. National
Planning policy in the NPPF requires f irst consideration be given to the use of
previously developed land/or land which is well served by public transport. This
is evidenced in the Development Capacity Update 2022 and Site Selection
methodology.
5.26Prior to the release of Green Belt ,national planning policy advises thatthePlan
should also set out ways in which the impact of removing land from the Green Belt
can be offset through compensatory improvements to the environmental quality
and accessibility of remaining Green Belt land .The Preferred Options document
and this pre -subm ission version of the Plan c ontain policy SO 7.7 Amendments to
the Green Belt and the strategic housing and employment site specific policies
include details of the compensatory improvements .The NPPF further adds that
when drawing up or reviewing Green B elt boundaries, the need to promote
sustainable patterns of development should be taken into account .This is set out
in the Development Capacity Study 2022 and Site Selection paper 2022 ,
supported by the SHLAA 2022 and ELAA 2022.  From this evidence it  is
considered necessary that land is released from the Green Belt to enable the
delivery of a sustainable spatial/development strategy and that exceptional
circumstances exist to justify the release .Details of the specific sites chosen are
discussed in the sections on housing and employment.
5.27A spatial strategy for Cannock/Hednesford/Heath Hayes, Rugeley and Brereton,
Norton Canes and for the rural areas including Cannock Chase AONB and Rural
north including Rawnsley, Hazelslade, Prospec t village, Cannock Wood and
Slitting Mill is included in the document.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES OF THE LOCAL PLAN
5.28The Local Plan has 8 strategic objectives, which are in no order of priority .They
are:
1.To deliver high quality development that protect s the historic environment and
is appropriate, distinctive, attractive, and safe .
2.To c reatecommunity facilities and healthy living opportunities across the
district .
3.To deliver a sufficient supply of homes to provide for housing choice and
ensure al l people are able to live in a decent home .
4.To encourage a vibrant local economy and workforce .
5.To support the provision of sustainable transport and communications
infrastructure .
6.To create attractive town and local centres.
7.To protect and enh ance the natural environment.
8.To support a greener future.
5.29These have been amended to include reference to the historic environment and
amend the reference to community facilities.Item No.  8. 9
HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT
5.30 Chapter 1 contains policies to protect, conserve and enhance the distinctive local
historic environment and lists the historic assets which include conservation
areas , listed buildings, scheduled monuments and also how we will protect the
non-designated historic assets, unknown archaeol ogical remains. It also sets out
the requirement for a heritage statement to accompany applications and a future
commitment to prepare a Local List of local heritage assets .Policy SO 1.2 states
how the Plan will enhance the quality of the built environme nt and retain and
enhance the distinct and separate character of each of the District’s settlements.
It requires the preparation of Local Design Guides to support this .Both these
policies have been redrafted following changes to the NPPF and representat ions.
The chapter contains policy SO1.3 which seeks to create safe places which deter
crime and reduce the fear of crime .
COMMUNITY FACILITIES , OPEN SPACE, LEISURE ,AND SPORTS
5.31 Chapter 2 contains policies to safeguard existing community facilities and provide
new community facilities or enhanced facilities to meet the needs arising from new
development .Safeguard the health and amenity of local communities ; Provide
active leisure and sports facilities through supporting the delivery of n ew and
enhanced provision and safeguarding the provision of open space, sports and
recreational buildings and land including playing fields and setting a local standard
for the provision of allotments and supporting provision and safeguarding
community gar dens for the purpose of growing food ;Providing healthy living
opportunities and increasing physical activity in everyday lives by encouraging
Active Design within development and throughout the district.
5.32The delivery of community facilities is identi fied as a spatial priority for the Local
Plan.The protecti onand enhancement to address deficiencies in education,
roads, health care, parks, leisure and recreation and community facilities to meet
future needs and support the sustainability of communities and their health, social
and cultural well -being within the district .This chapter was amended following the
consultation, incorporating changes relating to the inclusion of Active Design, the
NPPF, the new Open Space Assessment evidence and standards for open space
and allotment provision.
HOUSING
5.33Chapter 3 seeks to deliver a sufficient supply of homes to provide for housing
choice an ensure all people are able to live in a decent home which meets their
needs. Policy SO3.1 specifies the minimum number of homes to be built within
the plan period as calculated using the Govern ment’ s standard methodology and
including provision for an additional 500 dwellings to assist in meeting the needs
arising in the housing market area .It includes an allowance for flexibility to ensure
the Council can maintain its requirement to have a five-year housing supply
throughout the plan period .Itdemonstrates how this can be achieved by listing
the site s.The document provides a n updated list of sites to that in the Preferred
Options document and identifies further sites and utilises the lat est monitoring
data in the Draft SHLAA 2022 .The policy has been amended following the
representations made to the previous consultations .Item No.  8. 10
5.34The site selection was undertaken utilising the site selection methodology
consulted upon in the Issues and Sco pe and Issues and options consultation
documents .The methodology was applied to the site selection by a joint member
officer working group and the findings will be published in due course.
5.35The housing strategy reflects the spatial priorities .It seeks to meet the
development needs arising from the district, plan for our future needs and provide
a contribution towards the Housing Market area shortfall .To meet these needs,
it focuses on :
oPrioritis ingthere-use of brownfield land b y allocating land at the former
Rugeley Power Station and that identified within the Development Capacity
Study 2022.
oSupport ingexisting settlements and characteristics as the total dwellings
proposed through the plan period respects the settlement hiera rchy and
maintains separation between them.
oAssistingin the rejuvenation of town centres by allocating mixed use
development within the centres reflecting the ambitions of the town centres
and their potential to increase retail and other town centre floo rspace.
oEnsuringthe delivery of infrastructure to support growth which has been
identified in association with our partners in health, education, transport,
flood ris k as well as open space and affordable housing and assessing their
requirements in site -specific viability assessment sfor the large sites to
ensure deliverability of the infrastructure.
oSafeguard ingnatural and historic assets .No employment or housing
allocations are proposed within the AONB that do not already planni ng
permission andthe proposed allocations within the town centres where many
of our historic assets are will assist in the rejuvenation of the town centres
and thus long-term protection of the historic assets.
oAssistingin the delivery of the Council’s a mbition to be net zero carbon by
2030, ahead of the Government’s target date of 2050 by requiring a higher
standard of build quality than the current Building Regulations where viable.
5.36The evidence showed that in order to achieve the Council’s spatial priorities and
deliver sustainable development it was necessary to remove some land from the
Green Belt. The sites to be removed from the Green Belt are:
SH1:Land south of A5190, Lichfield Road, Heath Hayes for a minimum of 700
dwellings (previously SH1 in the Preferred Options consultation document)
SH2:Land east of Wimblebury Road at Bleak House, Heath Hayes for a minimum
of410dwellings * previously SH1 in the Preferred Options consulta tion document
SH3:Land to the rear of Longford House, Watling Street, Cannock approx. 45
dwellings previously SH1 in the Preferred Options consultation document)
SH4:Land east of The Meadows, Armitage Lane, Brereton approx. 33 dwellings
previously SH1 in the Preferred Options consultation document)Item No.  8. 11
SH6:Former Hagley Park Academy, Burnthill Road, Rugeley approx. 145
dwellings
Land to be removed from the Green Belt to safeguard it for future
development and to deliver strategic green inf rastructure and pedestrian
and cycle links
S2Land at Newlands Lane, Heath Hayes
S3Land to the west of Hednesford Road, Norton Canes approx. 175 dwellings
previously SH1 in the Preferred Options consultation document)
*The re is an additional site S 1at east of Wimblebury Road which is part of a larger
allocation incorporating the land currently identified in the adopted Local plan as
safeguarded land and will deliver the Wimblebury Road relief road .
5.37The overall strategy provides 6,479dwellings during the plan period, this will
provide a 16.5%flexibility allowance over the 5,930minimum housing requirement
(including 500 additional contribution to the HMA) and falls within the range of 5 -
20% advised -required by the NPPF to ensu re a 5-year supply of housing land
can be achieved throughout the plan period .The5-year supply is monitored by
the Government on an annual basis and where authorities cannot demonstrate a
five-year supply then this is given significant weight in the con sideration of
planning appeals and the need for housing is given greater weight than other
matters impacting the delivery of housing .
5.38Policy SO3.2 Housing Choice sets the policy in relation to the provision of
affordable housing from sites of over 10 units and the breakdown in relation to the
housing type (number of bedrooms) .It is updated following the consultation,
changes to the NPPF including in relation to the inclusion of First Homes and the
evidence on the impact upon viability expected by the new Local Plan policies.
5.39The viability evidence shows that the Bridgtown and Cannoc kwards are able to
provide 20% affordable homes which is equal to the existing standard of provision.
Elsewhere is Cannock district the percentage of affordable h omes which can be
provided on sites of over 10 houses is between 25 %and 30% On the large
greenfield strategic sites a site-specific viability assessment has been undertaken
and where the number of 4 bed market homes can be increased from 4% to 10%
in line with the economic aims to attract higher earners and business owners that
will be attracted to move to and remain in the district .These development scould
attract a level of affordable homes at35%. In some cases the minimum
requirement may not be feasible and viable and this will be subject to site specific
assessment.
5.40 The Local Plan will not provide sufficient affordable homes to meet the needs
arising in the Local Housing Needs Assessment of 110 dwellings per annum,
however the viability evi dence demonstrates that the new Local plan will provide
a higher provision than the existing Local Plan.
5.41 Policy SO3.3 seeks the delivery of high -quality housing in terms of its design and
resilience and requires new dwellings to meet the Nationally Described Space
Standards and provide sufficient external space or private gardens .The
population is ageing and providing housing choices for an ageing population is aItem No.  8. 12
bullet point in the strategic objective .The policy requires 60% of the total number
of units to be suitable for households with health problems or disabilities and this
can be achieved through the provision of dwellings, single storey accommodati on
such as bungalows or ground floor flats which are accessible or can easily be
adapted to be accessible for persons with reduced mobility .This policy will
provide homes suitable for an ageing population and will enabl epersons to stay
in their home longer andreduce the length of hospital stays .The policy has been
updated in line with the NPPF, representations were made with regard to the
implications upon the cost of building to a higher quality, the implications of this
policy have been considered in the viability assessment.
5.42Policy SO3.4 addresses the requirement to provide a five -year housing supply
and meet the accommodation needs arising for gypsies and travellers and
travelling show people .A site is proposed to be allocated adjacent to the existing
site at Cannock Wood .The site selection was undertaken utilising the site
selection methodology consulted upon in the Issues and Scope and Issues and
Options consultation documents .The methodology was applied to the site
selection by a joint m ember officer working group and the findings will be
published in due course .The policy has been amended since the preferred
options consultation document.
ECONOMY
5.43Chapter 4 seeks to encourage a vibrant local economy and workforce by
safeguarding existing employment areas for employment purposes, providing
employment opportunities in locations which best respond to market demands and
will attract inward investment and championing clean, green growth principles to
support a highly produ ctive, clean, and resilient economy .Policy SO4.1
safeguards existing employment areas for employment uses in response to the
review of the existing employment areas which found them to be still performing
important economic roles and providing a mix of l and and premises for a range of
uses .The policy lists the existing employment areas encourages inward
investment and supports indigenous employers .The policy has been amended
following the consultation responses.
5.44Policy SO 4.2 seeks the provision o f land for new employment uses to meet the
needs of the district as required by the NPPF .The Preferred Options consultation
sought the provision of 50 hectares of employment land, and this was within the
46–66-hectare net range identified in the Economic Development Needs
Assessment but will be 50 -70 hectares allowing for the additional year of the plan .
Through the representations received to the Preferred options it was identified that
insufficient account had been taken for the annual loss of employme nt land to
alternative uses during the plan period.  Consequently ,with the additional year to
the plan period and taking account of the annual losses, the requirement for
employment land has now increased to 66hectares .This is within the range of
46–66(2018 to 2038) hectare level of growth previously agreed by the Council for
the Preferred Options consultation.
5.45Evidence prepared shows land at the West Midlands interchange would serve the
employment needs arising within Cannock District .Theevidence identifies that
this would be 10 hectares .The Association of Black Country Authorities haveItem No.  8. 13
identified in evidence a shortfall as discussed earlier in this report .However, this
has not yet been tested at Examination and is not in an adopted Lo cal Plan.
5.46The document provides an updated list of sites to that in the Preferred Options
document and identifies further sites and utilises the latest monitoring data in the
Draft ELAA 2022 .The policy has been amended following the representations
made to the previous consultations.
5.47The site selection was undertaken utilising the site selection methodology
consulted upon in the Issues and Scope and Issues and options consultation
documents .The methodology was applied to the si te selection by a joint member
officer working group and the findings will be published in due course.
5.48Theemployment land strategy reflects the spatial priorities .It seeks to meet the
development needs arising in the district and plan for our futu re needs by
focussing on:
oRe-using brownfield land (site sel ection methodology and the latest ELAA
2022)
oSupporting existing settlements and characteristics by safeguarding existing
employment areas, sites with existing planning permission for employment
uses and allocating new site on the A5 corridor adjacent to an existing
employment area and where has been identified previously as having further
potential for expansion and which can utilise existing active and sustainable
transport networks.
oAssisting in the rejuvenation of town centres by supporting existing
employment areas which are accessible to the existing settlements, services,
and facilities .
oEnsuring infrastructure delivery to support growth to enable the employment
areas to modernise and meet the changing needs for EVcharging, driver
facilities and parking for HCV delivery drivers, access to green infrastructur e.
oSafeguarding natural and historic assets by not allocating sites within AONB
or the
oAssisting in the delivery of the Coun cil’s ambition to be net zero carbon ahead
of the Government’s target date of 2050 by requiring a higher standard of build
quality than the current Building Regulations where viable .
5.49The evidence showed that in order to achieve the Council’s spatial priorities and
deliver sustainable development it was necessary to remove some land from the
Green Belt. The sites to be removed from the green belt are:
SE1 (ELAA CE18) Kingswood Lakeside Extension 2, Norton Canes 10.86
Hectares (net)
5.50 Land to be removed from the Green Belt to safeguard it for future development
andthedeliver y ofstrategic green infrastructure and pedestrian and cycle links
from Norton Canes across the A5 to the Cannock Extension Canal /Grove Colliery.Item No.  8. 14
S5Watling Str eet Business Park and extension of 5 hectares to the rear (total
10.9 hectares) , Watling Street, Norton Canes
S4Jubilee Field, Lime Lane/ Watling Street, Norton Canes -5 hectares
5.51 Policy SO4.3 Sustainable tourism and the rural economy ensures the land based
economies of the district including agriculture and forestry can continue to
operate, diversify and prosper and balances this with the protection of the AONB
and the District’s two Special Areas of Conservation; Policy SO4.4 Live Wo rk
Accommodation which  recognises that much of the economy is indigenous to
Cannock and highly localised and enables a variety of workspaces and ways of
working and SO 4.5 Provision for Local Employment and Skills have been
reviewed following the represen tations received.
TRANSPORT
5.52Chapter 5 relates to Strategic objective 5 which seeks to support the provision of
sustainable transport and communications infrastructure has three threads: To
manage the need to travel, supporting low carbon transport systems and
maintaining and improving the transport system.
5.53Policy SO5.1 Accessible Development, Policy SO5.2 Communication
Technologies has been expanded to include lo cation and deign of structure
associated with digital infrastructure and requires development to incorporate
digital connectivity where appropriate .To increase the sustainability of the district
and recognise the existing level of access to high quality digital connectivity and
importance of integrated journey planning to encouraging the use of sustainable
transport .SO5.3 Low and zero carbon transport supports the delivery of electric
vehicle charging points and other infrastructure that may be required for
alternative low and zero carbon transport options, including hydrogen vehicles and
has been updated following the repres entations received, NPPF and changes to
Building Regulations .Policy SO5.4 Maintaining and improving the transport
system supports a variety of measures and has been reviewed in association with
Staffordshire County highways .Policy SO5.5 Hatherton Canal Restoration
Corridor and Policy 5.6 Safeguarding Proposed recreational footpath and cycle
routes will achieve improvements to walk ing and cycling routes and supporting
increased use of the canal network and towpaths as art of the integrated transport
network and increase the opportunity for the creation of short circular walks .
These policies have been reviewed in response to the re presentations received
and updated evidence .Policy SO5.7 Parking Provision advises that detailed
standards will be in further guidance.
TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES
5.54Chapter 6 relates to Strategic Objective 6 which seeks to create attractive town
andlocal centres .It maintains the hierarchy of centres with Cannock Town Centre
being the strategic centre and the revised town centre boundaries proposed in the
Preferred Options document .The threshold at which an impact upon the vitality
and viability o f an existing centre is identified and is unchanged from that proposed
in the Preferred Options document .It safeguards existing town centre services
reflecting the use classes order update in September 2020 and lists criteria for
ensuring high quality de sign within town centres .Policies SO6.5 Cannock Town
Centre redevelopment areas, SO 6.6 Rugeley Town Centre redevelopment areasItem No.  8. 15
and SO6.7 Hednesford Town Centre redevelopment areas identify the potential
sites for mixed uses and has been updated followin g the representations, changes
to planning legislation and updated retail evidence.
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
5.55Chapter 7 relates to Strategi c Objective 7 which seeks to protect and enhance the
natural environment .Policy SO 7.1 lists the current assets and the importance of
ecological networks and how Biodiversity NetGainwill be delivered in the district .
(Policy SO7.2) .Policies SO7.3 demonstr ate the Council’s approach and the
approach of the SAC Partnership to the issues around the Cannock Chase SAC
and Cannock Extension Canal SAC and how the Local Plan can meet it slegal
obligations as a competent authority and the requirements of the Habitat
Regulations 2017 .SO7.4 protects, conserves and enhance landscape c haracter
in the district and SO7.5 rela tesspecifically to the AONB .Policy SO 7.6 seeks to
protect, conserve, and enhance the Green Belt and update the lists of the areas
to be safeguarded as community park which will be delivered as mitigation for the
loss of Green Belt through development at South of Lichfield Road, Wimblebury
Road and Kingswood Lakeside .Policy SO7.7 lists the areas to be removed from
the Green Belt for development within this plan period and safeguard edfor
development in the next pl an period and as in the Preferred Options documents
lists the mitigation required to compensate for the loss of Green Belt land .Policy
SO7.8 replaces the policy on the Green Space Network to accord with the new
NPPF and seeks the protection, conservation and enhancement of the green
infrastructure and links this to the latest evidence on open spaces and the future
open spaces strategy.
5.56The policies have been amended in response to the representations, changes in
the NPPF, spatial strategy, open space s assessment and Environment Bill.
CLIMATE CHANGE
5.57Chapter 8 relates to Strategic Objective 8 which seeks to deliver a greener future .
It supports low and zero carbon energy and heat production, requires
development to strive towards achieving the highest level of building performance
standards and achieve the lowest carbon emissions where viable .Set the
Council’s policy on sustainable design and includes adoption of the optional water
efficiency standards for new developments .Policies will ensure development
minimise flood risk and avoid air, water, noise or light pollution and soil
contamination .Brownfield and Despoiled and underutilised land will be prioritised,
mineral reserves safeguarded and waste managed.
5.58The policies have been amended in response to the representations received ,
NPPG and discussions with our partners.
REASONABLE ALTERNATIVES
5.59TheSEA regs require the consideration of reasonable alternatives to the spatial
strategy and policies .The reasonable al ternatives to the polices were considered
through the preparation of the plan and the reasonable alternatives to the spatial
strategy submitted via the SHLAA, ELAA, call for sites, and representations have
been considered through the site selection methodology previously consulted
upon and in association with the Local Plan Member Officer Working Group .TheItem No.  8. 16
sites submitted thus far have been considered and have been incorporated into
the SHLAA 2022 and ELAA 2022 as appropriate .TheLPMOWG found that the
proposed spatial strategy and local plan policies represented the most sustainable
development for Cannock District .TheSA/SEA of the Local plan is being
prepared by consultants and will further test this conclusion. The site selection
methodology, SA/SEA, SHLAA 2022 and ELAA 2022 will be published in due
course.
NEXT STEPS
5.60 Following consultation, representations will be recorded ad collated to be reported
toCabinet for noting early 2023 .The Submission version of the Local Plan w ill
then be finalised in readiness for submission alongside the supporting documents
and evidence base to the Planning Inspectorate who will then arrange for an
Examination in Public.
5.61 A further report will be presented to Cabinet around submission to detail the
arrangements for the Examination in Public .
6 Implications
6.1 Financial
There are no direct financial implications for the Council as a result of this report
any additional costs will need to be contained within approved budget s.
6.2 Legal
Legal implications are set out within the report.
6.3 Human Resources
None
6.4 Risk Management
Potential legal challenge and the plan not being found sound are the main risks
associated with the plan .These risks can be minimised by ensuring that the plan
and accompanying documents are legally compliant, that legal support is engaged
where necessary and that all interested parties are actively informed and engaged
throughout the preparation of the plan .The plan should b e based on sound,
robust and up to date evidence.
Lesser risks that will primarily impact on costs and timetable are linked to staff
resources being available to maintain the plan review as well as potential changes
to government planning policy.
6.5 Equal ity & Diversity
The Local Plan Review is supported by an Equality Impact Assessment.Item No.  8. 17
6.6 Climate Change
TheLocal Plan will be a key vehicle for the delivery of the Council’s commitment
toaddress the impacts of climate change and help to make Cannock Ch ase a
more environmentall y sustainable place .The Local Plan will set out measu res for
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, minimising energy use and maximising low
carbon energy production and decarbonise heat, enhanced sustainable
construction standards ,minimise waste and the conservation and enhancement
of natural environment and habitats .
7 Appendices to the Report
Appendix A:Cannock Chase Local Plan Review Preferred Options consultation
responses
Appendix B: Cannock Chase District Local Plan Regulation 19 document
Appendix C :Local Plan Reg 19 Site Specific Policies (not available at the time
of publishing the report)
Previous Consideration
Local Plan Preferred Options Consultation Feedback and Next Steps -Cabinet -16th
December 2021
Background Papers
Stantec report W estMidlands Interchange ,RefConsultee/Organisation Name (Put 
name after Organisation)Consultancy & Consultants 
name (If applicable) Date Received SummaryDraft CCDC Response
Planner A OR Cannock Chase Council - Planner A Chase Planning - Planner A 01/04/2021
LPPOSA001 Historic England - E, Boden 1/29/2021 With regard to the IIA: Cannock Chase Local Plan Preferred Options, Sustainability Appraisal Report (incorporating Health Impact Assessment) which accompanies the Reg 18 Plan, Historic England welcomes the 
inclusions of a specific indicator for the historic environment (SA17) and considers this essential for the SA process. Furthermore, we are pleased to see that during the course of plan preparation SA objective 17 was 
updated to reflect a consultation comment received from Historic England and to better conform to the guidance of the NPPF. Historic England also notes that the appraisal of SA objective 17 for all sites at this stage of 
the Local Plan process has been informed by the Cannock Chase HIA, September 2020, commissioned by the Council, and that the effects recorded through this assessment have been drawn upon for each site option to 
inform the effects presented in the SA in relation to SA objective 17. In this regard, we are pleased to see that previous advice from Historic England has been followed. We also note the inclusion of the consideration of 
the historic environment in Table 3.1. We note and welcome the acknowledgement that the new Local Plan offers the opportunity to update and develop the overarching policy on the historic environment within the 
adopted Local Plan, as well as offering opportunities to incorporate mitigation into site specific policies where appropriate. We also welcome that possible opportunities to deliver heritage-based regeneration are 
highlighted, such as those linked to canal networks and former collieries. However, we consider that this aspect could be developed further in several Local Plan policies; particularly policies SO1.1, SO1.2, SO4.3, SO6.5, 
SO6.6 and also through development guidelines for the relevant site allocations as they emerge. With regard to the canal network in particular, the Sustainability Appraisal offers opportunities to highlight synergies 
between the natural and historic environment and we recommend that these should also be developed through Local Plan policies. We note that all sites have been assessed in the SA on the assumption that no 
mitigation measures are in place at this stage. This inevitably will give a "worst-case scenario" of effects. However, it is clear from the Council's HIA what for some sites mitigation of harm and maximisation of 
enhancements in relation to the historic environment are recommended and once these are encompassed into site specific policy requirements at the next stage of the Local Plan, the outcomes of some site 
assessments may charge in the next iteration of the SA and we will comment further at that stage. With regard to the assessment of effects of allocations on SA objective 17 we have the following comments: Sites 
scoring --? (uncertain/likely significant negative effects) - Historic England notes that several of the proposed site allocations (SH1/SH5/H31/H39/MA and M2) have been assessed as having 'uncertain/likely significant 
negative effects' on the historic environment. We refer you to our comments on these sites contained in Appendix A to this letter. We also note that proposed allocation M9 has no heritage assets on, or near to the site 
and was not assessed in the Council's HIA. Explanation of why this has been scored with --? would therefore be welcomed. - Sites scoring -? (uncertain/minor negative effects) - we note that some sites that have been 
assessed as having uncertain/minor negative effects on heritage assets where we consider there may be the potential for significant effects and would recommend further consideration of sites H36/H40/H45/H50/M5 
and M10. - Sites scoring 0? (uncertain/negligible/no effects) - we note that some sites that have been assessed as having uncertain/negligible/no effects on heritage assets where we consider there may be the potential 
for minor effects and would recommend further consideration of sites H37/H48/H49/H51/H52/H53/M4/M8 and E6. However, it is accepted that the effects of new development on this historic environment will be 
dependent, in part, upon their specific layout and design, and also on any mitigation and enhancement, which is an unknown at this stage in the Plan process.Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed.
LPPOSA002 Canal & River Trust - H, Smith 4/29/2021 We wish to raise the following comments in respect of the above consultation: Largely agree with the conclusions of the Habitat Regulations Assessment Report. We do wish to comment that the document lacks 
recognition that the Chasewater Reservoir SSSI is integral to the water supply of the Cannock Extension Canal SAC. Where new development would be hydrologically connected to the water supply catchment for 
Chasewater reservoir this should be included in the Habitat Regulations Assessment Report. Should this not be included, there is a risk that new developments in the water supply catchment for Chasewater reservoir 
could be detrimental to the integrity of the Cannock Extension Canal SAC. Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed.
LPPOSA003 K, Dixon 5/7/2021 On p.712, the document refers to the Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM) measures, which I take it means what the County Council approved in February 2021 amid much controversy. The Bristol 
based consultants may be unaware of how controversial the SAMM are. In any case, they seem to be taking them as a given. This is buried on p.712 of the 733pp document, and so may not have been spotted by many 
people, including elected councillors. My comments are that the SAMM measures are flawed, Links between the spoused purposes of the SAMM (i.e. protecting Cannock Chase SAC and the AONB more generally for 
future generations) and most of the detailed measures range from tenuous to fantasy and mere image management and making it look as if something is being done. I have set out in table 1 a complete set of criticisms 
of the SAMM measures in the form of myths used to promote the measures by the County Council, AONB Joint Committee and SAC Joint Board. I should like to add the following as where things should go from here in 
relation to the SAMM. An alternative policy for Cannock Chase Forest: Basic Principles: To conserve, even enhance and expand, the Cannock Chase forest and the communities around it as comprising a designated 
AONB and an area with thriving cultural, social, economic and political facets. To encourage the notion that residents of the communities around Cannock Chase have a trustee responsibility for the Chase and for the 
ideas in Basic Principle 1; that trustee responsibility should be reflected in continuing consultation on issues affecting the Chase effected by public bodies with legal, administrative responsibilities for the Chase. Specific 
responses to the measures adopted by Staffordshire County Council under the guise of Protecting Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation for Future Generations Implementation of the measures to be halted 
pending a review during May to August 2021 of their contents and omissions, how they were arrived at and how they have been officially enunciated. If, in the unlikely event the further two phases of the existing 
measures do proceed following this review, the consultations should be far more comprehensive and effective as public consultations, sailing into the winds of likely controversy. The decisions made following these 
consultations should explain how they derive from the findings of the consultations. A change in the SCC communications strategy so as to provide clear and truthful information to residents of the communities around 
Cannock Chase and the public generally, so building up the trust and rapport needed to put Principle 2 into effect. Part of this strategy will be to reduce the need for FOI requests, any such requests not only to be 
responded to quickly and without appearance of obstruction but also to prompt changes in reporting to make further requests of a similar nature unnecessary. Chase Road to remain open to give access to adjacent for 
pedestrians, horses, cyclists, other persons and vehicles to which it is suited, and to be physically maintained, but significant through traffic will be discouraged with extant features (e.g. chicanes, speed bumps). 
Effective public consultation to be carried out for a period of at least 3months, commencing as soon as possible after the aforementioned review, assuming the review finds the 2019 consultation or subsequent actions 
defective. The consultation shall include but not be limited to opinions and ideas of residents of the communities around the entire Cannock Chase forest and groups of wider users/visitors on a. how car parking 
provision and public transport access around the Chase should be reorganised, if at all. The primary considerations in such reorganisation shall be as follows. To disperse visitors such that the areas identified already as 
overused are subject to less use. To ensure large areas of Cannock Chase AONB are not off limits to those with mobility issues, the elderly or young families. b. How revenue should be raised to fund conservation, 
enhancement and expansion of Cannock Chase. This would subsume the charging of visitors to use car parks included in the measures. c. How any of this revenue raising should not erect economic barrier which 
prevent or deny access to low income families and households, or vulnerable people/ d. How so called Section 106 revenue (an amount said to be order of £7.8million) should be spent, and not be spent, in keeping with 
Principle 1. e. The role of a dedicated and resources County Ranger Service in pursuing Principle 1. f. How principle 2 will be put into affect.Comments are noted. The evidence 
referred to supports the delivery of 
the Local Plan and has been prepared 
in partnership. The evidence offers a 
strategy which will prevent harm 
arising to the SAC and meets the 
Council's legal obligations. 
Opportunities for greater public 
involvement within some of the 
specific projects listed in the 
document is envisaged.
Revisions to the governance and administration of the Chase: A commitment to open government, in pursuit of Principle 2 in particular, and taking care not to be seeing as favouring particular interest groups, political 
supporters and personal friends when it comes to consultation and appointing committees, working parties, teams and the like as part of the governance or administrative process. Also in pursuit of Principle 2 in 
particular, reorganisation and revision of the governance structure and governance bodies responsible for the Cannock Chase forest and the communities around it, with appropriate provisions for how their officials are 
appointed to be representative of these communities are represented on them and have access to speak or petition their meetings. A County Council cabinet member with specific responsibility for Cannock Chase who 
is part of the communities around it. An equivalent to the cabinet member identified in 3 in the shadow cabinet or from the opposition. More substantial efforts around Principle 2, especially in performing public 
consultations so that it is clear they capture community opinions and interests. Those performing consultations should sail into the winds of likely controversy, not try to blindside likely opponents to controversial 
proposals, or see residents as highly interest but with low influence (an so ignorable!).Comments are noted. Not all matters 
are able to be dealt with through the 
Local Plan.Local Plan Consultation Preferred Options, Consultee Responses 
Log – April 2021
Please use the following formatting when saving documents and complete the table below for 
ease of reference: 1. Save files with surname of the consultee followed by first initial (use full 
first name if 2 identical entries).  2. If it is an organization use the organization, company or 
charity name instead.  3. If the consultee or organisation is represented by a consultantancy 
put the company name in brackets after their name (It would be useful to also add the agents 
name to their company name in the table below for reference).Appendix A
Item No.  8.18LPPOSA005
Natural England 4/30/2021We welcome the HRA and note that the assessment has concluded that further information is required. We wish to provide the following advice: • The HRA scoping Report 2019 considered Humber Estuary 
SAC/SPA/RAMSAR in its assessment. Since the options and issues stage in 2019, the preferred policies have progressed and new sites are proposed to be allocated. We advise that the current HRA should reflect back 
and consider the Humber Estuary in the current HRA. • 4.13. Ammonia (NH4) is also a key pollutant from vehicle traffic. • 4.19. Once traffic data has been gathered and you understand what is the affected road 
network, we advise that you review the sites that could be affected. • 4.34. One of the allocated sites is hydrologically connected to Cannock Extension Canal SAC- SH2/ SH2 (part) Land to the East of Wimblebury Road, 
Heath Hayes. There is a water course to the east of the site and is upstream of and connected to Chasewater and Southern Staffordshire Coalfield Heaths SSSI (unit 13) which is hydrologically linked to Cannock Extension 
Canal SAC. • 5.30. Consideration should be given to water quantity impacts on Cannock Extension Canal SAC and water quality impacts on Cannock Chase SAC. Also impacts from surface water should be considered.  • 
Appendix A- we would advise also looking at European sites conservation objectives: supplementary advice as well as the site improvement plans, as these are more up to date.Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed.
LPPOSA006 Severn Trent 4/30/2021 We support the themes used within the sustainability appraisal specifically: 2) Minimise pollution and protect and enhance air, water and soils; 3) Ensure development makes efficient use of previously developed land 
and buildings; 4) Adapt to the impacts of, and minimise factors contributing to, climate change; 5) Reduce the risk of flooding. We would highlight a common theme within the sustainability appraisal around the 
assumption that Sustainable Urban Drainage systems can somewhat mitigate a new developments impact to existing flood risk or the future impacts from climate change. Whilst this at a basic level is true it is important 
that the drained hierarchy still be applied. Should SuDS end up disposing surface water into the foul or combined sewerage network via a new connection then there is still an increase on existing flood risk. It would 
have been good to see the appraisal consider the availability of sustainable surface water management options from the drainage hierarchy as part of its scoring. The appraisal does highlight in several areas that 
development on greenfield land would increase the area of impermeable surfaces in the District and could therefore increase overall flood risk. We have no comments to make regarding the equality, health, or habitat 
assessments. For your information we have set out some general guidelines that may be useful to you. Position Statement As a water company we have an obligation to provide water supplies and sewage treatment 
capacity for future development. It is important for us to work collaboratively with Local Planning Authorities to provide relevant assessments of the impacts of future developments. For outline proposals we are able to 
provide general comments. Once detailed developments and site specific locations are confirmed by local councils, we are able to provide more specific comments and modelling of the network if required. For most 
developments we do not foresee any particular issues. Where we consider there may be an issue we would discuss in further detail with the LPA. We will complete any necessary improvements to provide additional 
capacity once we have sufficient confidence that a development will go ahead, We do this to avoid making investments on speculative developments to minimise customer bills. Sewage Strategy Once detailed plans are 
available and we have muddled the additional capacity, in areas where sufficient capacity is not currently available and we have sufficient confidence that developments will be built, we will complete necessary 
improvements to provide the capacity. We will ensure that our assets have no adverse effect on the environment and that we provide appropriate levels of treatment at each of our sewage treatment works. Surface 
Water and Sewer Flooding We expect surface water to be managed in line with the Government's Water Strategy, Future Water. The strategy sets out a vision for more effective management of surface water to deal 
with the dual pressures of climate change and housing development. Surface water needs to be managed sustainably. For new developments we would not expect surface water to be conveyed to our foul or combined 
sewage system and, where practicable, we support the removal of surface water already connected to foul or combined sewer. We believe that greater emphasis needs to be paid to consequences of extreme rainfall. 
In the past, even outside of the flood plain, some properties have been built in natural drainage paths. We request that developers providing sewers on new developments should safely accommodate floods which 
exceed the design capacity of the sewers. To encourage developers to consider sustainable drainage, Severn Trent currently offer 100% discount on the sewerage infrastructure charge if there is no surface water 
connection and a 75% discount if there is a surface water connection via a sustainable drainage system. More details can be found on our website. Water Quality Good quality river water and groundwater is vital for 
provision of good quality drinking water. We work closely with the Environment Agency and local farmers to ensure that water quality of supplies are not impacted by our or others operations. The Environment 
Agency's Source Protection Zone (SPZ) and Safe Guarding Zone policy should provide guidance on development. Any proposals should take into account the principles of the Water Framework Directive and River Basin 
Management Plan for the Severn River basin unit as prepared by the Environment Agency.Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed.
LPPOSA007
Water Supply When specific detail of planned development location and sizes are available a site specific assessment of the capacity of our water supply network could be made. Any assessment will involve carrying out 
a network analysis exercise to investigate any potential impacts. We would not anticipate capacity problems within the urban areas of our network, any issues can be addressed through reinforcing our network. 
However, the ability to support significant development in the rural areas is likely to have a greater impact and require greater reinforcement to accommodate greater demands. Water Efficiency Part G of Building 
Regulations specify that new homes must consume no more than 125l of water per person per day. We recommend that you consider taking an approach of installing specifically design water efficient fittings in all areas 
of the property rather than focus on the overall consumption of the property. This should help to achieve a lower overall consumption than the maximum volume specified in the Building Regulations. We recommend 
that in all cases you consider: • Single flush siphon toilet cistern and those with a flush volume of 4 litres. • Showers designed to operate efficiently and with a maximum flow rate of 8 litres per minute. • Hand wash 
basin taps with low flow rates of 4 litres per minute or less. • Water butts for external use in properties with gardens. To further encourage developers to act sustainably Severn Trent currently offer a 100% discount on 
the clean water infrastructure charge if properties are built so consumption per person is 100l per person per day or less. More details can be found on our website. We would encourage you to impose the expectation 
on developers that properties are built to the optional requirement in Building Regulations of 110l of water per person per day.Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed.
LPPOSA008 G & P, Small 4/30/2021 Detailed Harm Assessment s- Rugeley Part 2 RU25. We own an acre plot of residential land adjacent No1 Forge Row, Slitting Mill, Rugeley WS15 2UT. We are registered as R39. R39 is down as 41.493 in 2005 as a 
suggested site. R39 is registered on the SHLAA 2008, R39 is marked as a potential building plot on Local Plan 2017. R39 has been on the government self build register with Cannock Chase Council since 2017. As a fully 
serviced site with all basic amenities. Mains electric mains water supply coming directly into plot from road. Two off road access into plot one down side of No. 1 Forge Row which is part of R39. Also off road access with 
dropped curb 16' wide leading into gateway 13' inside plot boundary up to gates 12' wide so as to leave road footpath clear also there is lots of room for off road parking inside plot. R39 is surrounded by well kept 
established hedges that would obscure any development from view so it would detract from our surroundings. The plans would be to self-build an eco home on the site in line with the existing cottages which would not 
impact on our neighbours. The local Plan RU25 has R39 down on it. We are the only residential land in this parcel along with no1 to 7 Forge Row cottages our land is adjacent to No1. We would there fore ask if we could 
be removed from Green Belt status to Enable us to self build on R39 a fully serviced site with existing facilities in place, a sustainable eco detached home.Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed. 
LPPOSA009 Staffordshire County Council - J, 
Chadwick4/30/2021 We welcome the enhancement of the evidence base through the production of the Cannock Chase HIA. This was produced using a robust methodology, working to national standards, and it is particularly noted that, in 
addition to assessing significance and impact, this also explored each site through the lens of maximising enhancement and the mitigation of harm. Whilst we haven't taken the opportunity to review each of the 69 sites 
ultimately chosen for assessment in this report, we have reviewed a selection of these which appear to be comprehensive and generally fit for purpose. The inclusion of the historic environment, including heritage 
assets and their settings, as a specific SA Objective is welcomed, and the assessment of the likely sustainability effects for the various different site types and the specific site options (Appendix 5) has made use of the 
enhanced evidence base to provide a detailed assessment against this objective. These assessments are generally supported. Please also note that the number of scheduled monuments in the district outlined in section 
47 (page 2150 is incorrect - the Conduit Head at High Green, Cannock has been removed from the National Heritage List for England.Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed.
Item No.  8.19LPPOSA010 St Modwen Industrial & Logistics RPS - J, Bonehill 4/29/2021 RPS note the response to our previous submissions with regards to the SA set out on pages 154-156 of the SA of the Cannock Chase Local Plan: Preferred Options. However, we note that a number of inconsistencies in 
the assessment of the site which we set out below. SA Objective 1: RPS note that the score against this objective for the Site has been amended following comments received from the Canal & River Trust (CRT). Ecology 
Solutions have reviewed the assessment work undertaken and have provided a response addressing the points raised (Appendix B). In summary although the site is located adjacent to the Cannock Extension Canal SSSI 
the closest proposed built development as the site is located approx. 120m from the SSSI and SAC at its closest point. Land adjacent to the SSSI would be retained as greenspace and indeed opportunities for ecological 
betterment could be delivered as an enhancement associated with emerging proposals. It is note that site N5: Turf Field, Watling Street is located 200m from the SSSI at its closest point, but has been attributed a score 
of (-?) under this objective which is inconsistent with the scoring for the Site as (--?). We suggest that the scoring for the Site should be amended to (-?) accordingly. CRT also make reference to potential adverse impacts 
to the towpath associated with the Cannock Extension. Use of footpath would not have the potential to result in any adverse impacts on the SAC/SSSI. Ecology Solutions note that the potential for recreational impacts 
on this designated site have been scoped out in the Council's own Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) work (March 20201) In any event, there is no reason to consider that employment sites would generate any 
significant increase in use along the towpath. Through discussions with Officers RPS understand that there are concerns regarding the potential for airborne and waterborne pollution to have a negative impact on the 
SAC/SSSI. Further work is being undertaken with regards to these possible issues and will be provided to the Council in due course. Ecology Solutions have also identified an issue with the methodology adopted for this 
objective. Subsequent HRA work has only be undertaken on Preferred Options sites. This means that there is no opportunity for other sites, including the Site, to have their true impact acknowledged, with such sites 
being given an artificially low score as a result. A 'shadow' HRA has been undertaken by Ecology Solutions for the emerging proposals for the Site which concludes that potential impacts on the integrity of any European 
Sites (including their underpinning SSSI's) would be avoided subject to the adoption of an appropriately designed scheme, As such it can be concluded that potential adverse impacts would be avoided on any 
biodiversity assets, indicating that emerging proposals would, at worse, attain a neutral score under this objective. SA Objective 2: RPS are disappointed that our previous comments on this point summaries on pages 
154 and 155 of the SA have been discounted [See FIG 3.1 in the document]. [...] there is evidence that air quality issues continue to improve, to the point where a detailed assessment is now to be undertaken which will 
consider revolving the AQMAs 1 and 2 which cover the A5 corridor running through the District. Furthermore, the only AQMA to experience exceedances of the objective is not located in close proximity of the Site. 
While no timescales are provided for this detailed assessment, it clearly indicates that as a minimum the potential impacts on air quality of sites in the proximity of these particular AQMAs which are showing compliance 
with the objective should not be scored as negatively in the SA as sites in the proximity of the AQMA3. RPS note that the 2020 Air Quality Annual Status Report identifies the preparation of this detailed assessment as a 
key priority for 2021/21 and so trust that the findings of it will be available to inform the next stages of preparation of the Plan. RPS note that air quality issues in Walsall, which lies to the south of the Site, have also 
improved in recent years. RPS also note that traditional working patterns have been disrupted by the Covid-19 pandemic with people working from home where their job allows them to. Many prominent businesses are 
suggesting that post pandemic home working will continue to be at least an element of the working arrangements and it is expected that the number of commuters will reduce. Should this occur it is expected that air 
quality issues arising from motor vehicles will similarly reduce.Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed.
This is particularly relevant for Cannock Chase District which as stated by paragraph 2.45 if the 2020 EDNA has 27.6% of its workforce employed in Professional Occupations compared to 20.2% across the West Midlands 
and 21.5% nationally. In contrast, the District has very few residents in the most elementary of occupations - just 6.4%, almost half the regional rate of 11.9% and much lower than the national rate of 10.2%. The District 
also has net outward commuting patterns as noted under part 4 of paragraph 5.50 of the 2020 EDNA. People employed in Professional Occupations are more likely to be able to work from home either full time or as 
part of an agile working pattern. Therefore, RPS suggest that the anticipated reduced level of commuting and reduced air quality issues is likely to have a greater impact on Cannock Chase District than in locations where 
a greater proportion of residents work in more elementary occupations which have greater requirements for staff to attend their workplace. The benefits of this reduction are likely to be particularly pronounced due to 
the high proportion of Cannock Chase residents recorded as commuting out of the District pre-pandemic. Furthermore, given that the A5 is a key road link out of the District is anticipated that the reduction will be 
particularly noticeable in the AQMA that the site is located near to. Given the above RPS consider that the scoring against this objective should be amended to be negligible. RPS note that Officers have queried the 
anticipated volume of traffic that will be generated by the Site and the resultant impacts on air quality if the expansion land was developed. Further work is being undertaken on this matter and will be provided to the 
Council when it is completed. SA Objective 5: RPS disagree with the approach taken to the scoring of SA5. The Environment Agency provided advice on this point as part of their consultation comments on the June 2018 
SA Scoping Report which are set on page 164 of the SA of the Cannock Chase Local Plan: Preferred Options. [...]. In accordance with this advice RPS recommend that the assessment of this objective is divided into 
surface water and fluvial. On this basis the Site would be scored as negative against surface water and negligible against fluvial as it is in Flood Zone 1. We also note that for many of the other objectives that the 
potential for appropriate mitigation to avoid adverse effects means that effects have been identified as uncertain. For consistency RPS recommend that the assessment of SA5 should follow the same approach. This 
would mean that with regards to surface water flood risk that the Site should be scored as uncertain negative and negligible for fluvial flood risk. SA Objective 14: RPS note the Council's comments with regards to access 
to services, however as acknowledged in the revised assessment of SA8 on page 155 of the SA of the Cannock Chase Local Plan: Preferred Options there is a cycle route along the A5. This offers a sustainable transport 
link to services and facilities further afield. To be consistent with the scoring given for site (CE19/E12) the scoring for the Site should be revised to minor negative. SA Objective 17: The Cannock Chase Heritage Impact 
Assessment 2020 screened out the Site at the first stage of assessment on the basis that no significant impact on heritage would occur as a result of development (apart from the possibility of undiscovered 
archaeology). To be consistent with the assessment of other employment sites as set out at paragraph 4.129 of the SA of the Cannock Chase Local Plan: Preferred Options a negligible uncertain effect should be recorded 
for the site under this objective. Conclusions: On the basis of our observations set out above RPS recommend that the revised assessment of the Site should be as set out below [see Table 3.1 in the document].Comments are noted and will be 
reviewed.
Item No.  8.20Consultee/Organisation Name (Put name 
after Organisation)Consultancy & Consultants name (If 
applicable)Date Received Document Summary Draft CCDC Response
A, Webster 3/22/2021Green Belt Part 2 Study 
Report - Appendix BNorton Canes - NC23 & NC24 (P101-108inclusive). I would like to 
address the statement for NC23 'The additional impact of its release 
on the adjacent Green Belt should be minor-moderate' and argue that 
the following should be considered to elevate this impact. NC24 has 
frequent visitations of wild deer these sometimes stray into the parcel 
NC23. NC23 as been used for agriculture for many years. Bats have 
long visited the gardens of the properties on the north side of Norton 
Springs, flying in from the west. NC24 has stabled and grazed horses 
for several years. I would content that NC23 and NC24 form bulwark 
against urban encroachment with inobtrusive rural usage. The 
character of these parcels are appreciated when viewed by walkers 
taking their permitted lock-down exercise, and thus serve a 
community health purpose too. Comments are noted. The 
evidence has been 
prepared through an 
independent company to 
ensure consistency across 
the district.
Heath Hayes & Wimblebury Parish Council - 
L, Bowman 4/28/2021Green Belt Part 2 Study 
Report - Detailed Harm 
Assessment for 
Wimblebury & Heath 
HayesThe Parish Council would like the following removed from the plan and 
be kept as Green Belt Land preventing the mergence of Heath Hayes, 
Wimblebury, Norton Canes and Chase Terrace. All Green Belt land to 
the east of Wimblebury Rd and to the south of A5190 Cannock Rd. 
Particularly those parcels of land identified as WI 8-15 inclusive, and 
WI 20-23 inclusive. Removal from the Green Belt ranges from 
moderate to very high, but in all cases this land makes an important 
contribution to prevention of urban sprawl in the directions of Chase 
Terrace (Burntwood) and Norton Canes. Comments are noted. The 
consideration of the 
removal of sites from the 
Green Belt is a matter for 
the Local Plan not the 
supporting evidence. This 
matter will be addressed 
through the Local Plan.
J, Armitage 4/28/2021Green Belt Part 2 Study - 
particularly RU21, and 
adjoining areas RU20, 
RU14, RU18, RU22, RU19All of these areas make a strong contribution to the diversity of wildlife 
in the area including: deer, badgers, foxes, owls, bats, skylarks (recent 
return to this area). This is a beautiful area and is very popular with 
local people. Effects of development would be high. Loss of agricultural 
land - once this has disappeared it would be lost permanently. Traffic 
on Penkridge Bank Road is already very heavy, accidents on the Slitting 
Mill Road/Penkridge Bank Road happen regularly. Building on power 
station site should fulfil all local needs. Rugeley is a small town with 
limited infrastructure.Comments are noted. The 
consideration of the 
removal of sites from the 
Green Belt is a matter for 
the Local Plan not the 
supporting evidence. This 
matter will be addressed 
through the Local Plan.Local Plan Consultation Preferred Options, Consultee Responses Log – April 2021
Please use the following formatting when saving documents and complete the table below for ease of reference: 
1. Save files with surname of the consultee followed by first initial (use full first name if 2 identical entries).  2. If 
it is an organization use the organization, company or charity name instead.  3. If the consultee or organisation is 
represented by a consultantancy put the company name in brackets after their name (It would be useful to also 
add the agents name to their company name in the table below for reference).
Item No.  8.21C, Downes 4/30/2021 SHLAA 2020Includes site C64. Records previous refusal of planning application 
1999. All of the considerations applicable in 1999 remains so today. 
The pressure on Local Green Space currently makes this site even less 
suitable for planning development. The re-designation as Local 
Greenspace would be appropriate. Comments are noted. This 
matter will be considered 
through the Local Plan 
housing allocations and 
planning application 
process.
C. Downes 4/30/2021Housing Development 
Capacity Study 2018 -38 
March 2020If the number of houses required can be fulfilled without the inclusion 
of these sites I can see no reason for the possible change of status for 
sites C64 and C81. The only suitable change of status in my opinion for 
C64 would be to permanent protected green space. Comments are noted. This 
matter will be considered 
through the Local Plan 
housing allocations and 
planning application 
process.
Item No.  8.22 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cannock Chase District  
Local Plan Pre-Submission 
Consultation ( Reg19 ) 
DATE  2022 
Appendix B
Item No.  8.231. Non-Technical Summary  
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 The Cannock Chase District Local Plan will guide and manage the development of the 
District during the period to 203 9. The Local Plan will identify land to meet the needs of the 
economy and to ensure that a sufficient number of homes can be built. New deve lopment 
will be well -designed and safe, and will have good access to schools, health services, parks 
and green spaces, leisure facilities and other services. New development will be 
accommodated whilst protecting and enhancing the natural, built and histor ic environment.  
 
1.2 The Council asked people for their views on what sort of things should be covered by the 
Local Plan through an ‘Issues and Options Consultation’ in May 2019. The responses to 
that consultation were  taken into account in the Local Plan ‘Pr eferred Options’ consultation 
document (spring 2021). The responses to the ‘Preferred Options’ document were taken 
into account in the preparation of this draft Local Plan. Th is Pre-Submission  Draft Local 
Plan identifies the sites proposed  for new developm ent, and the policies that will guide and 
manage the development of the District  throughout the plan period . This document provides 
a summary of the Pre-submission Draft Local Plan consultation document.   
 
1.3 The Council will consider the responses to the ‘P re-Submission (Regulation 19) Draft Local 
Plan’, After that, the Local Plan will be submitted to the Secretary of State (Planning 
Inspectorate) for independent examination, probably over the winter 2023. A planning 
inspector will be assigned by the Secreta ry of State to examine the Local Plan to see 
whether it can be found ‘sound’ and capable of adoption by the Council during 202 4. 
 
1.4 The Local Plan will then form part of the Development Plan for the District, together with 
plans for minerals and waste prepar ed by Staffordshire County Council, and neighbourhood 
plans. There is an adopted Neighbourhood Plan for Hednesford, and four designated areas 
(Brereton & Ravenhill, Norton Canes, Cannock Wood and Rugeley) where Neighbourhood 
Plans are in the early stages o f preparation.  
 
1.5 Throughout the preparation of the Local Plan, the Council will engage with partner 
organisations, statutory consultees, and other relevant Local Authorities under the legal 
Duty to Co -operate.  
 
THE DISTRICT CONTEXT  
 
1.6 Cannock Chase District lies within Southern Staffordshire on the northern edge of the Black 
Country areas. At the heart of the District lies the nationally significant Cannock Chase Area 
of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and around 60% of the District i s designated Green 
Belt.  
 
1.7 The document includes a ‘District Profile’ which sets out information about the 
characteristics of: the population (health, education, deprivation); the place (housing, 
employment, town centres, transport and infrastructure); and , the environment (Green Belt, 
climate change).  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES  
 
1.8 The Local Plan includes eight Strategic Objectives:  
 
• To deliver high quality development that  protects the historic environment and is 
appropriate,  distinctive, attractive and safe;  
 
Item No.  8.241. Non-Technical Summary  
 
 
 
 • To create community facilities  and healthy living opportunities  across the District ; 
 
• To deliver a sufficient supply of homes to provide for housing choice and ensure all 
people are able to live in a decent home;  
 
• To encourage a vibrant local economy and workforce;  
 
• To support the provision of sustainable transport and communications infrastructure;  
 
• To create attractive Town and Local Centres;  
 
• To protect and enhance the natural environment;  
 
• To support a greener future.  
 
THE SPATIAL STRATEGY  
 
1.9 Cannock Chase District will meet the development needs arising from the district and 
provide a contribution towards the Housing Market Area shortfall. In order to meet these 
needs, the Spatial Strategy of the Pre-Subm ission Draft Local Plan proposes that:    
• Development will be located the most sustainable locations, be focussed on the existing 
urban areas , and will protect and enhance Green Belt land and the  AONB ;  
 
• Adverse environmental impacts of development will be minimised and mitigated where 
unavoidable;  
 
• Housing and employment requirements will be met where possible within urban areas or 
in accessible and sustainable expansion s to the urban areas ; 
 
• The reuse of previously developed sites  will be optimised , and natural assets will be 
protected;  
 
• Cultural and heritage assets  will be protected  and local distinctiveness and sense of 
place will be maintained and strengthened through quality design ; 
 
• Green Bel t release in order to provide sufficient land to meet Cannock Chase District’s 
housing need with an element of flexibility ; 
 
• A minimum 5, 430 dwellings will be delivered to meet the district’s housing need between 
2018 and 203 9 at a rate of 258 dwellings per annum;  
 
• A further 500 dwellings will be delivered to help meet a shortfall arising from the wider 
housing market area, (increasing total delivery 5,930  dwellings at a rate of 283 dwellings 
per annum;  
 
• Up to 66 hectares of employment land will be provided to meet the District’s 
requirements ; 
 
• 10 hectares of this will be at the West Midlands Interchange  
 
• Look to meet our development needs beyond the plan period . 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.251. Non-Technical Summary  
 
 
 
 STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1: TO DELIVER HIGH QUALITY DEVELOPMENT THAT 
PROTECTS THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT AND IS APPROPRIATE,  DISTINCTIVE, 
ATTRACTIVE AND SAFE  
 
1.10 The ‘ Pre-Submission Draft Local Plan includes Policies that will:  
 
• Protect, conserv e and enhanc e our distinctive  historic environment and avoid adverse 
impacts on our Conservation Areas, Scheduled Monuments, Listed Buildings, Locally 
Listed buildings, and Sites of Archaeological Interest  (Policy SO1.1) . 
 
• Enhanc ing the quality of the built environment by retaining and  enhancing the distinct 
and separate character of each of the District’s settlements, and deliver ing the highest 
quality of building design and layout  (SO1.2) . 
 
• Create safe places which deter crime and reduce the fear of crime by designing out 
crime  withou t detracting from attractive, high quality design  (SO1.3) .  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2: TO CREAT E  COMMUNITY  FACILITIES  AND HEALTHY 
LIVING OPPORTUNITIES  ACROSS THE DISTRICT  
 
1.11 The Pre -Submission Draft Local Plan includes Policies that will:  
 
• Safeguard the provision of community facilities  (such as schools and health centres) 
and ensure that development contributes towards new community facilities which  are 
easily accessible to the local community  (SO2.1).  
 
• Safeguard health and amenity by ensuring that new development provides for 
satisfactory daylight, sunlight, outlook, and privacy, and protects residents, workers and 
visitors from noise, smell, litter, dust or other unacceptable impacts  (SO2.2) . 
 
• Provide open space, sports and recreational buildings and land, including playing fields 
by ensuring that development proposals contribute to meeting the demands generated 
by the development  (SO2.3) . 
 
• Protect existing, and provide new, allotments and commu nity food growing sites 
(SO2. 4). 
• SO5.1  by integrating walking and cycling routes, co -locating community facilities in 
accessible locations, and providing multifunctional open spaces  (SO2. 5). 
 
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3: TO DELIVER A SUFFICIENT SUPPLY OF HOMES TO 
PROVIDE FOR HOUSING CHOICE AND ENSUR E ALL PEOPLE ARE ABLE TO LIVE IN 
A DECENT HOME  
 
1.12 The Pre -Submission Draft Local Plan includes Policies that will:  
 
• Provide for a minimum of 5, 430 dwellings to meet local housing needs, and an 
additional 500 dwell ings to meet unmet needs of neighbouring areas, and ensure a 
sufficient supply of deliverable and developable land is available  (SO3.1) . 
 
• Deliver housing choice to widen opportunities for home ownership, meet needs for 
social and rented housing, and create sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities 
(SO3.2).  
 
Item No.  8.261. Non-Technical Summary  
 
 
 
 • Deliver high quality housing of sufficient size and layout to meet the needs of their 
occupants , and  suitabl e housing for households with health problems or disabilities  
(SO3.3) . 
 
• Consider proposals for new sites for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople to 
meet assessed needs (SO3.4).  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 4: TO ENCOUR E A VIBRANT LOCAL ECONOMY AND 
WORKFORCE  
 
1.13 The Pre -Submission Draft Local Plan includes Policies that will:  
 
• Safeguard existing Employment Areas (as listed in the Explanatory Text) for non -town 
centre offices, industry and warehousing (SO4.1).  
 
• Provide for  new employment uses with  up to 66 hectares of land for office, 
manufacturing and distribution employment development during the period to 203 9, with 
a range of sizes and types of employment to meet business needs (SO4.2).  
 
• Provide for the sustainable develop ment of tourism and the rural economy (SO4.3).  
 
• Support proposals for the development of live work spaces within residential areas 
(SO4.4).  
 
• Require major employment development proposals to develop Employment and Skills 
Plans to support local workers  (SO4 .5). 
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 5: TO SUPPORT  THE PROVISION OF SUSTAINABLE 
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
1.14 The Pre -Submission Draft Local Plan includes Policies that will:  
 
• Provide for accessible development which is located where it can provide convenient 
access for all sections of the community to work, shopping, health, education, leisure, 
green space and other facilities  (SO5.1) .   
 
• Require development proposals to demonstrate how they will deliver communication s 
technologies and digital connectivity (SO5.2).  
 
• Provide for low and zero carbon transport by ensuring  development contributes to the 
reduction of the reliance on carbon -intensive modes of transport, for example by 
supporting the take -up of ultra low emission vehicles, and developing electric vehicle 
charging networks (SO5.3).  
 
• Maintain and improve the tra nsport system by continu ing work between the District 
Council and the local highway authority, transport stakeholders, other partners, business 
and the local community (SO5.4).  
 
• Protect the Hatherton Canal Restoration Corridor from development that would p revent 
the future implementation of the canal restoration project (SO5.5).  
 
• Safeguard proposed recreational footpath and cycle routes from development that will 
prevent the future implementation of the proposed schemes (SO5.6).  
 
Item No.  8.271. Non-Technical Summary  
 
 
 
 • Ensure that development mak es appropriate off -street parking provision in accordance 
with the relevant Local Design Guide  (SO5.7).  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 6: TO CREAT E ATTRACTIVE TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES  
 
1.15 The Pre -Submission Draft Local Plan  includes  Policies that will:  
 
• Maintain the established hierarchy of Town and Local Centres and e nsure development 
proposals for Main Town Centre Uses are appropriate to the role, scale, and historic 
character of the settlement(SO6.1).  
 
• Require proposals for Retail and Leisure Uses outside designated Primary Shopping 
Areas to be accompanied by an impact assessment where the floorspace exceeds the 
set floorspace thresholds (SO6.2).  
 
• Safeguard existing town centre services which occupy active street frontages/gr ound 
floor level within a designated Primary Shopping Area (SO6.3).  
 
• Create an attractive and safe environment through good design to ensure the growth 
and resilience of our town centres (SO6.4).  
 
• Identify redevelopment opportunity sites in Cannock Town Ce ntre (SO6.5).  
 
• Identify redevelopment opportunity sites in Rugeley Town Centre (SO6.6).  
 
• Identify redevelopment opportunity sites in Hednesford Town Centre (SO6.7).  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  7: TO PROTECT AND ENHANC E THE NATURAL 
ENVIRONMENT  
 
1.16 The Pre -Submission Draft Local Plan includes Policies that will:  
 
• Protect, conserv e and enhanc e biodiversity and geodiversity  of designated sites and 
ensur e that development takes opportunities to improve biodiversity, especially where 
this can secure measurable net gains (SO7.1).  
 
• Ensure development does not lead directly or indirectly to an adverse impact upon a 
Special Area of Conservation (SO7. 2). 
 
• Protect, conserve and enhance landscape character (SO7. 3). 
 
• Protect , conserve and enhance  landscape areas within the Cannock Chase Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) from damaging or inappropriate development 
(SO7. 4). 
 
• Protect , conserve and enhance  the Green  Belt area within the Cannock Chase District 
with the highest degree of protection from development  and safeguard areas required 
for compensation of Green Belt losses (SO7. 5). 
 
• Identify areas of safeguarded land and amendments to the Green Belt and e nsure that 
any loss of Green Belt is suitably mitigated  (SO7. 6). 
 
• Protecting and improving green infrastructure within the District  (SO7. 7).   
 
 
 
Item No.  8.281. Non-Technical Summary  
 
 
 
  
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  8: TO SUPPORT A GREENER FUTURE  
 
1.17 The Pre -Submission Draft Local Plan includes Policies that will:  
 
• Support development proposals for appropriate low and zero carbon energy and heat 
production installations, including solar photovoltaic, wind energy, and air and water source 
heat pumps (SO8.1).  
 
• Help achieve net zero carbon development by ensuring that development proposals strive 
to achieve the highest level of building performance standards for  cooling, ventilation and  
energy use and achieve the lowest carbon emissions that can p ractically and viably be 
achieved . Further advice will be given in a Design SPD  and Local Design Guides.  (SO8.2).  
 
• Encourage sustainable design by requiring development proposals to include a 
Sustainability Statement to set out how the design will achieve  sustainability (SO8.3).  
 
• Manage flood risk within the Plan Area by directing development away from areas at 
highest risk (SO8.4).  
 
• Avoid air, water, noise or light pollution  and soil contamination or, if not possible, mitigate  
the impacts  (SO8.5).  
 
• Prioritise the use of suitable brownfield and despoiled land  and under -utilised land (SO8.6).  
 
• Safeguard mineral reserves and e nsure that development will maximise the contribution 
that substitute or secondary and recycled material can make as an alternative to primary 
minerals (SO8.7).  
 
• Manage waste and r equire development proposals to be supported by a site waste 
management plan demonstrating that waste prevention is the first priority (SO 8.8). 
 
CONSULTATION INFORMATION  
 
1.18 We will be consulting on the Pre-Submission Draft Local Plan  Friday XXth MONTH , 2022 to 
16:45 on Friday XXth MONTH , 202 2. 
 
1.19 You may email your questions and queries to planningpolicy@cannockchasedc.gov.uk  . 
You can also arrange a time to discuss the plan with officers via the telephone or by using 
Teams. Requests can be made by via email, letter or by calling 0154 3 462621.  
 
1.20 We have also written to and emailed everyone who is registered on the Planning Policy 
consultation database. If you wish your details to be added to the database for future 
consultations please email us at: planningpolicy@cannockchasedc.gov.uk .  
 
1.21 Documents can be viewed on our website at: www.cannockchasedc.gov.uk/planningpolicy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.291. Non-Technical Summary  
 
 
 
  
Item No.  8.30Contents  
 
Page. 1 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
 
 Address:       Planning Policy  
Cannock Chase Council  
Civic Centre  
PO Box 28  
Beecroft Road  
Cannock  
Staffordshire  
WS11 1BG  
 Telephone:    (01543) 462621  
 
 E-mail:  planningpolicy@cannockchasedc.gov.uk  
 
 
 Website:        www.cannockchasedc.gov.uk/planningpolicy  
 2. Introduction   2 
3. The District Context   6 
4. How the District Fits within the Wider Context  18 
5. Local Plan Vision and Objectives  22 
6. Local Plan Policy Options  31 
- Objective 1  31 
- Objective 2  44 
- Objective 3  56 
- Objective 4  71 
- Objective 5  81 
- Objective 6  95 
- Objective 7  111 
- Objective 8  127 
7. Monitoring Framework  142 
Appendices  
- Appendix I: Glossary   
154 
Item No.  8.312. Introduction  
 
Page. 2 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
What is this document about?  
 
2.1 The Local Plan will help shape the way in which the physical, economic, social and 
environmental  
characteristics of Cannock Chase District will change until at least the year 203 9.  
 
2.2 It will n eed to ensure that we provide the right amount and type of homes, sufficient and 
appropriate land to provide  a range of local employment opportunities as well as providing 
the right conditions for retail, leisure  and other kinds of uses. It will need to ensure the 
natural and built environment, especially the highest quality and most sensitive areas, are 
protected and enhanced.  
 
2.3 The plan will also have to provide the right infrastructure for transport, open and gr een 
spaces, education and health and well being of our communities.  
 
2.4 The Local Plan is a statutory document and is therefore important for informing decisions 
on planning applications.  
 
2.5 The Local Plan we currently use was adopted by the Council in 2014 and  set the strategic 
policies to guide development in the District up  to 2028 e.g. number of new homes and 
employment land required.  
 
2.6 Changes to the planning system mean that we need to review our plans every five years. 
The Council began reviewing the Local Plan in 2018 with a Scope and Issues paper. It 
then consulted upon an Issues and Options plan in May 2019 . This was followed by the 
‘Preferred Options’ consultation in March/April 2021 which  identified a level of growth for 
the district and where thi s development would go by identifying specific sites for housing 
and employment. It include d detailed policies to guide development  and deliver 
sustainable development . 
What does preparing a Local Plan involve?    
2.7 Preparing a Local Plan is complex, and we set the timescales out for its preparation in 
the Local Development Scheme  (2022) . The table below sets out the key stages we will 
need in order to prepare the plan, and the timing of these. The Local Plan also has to be 
informed by a Sustainability Apprai sal which is a legal requirement, and which ensures 
that we are taking ‘reasonable alternatives’ into account for delivering the development 
we need whilst ensuring that we do this in a balanced way taking account of 
environmental, economic and social cons iderations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.322. Introduction  
 
Page. 3 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Table 1  
PREPERATION  DESCRIPTION  TARGET DATE  
Commencement of 
work including evidence 
base updating  Evidence needs to inform the plan,  we gather 
this at the early stages and update where 
needed.  
 February 2018  
Regulation 18 Scoping 
and Issues 
Consultation  We looked at the issues and scope which the 
plan needs to cover.  
  July 2018  
Regulation 18 Issues & 
options consultation  We considered the feedback from the Issues 
and Scope consultation, looked at any further 
issues, and then suggested options for 
dealing with these.  
 May 2019.  
 
Preferred Option 
Consultation  This is a non statutory stage where we refine 
the plan into a draft version, based on the 
feedback of the previous consultation and 
using the evidence available. It contains draft 
policies and site allocations, for example.  
 Spring  2021  
Pre-Submission 
(Regulation 19) 
consultation  This is the stage we are currently 
consulting on.  This is the final draft, which 
we have to publish for comment before 
submitting the plan to the Secretary of State 
(Planning Inspectorate) for independent 
examina tion. Feedback at this stage will need 
to be focused very specifically on whether the 
plan is ‘sound’, which is currently defined as:  
Positively prepared – does the plan allocate 
enough land to meet all needs for the various 
uses where it is reasonable to do so and 
consistent with placing development in the 
right locations? Justified – is the plan the 
most appropriate strategy when considered 
against reasonable alternatives?  
Effective – can the proposals in the plan be 
delivered over its period? Consistent with 
national policy – is the plan in accordance 
with national policies?  
 Summer 2022  
Submission  This is the stage where the plan is submitted 
to the Planning Inspectorate.  
 Winter  2022  
Examination in Public  A planning inspector is assigned to examine 
the plan to see whether it can be found 
‘sound’ (see above) and whether it is then 
capable of adoption by the Council. The 
examination will focus on the main areas of 
contention and will normally involve public 
hearings.  
 Summer 2023  
Item No.  8.332. Introduction  
 
Page. 4 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Adoption  Once the plan has been confirmed as being 
sound then the Council can adopt it and it will 
set policy for making decisions on planning 
matters in the district.  
 Spring 2024  
 
 
2.8 Setting out a future timetable is not straight forward. For example the time it takes to m ove 
from Pre -Submission to Submission depends upon the level and complexity of objections, 
and therefore the length of time it will take to process them, which cannot be quantified until 
after the plan has been consulted upon. At the point of Submission of  the plan to the Secretary 
of State the plan timetable is in the hands of the Planning Inspectorate and will depend upon 
on a range of factors which are outside of the control of the local authority. These factors 
include the need for a pre -hearing meeting , the availability of an inspector to examine the 
plan and the length and complexity of the hearing process.  
 
How does the Local Plan fit with the rest of the planning process?  
2.9 We have to  prepare the Local Plan so that it is consistent with Government policy, which 
is set out within the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) and ministerial 
statements and supported by the National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG). The 
Local Plan forms part of the Development Plan for the wider area. Staffordshire County 
Council prepare plans for minerals and waste, and Cannock Chase Council will prepare 
the Local Plan (as described above) for shaping development in its own District.  We will 
also need t o work alongside other Councils and agencies to ensure our plans align and 
deliver on the more strategic issues – even though the plans of other areas may be 
prepared at different times. We need to work together under the legal ‘Duty to Co -
operate’.  
 
2.10 Once we have adopted our new Local Plan we can also choose to provide more detail for 
our policies if we need to, by preparing ‘Supplementary Planning Documents’ (SPDs) , and 
Design Codes/Design Guides . For example , our current Local Plan is supported by SP Ds 
on Design, on Developer Contributions and by a development brief for the site of the closed 
Rugeley Power Station. As part of this process we will consider whether to make changes 
to any of our SPDs or whether we need to add new ones.  
 
2.11 Communities can a lso choose to prepare their own Neighbourhood Plans should they so 
wish. These set planning policies at a much more local (often Parish) level. They need to 
broadly conform to the Local Plan, are independently examined and then voted on by the 
community at  a referendum. If there is a majority vote in favour of the plan they are then 
‘made’ (i.e. adopted) and become part of the Development Plan for the area. We currently 
have an adopted Neighbourhood Plan (Hednesford) and four designated areas (Brereton & 
Ravenhill, Norton Canes, Cannock Wood and Rugeley) where Neighbourhood Plans are in 
the early stages of preparation.  
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.342. Introduction  
 
Page. 5 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Consultation Information  
2.12 We will be consulting from Friday XXth MONTH , 202 2 to 16:45 on Friday XXth, MONTH , 
2022. 
 
2.13 The documents will be available at the following  locations:  
 
(insert locations)  
 
2.14 Exhibitions showing the policies map including the proposed allocations in greater detail  
the Local Plan  document  and representation forms  including  the opportunity to find out 
more about the Local Plan and how you can have your comments considered by the 
Independent Inspector are as follows:  
 
2.15 Insert dates and times  
 
2.16  Questions and queries  can be emailed to  planningpolicy@cannockchasedc.gov.uk   and 
responses to queries will be prioritised. You can also arrange a time to discuss the plan with 
officers via the telephone or by using  Teams. Re quests can be  made by via email, letter or 
by calling 01543 462621 . 
 
 
2.17 You may have already received a letter or email from us as w e have also written to and 
emailed everyone who is registered on the Planning Policy consultation database. If you 
wish your details to be added to the database or amended for future consultations please 
email us at: planningpolicy@cannockchasedc.gov.uk .  
 
2.18 Documents , supporting  evidence can be viewed on our website at 
www.cannockchasedc.gov.uk/planningpolicy  and representation forms downloaded.  
 
How to respond  
2.19 Representation forms can either be submitted online via the web link above (social media 
pages will also link to this) , email or by post to us  All information will be used in accordance 
with our Fair Processing procedures .
Item No.  8.353. The District Context  
 
Page. 6 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
UPDATED DISTRICT PROFILE  
What are the key features of ou r District and what are the key issues it faces?  
 
Sub-national Context  
 
Cannock Chase District lies within Southern Staffordshire on the northern edge of the Black 
Country areas. At the heart of the District lies the nationally significant Cannock Chase 
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and around 60% of the District i s designated 
Green Belt, testament to its strategic role as part of the West Midlands rural -urban fringe. 
The District acts as a strategic link between wider Staffordshire and the West Midlands 
conurbation.  
  
Internal migration has been the most numerically significant contributor to population 
growth in Cannock Chase during recent years.  The strongest residential migration flows to 
and from the District have typically been with Lichfield, South Staffordshire and Walsal l.  
The most common commuter destinations for Cannock Chase residents are Lichfield, 
Walsall, Stafford, South Staffordshire and Birmingham. The conurbation also offers larger -
scale retail and leisure provision. In recognition of these key economi c and social links the 
District Council is a member of both the Stoke on Trent and Staffordshire Local Enterprise 
Partnership (LEP) and the Greater Birmingham and Solihull LEP although it should be 
noted that the Government is currently undertaking a revie w of LEPs. The Council is also a 
non-constituent member of the West Midlands Combined Authority (WMCA) which is a 
body that has devolved powers from central Government to implement budgets and policy 
in relation to key areas such as transport and housing.  
 
Population  
 
Between 2018 and 2019 the population in Cannock Chase rose by 0.7% to 100,762 
residents.  The working age population aged 16 -64 comprised 62.9% of the population, 
slightly above the West Midlands (61.7%) and England (62.4%) averages. 19.2% of  the 
population of Cannock Chase were aged 65+ in Mid -2019 which was higher than the West 
Midlands (18.6%) and England (18.4%) averages.1  
 
Population density in the District, the number of people per square mile (ppsqm),  is the 
second highest in Staffordshire after Tamworth (2486 ppsqm) at a rate of 1277 people per 
square mile in mid -2019. This reflects the largely urban, commercial and residential 
landscape of Cannock Chase.2  
 
Over the  five years since mid -2014 Cannock  Chase has experienced an increase of 2.3% 
in population with a higher proportion of births than deaths. However, the most numerically 
significant contributor to population growth has been internal migration – residential moves 
into the District by people from other local authorities. A large number of people who have 
moved into Cannock Chase in recent years have migrated from South Staffordshire, 
Lichfield and Walsall.3 
 
2018 -based population estimates project that the District’s population will rise to 115,178 
residents by 2043. The age profile of the population is forecast to change during this 
period, with a rise in the proportion of older residents, particularly those aged 70+.4  
In December 2019 the Office for National Statistics published a research report  which   
estimates  that of the 97,000 people in the District at this time, 95,000 were White British 
 
1 Office for National Statistics, Mid -2019 Population Estimates, June 2020.  
2 Office for National Statistics, Population Profiles for Local Authorities in England, December 2020.  
3 Office for National Statistics, Mid -2019 Population Estimates, June 2020.  
4 Office for National Statistics, 2018 -Based Population Projections for Local Authorities: Table 2 (March 2020).  
Item No.  8.363. The District Context  
 
Page. 7 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   with an increasing proportion of residents who identified with  different ethnic groups.  The 
estimates are for 2016, based on a three -year Annual Population Survey pooled dataset 
2014 -2016  and were rounded to the nearest thousand . 
 
Health and Education  
Cannock Chase experiences a range of health inequalities which impact on the welfare of 
the District and its residents. These include premature mortality from a range of health 
conditions such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, liver disease and respirator y disease, 
under -75 mortality from which was above the national average in 2020. The District 
experiences relatively high rates of adult and child obesity with adult obesity being over the 
national average, as well as below average consumption of the recom mended 'five -a-day'. 
Rates of smoking prevalence among adults aged 18+, as well as the rate of hospital 
admissions for alcohol -related conditions, remain above the national averages in recent 
years. Life expectancy at birth and at age 65 was below the nati onal average during 2020, 
with inequalities in health and life expectancy related to deprivation across the 
District.5  The Indices of Deprivation 2019 illustrates that a number of neighbourhoods in 
Cannock Chase were amongst the 10% and 20% most deprived  nationally in relation 
to poor health and shorter life expectancy in 2019.  
 
Rates of physical inactivity and excess weight continue to exceed the England average. 
27.8% of adults aged 16+ were physically inactive during 2020/21, doing less than 30 
minutes  of physical activity per week. This rate of physical inactivity was above the England 
average (23.4%).6 73.7% of adults 18+ were overweight or obese in 2020 -2021, above the 
West Midlands average (66.8%) and England average (63.5%).7 Smoking prevalence i n 
adults aged 18+ was above the England average of 12.1% in Cannock Chase during 2020 
with a local rate of 18%, whilst the rate of admission episodes for alcohol -related conditions 
in the District was above the national average in 2020/21.8 
 
Evidence and monitoring for Local Plan (Part 1) 2014 shows that access to indoor leisure 
facilities in the District has improved with the completion of Rugeley Leisure Centre and the 
major refurbishment of facilities at Cannock Leisure Centre.  The updated  indoor sport 
facilities evidence base910 notes that facilities are generally above average but will require 
continued investment to maintain standards and meet increased demand from housing 
growth. The use of sports facilities could be much improved thro ugh greater partnership 
working.  The evidence1112 for outdoor playing pitches shows that investment will be 
required in the quality of most pitches and to avoid a shortfall in provision to meet demand 
for Football, Rugby and Cricket.  
 
Whist the AONB is a vital asset for outdoor leisure and recreation the most recently 
produced evidence 13 identified there are areas within the District deficient in access to 
alternative open spaces, particularly semi -natural sites. This evidence base is in the 
process of be ing updated. Monitoring of the Local Plan (Part 1) identifies there have been a 
number of new open and play spaces provided alongside new developments but that 
 
5 Public Health England, Public Health Outcomes Framework Tool, June 2022 . 
6 Sport England, Active Lives Adult Survey May 2019/20 Report, June 20 22. 
7 Public Health England, Public Hea lth Outcomes Framework , June 2022 . 
8 Public Health England, Public Hea lth Outcomes Framework , June 2022 . 
9 CCDC Indoor Built Facilities Study (May 2019)  
10 CCDC Sport and Leisure Facilities Needs Assessment (August 2018)  
11 CCDC Playing Pitch Strategy Assessment Report (August 2018)  
12 CCDC Playing Pitch Strategy and Action Plan (May 2019)  
13 CCDC Open Space Assessment (2009)  
Item No.  8.373. The District Context  
 
Page. 8 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   deficiencies are likely to still remain. Phase one of the £1.3 million development on the 
Stadiu m site in Pye Green, Hednesford was completed in September 2020.  This has 
provided facilities including an adventure play area, green gym equipment, BMX track and 
more which will improve access to healthy living opportunities in this area.14 
 
The outdoor environment in Cannock Chase proved particularly important to local residents 
throughout the UK Government Lockdown. 50% of the 399 Cannock Chase respondents to 
the Staffordshire County Council Covid -19 Resident Survey identified that enjoying more 
time ou tdoors in and around their local area had been a positive change to emerge from 
the pandemic. The development of a greener, sustainable community and environment will 
be key to the District’s future. In 2020 the Thriving Places Index rated Cannock Chase as  
being above the England average for Place and Environment and Green Infrastructure.15 
Across the 7 domains of the Indices of Deprivation 2019, Cannock Chase is most deprived 
in the domain of education, skills and training which measures the lack of attainment and 
skills in the local population. The District falls just outside the most depri ved 10% of local 
authority districts nationally for this domain.16 GCSE attainment in the District is typically 
below the national average. In 2019 31.6% of students in Cannock Chase achieved grade 
5 or above in English and Mathematics which was below the Staffordshire (36.9%), West 
Midlands (40%) and England (43.2%) averages. Across the District, rates for this level of 
attainment range from 17.5% in Cannock North to 46.5% in Hagley.17 In terms of 
qualifications among the working -age population, estimates indicate that the proportion of 
residents aged 16 -64 qualified to NVQ Level 4 and above saw an increase to 34.3% in 
2019 and is slightly above the Regional average. However, the proportion of residents 
employed in jobs associated with higher skills -levels and earnings are estimated to have 
fallen in 2019 -2020. 37.2% of residents were estimated to be working in managerial and 
professional occupations in the period July 2019 to June 2020, below the regional and 
national averages.18 
 
Community Deprivation  
In the Indices of Deprivation 2019 Cannock Chase is ranked overall as the 126th most 
deprived local authority district in England. The District is the second most deprived in 
Staffordshire after Tamworth which is ranked 125, with Cannock Chase ranked as 13th 
most deprived local authority District in the West Midlands Region.19  
 
Such deprivation can be attributed to the legacy of industrial decline in the District  reducing 
access to employment, but can also be related to the need for appropriate social 
infrastructure.  
 
In 2019 around 17.2% of children aged 0 -15 were estimated to be living in income deprived 
families, although this ranged from 8.2% in Hawks Green t o 30.2% in Cannock North.20 
 
14 CCDC Leisure Services  
15 Centre for Thriving Places, Thriving Places Index, 2020.  
16 Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, The English Indices of Deprivation 2019 (IoD2019) 
Statistical Release (September 2019).   
17 Staffordshire County Council, Children’s Joint Strategic Needs Assessment: District and Ward Data 
Matrices (March 2020).  
18 Office for National Statistics via NOMIS Labour Market Profile for Cannock Chase  
19 Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Governm ent, The English Indices of Deprivation 2019 (IoD2019) 
Statistical Release (September 2019).   
20 Staffordshire County Council, Children’s Joint Strategic Needs Assessment: District and Ward Data 
Matrices (March 2020).  
Item No.  8.383. The District Context  
 
Page. 9 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   The median gross weekly pay for full time workers living in the District was £517.10 in 2020 
which was below both the regional (£551.70) and Great Britain (£587.10) averages.21 
 
Crime  
Restrictions imposed as part of the government approach to controlling the Coronavirus 
pandemic have resulted in significant reductions in recorded crime and disorder from mid -
March 2020 onwards22. This is particularly the case with regards to crime, disorder and 
ASB taking place in public p laces. Since Coronavirus restrictions have been lifted, 2021/22 
crime figures show a significant increase.  
 
The data for the period from April 2019 to March 2020 has shown limited significant change 
in most types of crime since the last assessment.  Acros s all major crime types, levels of 
crime in Cannock Chase overall are statistically similar to England & Wales.  
The most significant increase locally has been in recorded Stalking and Harassment 
offences (+19%), however this is in line with CSP areas acros s England & Wales (+21%).  
There is growing concern that the wider impact of COVID -19 will result in considerable 
increases in demand relating to all major vulnerabilities (alcohol, drug and substance 
misuse, mental health, safeguarding).  Fraud is of incr eased and growing concern in 
Staffordshire and Stoke -on-Trent, especially online fraud.   Monthly Fraud incidents picked 
up by the National Fraud Intelligence Bureau (NFIB) increased significantly following the 
first UK lockdown in March 2020 and are expec ted to remain high into 2021.  
 
Housing  
 
The 2014 -based household projections indicate an increase from 42,828 households 
(2018 ) to 47,102  households ( 2039 ), and these are the ones the Government has chosen 
to utilise for its draft standard housing methodology which indicates a housing requirement 
of 259 dwellings per annum (2018 -2039) for the District.  
 
From a detailed analysis of the market undertaken in 2019 the Cannock Chase Local 
Housing Needs Assessment identified a net annual need of 105 23dwellings per year, over 
the 20 -year period 2018 -38. The study shows there will be a need for around 4% of new 
homes to be for nursing homes and other residential institutions. It also shows that for the 
types of dwellings the majority of the need is for s maller dwellings suited to younger people 
and small households (12% one bed and 64% two bed), whilst larger properties for families 
and bigger households account for (16% 3 bed and 8% 4+ bed).  
 
Furthermore, there is a significant housing shortfall to the y ear 2036 across the Greater 
Birmingham and Black County Housing Market Area, and as one of the fourteen authorities 
in this area24, Cannock Chase Council will need to play a role in helping to address this.  
 
 
Employment  
The local economic base has develo ped and diversified significantly from the mining 
heritage of the last century with expansion of the tourism sector and growth arising from 
 
21 Office for National Statistics via N OMIS Labour Market Profile for Cannock Chase  
22 Staffordshire Commissioner and CCDC Community Safety Strategic Assessment – Cannock Chase 2020  
23 For the 18 year period 2018 -36 in the main body of the report, the annual need is calculated as 110 
affordable d wellings per year, of which 11% one bed, 65% two bed, 16% 3 bed and 8% 4+ bed  
24   Local Authority areas: Birmingham, Bromsgrove, Cannock Chase, Dudley, Lichfield, North Warwickshire, 
Redditch, Sandwell, Solihull, South Staffordshire, Stratford upon Avon, T amworth, Walsall and 
Wolverhampton.  
Item No.  8.393. The District Context  
 
Page. 10 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   businesses locating near the strategic M6 Toll/A5 corridor. The District now has a more 
diverse employment structure  with 46.7% of District residents aged 16+ estimated to be 
employed in Group 1 -3 occupations (including Managers, Directors, Professional, 
Associate Professional and Technical occupations) in 2022. This accords  with the West 
Midlands (46.6%) but is below t he average for  Great Britain (49.7%) , the proportion of 
residents estimated to be working in administrative and skilled trades occupations was 
above both regional and national averages during 2021/22.25  
 
Four business industry sectors in Cannock Chase provided relatively high proportions of 
GVA (Gross Value Added) and employee jobs within the District during 2018 -2019: 
Wholesale and Retail Trade; Repair of Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles, Construction, 
Transportation and Storage and Manufacturing. The proportion of employee jobs in Human 
Health and Social Work Activities also saw an increase during this period. 21.1% of 
business enterprises in the District were in the Construction industry in 2020.26 
 
The rate of working -age people in employment in Cannock Chase is typically above the 
regional and national averages, with the District ranked as ‘high’ above the England 
average for Employment in the Thriving Places Index 2020.27 In March 2022, 3.4% of 
District residents (16 –64 years) were claiming out of work benefits, a rate below both the 
West Midlands (5.2%) and England (4.1%) averages.  Whilst 83.9% of economically active 
residents aged 16 -64 were estimated to be in employment between January and 
Decem ber 2021, the Coronavirus pandemic and UK Government Lockdown has caused an 
increase in the rate of claims for out of work benefits in Cannock Chase, particularly among 
young people  where the figure for 18 -24 years old claiming out of work benefits rose to  
10.4%, which was considerably higher than the national and regional average .  
Covid -19 has had a considerable impact on the UK economy.  During lockdown the 
economy suffered an unprecedented contraction and employment fell significantly.  
Consumer demand suffered given social distancing and low confidence, leading to a big 
drop in social consumption, especially for recreation, leisure and travel.   
 The economy is recover ing.   
 
 
Town Centres and Shopping  
 
In the first half of 2020 there was a net loss of 7,834 stores across Great Britain compared 
with a 3,647 stores loss over the equivalent period in 2019 and 4,402 in 2018.  Closures 
increased by 21% from 2019 -2020 with 31,139 shops closing.  The comparison  goods 
sector declined the highest in H1 (January to June) 2020 with a net loss of 4,975 units.  
Independent businesses have been more resilient than national multiples in H1 of 2020 
with the decline lower across all four sectors.  This, together with cons umers doing more of 
their shopping online, which has been compounded by Covid -19, has resulted in a large 
number of retailers restructuring or going into administration.  
 
Vacancy rates in town centres have been increasing since 2017 from 11% to 13%.  The 
vacancy rate for both retail and leisure is forecast to increase further with retail anticipated 
to see a higher increase.  The increase in vacancies was already apparent before the 
Covid -19 with the pandemic accelerating the level.  
 
 
e 
26 Office for National Statistics via NOMIS Labour Market Profile for Cannock Chase ; Office for National 
Statistics UK Business Activity, Size and Location (October 2020).  
27 Centre for Thriving Places, Thriving Places I ndex, 2020.  
Item No.  8.403. The District Context  
 
Page. 11 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Cannock Town Centre is  ranked 508 against other town centres and retail parks for 
2016/17.  The data also shows that Rugeley is at rank 608 and Hednesford is ranked 
2,815.  All three Town Centres have registered a lower ranking since the previous 2014/15 
analysis reflecting bot h a decline in the number of ‘multiple retailors’ (anchor stores and 
fashion operators) and the relative smaller settlement size on a national register of retail 
centres.28  Cannock represents the largest town within the District’s retail hierarchy and is 
suitable for larger scale retail and leisure developments.  A Town Centre Prospectus has 
been published to attract new investment into Cannock , supported by the successful 
Levelling Up Fund Bid  and improvements have been made recently to improve the public  
realm.  Hednesford town centre has undergone significant regeneration to deliver an 
improved retail and leisure offer for the area, as well as other public realm improvements 
e.g. at Hednesford Park.  Rugeley town centre has also attracted investment in t erms of 
new retail food stores, improvements to the public realm and a flood alleviation scheme 
which will enable further redevelopment projects to be taken forward.  All three Town 
Centres will require continued investment in what is currently a challengi ng and rapidly 
changing retail market.  There continue to be a number of local centres which serve local 
daily shopping needs in and around the District.  A new retail designer outlet village opened  
at Mill Green (just outside Cannock town centre boundary ) in 2021.  
 
 
 
Transport and Infrastructure  
 
The District is located at a strategic road/rail transport crossroads between the North West 
and South East via the M6T/M6 and West Coast Main Line railway and East -West A5/M54 
corridor, and the West Midlands a nd wider Staffordshire. A new M6 -M54 link road is due to 
open by 202529 and there is a long term  aspiration to upgrade the A5 Trunk Road to 
‘Expressway’ status. Rugeley benefits from the Rugeley Eastern Bypass and direct rail 
services to London on the West Coast Main Line.  
 
The Rugeley -Hednesford -Cannock -Walsall -Birmingham, ‘Chase Line’ rail service continues 
to grow in its popularity and the three stations at Cannock, Hednesford and Rugeley Town 
carry over 700,000 passengers’ per year.  The Chase Line electrification and lin e speed 
improvements completed in May 2019 have enabled the introduction of faster, longer and 
more frequent services, including two trains per hour throughout the day to Birmingham, 
and new direct services to the NEC/Birmingham Airport.  
 
The Council is al so actively involved in the innovative Chase Line ‘Stations Alliance’, with 
the West Midlands Rail Executive, Staffordshire County Council (SCCREP), LEPs, Network 
Rail and West Midlands Trains (the new West Midlands franchise operator). Cannock 
station in particular is the focus of attention for a major upgrade, in view of its close 
proximity to the £160m West Midlands Designer Outlet at Mill Green which will attract 3 -4 
million visitors per annum.  COVID -19  impacted the levels of footfall and in 2018/19 these 
were 500,000. Rail services have seen significant improvements and strong growth in 
passenger numbers leading to continued investment in infrastructure. There is the 
expectation that footfall levels are expected to grow with the return of passengers to the 
railway and building back better.  
 
Rugeley has also benefited due to its position on the West Coast Main Line (WCML) 
including the introduction of hourly services to Crewe, Stafford, Milton Keynes and London. 
The High Speed 2 (HS2) railway from Lon don to Crewe will not run through the District. 
Rail services have seen significant improvements to Birmingham, London and the north 
 
28Venuescore  UK Shopping Venue Rankings  (Javelin Group)  2016 -17 (also referenced in the 2021 Retail Study)  
29 Highways England M54 to M6 Link Road  
Item No.  8.413. The District Context  
 
Page. 12 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   west The off -peak Chase Line service frequency to Birmingham has been increased, while 
the electrification and line speed i ncrease schemes have been completed, including the 
introduction of longer, faster services to Birmingham with direct services to Birmingham 
International (Airport/NEC).  
 
While there is a good core urban and inter urban bus service network from Cannock to 
Wolverhampton, Stafford, Lichfield, Walsall and Wolverhampton and from Rugeley to 
Stafford and Lichfield, these are not immune from the national trend in falling passenger 
numbers. Parts of the district have seen reduced levels or even loss of their bus ser vices 
and are now more isolated, especially away from the main commuter routes. Social 
isolation is an issue for many who do not have access to cars. County Council budget 
cutbacks have led to the loss of evening services and there are no longer any Sunday  bus 
services.  A new bus operator has taken over bus services operating from Cannock bus 
depot, which run most of the local bus routes.  
 
In terms of the road network the A5/M6T/A460/A34 Churchbridge Junction only has a 
design life to 2020 and much of the A5 in the District is also designated as an Air Quality 
Management Area, as is the area around Five Ways junction in Heath Hayes. Congestion 
along the A5 has been cited as an issue for road freight and the reliability of journey times, 
and there is an A5 P artnership which meets to address issues in this regard.  
 
The historical development of the District has provided a wealth of canal network assets 
which provide connections to neighbouring areas and potentially offer opportunities for 
improved linkages inc luding cycling and walking, contributing to sustainable communities 
and providing a wealth of other benefits (e.g. tourism, health and wellbeing, green 
infrastructure and biodiversity). Ongoing initiatives by the Lichfield and Hatherton Canals 
Restoration Trust, propose the phased restoration of the Hatherton Canal, partly on a new 
alignment.  
 
Environment  
 
The District  comprises land rising from the low lying, largely urbanised areas in the south -
west and Green Belt area around Norton Canes in the south -east to the higher plateaux 
within the Cannock Chase AONB. These plateaux then fall to the wide valley of the River 
Trent with the urban area of Rugeley and Brereton bordered by Green Belt in the north. 
Cannock Chase AONB provides a strategic area of accessible countryside with 
conservation, recreation, economic and tourism benefits. The Green Belt is also important 
for recreation, maintaining the District’s character and its wildlife and safeguarding the 
wider open countryside. The District supports two Special Areas of Conservation, Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest, Ancient Woodland, local Sites of Biological Interes t, Local 
Nature Reserves and a Local Geological Site.  However, some elements of the District’s 
biodiversity assets are at potential risk of decline due to development and recreational 
pressures unless appropriate mitigation measures are put in place30. This natural 
environment gives the District a valuable semi -rural landscape, which combined with the 
historical influence of human activities results in a distinctive landscape character.   
 
The District’s medieval origins, mining legacy and industrial/agric ultural heritage provide a 
wealth of valuable assets, which contribute to this distinctive character and provide a range 
of recreation and tourism benefits. There are 8 Conservation Areas within the District 
(primarily focused around Rugeley), a large numb er of listed buildings and several 
Scheduled Monuments. There are also a range of non -designated heritage assets 
including archaeological features of interest, potential sites of national importance related 
 
30 CCDC Appropriate Assessments (2009 onwards)AND Cannock Chase SAC Guidance to Mitigate(2017)  
Item No.  8.423. The District Context  
 
Page. 13 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   to military activities and locally significant hi storic farmsteads. The canal network 
represents a key heritage asset that can contribute towards the natural and built 
environment including opportunities for heritage -led regeneration and high quality design. 
The central landscape areas of the District ar e in a fairly good and strong condition overall 
and are of high sensitivity to change; those in the weakest and poorest condition are 
primarily at southern and eastern parts (around Norton Canes), mainly due to the extent of 
change in this area; although s ome parts are still sensitive to further change31 
 
In addition, the District’s mining legacy has resulted in a variety of issues and constraints. 
Surface hazards, such as mine entries and fissures, are present throughout the District and 
rising mine water is an issue that The Coal Authority is monitoring due to its potential 
pollution and flooding effects. Southern parts of the District are still classified as potential 
mineral resource areas for coal. Central and northern parts of the District are also cla ssified 
as having potential mineral resources (sand and gravel).32 
 
 
Green Belt  
 
Given that 60% of the District  is designated Green Belt, it is a key feature of the District’s 
overall character.  It provides a range of multifunctional benefits (as outlined above) and 
serves to maintain the openness of the rural -urban fringe (with the West Midlands 
conurbation) as w ell as the District’s separate urban areas and their identities.  A Green 
Belt study (2016) provides an overview of the current condition of the Districts’ Green Belt 
(in terms of how it performs against the nationally defined purposes of Green Belt) and a  
more detailed Green Belt33 study has been undertaken to inform the preparation of the 
Plan.  
 
Climate Change  
 
Cannock Chase Council has declared a Climate Change Emergency with a target date for 
achieving Net Zero by 2030.  
 
The impacts associated with cl imate change risks are already being felt. Local, regional, 
national and global trends for climate change will rise in line with emissions that have 
already been released to the atmosphere, exacerbating the hazards that occur naturally, 
and magnifying the impacts experienced. Policies should therefore seek to ensure that 
developments are ‘resilient’ to climate change risks and the influence that a high -emission 
projection scenario could have.34 
 
Safeguarding against future climate impacts is a cross -cutting issue and should be 
integrated with approaches to achieve a pathway towards low and zero carbon. This may 
include measures such as requiring on -site renewable energy generation, diversifying 
transportation links and ensuring development alloc ations are  designed to be resilient to 
chronic and acute climate change impacts such flooding and biodiversity migration.  
 
 
Key Issues  
 
From the profile the following key issues for the District can be identified:  
 
• Levels of crime, and perceptions of crime, remain a concern;  
 
• Low standards of health and educational attainment require improvement;  
 
 
31 Landscape Character Assessment for Cannock Chase District (2016) and Addendum (2017)  
32 Staffordshire County Council Minerals Local Plan (2017)  
33 Cannock Chase G reen Belt Harm Assessment (2020)  
34 SCC Climate Change Adaption and Mitigation Report (October 2020)  
Item No.  8.433. The District Context  
 
Page. 14 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Future housing needs, particularly affordable housing requirements, have to be 
met including a contribution to the shortf all across the wider housing market area;  
 
• Economic growth and regeneration needs have to be met and access to 
employment opportunities and local labour skills require improvement  and 
resilience ; 
 
• The natural and built environment (inclusive of indoor, built and outdoor sports) 
should be planned effectively to encourage opportunities for healthy and active 
lifestyles amongst all sections of the community.  
 
• Educational provision will need to be provi ded for including school expansions or 
new provision where applicable  
 
• Provision of comprehensive transport networks need to be better supported to help 
reduce social exclusion and unsustainable development impacts;  
 
• The town centres need to adapt and incr ease their competitiveness to maintain 
local shopping provision, be responsive to changing consumer needs and the role 
and function of centres, maximise opportunity, reverse decline and contribute to 
regeneration;  
 
• The highly valuable and sensitive natural  environment, historic environment and 
landscape character, green linkages and the canal network need to be protected 
and enhanced whilst meeting demands and providing opportunities for housing, 
recreation and economic activity including heritage -led regen eration;  
 
• The natural and built environment including indoor, built and outdoor facilities and 
including the role of green infrastructure, the canal networks and linked cycleways 
and walkways should be planned effectively to encourage opportunities for hea lthy 
and active lifestyles amongst all sections of the community  
 
• Potential challenges posed by the need to respond to climate change need to be 
tackled e.g. alternative forms of energy supply, addressing flood risk, helping local 
wildlife to adapt, along with wider sustainable development concerns.  For 
example, air and water quality concerns as well as more specific local issues (such 
as those related to minerals and the coal mining legacy).   
 
These District -wide issues manifest in the localities of the District in different ways, 
reflecting local features. The key points are summarised below with brief profile 
characteristics.  
 
Cannock/Hednesford/Heath Hayes  
 
 
• These areas are described together as they form a continuous urban area. The 
combined population is 65,423, 67% of the District total (2011 Census).  
 
• Housing provision is a mix of age, size and tenure. There have been a number of 
Council -led programmes to regenerate public housing estates which were of poor 
quality, being constructed from defective pre -cast reinforced concrete.  
 
• The urban area, particularly Cannock, provides the majority of employment 
opportunities for the District with particular concentrations along the A5/M6 Toll 
corridor, which links into the neighbouring West Midlands conurbation.  
 
• Rail services have seen sig nificant improvements and strong growth in passenger 
numbers leading to continued investment in infrastructure. Parts of the District have 
seen reduced levels or even loss of their bus services and are now more isolated, 
especially away from the main commu ter routes.  Social isolation is an issue for many 
people who do not have access to cars.  
 
Item No.  8.443. The District Context  
 
Page. 15 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Health provision has traditionally been via small doctors’ surgeries across the area, 
with more recent investment in larger health centres to serve growing populati ons and 
to help retain specialist staff.  There are several schools to serve both primary and 
secondary age pupils along with a number of community facilities, including Chase 
Leisure Centre.  
 
• The area is served by a series of major open recreational spaces e.g. Hednesford 
Hills, a designated SSSI35, and major parks at Cannock, Hednesford and Heath 
Hayes. Improvements to the quality of play areas/hubs have occurred including at 
Cannock Stadium a nd ongoing maintenance/improvements to the District’s parks 
which have achieved ‘Green Flag’ status.36 However, some residential areas do not 
have good access to children’s play facilities.  Indoor leisure provision has been 
improved through modernisation works at the Chase Leisure Centre.  
 
• Since the sixteenth century, coal extraction has had a major impact on the landscape 
character, resulting in extensive industrialisation.  Cannock Town Centre 
Conservation Area, with its listed buildings, requires manage ment and investment to 
enhance its character whilst North Street, Bridgtown Conservation Area, illustrative of 
the area’s growth during the late Victorian period, has benefited from investment and 
major enhancements.  
 
Hednesford Town Council produced a Nei ghbourhood Plan (adopted in 2018) which sets 
out local issues and aspirations in more detail including a particular focus upon local 
regeneration and the town centre area.  
 
Rugeley & Brereton  
 
• The combined population of 24,650 is 25% of the district  total (2011 Census).  
 
• The former Rugeley power station site continues to be prepared for development 
and will provide a major change to Rugeley and Brereton and a significant 
contribution to the grow th in the district.  
 
• Rugeley town centre has had limited new investment since the mid-1980s  and is in 
continued need of regeneration.  However, more recent investment in the form of a 
new supermarket, public realm enhancements and a flood alleviation sche me have 
brought about new opportunities and improvements to the town.  The Towers 
Business Park (developed on the former Lea Hall Colliery site) home to major 
companies, such as Amazon. The now well-established  Eastern Bypass also 
provides links to nearby employment opportunities. However, some issues of out 
commuting and lack of access to local high quality employment opportunities 
remain.  
 
• Rail services have seen significant improvements to Birmingham, London and the 
north -west. The off –peak Chase Line se rvice frequency to Birmingham has been 
increased, while the electrification and line speed increase schemes have been 
completed, including the introduction of longer, faster services to Birmingham with 
direct services to Birmingham International (Airport/N EC). 
 
• Bus services have followed the national trend of gradual decline in passengers and 
a diminishing network. County Council budget cutbacks and the resulting reduced 
operating hours at Cannock bus depot have led to the withdrawal of evening 
services and  the removal of Sunday bus services in the District.  
 
 
35 Included as part of the Chasewater and the Southern Staffordshire Coalfield Heaths SSSI  
36 CCDC Authority Monitoring Report 2016/17  
Item No.  8.453. The District Context  
 
Page. 16 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Apart from the Victorian residential streets around Rugeley Town Centre, the historic 
core of Brereton village and areas of north -west Ravenhill most housing is post 1945 
with several estates of public housing including the former National Coal Board Pear 
Tree estate, which has environmental and infrastructure problems.  
 
• There are two health centres, 9 primary schools, and 1 secondary school.  A new 
school will be provided on the Rugeley Power Station site with additional health 
infrastructure provided in the area to serve the new housing developments.  There 
are also a nu mber of community facilities including Rugeley Leisure Centre and 
swimming pool.  Despite being adjacent to the AONB, there is a lack of alternative 
recreational sites and deficiencies in access to play areas.  
 
• There is a wealth of historic natural and bui lt assets in the area e.g. 6 Conservation 
Areas in and around Rugeley Town Centre, along the Trent and Mersey Canal and 
at Main Road, Brereton. Rugeley’s position alongside the strategic River Trent 
corridor has resulted in its development since early Dome sday records and the 
layout of the town pattern is largely unchanged from the sixteenth century  
 
Norton Canes  
 
• The population of 7,479 is almost 8% of the District  total (2011 Census). Originating 
as a mining village it expanded to include estates of public and private housing 
during the 1960/70s. There have been more recent expansions in the form of 
housing developments to the south -east of the urban area (at the f ormer Greyhound 
Stadium) and there is a large housing development under construction to the south 
of the urban area (450 homes).  There are 2 primary schools, a secondary school, 
library and community centre together with a limited range of local shops. A modern 
health centre opened in 2007 and three GP surgeries operate from this, however 
concerns about local capacity have been raised (noting that there are cross 
boundary linkages with Great Wyrley in South Staffordshire in terms of the local 
catchment). T he village centre is accessible by bus, but some peripheral areas of 
Norton Canes have lost their services, and there are no Sunday bus services.  
 
• Access to recreational sites in the area is relatively good, particularly given the 
proximity to the Chasewater Country Park (in Lichfield District). Access to indoor 
leisure facilities is mainly outside the settlement at Cannock, Burntwood or Walsall.   
 
The Rural Areas  
 
The Cannock Chase AONB contains one of the largest areas of readily accessible 
recreational land in the West Midlands, being a statutory designation under the Countryside 
and Rights of Way Act 2000.  It is a significant asset for nearby communities as well as 
comprising important heathland areas covered by the European designated Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC). The landscape is dominated by forestry plantations, however within 
the AONB and around its fringes there have been, and conti nue to be, a number of 
influences on its landscape and heritage e.g. hunting and military activities, mining, 
agriculture, equestrian activity and recreation. Modern -day activities require careful 
management in view of the areas sensitivities.  
 
 
• Slitting M ill, Prospect Village and Cannock Wood village are all situated in the 
northern area outside the Green Belt. All have village halls; however Prospect 
Village and Slitting Mill have no shops or schools. Cannock Wood has access to a 
local primary school (in Lichfield District) and shop.  Prospect Village, Rawnsley and 
Hazel Slade have a daytime and Saturday bus service to destinations such as 
Cannock, Hednesford, Burntwood and Lichfield.  Slitting Mill and Cannock Wood 
Item No.  8.463. The District Context  
 
Page. 17 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   have no timetabled bus service.  Access to public transport and the potential for 
social isolation is now an issue.  
 
• The rural area south of the M6 Toll contains the hamlet of Little Wyrley , scattered 
dwellings and farms, commercial developments at Watling Street, Lime Lane and a 
completed landfill site at the former Grove Colliery. It also contains the Cannock 
Extension Canal Special Area of Conservation (SAC). This area contains some of 
the most intact rural landscape character in the District, particularly south of the A5.  
 
• The rural areas, by their largely undeveloped nature, have a unique character by 
virtue of the surviving historic farmsteads and field patterns, largely from the 18th 
and 19th centuries. However the District also retains a wealth of late medieval and 
early post medieval industrial sites including glass working, mining and metal 
working. Such sites throughout the West Midlands represent the first stirrings of 
what was to  become the Industrial Revolution during the 19th Century, though by 
this time much of the industrial focus had moved away from the District. These 
assets are sensitive to development pressures and require careful consideration.  
 
Item No.  8.474. How the Local Plan fits within the Wider Context  
 
Page. 18 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
Cannock Chase Councils’ Corporate Plan   
4.1 The Council’s Corporate Plan covers the period 20 22 to 202 6. This states the Councils 
vision:  
• Ambition is at the heart of the plan  
• Want local residents  to be proud to call Cannock Chase home  
• Rejuvenated town centres, local businesses that are supported and an environment 
where entrepreneurship is encouraged  
• Working together with partnerships, town and parish councils and community groups to 
achieve this ambition.  
• Empowered residents encouraged to lead healthy and independent lives.    
• A local environment that is protected, preserved, and enhanced for future generations.    
• Forward -thinking Council, making best use of our assets, living within o ur means, and 
ensuring we are accountable for our decisions.  
4 Priorities for 2022 -2026  
– Economic Prosperity  
– Health & Wellbeing  
– The Community  
– Responsible Council  
4.2 In terms of Pr omoting Prosperity there are five key aims ‘To reinvigorate the economy and 
create a District that thrives’ : 
 
• Attract investment to develop the District’s economy.  
• Encourage entrepreneurship, promote apprenticeships, and support business.  
• Attract modern, green, and skilled industries and create jobs.  
• Rejuvenate our town centres.  
• Support the development of our visitor economy.  
 
4.3 For Community Wellbeing there are four key aims:  
 
• Provide opportunities for residents to lead healthy and active lifestyles and recognise 
the importance of mental health and wellbeing.  
• Embed health and wellbeing into all of our policies and everything that we do.  
• Work with partners to address health inequalities across the District.  
• Support residents that need our help.  
 
4.4 The new Local Plan will therefore need to help the Council to achie ve its vision . 
 
4.5 The geography of the West Midlands is complex and Cannock Chase Council is involved 
in a range of different partnerships and groups formed under the Duty to Co -operate 
delivering a range of different functions. Some key ones include:  
 
Item No.  8.484. How the Local Plan fits within the Wider Context  
 
Page. 19 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • The Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local Economic Partnership (LEP)37 
 
• Staffordshire and Stoke LEP38 
 
• The West Midlands Combined Authority39  
 
• The 14 authorities comprising the Greater Birmingham and Black Country Housing 
Market Area40 
 
• The Cannock Chase AONB Partnership41; and  
 
• The Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation Partnership (SAC)42 
 
4.6 The Council will need to ensure that the new Local Plan helps these (and other) 
partnerships to deliver their ambitions and obligations. As the Local Plan de velops we will 
need to ensure that the plan links to a range of strategies and plans, for example:  
 
• The Government’s Industrial Strategy  
 
• The Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan  
 
• The West Midlands Engine Growth Strategy and Midlands Connect Strategy  
 
• Strategic Economic Plans  
 
• The West Midlands Combined Authority Spatial Investment and Delivery Plan  
 
• DfT Gear Change: A bold vision for cycling and walking, July 2020  
 
• Statutory Cycling and Walking Investment Strategy (CWIS), 2017  
 
• Staffordshire Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan 2021  
 
• Cannock Chase Integrated Transport Strategy (to be reviewed)  
 
• Various environmental strategies and management plans ; and  
 
• Infrastructure and delivery strategies (these can cover a range of issues such as 
utilities, health, education, community infrastructure and so on)  
 
4.7 New evidence since the publication of the preferred  options includes:  
 
 
• Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation  Action plan Staffordshire County Council 
(AECOM  2022 ). 
 
• Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study  Update  (2022 ) 
 
• Development  Capacity Study (2022)  
• Open Space Assessment (2022)  
 
37 Local Authority areas : Birmingham, East Staffordshire, Lichfield, Tamworth, Brom sgrove, Cannock Chase, Redditch,  Solihull, 
Wyre Forest  
38 Staffordshire and Stoke, list of partners at https://www.stokestaffslep.org.uk/about -us/our -people -partners/  
39 Constituent local authorities: Birmingham, Coventry, Dudley, Sandwell, Solihull, Walsall, Wolverhampton. Non con stituent 
local authorities: Cannock Chase, North Warwickshire, Nuneaton & Bedworth, Redditch, Rugby, Shropshire, Stratford -upon -
Avon, Tamworth, Telford & Wrekin  
40 Local Authority areas: Birmingham, Bromsgrove, Cannock Chase, Dudley, Lichfield, North Warwic kshire, Redditch, Sandwell, 
Solihull, South Staffordshire, Stratford upon Avon, Tamworth, Walsall and Wolverhampton.  
41 Local Authorities involved: Cannock Chase, Lichfield, Stafford, South Staffordshire; Staffordshire County Council also workin g 
with a ran ge of other organisations  
42 Local authorities: Cannock Chase, East Staffordshire, Lichfield, South Staffordshire, Stafford, Staffordshire County Council,  
Walsall, Wolverhampton also with a range of other organisations  
Item No.  8.494. How the Local Plan fits within the Wider Context  
 
Page. 20 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Viability Assessment (2022)  
• Five Ways transport Modelling and Air  Quality Impact 2022  
• Cannock Chase Memorandum of Understanding 2022  
 
4.8 The Council will also need to work with neighbouring authorities on a range of strategic 
issues as well as a number of organisations who are listed in the National Planning Policy 
Framework as prescribed bodies under the statutory Duty to Co -operate. These  are: 
 
• Local Planning Authorities  
 
• County Councils  
 
• Local Enterprise Partnerships  
 
• Environment Agency  
 
• Historic England  
 
• Natural England  
 
• Civil Aviation Authority  
 
• Homes England  
 
• Integrated Care Systems/Integrated Care Board  
 
• Office of Rail and Road  
 
• Local Integrated Transport Authority  
 
• Highways Authorities  
 
• Local Nature Partnerships  
 
4.9 The NPPF requires that Statements of Common Ground will need to be prepared to 
demonstrate how the Duty to Co -operate has been met. We will also need to be able to 
demonstrate how we are preparing the plan in the context of the most appropriate 
functional geographical/market areas for housing and the economy.  
 
4.10 We had already identified the following cross boundary issues:  
Housing Land N eed 
Discussions will continue w ith our Duty to Co -operate partners to ascertain potential 
assistance to meet Cannock’s housing need and ongoing dialogue in relation to the wider 
Housing Market Area shortfall.  
 
Cannock Chase SAC  
Policies are necessary to  carefully balance recreational uses and control development in 
order to protect these a reas from any negative impacts.  
 
Cannock Chase AONB  
Cannock Chase Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) is a high value protected 
landscape that benefits from prot ection against most forms of development in order to 
preserve the views into and across the heathland and forest habitats.  
 
 
Item No.  8.504. How the Local Plan fits within the Wider Context  
 
Page. 21 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
 
Gypsy  and Traveller Need  
We will continue to  ascertain potential assistance to meet the need arising in Cannock  
District and add ress the shortfall in the accommodation need of this community in our 
neighbouring authorities.  
  
Employment Land N eed 
Discussions will continue with our Duty to Co -operate partners to ascerta in potential 
assistance to meet  unidentified need for employment land within the authorities which 
share our functional economic market area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.515. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 22 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES  
 
Strategic Objective 1 :  
 
To deliver high quality development that protects the historic environment and is 
appropriate, distinctive, attractive and safe by:  
 
• Protecting, conserving and enhancing the District’s historic environment, and 
sustaining local character and distinctiveness by managing designated and non -
designated heritage assets and their townscape and landscape settings;  
 
• Retaining and enhancing the distinct and separate character of the District’s 
settlements and protecting and enhancing the quality of the built environment by 
ensuring that new development is  designed to provide the highest quality of built form 
and public realm which will enhance the District’s distinctive heritage and natural 
assets; and  
 
• Creating places that are safe, inclusive and accessible which deter crim e and reduce 
the fear of crime.  
 
 
Strategic Objective 2:  
 
To create community facilities  and healthy living opportunities across the District by:    
• Ensuring the adequate provision of community facilities in accessible locations   
• Safeguarding the health and the amenity of local communities.  
 
• Providing open space,  sports and recreational buildings and land, including playing 
fields  
 
• Providing opportunities for allotments and local food growing  
• Providing healthy living opportunities and  increasing physical activity in everyday lives.  
 
 
 
Strategic Objective 3:  
 
To deliver a sufficient supply of homes to provide for housing choice and ensure all 
people are able to live in a decent home which meets their needs by:  
 
• Facilitating sustainable housing provision  for this plan period and the next ; 
 
• Delivering sufficient housing to meet the District’s own need and an appropriate and 
sustainable contribution to the wider housing market area shortfall where justified in 
adopted plans;  
 
• Helping meet local need for affordable dwellings;  
 
• Providing housing choices for an ageing population;  
 
• Catering for the needs of different groups in the community.  
 
 
Strategic Objective 4 : 
 
To encourage a vibrant local economy and workforce by:  
 
• Championing clean growth principles to support a highly productive, clean and 
resilient economy;  
 
• Safeguarding existing employment areas for employment uses;  
 
• Providing employment opportunities in locations which best respond to market 
demands and which wil l attract inward investment;  
Item No.  8.525. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 23 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
• Ensuring that business locations and centres are accessible by public transport from all 
areas of the District, reducing travel needs where possible;  
 
• Supporting the development of town centres as hubs for commercial uses such as 
offices,  leisure and culture uses, residential opportunities and community activities;  
 
• Providing a range of sizes and types of employment sites to meet modern business 
needs ; 
 
• Supporting sustainable tourism and the rural economy, balanced with the protection of 
the AONB and the District’s two SACs;  
 
• Ensuring the land based economies of the District, including agriculture and forestry, 
can continue to operate, diversify and pros per; 
 
• Encouraging the development of Live Work units;  
 
• Providing for local employment and the development of skills.  
 
 
Strategic Objective : 5  
 
To support the provision of sustainable transport and communications infrastructure by:  
 
Managing the need to travel by:   
 
• Providing for major new development in accessible locations that can provide access 
for all sections of the community to work, shopping, health, education, leisure, green 
space and other facilities.  
 
• Clustering the development of services and facilities in  locations that can provide 
convenient access to all sections of the community.  
 
• Ensuring major new developments provide for safe pedestrian and cycle movement 
within the scheme and to neighbouring areas, and are designed to accommodate high 
quality public  transport services.  
 
• Supporting the installation of high quality and resilient digital communication 
technologies to facilitate business development and remote working.  
 
Supporting low carbon transport systems:  
 
• Supporting the provision of electric vehicle charging points, and other infrastructure that 
may be required for alternative low and zero carbon transport options, including 
hydrogen vehicles.  
 
• Supporting changes to the road network where they are related to the reduction of 
environme ntal impacts and the enhancement of public transport.  
 
• Supporting sustainable freight distribution by road and rail.  
 
Maintaining and improving the transport system:  
 
• Achieving improvements to walking and cycling routes  so they are coherent, direct, 
safe, comfortable and attractive)  and supporting increased use of the canal network 
and towpaths as part of the integrated transport network.  
 
• Securing the continued development of the Chase Line rail services , facilities  and 
infrastructure as the preferred means of transport.  
 
• Safeguarding land that is required for sustainable transport schemes, including road, 
rail, cycle ways and footpaths.  
 
• Supporting the safe and efficient use of the highway network through traffic 
manageme nt schemes.  
 
Item No.  8.535. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 24 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Establishing standards for the provision of car and lorry parking.  
 
 
Strategic Objective 6 : 
 
To create attractive Town and Local Centres by:  
 
• Enhancing the Town, and Local Centres in order to protect and improve their vitality 
and viability;  
 
• Maintaining a hierarchy of Town and Local Centres;  
 
• Supporting growth of shops, offices, business, education, leisure, arts, cultural and 
tourism in Town Centres, and improving access to employment and housing in order 
to achieve Town Centres with good vitality and viability;  
 
• Supporting the development of T own Centres as hubs for comparison goods 
shopping, leisure and culture uses, residential opportunities and health and 
community activities;  
 
• Supporting the development of Local Centres mainly for local food shopping and local 
services; and  
 
• Supporting the direction  of new investment to the Town, and Local Centres via a 
range of means as most appropriate to the local context.  
 
 
Strategic Objective 7 : 
 
To protect and enhance the natural environment development will:  
 
• Minimise impacts on, and provide net gains for, biodiversity, including by conserving, 
expanding and linking natural habitats through habitat creation and improvement to 
ensure  they are robust, establishing coherent ecological networks of sites that 
provides wildlife with the opportunity to prosper;  
 
• Protect, conserve and enhance the District’s natural environment assets, valued 
landscape and townscape, sites of biodiversity or geological value and soils. The 
highest degree of protection will be given to the protected landscape s of the Cannock 
Chase Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and the Green Belt; and  
 
• Avoid any harmful impacts on the integrity of the Cannock Chase Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC) and the Cannock Extension Canal Spec ial Area of Conservation 
(SAC).  
 
 
Strategic Objective 8:  
 
To support a greener future, development will:  
 
• Increase production of low and zero carbon energy and heat;  
 
• Promote sustainable building design , site layout , construction materials  and increase 
Low and Zero Carbon development;  
 
• Offset and mitigate any carbon emissions that cannot be avoided;  
 
• Reduce the risk of flooding, manage surface water and drainage, maximise flood 
protection and manage the effects of flooding;  
 
• Avoid air, wate r, soil, noise and light pollution;  
 
• Ensure development makes efficient use of previously developed land and buildings;  
 
• Safeguard potential mineral reserves;  
 
Item No.  8.545. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 25 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Minimise waste: and,  
 
• Encourage and facilitate the use of sustainable modes of transport.  
 
 
SPATIAL PRIORITIES  
 
5.1 Cannock Chase District will meet the development needs arising from the district , 
plan for our future needs  and provide a contribution towards the Housing Market 
Area shortfall. To meet these needs development will focus on:  
• Re-using of brownfield land  
• Supporting existing settlements and characteristics  
• Assisting in the rejuvenation of town centres  
• Ensuring inf rastructure delivery to support growth  
• Safeguarding natural and historic assets  
• Assisting in the delivery of the Council’s ambition to be net zero carbon by  2030, 
ahead of the Government’s target date of 2050 . 
 
Introduction  
 
5.2 Cannock Chase District has experienced significant growth in recent years by capitalising 
on its location and accessibility, as well the backdrop of Cannock Chase Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty, that together provide an attractive environment for residential 
and commercial devel opment. Investment in commercial and industrial development has 
boosted the local economy at a rate that has exceeded local and national trends, and this 
has been enhanced by a consistent housebuilding programme.  
 
5.3 The Spatial Strategy provides the context for the future growth of Cannock Chase District 
and how the spatial priorities will be delivered over the lifetime of the Local Plan. It sets out 
the approach to the delivery of sustainable development by assessing the economic, 
environmental and social im pacts of development and growth in the District.  
 
5.4 The Local Plan sets out the amount of development that will be delivered up to 203 9, as 
well as policies to support delivery - through supporting infrastructure including affordable 
and specialist housing,  the protection of environmental and historic assets, climate change 
adaptation and mitigation etc.  
 
5.5 Cannock Chase District is situated in southern part of the County of Staffordshire and is the 
second smallest authority in terms of land area. It is compr ised of large areas of Green Belt 
and Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) which together account for over 60% of 
the district. Cannock Chase District’s population is concentrated in the existing settlements 
of Cannock/Hednesford/Heath Hayes, Norton C anes, and Rugeley /Brereton which are the 
most sustainable development locations in the District.  
 
National Policy Context  
 
5.6 The achievement of sustainable development is a core principle at the heart of the plan 
making system.  NPPF Chapter 2 - Achieving Sustainable Development states that the 
‘objective of sustainable development can be summarised as meeting the needs of the 
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’ 
(paragraph 7). Within this objective lie ‘…three overarching objectives, which are 
interdependent and need to be pursued in mutually supportive ways…’ these are economic  
objectives, social objectives and environmental objectives (paragraph 8).  
 
5.7 Further important NPPF references include:  
 
Item No.  8.555. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 26 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   5.8 The presumption in favour of sustainable development : 
 
11. Plans and decisions should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable devel opment.  
 
5.9 For plan-making  this means that:  
a) plans should promote a sustainable pattern of development that seeks to:  meet the 
development needs of their area ; align growth and infrastructure; improve the 
environment; mitigate climate change (including by mak ing effective use of land in 
urban areas) and adapt to its effects;  
 
b) strategic policies should, as a minimum, provide for objectively assessed needs for 
housing and other uses, as well as any needs that cannot be met within 
neighbouring areas  unless:  
 
(i) the application of policies in this Framework that protect areas or 
assets of particular importance provides a strong reason for restricting 
the overall scale, type or distribution of development in the plan area 
or 
 
(ii) any adverse impacts of d oing so would significantly and demonstrably 
outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in this 
Framework taken as a whole.  
 
15. The planning system should be genuinely plan -led. Succinct and up -to-date plans 
should provide a positive vision  for the future of each area; a framework for addressing 
housing needs and other economic, social and environmental priorities; and a platform for 
local people to shape their surroundings.  
 
20. Strategic policies should set out an overall strategy for the pattern, scale and design 
quality of places , and make sufficient provision for: 
 
a) housing (including affordable housing), employment, retail, leisure and other 
commercial development;  
 
b) infras tructure for transport, telecommunications, security, waste management, 
water supply, wastewater, flood risk and coastal change management, and the 
provision of minerals and energy (including heat);  
 
c) community facilities (such as health, education and cult ural infrastructure); and  
 
d)   conservation and enhancement of the natural, built and historic environment, 
including landscapes and green infrastructure, and planning measures to address 
climate change mitigation and adaptation.  
 
The Spatial Strategy  
 
• New development will be located in the most sustainable locations, including within and 
around existing town centres, neighbourhood centres and employment areas.   
 
• Development will be focussed on the existing urban areas and will protect and enhance 
Green Belt land and the  AONB.   
 
• The adverse environmental impacts of development will be minimised and mitigated 
where unavoidable. The Local Plan will protect and enhance species, habitats and 
geological sites.  
 
• Cannock  Chase District’s housing and employment requirements will be met as  far as 
possible within the existing urban areas or within planned expansion to the urban areas 
in accessible and sustainable locations.  
 
Item No.  8.565. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 27 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • The Local Plan will optimise the reuse of previously developed sites, protect natural 
assets and create opportunities for low and zero carbon energy and heat production.  
 
• The Local Plan will protect cultural and heritage assets, local distinctiveness and sense 
of place will be maintained and strengthened through quality design.  
 
• Green Belt release is considered in order t o provide sufficient land to meet Cannock 
Chase District’s housing  and employment  need with an element of flexibility.  
 
• The Local Plan, will seek to deliver a minimum 5, 430 dwellings to meet the district’s 
housing need between 2018 and 203 9 at a rate of 258 dwellings per annum.  A further 
27hectares of land will be removed from the Green Belt and safeguarded for future 
housing need, strategic green infrastructure link and infrastructure requirements in the 
next plan period or early review of the developmen t plan.  
 
• Cannock Chase District forms part of the Greater Birmingham and Black Country 
Housing Market Area (GBBCHMA) and has resolved to contribute 500 dwellings where 
infrastructure permits, to meet a shortfall arising from the GBBCHMA which sets a Local 
Housing need of 5,930  dwellings at 283 dwellings per annum.   
 
• Up to 66 hectares of employment land will be provided to meet the District’s 
employment need . A strategic employment site is proposed at Kingswood Lakeside 
which involves removal of 10.86 hectares of land from the Green Belt and a  further 16 
hectares  of land will be removed from the Green Belt  for employment purposes with 
10.08 hectares  safeguarded for future employment development and strategic green 
infrastructure link s in the next plan p eriod or early review of the development  Plan.  
 
5.10 Residential and employment sites have been identified within the Local Plan to meet 
identified needs, these will be within the existing urban area or accessible and sustainable 
locations within the Green Belt. 
 
5.11 The level of growth within the main urban centres will be predicated by the capacity of 
local infrastructure to accommodate growth. The availability of infrastructure and services, 
as well as the potential to enhance local infrastructure in mitigati on, will be taken into 
consideration. Development will be supported that delivers sufficient infrastructure (social, 
physical and environmental) to support the proposals to meet identified local needs.  
 
5.12 The Local Plan will promote sustainable and health promoting transport choices to access 
education, services and jobs. Health facilities , including GP services , will be positively 
planned and deficiencies in local services and facilities will be addressed through new 
facilities or development space made available during the Plan period. Accessibility 
enhancements will take the form of new walking, cycling and public transport services and 
infrastructure that will include an uplift in environmental quality a nd public realm  by 
encouraging networks to be coherent, direct, safe, comfortable and attractive These 
measures will help to reduce the negative impacts of climate change but also promote 
health and well -being whilst respecting the historic environment.  
 
5.13 Climate Change is a key consideration within the Local Plan. The Local Plan will deliver 
resilient communities and developments to mitigate climate change and minimise flood 
risk. Development should address the impact of climate change and incorporate meas ures 
that are deemed to be carbon neutral at the outset , or capable of being upgraded so that 
further carbon reduction initiatives can be implemented at a future date , in accordance 
with national requirements.  
 
5.14 The Local Plan designates the hierarchy of ce ntres and levels of retail growth for each 
centre and states the importance of our open spaces and leisure provision. The Plan also 
Item No.  8.575. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 28 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   seeks to conserve and enhance the landscape of the AONB, Hednesford Hills, Green Belt 
and green infrastructure of the Distri ct. The Plan also protects the Cannock Chase and 
Cannock Extension SACs from adverse impacts from development.  
 
5.15 The Local Plan review includes within it a strategic and overarching policy for the District 
which sets out the overall strategy for the pattern, scale and design quality of development 
and places during the plan period. It sets out where development will take place in order to 
deliver the Vision and Strategic Objectives set out in the document.  
 
5.16 The Council’s legal obligations in meeting the National Planning Policy Framework 
obligations will be satisfied.  
 
The Spatial Strategy for  Cannock/Hednesford/Heat h Hayes  
• Cannock, Hednesford and Heath Hayes will be the main priority area for new residential 
and commercial development.  
 
• Previously developed land and brownfield sites will be prioritised for development, and 
a high quality of design reflecting the cha racter of the area will be sought.  
 
• Cannock Town Centre is the designated Strategic Town Centre within the District, being 
the principal location for shopping and leisure.  
 
• Residential development opportunities will be promoted that will enhance the vitality of 
the Town Centre, increase housing choice and compliment retail and leisure 
opportunities.  
 
• Opportunities to deliver net zero carbon development will be prioritised and other types 
of development which can contribute to the delivery of a net zer o carbon District will be 
encouraged.  
 
• The networks of open space will be protected and enhanced to support the natural 
assets and continue to provide opportunities to improve health and well -being.  
 
• Improvements to cycle and footpath networks will be made  to enhance connectivity and 
encourage more active travel, health and well -being.  
• The Town Centre will be the focus for leisure and entertainment provision and provide 
new residential accommodation.  
 
• Hednesford is a designated Town Centre serving the ret ail and service needs of 
residents to the north east of Cannock. Opportunities to enhance the retail, commercial 
and residential offer will be prioritised.  
 
• Heath Hayes is a designated Local Centre and provides small scale services to serve 
local needs.  
 
5.17 A masterplan approach to the improvements to the Town Centre will be taken forward that 
will take in the opportunities to integrate the train station with the Town Centre and the 
West Midlands Designer Outlet at Mill Green. The recent upgrade of rail services to 
Birmingham will be reflected in the masterplan to harness the benefits of these improved 
links and provide a station facility that will be a key feature of the regeneration of Cannock 
Town Centre.  
 
The Sp atial Strategy for Rugeley and Brereton  
 
• Rugeley is a designated Town Centre serving the shopping needs of its hinterland  
 
Item No.  8.585. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 29 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • The consolidation of the Town Centre is a priority through the redevelopment or 
refurbishment of the Market Hall, and the improvement  of the station to provide a high -
quality gateway into the Town Centre.  
 
• The introduction of residential and commercial units that respect the historic character 
of the Town Centre will be prioritised.  
3 
• The provision of approx. 1,000 additional homes within Cannock Chase District will be 
delivered through the larger cross boundary redevelopment of the former Rugeley 
Power Station.  
 
• Development must seek to achieve a net zero carbon standard.  
 
• Improvements to Rugeley Train Station and Rugeley Trent Valley Train Station will be a 
priority, as well as the Rugeley bus station.  
 
• Improvements to cycle and footpath networks will be made to enhance connectivity and 
encourage more active travel, health and well -being.  
 
• A high -quality natural environment will be protected and enhanced through improved 
quality of the existing green infrastructure , enabling greater use and support for wildlife  
 
• Brereton is a designated as a Local Centre serving local needs.  
 
5.18 The redevelopment of the power station will also deliver education facilities, green  space 
and employment uses that will provide a show case for the potential to achieve net zero 
carbon across the district. The setting of the AONB will be enhanced through the 
reclamation and redevelopment of the derelict and underused power station site and the 
air quality improved.  
 
The Spa tial Strategy for Norton Canes  
 
• Norton Canes has experienced significant growth since  2018  and corresponding 
infrastructure is yet to be delivered to accommodate the increased demand upon 
services such as education.  
• Residential and commercial development opportunities will be prioritised within Norton 
Canes where they can make a positive and sustai nable contribution to the growth of the 
district.  The Council will safeguard land for future development and work with the Parish 
Council to deliver further housing growth where this enables the delivery of a further 
half FE primary school including, if ju stified, removal of land from the Green Belt. Land 
can only be released from the Green Belt through a development plan such as the 
Local Plan or Neighbourhood Plan.  
 
• Norton Canes is a designated Local Centre serving local needs.  
 
• Improvements to transport networks will include improved links to Kingswood Lakeside 
via a recreational cycle/footpath route  and a fu rther crossing  route  across the A5 to 
provide a safe recreational cycle/footpath route to Grove Colliery via the Cannock 
Extension Canal towpath . 
 
• The Local Plan supports the enhancement of the biodiversity link between Sutton Park  
 and Cannock Chase , Cannock Extension Canal  and dismantled rail line and SBI 
fronting on to the A5 .  
 
• Enhancement of the historic landscape and other heritage assets at Grove Colliery and 
support for appropriate open recreation , leisure and tourism uses . 
• The identity of Norton Canes as a separate s ettlement will be safeguarded and 
enhanced.  
Item No.  8.595. Local Plan Vision & Objectives  
 
Page. 30 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
The Spatial Strategy for Rural areas (Cannock Chase AONB and Rural north including 
Rawnsley, Hazelslade, Prospect village, Cannock Wood and Slitting Mill)  
 
• These areas have potential for local enterprises to support and contribute to the 
education, preservation and enhancement of the important landscape, habitat and 
species and history of the area. The retention of existing employment and working 
landscape will be important to retain the local v ibrancy of the area and support local 
services and facilities.  
 
• Some of the best and most sensitive areas of landscape and biodiversity within the 
District  that are of national significance are located here. Management Plans for the 
AONB will provide guidance to development in this area and the scale and type of 
development will need to respect this and support for mitigation strategies will enable 
residents  of the area and visitors to continue to appreciate and care for natural and 
historic environment.  
 
• Housing will be identified through neighbourhood plans reflecting local need and 
affordable housing provision as well as respecting the local character and infrastructure 
of the area.  
 
• Transport improvements will focus on the improvement of active travel methods such as 
cycling and walking to improve health and reduce the impact on air quality.  
 
• The alteration to the Green Belt boundary and the safeguarding o f areas of land for 
future development recognises the constrained nature of the District and will give 
permanence to the Green Belt so the revised boundaries can endure beyond the plan 
period.  
 
 
Item No.  8.60                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 31 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
  
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1   
 
To deliver high quality development that protects the historic environment and  is 
appropriate , distinctive, attractive and safe by:  
 
• Protecting, conserving and enhancing the District’s historic environment, and 
sustaining local character and distinctiveness by managing designated and non -
designated heritage assets and their townscape and landscape settings;  
 
• Retaining and enhancing the distinct and separate character of the District’s 
settlements and protecting and enhancing the quality of the built environment by 
ensuring that new development is designed to provide the highest quality of built 
form and public realm which will enhance th e District’s distinctive heritage and 
natural assets; and  
 
• Creating places that are safe, inclusive and accessible which deter crime and 
reduce the fear of crime.   
 
 
POLICY SO1.1: PROTECTING, CONSERVING A ND ENHANCING THE DISTINCTIVE LOCAL 
HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT  
Introduction  
6.1 The distinctive local historic environment plays a key part in making Cannock Chase District 
a diverse and special place to live, work and enjoy. The historic environment can be a 
catalyst for positive regeneration , and development can result in improvements to existing 
heritage assets, for  example by  preserving and enhancing them and their settings , and by  
better revealing their significance.  
 
6.2 The responses to  Local Plan  Consultation have demonstrated support for th e protection of 
the historic environment, and for the inclusion of a Local List in the Local Plan . 
Respondents also supported using the historic environment as a catalyst for positive 
regeneration , with reference to specific local heritage opportunities in  town centres, canals, 
former collieries , mineral railway lines and historic commercial buildings.  
 
6.3 National planning policy (NPPF 2021) requires local planning policies to take a positive 
approach towards the conservation and enjoyment of the historic environment.  In 
determining applications, local planning authorities should require an applicant to describe 
the significance of any heritage assets affected, including any contribution made by their 
setting. As a minimum the relevant historic env ironment record should have been consulted 
and the heritage assets assessed using appropriate expertise where necessary. Where a 
site on which development is proposed includes, or has the potential to include, heritage 
assets with archaeological interest, local planning authorities should require developers to 
submit an appropriate desk -based assessment and, where necessary, a field evaluation . 
 
Item No.  8.61                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 32 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
6.4 The National Design Guide (2021) acknowledges that well -designed places are responsive 
to local history, culture  and heritage, and development proposals should acknowledge how 
these have influenced the built environment and wider landscape. Sensitive re -use or 
adaptation adds to the richness and variety of a scheme and can help to integrate heritage 
into proposals in an environmentally sustainable way . 
 
6.5 A strategic objective of the Local Plan is to retain and enhance the distinct and separate 
character of the District’s settlements. This will partly be achieved through the spatial 
strategy which will distr ibute development in a way that will maintain a degree of physical 
separation between settlements. It will also be achieved through Policy SO1.1 , which 
aims to sustain local character and distinctiveness through the effective management of 
designated and n on-designated heritage assets and their townscape and landscape 
settings.  
 
 
POLICY SO1.1: PROTECTING, CONSERVING A ND ENHANCING THE DISTINCTIVE 
LOCAL HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT  
 
Development proposals which protect  and enhance the significance of designated 
and non -designated heritage assets and conserve them in ways that will contribute to 
the economic vitality, local  character and distinctiveness of local communities will be 
supported.  
 
Designated heritage assets  (including Conservation Areas, Listed Buildings, and 
Scheduled Monuments ) and their settings will be conserved and enhanced and given 
the highest level of protection.  Non-designated heritage assets (including locally 
listed buildings and features, and locally important parks and gardens ) and their 
settings will also be conserve d and enhanced.  
 
Development  proposal s which recognise that the historic environment can be a 
catalyst for positive regeneration , and which preserve and enhance heritage assets  
and their  setting to enhance  or better reveal their significance will be suppo rted.  
 
Development proposals affecting, or likely to affect, any heritage asset or its setting 
will be accompanied by a Heritage Statement which will:   
 
• identify all heritage assets that could be affected and explain their historic, 
archaeological , artistic or architectural significance . 
• reference the Staffordshire Historic Environment Record and other relevant 
sources such as landscape character and Conservation Area appraisals and 
management plans.  
• provide, where required, archaeological survey or historic building and landscape 
investigations.  
 
In the case of major development proposals, the Heritage Statement will form part of 
the Design and Access Statement.   
Item No.  8.62                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 33 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
Development proposals that will lead to substantial harm to (or total loss of 
significance of) a designated heritage asset  and its landscape and town scape setting 
will be refused , unless it can be demonstrated that the substantial harm or total loss 
is necessary to achieve substantial public benefits that outweigh  that harm or loss, or 
that other exceptional circumstances apply.  
Where development proposals will lead to less than substantial harm  to existing, or 
potential, designated and non -designated heritage assets and their landscape and 
townscape settings, they must be justified by evidence of:  
 
• the public benefits of the development; and  
• the action that will be taken to mitigate  and minimise  the harm.  
 
Non-designated archaeology will require an appropriate desk  based  or field 
evaluation setting o ut how development proposals affecting archaeology  interests 
will be considered.  
 
 
 
Explanat ion 
 
6.6 Proposals  for developments  that will affect  a ‘designated  heritage  asset ’, or ‘non-designated  
heritage  asset ’ or their settings  will include  a Heritage  Statement.  As a minimum,  the 
Heritage  Statement  will show  that you have  consulted  the relevant  historic  environment  
record  has been  consulted  and the heritage  assets  have  been  assessed  using  appropriate  
expertise.  The level of detail should  be proportionate  to the asset ’s significance  and 
sufficient  to understand  the potential  impact  of the proposal  on their significance.  
Applications  for Listed  Building  Consent  will require  more  detail  and will require  the advice  
from a suitably  qualified  and experienced  Conservation  Architect  for all but the simplest  
applications.   
 
6.7 The provision of a Heritage Statement will be proportionate to the scale of development 
and for major development proposals will be prepared as a part of the Design and  Access 
Statement  (see Policy SO1.2) . In all cases these documents should be prepared at an 
early stage by appropriately experienced historic environment specialists, and they will 
inform discussions with the local planning authority and their historic environment 
advisors regarding interventions and opportunities to enhance heritage assets within a 
scheme.  
 
6.8 In considering the impact of a proposed development on a designated o r non-designated 
heritage asset, the local planning authority will giv e great weight to the asset’s 
conservation, irrespective of whether any potential harm amounts to substantial harm, 
total loss or less than substantial harm.  
 
6.9 The ‘exceptional circumstances’ that might justify proposals that will lead to substantial 
harm to (or total loss of significance of) a designated heritage asset are defined in national 
planning policy (NPPF ) as: 
 
Item No.  8.63                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 34 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
‘(a) the nature of the heritage asset prevents all reasonable uses of the site; and  
 
(b) no v iable use of the heritage asset itself can be found in the medium term through 
appropriate marketing that will enable its conservation; and  
 
(c) conservation by grant -funding or some form of not for profit, charitable or public ownership is 
demonstrably no t possible; and  
 
(d) the harm or loss is outweighed by the benefit of bringing the site back into use. ’ 
 
6.10 The planning system recognises three types of heritage asset – those which are of 
international importance, those which are of national importance and those which are 
important locally.  Nationally important heritage assets are identified and given statutory 
protection by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (having consulted 
Historic England) on the basis of nationally  set selection criteria. Locally important 
heritage assets are identified by local planning authorities and neighbourhood plan 
forums based on locally  set criteria.  
 
6.11 Designated heritage assets include Conservation Areas, Listed Buildings, and Scheduled 
Monuments.  The Cannock Chase District Conservation Areas Management Plan 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) was adopted in April 2014. The SPD sets out 
the package of measures available to the Council to apply to all its eight Conservation 
Areas.  It sh ould be read in conjunction with the area -specific Management Plans relating 
to the individual Conservation Areas.  
 
6.12 Development proposals in Conservation Areas need to be supported by a Design and 
Access Statement which explains the design thinking behind  the application and the 
effect on the historic and architectural interest of the Conservation Area to ensure that it 
has been given proper consideration.  A description of the significance of the heritage 
assets affected, the contribution of their setting  to that significance, and an assessment 
of the impact of the proposal on that significance should be included. Design and 
development briefs will be encouraged for any substantial development proposals.  
 
6.13 The ‘public realm’ is the space between buildings that is publicly  accessible - including 
streets, squares, parks and open spaces. The enhancement of the public realm in 
Conservation Areas gives huge benefits and its design and management can be 
significan t in reinforcing historic character.   
 
 
6.14 Conservation Area designation places protection over all trees, and some trees which 
make a particular contribution have the additional protection of Tree Preservation Orders.  
 
6.15 Legislation places a duty on the Counc il to draw up and publish proposals for preserving 
and enhancing Conservation Areas and to consult the local community on the proposals.  
Character Appraisals provide a basis for developing Management Plans to address 
issues arising from the Appraisals. Ca nnock Chase District Council has adopted eight 
Conservati on Area Management Plans (SPDs) : 
 
• Main Road, Brereton (2014)  
Item No.  8.64                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 35 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Rugeley Town Centre (2014)  
• Cannock Town Centre (2014)  
• North Street, Bridgtown (2014)  
• Sheep Fair/Bow Street, Rugeley (2018)  
• Trent and Mersey Canal (2019)  
• Church Street, Rugeley (2019) ; and  
• Talbot Street/Lichfield Street, Rugeley (2019)  
 
 
6.16 All the District's listed buildings are listed on the Council's website.  They are listed by the 
Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport  and special controls apply to 
protect them from unnecessary demolition, unsuitable and insensitive alteration. 
Buildings are ‘listed’ for their special architectural or historic interest and there is a general 
presumption in favour of their preservation. Listing seeks to protect them from unsuitable 
and insensitive alteration. The need to preserve the setting of a Listed Building may affect 
development on nearby sites.  
 
6.17 There are  currently 70 listed buildings in the District  - 7 are listed at Grade II*, the 
remainder Grade II. These include all sorts of buildings - churches, houses, garden walls, 
milestones, a churchyard tomb, pubs,  and canal bridges. They cover buildings of all 
periods including medieval stone churches, 16th/1 7th Century timber framed buildings, 
and many 19th Century brick buildings, the latter dating from Cannock Chase' s period of 
mining prosperity.  
 
6.18 There are  four Scheduled Monuments  in the District:  
 
• Churchyard Cross, St Luke's Churchyard, Cannock (a medieval sandstone cross)  
 
• Castle Ring, Cannock Wood (remains of an Iron Age hill fort and of a medieval hunting 
lodge)  
 
• Moated site and bloomery (a charcoal fired furnace used to produce wrought iron from 
iron ore), Courtbanks Covert, Cannock Wood  
 
• World  War One Trench System, Cannock Chase   
 
6.19 The Staffordshire Historic Environment Record (HER)43 includes records of archaeological 
sites, finds and buildings, historic landscape character information, designation information 
(including Listed Buildings, Sch eduled Monuments, Registered Parks and Gardens, 
Registered Battlefields and Conservation Areas).  
 
6.20 Development proposals where there is potential for the site to contain heritage assets of 
archaeological interest should be accompanied by an Archaeological Assessment. The 
Historic Environment Team at Staffordshire County Council can provide pre -application 
advice on the information any application should contain. This could be a desk -based 
archaeological assessment or, if necessary, a field evaluation.  
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.65                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 36 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.21 Archaeological remains can provide irreplaceable information about our past and hold the 
potential to increase our future knowledge. The Local Plan therefore seeks to preserve ‘in -
situ’ all sites of known or suspected archaeological interest. Development proposals should  
appropriately provide for ‘in -situ’ preservation, or investigation and recording of 
archaeology, based upon significance.  
 
6.22 Non-designated heritage assets include Local ly Listed historic areas, sites, buildings and 
archaeological remains which are valued for their local architectural or historic character, 
their contribution to the local scene, or their local historical associations. Locally Listed 
buildings and features have no statutory protection , but any impact on them will be 
consider ed in the assessm ent of planning applications and will need to be given weight in 
decision making. They include archaeological features of interest, potential sites of national 
importance related to military activities and locally significant historic farmsteads. 
Developme nt proposals affecting a Locally Listed building or feature will need to 
demonstrate how the design of the development has considered its defined significance.   
 
6.23 Preparation of a Local List for the District is being taken forward though the District Desig n 
Guide SPD which includes a procedure for compiling a Local List of local heritage assets 
which are valued by the community in contributing to the local distinctiveness, character 
and appearance of the area.  
 
List of relevant evidence  
 
 
• ‘National Planning Policy Framework and National Model Design Code’ ( January 
2021)  
 
• Cannock Chase Conservation Areas Management Plan Supplementary Planning 
Document 2014 ; and  
 
• Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) 
(Amendment) (No. 2) Order 2020  
• Staffordshire County Council Extensive Urban Survey  (Final Report 2014 ) 
• Staffordshire County Council Historic Character Assessments (Cannock 2009; 
Rugeley 2010)  
• DfT Gear Change: A bold vision for cycling and walking July 2020  
• Statutory Cycling and Walking Investment Strategy (CWIS), 2017  
• Local Transport Note LTN 1/20 Cycle I nfrastructure Design, 2020  
• Staffordshire Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan, 2021  
 
 
POLICY SO1.2: ENHANCING THE QUALITY OF T HE BUILT ENVIRONMENT   
Introduction  
 
6.24 The responses to Local Plan Consultations have demonstrated support for strengthening 
design policies and including additional design standards in the Local Plan, including the 
Item No.  8.66                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 37 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
concept of ‘Active Design’ (add link) which is rooted in Sport England’s aims t o promote 
the role of sport and physical activity in creating healthy and sustainable communities.  
Local Plan policies aim to ensure that developments add to the overall quality of the area, 
are visually attractive, sympathetic to local character and hist ory, create a strong sense 
of place, accommodate and sustain an appropriate amount and mix of development, and 
create places that are safe, inclusive and accessible and which promote health and well -
being. Development that is not well designed will be re sisted, especially where it fails to 
reflect local design policies and government guidance on design.  
 
6.25 National planning policy requires all local planning authorities to prepare design guides 
or codes consistent with the principles set out in the National Design Guide and National 
Model Design Code, and which reflect local character and design preferences.  The 
National Design Guide (2021) acknowledges and states that well -designed places are:  
• based on a sound understanding of the features of the site and the surrounding context, 
using baseline studies as a starting point for design . 
• integrated into their su rroundings so they relate well to them . 
• influenced by and influence their context positively . 
• responsive to local history, culture and heritage.  
 
6.26 The National Design Guide provides a structure that can be used for the content of local 
design policies, guid es and codes. Ten characteristics of good design have been 
identified to reflect the Government’s priorities and provide a common overarching 
framework:  
• Context – enhances the surroundings.  
• Identity – attractive and distinctive.  
• Built form – a coherent pa ttern of development.  
• Movement – accessible and easy to move around.  
• Nature – enhanced and optimised.  
• Public spaces – safe, social and inclusive.  
• Uses – mixed and integrated.  
• Homes and buildings – functional, healthy and sustainable.  
• Resources – efficient and resilient.  
• Lifespan – made to last.  
 
 
POLICY SO1.2: ENHANCING THE QUALITY OF T HE BUILT ENVIRONMENT   
 
Development proposals will be designed to enhance the quality of the townscape and 
landscape , and will  retain and enhance the distinct and separate character of each of 
the District’s settlements.  
 
Development proposals will demonstrate conformity to Local Plan Policies and the 
relevant Local Design Guide  and will deliver a high quality of building design and 
layout  which is:  
• visually attractive , as a result of good architecture, layout and landscaping  
• sympathetic to local character and h eritage  
• able to accommodat e an appropriate amount and mix of development  
Item No.  8.67                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 38 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• inclusive of green infrastructure , tree planting and other public space  
• support ive of local facilities and transport networks; and  
• safe, inclusive and accessible  
All major development proposals and all Listed Building consent applications will 
include a Design and Access Statement that will set out:  
 
• How the design will  respect the local distinctiveness and character of the 
surroundings in terms of heritage, biodiversity, landscape and townscape, 
cycleways and footpaths, bridleways , public transport networks, and the road 
network.  
• What would be built on the site, how the buildings and spaces will be arranged on 
the site, the density and mix of housing types and tenures, the services and 
facilities that will be provided, the details of the siting, layout, orientation, massing, 
height , materials and landscaping, and the provision of access to and from nearby 
locations and facilities.  
 
The Design and Access Statement will set out how the proposal will align with the 
relevant Local Design Guide  and the requirements of other relevant Loca l Plan 
Policies, particularly : 
 
• Policy SO1.1: Protecting, Conserving and Enhancing the Distinctive Local 
Historic Environment  
• Policy SO1.3: Creating Safe Places which Deter Crime and Reduce the Fear of 
Crime  
• Policy SO2.2: Safeguarding Health and Amenity  
• Policy SO5.1: Accessible Development  
• Policy SO5.3: Low and Zero Carbon Transport  
• Policy SO8.2: Achieving Net Zero Carbon Development  
• Policy SO8.3: Sustainable Design  
 
Major development , where deemed appropriate by the local planning authority, wil l 
require a masterplan to support the detailed design stage. The masterplan will ensure 
the vision of the development is not diluted over time through cumulative minor 
changes, and will help to enable infrastructure delivery.  
 
 
Explanat ion 
 
6.27 The Local Plan seeks to ensure that all development has regard to the design principles 
that will deliver high quality places. Design is about more than the architecture of the 
buildings. It is also about the spaces in between buildings, the relationship b etween the 
development and surrounding areas, and the appropriateness of the proposed use of the 
building in the location of the development.  
 
6.28 The requirements  for a Design  and Access  Statement  set out in the Policy  are in 
accordance  with the Town  and Country Planning  (Development  Management  Procedure)  
Item No.  8.68                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 39 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
(England)  (Amendment)  Order  2015  and The Planning  (Listed  Buildings  and Conservation  
Areas)  (Amendment)  (England)  (Regulations)  2013.   
 
6.29 A ‘Design  and Access  Statement ’ (DAS)  must  accompany  the following  types  of planning  
applications:  
• Major  developments . 
• Development  in a conservation  area consisting  of the provision  of one or more  dwelling  
houses . 
• Development  in a conservation  area where  the floor space  created  by the development  is 
100 square  metres  or more .  
• All applications  for listed  building  consent . 
 
6.30 The Design  and Access  Statement  shall explain:  
• The design  principles  and concepts  that have  been  applied  to the development . 
• The steps  taken  to appraise  the context  of the development  and how the design  takes  that 
context  into account .  
• The policy  adopted  as to access  and how policies  in relation  to access  in local development  
documents  have  been  taken  into account .  
• What,  if any, consultation  undertaken  on issues  in relation  to access  to the development  
and what  account  has been  taken  of the outcome . 
• How any specific  issues  which  might  affect  access  to the development  have  been  
addressed .  
 
6.31 The additional  requirements  in relation  to Listed  Building  consent  include  an explanation  of 
the design  principles  and concepts  that have  been  applied  to the works  and how these  take 
account  of:  
• The special  architectural  or historic  importance  of the building .  
• The particular  physical  features  of the building that justify  its designation  as a listed  building .  
• The buildings  setting .  
• How issues  relating  to access  to the building  have  been  dealt  with (unless  the application  
relates  to internal  changes  only) .  
 
6.32 The Listed  Building  Design  and Access  Statement  shall also:  
• Explain  the policy  adopted  as to access,  including  what  alternative  means  of access  have  
been  considered,  and  how policies  relating  to access  in Local  Plan documents  have  been  
taken  into account  
• Explain  how policy  as to access  takes  account  of the special  architectural  or historic  
importance  of the building.   
• What,  if any, consultation  has been  undertaken  and what  account  has been  taken  of the 
outcome  and explain  how any specific  issues  which  may affect  access  have  been  
addressed.   
 
6.33 For applications  for listed  building  consent  submitted  in parallel  with a planning  application,  
a single  DAS is acceptable.   
 
 
Item No.  8.69                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 40 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.34 The aim of a masterplan is to provide a framework for the application of national and local 
design guidance to the site. This is likely to include:  
• A landscape strategy, taking account of existing natural features.  
• Open space provision.  
• The quantity of dwellings and other uses.  
• Points of access and connections to wider networks.  
• Broad posit ion of primary and secondary streets.  
• Position of local centre and facilities.  
• Proposed types of development (density, height, etc).  
 
6.35 A number of  documents exist across the authority which can assist in designing good 
quality, beautiful development, including the Cannock Chase Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty ( AONB ) Design Guide.  
 
6.36 Local design guides will be developed within the context provided by the Local Plan. 
These will set out the local context and an analysis of local character and identity. The 
local design guides will use the ten characteristics identified in the National D esign Guide 
(and reproduced in the introduction to this policy) as a structure and will consider:  
• the relationship between the natural environment and built development;  
• the typical patterns of built form that contribute positively to local character;  
• the street pattern, their proportions and landscape features;  
• the proportions of buildings framing spaces and streets;  
• the local vernacular, other architecture and architectural features that contribute to local 
character.  
 
6.37 Local design guides may be prepared for each of (or combinations of) the Character 
Areas defined in the Cannock Chase Design Supplementary Planning Document  (2016). 
These are :    
• Brereton and Ravenhill  
• Hagley  
• North Rugeley and Brereton  
• Rugeley Town Centre and Historic Suburbs  
• Slitting Mill  
• Western Rugeley – Etchinghill and Springfields  
• A5 Corridor  
• Bridgtown  
• Cannock Town Centre and Historic Suburbs  
• Cannock Wood  
• Hawks Green  
• Hazelslade and Rawnsley  
• Heath Hayes and Wimblebury  
• Hednes ford Town Centre and Historic Suburbs  
• North Cannock –Chadsmoor, Broomhill and Blackfords  
• Norton Canes  
• Outlying Buildings/Hamlets in Rural Areas  
• Prospect Village  
Item No.  8.70                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 41 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Pye Green Valley; and  
• South and West Cannock  
   
6.38 Consideration will also be given to the n eed for Local Design  Guides  for the rural parts of 
the District that are not included as Character Areas.  The Cannock Chase Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan (2019 -2024 and successive plans) is a 
material consideration when preparing this Local Plan and Neighbourhood Plans, as well 
as determining planning applications.   
Figure 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.71                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 42 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
• The National Design Guide ( 2021 )  
• The Better Building, Building Beautiful Commission report ‘Living with Beauty’(2020)  
• National Model Design Code ( January 2021 ) 
• Cannock Chase AONB Management Plan 2019 -2024  
 
 
POLICY SO 1.3: CREATING SAFE PLACES WHICH DETER CRIME AND REDUCE THE FEAR 
OF CRIME  
Introduction  
6.39 National planning policy requires local planning policies to aim to ensure places are ‘safe and 
accessible, so that crime and disorder, and the fear of crime, do not undermine the quality of 
life or community cohesion – for example through the use of attra ctive, well -designed, clear 
and legible pedestrian and cycle routes, and high-quality  public space, which encourage the 
active and continual use of public areas’ (NPPF paragraph 92(b)) . 
 
6.40 The National Design Guide (2021) identifies the ways that well-designed spaces that are safe 
can be created through careful planning and design. For example, buildings with active 
frontages (entrances and windows overlooking the space) can be placed around the edges 
of spaces to provide natural surveillance.  
 
 
POLICY SO 1.3: CREATING SAFE PLACES WHICH DETER CRIME AND REDUCE THE 
FEAR O F CRIME  
 
Development proposals will create safe and secure environments by designing out 
crime, and the fear of crime, without detracting from attractive, high -quality  design.  
 
The Design and Access Statement, which will accompany a ll major development 
proposals and all Listed Building consent applications, will  take account of the 
relevant Local Design Guide  and best practice guidance and set out how the design 
(inclu ding the buildings, road layout, footpaths, communal spaces, car parking and 
lighting) will:  
 
• Contribute to the vitality of area and improve community safety.  
• Reduce vulnerability and increase resilience, particularly in places where people 
gather and in the vicinity of vulnerable uses.  
 
Where appropriate, spaces accessible to the public will be overlooked and clearly 
visible from adjoining buildings, with the design and landscaping providing for clear 
sight lines along paths and cycle ways.  
 
Buildings wil l be visually interesting at street level, with entrances and windows used 
to create active frontages which allow for natural surveillance and provide a sense of 
vitality. Ground floors will be occupied by active uses , where there is likely to be direct 
Item No.  8.72                 6. Local Plan Policy Options  
                   Objective 1: Delivering High Quality Development that  Protects the Historic 
Environment and  is Appropriate, Distinctive , Attractive and Safe   
 
Page. 43 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
and regular visual connection between the rooms in the building and the areas 
outside , and buildings will not turn their back on streets and other public spaces.  
 
Public and private open space will be clearly differentiated, avoiding piecemeal and 
isolated spaces that have no clear purpose and that could be prone to vandalism and 
anti-social behaviour.  
 
 
Explanat ion 
 
6.41 National planning policy requires Local Plans to create places that are safe, inclusive and 
accessible and where crime and disorder, and the fear of crime, do not undermine the quality 
of life or community cohesion and resilience . In the delivery of Local Plan policies, the local 
planning authority will ensure that the design of development is informed by the most up -to-
date information available from the police and other relevant agencies.  
 
6.42 The National Design Guide (2021) notes that well-designed public and shared amenity 
spaces feel safe for people who occupy the buildings arou nd them, and also for visitors and 
passers -by. They help to overcome crime and the fear of crime. Careful planning and design 
create the right conditions for p eople to feel safe and secure, without  the need for additional 
security measures.  
 
6.43 Development proposals should be informed by the most up to date information and guidance 
available from the police and other agencies to ensure public safety and security. F or 
example, ‘Secured by Design’44 has produced a series of Design Guides to assist the building, 
design and construction industry to incorporate security into developments. The Secured by 
Design Guides cover Homes, Commercial, Self -Build, Sheltered Accommo dation, New 
Schools, and Hospitals.  
 
6.44 In accordance with the guidance provided in the National Model Design Code  (2021 ), Local 
Design Guides may be prepared for each of (or combinations of) the Character Areas defined 
in the Cannock Chase Design Supplementary Planning Document (2016). The Local Design 
Guides will draw on the advice and guidance from ‘Secured by Design’ so that the creation 
of safe residential, commercial, industrial and town centre environments can be delivered 
without compromising aesthetics and beauty.  
List of relevant evidence  
 
• Community Safety Strategic Assessment (2019)  
 
• National Model Design Code  (2021 ) 
 
 
44 https://www. securedbydesign .com/guidance/design -guides  
 
Item No.  8.736. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 44 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation     
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2:  
 
To create community facilities  and healthy living opportunities across the District 
by: 
 
• Safeguarding existing community facilities , and providing new and improved 
community facilities  to meet the needs arising from new development.  
• Safeguarding the health and the amenity of local communities ; 
• Providing active leisure and sports facilities ; 
• Providing opportunities for allotments and local food growing.  
• Providing healthy living opportunities and  increasing physical activity in 
everyday lives ; 
 
  
POLICY SO2.1: SAFEGUARDING THE PROVISION OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES   
Introduction  
6.45 Responses to consultation on the Local Plan has revealed concerns about the 
capacity of existing community facilities and infrastructure (education, roads, health 
care, parks , leisure and recreation facilities ) to meet future needs.  
 
6.46 National planning policy (NPPF 2021) sets out a social objective to foster well -
designed places, with accessible services and open spaces that meet  current and 
future needs , and support good health, and social and cultural well -being. This 
requires local plan polici es to make sufficient provision for community facilities (such 
as health, education and cultural infrastructure).  Local planning policies should  also 
plan positively for the provision and use of shared spaces, community facilities (such 
as local shops, meeting places, sports venues, open space, cultural buildings, public 
houses and places of worship) and other local services to enhance the sustainabilit y 
of communities and residential environments . 
 
 
POLICY SO2.1: SAFEGUARDING THE PROVISION OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES    
 
Community facilities  include health  facilities  (GP surgeries and health centres ), 
education facilities (nursery and early years, primary, secondary), , cultural facilities  
(meeting places, theatres and other cultural buildings, public houses, places of 
worship , village halls and active leisure and sports facilities ), and local shops and 
other facilities .. 
 
All major development will safeguard existing community  facilities and  contribute 
towards new community facilities  to meet the needs arising from the development. 
The loss or change of use of existing community facilities or sites will be resisted 
unless it can be d emonstrated that demand can be met from alternative facilities  in a 
suitable and accessible location .  
 
Any development proposals that would result in a reduction in the provision of 
community facilities  will only be supported where:  
 
Item No.  8.746. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 45 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • An appropriate and qu alified  assessment has been undertaken which has clearly 
shown the facilities or sites are surplus to requirements; or  
• The reduction in provision resulting from the proposed development would be 
replaced by equivalent or better provision in a suitable and accessible location; 
or  
• The development is for alternative community facilities.  
 
From an early stage, developers will be expected to engage with local authorities, 
statutory consultees, community service providers and relevant local community 
groups to ensure that the new provision meets the needs of the community it will 
serve.  
 
All major development proposals will make sufficient provision at the appropriate 
stage of delivery for community facilities , and ensure that the design and layout of the 
community facilities  makes them  easily accessible to the local community, including 
by walking and cycle (in line with Policy SO5.3: Low Carbon Transport , and Policy 
SO5.1: Accessible Development ).  
 
Where practicable, different types of  community facility will be co -located together , 
and the provision will be planned and phased in parallel with new development.  
 
New development will be required to provide the necessary community facilities at a 
timely stage to meet the community needs arising as a result of the development.  
 
 
Explanat ion 
 
6.47 National planning policy ( NPPF 2021) states that the planning system must pursue 
interdependent economic, social and environmental objectives to achieve sustainable 
development. The social objective includes a reference to ensuring that accessible 
services are provided to support c ommunities’ health, social and cultural well -being.  The 
Local Plan’s Objective to safeguard existing, and create new, community facilities  aligns 
with the national planning policy objective.  
6.48 In applying local plan policies to decisions, the local planning authority will take an 
integrated approach to considering the location of housing, economic uses and community 
facilities and services , and will guard against the unnecessary loss of valued facilities and 
services . 
6.49 The local planning authority will take a proactive, positive and collaborative approach to 
ensuring that a sufficient choice of school places and other public service infrastructure 
such as further education colleges  and health provision  is available to me et the needs of 
existing and new  residents . 
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Index of Local Deprivation (2019)  
• Joint Strategic Needs Assessment Annual Update (2019)  
 
 
Item No.  8.756. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 46 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
POLICY SO2.2: SAFEGUARDING HEALTH A ND AMENITY  
Introduction  
6.50 National planning policies (NPPF 2021) require local plans to create places that are safe, 
inclusive and accessible , and which promote health and well -being, with a high standard 
of amenity for existing and future users.  Local plan policies should ‘ enable and support 
healthy lifestyles, especially where this would address identified local health and well -being 
needs – for example through the provision of safe and accessible green infrastructure, 
sports facilities, local s hops, access to healthier food, allotments and layouts that 
encourage walking and cycling’ . 
 
POLICY SO2.2: SAFEGUARDING HEALTH A ND AMENITY  
 
Development proposals will be required to safeguard the health and the amenity of 
local communities by:  
 
• Ensuring that new development provides for satisfactory daylight, sunlight, 
outlook, and privacy, and protects new and existing residents, workers and visitors 
from noise, smell, litter, dust or other unacceptable impacts. Unacceptable impacts 
will be judg ed against the level of amenity in the locality.  
• Ensuring that all developments and spaces for the public are designed to be 
accessible to all people, including people with disabilities and people whose 
mobility is impaired by other circumstances.  
 
All maj or development proposals and all Listed Building consent applications will 
include a Design and Access Statement that will set out how the proposal will 
safeguard health and amenity by aligning with the relevant Local Design Guide  and 
the requirements of o ther relevant Local Plan Policies, particularly by:  
 
• Safeguarding existing community facilities and ensuring that new development 
makes sufficient provision for community facilities  (in line w ith P olicy  SO2.1: 
Safeguarding the Provision of Community Facilities ).  
• Linking to, or adding to, green infrastructure (in line with Policy SO2.4 : Providing 
Opportunities for Healthy Living and Activity).  
Ensuring that the design and layout of the development will prioritise and 
promote walking and cycl ing (in line with Policy SO5.3: Low Carbon Transport  
and SO5.1 Accessible Development ). 
• Achieving the lowest carbon emissions that can practically and viably be achieved 
(in line with Policy SO8.2: Achieving Net Zero Carbon Development).  
• Avoiding unacceptable on -site or off -site risk or harm to human health or the 
natural environment (in line with Policy  SO8.5: Avoiding Air, Water, Soil, Noise and 
Light Pollution).  
 
 
Explanat ion 
 
 
6.51 The Local Design Guides  will set out the detailed design requirements for safeguarding 
health and amenity.  
 
 
Item No.  8.766. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 47 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   List of relevant evidence  
 
• Joint Strategic Needs Assessment Annual Update (2019 ) 
  
POLICY SO2.3: PROVISION OF OPEN SPACE, SPORTS AND RECREATIONAL BUILDINGS 
AND LAND, INCLUDING PLAYING FIELDS   
Introduction  
 
6.52 Green infrastructure is defined (NPPF 2021) as  ‘a network of multi -functional green and 
blue spaces and other natural features, urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a 
wide range of environmental, economic, health and wellbeing benefits for nature, climate, 
local and wider communities and pros perity’. The multi -functional nature of green 
infrastructure within Cannock Chase District is attested by the diverse range of 
designations and typologies of land within its extent. An important component of green 
infrastructure is land used for open space , sports and recreation.  
 
6.53 The NPPF (2021) provides that planning policies should support healthy lifestyles through 
the provision of open  space, sports and recreational buildings and land, including playing 
fields. Planning policies should be based on robu st and up -to-date assessments of the 
need for open space, sport and recreation facilities (including quantitative or qualitative 
deficits or surpluses) and opportunities for new provision. Information gained from the 
assessments should be used to determine  what open space, sport and recreational 
provision is needed, which plans should then seek to accommodate.  
 
6.54 There are various national standards and benchmarks to guide the provision of different 
types of open space. These include , for example : 
• Natural England has defined standards of provision for Accessible Natural Green 
Space . 
• Fields in Trust (FIT) recommend benchmark standards for outdoor sport and play 
provision . 
 
6.55 National standards and benchmarks have been taken into account in the preparation of 
the following local strategies and plans, including:  
• Cannock Chase Sport and Leisure Facilities Needs Assessment (August 2018).  
• Cannock Chase District Council Playing Pitch Strategy & Action Plan (May 2019).  
• Cannock Chase Open Space Assessment and Strategy ( XXX 2022 ). 
 
POLICY SO2.3: PROVISION OF OPEN SPACE, SPORTS AND RECREATIONAL 
BUILDINGS AND LAND, INCLUDING PLAYING FIELDS   
 
Existing Provision  
The local planning authority will  require development to  maintain and  support the 
improve ment to  the level of provision of open space, sports and recreational buildings 
and land, including playing fields  and resist development which restricts physical 
access to them . Any development proposals that would result in a reduction in the 
provision will only be supported where:  
 
Item No.  8.776. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 48 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • an assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown the open space, 
sports and recreational buildings or land , including playing fields  to be  surplus to 
requirements; or  
• the loss of provision resulting from the proposed development would be replaced 
by equivalent or better provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable and 
accessible location; or   
• the development is for alternative pro vision, the benefits of which clearly outweigh 
the loss of the current or former provision and meets an identified need within the 
Cannock Chase Playing Pitch Strategy (and any subsequent updates).  
 
New Provision  
 
The local planning authority will generally support development that provides 
opportunities to improve the provision of open space, sports and recreational 
buildings and land, including playing fields , where these do not conflict with other  
policies of this Local Plan . Major development proposals will provide new and/or 
enhance d open space, sports and recreational buildings and land, including playing 
fields to meet the demands that will be generated by the development.  
 
Both new and replac ement provision of o pen space, sports and recreational buildings 
and land, including playing fields  will meet locally defined minimum standards and 
benchmarks  in regard to quantity and accessibility. The contribution of the proposed 
provision will be assessed by its primary function . Provision will only be counted as 
helping to meet these standards where it is of sufficient quality to properly fulfil its 
intended primary function and meet the level of demand generated by the proposed 
development.  
The contribution made by new developments to the achievement of these standards 
may include both new facilities and the improvement or refurbishment of existing 
facilities  and should be in accordance with the following order of preference :  
A) On -site provisio n where this is practicable and would be the most effective way of 
meeting the needs generated by the development  
B) Off -site provision and/or a financial contribution to off -site provision   
 
Where there are anticipated deficiencies, financial contributions to appropriate 
projects will be sought to enable the impacts of the new development to be mitigated. 
Where practicable, the required facilities will be phased and delivered as an integral 
part of the development.  
 
New development  proposals should set out how the management and maintenance of 
any facilities provided  will be sustained , proportionate to the additional demand that 
they would be expected to generate . 
 
Major development proposals will follow the principles of ‘Active De sign’ in order to 
deliver a form of development  that will encourage healthier and more active lifestyles.  
 
Item No.  8.786. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 49 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   All major development will ensure that the design and layout of the development will 
promote walking and cycling (in line with Policy SO5.3: Low Carbon Transport ) and  
create new green infrastructure within the development (as required by Policy SO7.8).  
 
From an early stage, developers will be expected to engage with local authorities, 
statutory consultees, infrastructure providers and relevant loca l community groups 
to ensure that the new provision meets the needs of the community it will serve.  New 
development will be required to provide the necessary provision at a timely stage to 
meet the community needs arising as a result of the development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanat ion 
6.56 Open space includes a ll open space of public value, including not just land, but also areas 
of water (such as rivers, canals , lakes and reservoirs) which offer important opportunities 
for sport and recreation and can act as a visual ameni ty’ (NPPF 2021 Glossary definition) . 
Improving provision will increase opportunities for leisure and physical activity, improve 
access to sports and recreation facilities , and enhance the quality of life of residents . 
 
6.57 Protecting existing levels of access to  high quality open space, sports and recreational 
buildings and land, including playing fields  is an important part of supporting healthy 
communities. If the quantity, quality,  and accessibility of provision in Cannock Chase is  to 
be maintained an d enhanced, then it will be necessary to strictly control developments that 
would affect existing provision. The incremental loss of existing provision t o other uses has 
the potential to compromise the District Council’s ambition to improv e provision in su pport 
of social, economic and environmental objectives.  
 
6.58 Minimum l ocal standards have been established, informed by nationally recognised 
standards, to guide developers of requirements . Contributions will be measured by the 
primary function of the provision. Multi -functional provision will be assessed in relation to 
the contributions made to each typology.  
 
Typology  and Definition of Primary Purpose  Size-
based 
standards  
(Hectares 
per 1,000 
population ) Distance -based 
standards  
(Walking Distance in 
metres)  
Parks and Gardens  
Principal:  High quality multifunctional green space 
with a distinct landscape or historical character and a 
range of facilities and activities accessible for all the  
community.  
Neighbourhood:  Multifunctional green space offering 
facilities and activities for distinct groups.  
Local:  Green space with limited facilities and 
activities other than informal recreation.  0.80 
 2,000  
 
 
 
 
710 
 
400 
Semi -Natural Spaces  
Principal:  High quality ecological site managed 
primarily for biodiversity. International or national 1.80 720 
 
Item No.  8.796. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 50 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   designated site with specific nature conservation aims 
and/or dedicated long term management plan.  
Neighbourhood:  District important site managed for 
biodiversity w ith specific nature conservation aims. 
Likely defined component of other typologies.  
Local:  Local important site managed for nature 
conservation within scope of ground maintenance 
specifications.  
Landscape Link s 
Principal:  Network or corridor of green space linking 
several open space typologies or settlements with 
multifunctional provision for people, landscape and 
wildlife . 
Neighbourhood : Corridor of green space linking at 
least two open space typologies or settlements wit h 
multifunctional provision for people, landscape and 
wildlife.  
Local:  Corridor of green space linking at least two 
open space typologies or settlements with at least 
one provision for people or landscape and/or wildlife.  Not 
Applicable  See CCDC Open 
Space Strategy  
Green Spaces for Children and Young People  
Neighbourhood:  Designed play space with equipped 
play facilities and informal opportunities for play 
toddler and junior , including Neighbourhood Equipped 
Areas for Play (NEAPs) . 
Local:  Designed pla y space incidental play space 
catering for toddler and juniors , including Local 
Equipped Areas for Play (LEAPs) . 0.25 
 
 
 
 
  
1,000 
 
 
 
400 
 
 
Amenity Green Space s 
Area of designed incidental open space associated 
with housing estates. Primarily for landscape and 
visual setting rather than recreation.   
0.60  
480 
Churchyards, Burial Sites and Cemeteries  
Important formal spiritual area for commemoration of 
deceased. Including all faith and nonfaith groups.  Not 
Applicable  See CCDC Open 
Space Strategy  
 
Outdoor Sports Provision  
Formal outdoor sports pitches for rugby, football, 
hockey  or cricket for hire with associated facilities and 
infrastructure including car parks and changing 
rooms. Including public land, private clubs or 
institutional land.   
1.60  
1,200  
Civic Spaces and Public Squares  
Spaces for memorials or associated with civic 
buildings. High quality hard and soft landscaping.  Not 
Applicable  
 See CCDC Open 
Space Strategy  
 
 
6.59 The local standards as described should be applied in a co -ordinated way  to deliver multi -
functional open space . For example, natural and semi -natural green spaces can  overlap 
with amenity green space, or equipped open spaces for children and young people can be  
acceptable facilities within a wider area of parkland or amenity green space.   
Item No.  8.806. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 51 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
6.60 A distance of at least 30 metres should be maintained between the curtilage of residential 
properties and any recreation facilities that are likely to generate a significant level of noise 
and activity , such as Neighbourhood  Equipped Areas for Play.  
 
6.61 The strategic planning, management and provision of open space within Cannock Chase 
District will focus on the following aims.  
• Maintaining the district standard of unrestricted open space of 28 hectares per 1,000 
head of population.  
• Ensuring the quantitative component of unrestricted open space (the supply) is planned 
to meet to meet future provision (demand).  
• Maintaining standards in quality provision of unrestricted open space.  
• Ensuring accessibility to unrestricted open  space.  
• Ensuring public satisfaction levels of open space are maintained as good or very good.  
 
6.62 The Cannock Chase District Council Open Space Strategy and the Local Plan will form 
the basis of how the above will be achieved over time. This will be a combin ation of 
planning gain via planning policies such as s106; planned development within the District 
through high quality masterplanning and strategic management of open spaces by the 
Council and their partners.  
 
6.63 The Cannock Chase Sport and Leisure Facilitie s Needs Assessment (August 2018)  was 
prepared to identify supply and demand issues for sport and recreation provision across 
the District, identify priority sports based on national targets and local needs, and enable 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan to be  kept up to date.  The assessment considered the 
supply and demand for sports halls, swimming pools, health and fitness suites, other sports 
(indoor bowls, squash, athletics), village halls and community centres.  
 
6.64 The Cannock Chase District Council Playing Pitch Strategy & Action Plan (May 2019)  
provides the evidence required to help protect playing fields to ensure sufficient land is 
available to meet existing and projected future pitch requirements. The Playing Pi tch 
Strategy and Action Plan concluded that there is a need to protect all existing outdoor 
sports provision, or to deliver an equivalent or better quantity and quality of provision to 
offset any loss of facility prior to the loss taking place. The only ex ception to the above 
would be in the case of existing sports provision being upgraded to provide a better facility . 
The following types of outdoor sports facilities are included in the Assessment and 
Strategy:  
 PITCH SPORTS  OUTDOOR SPORTS  
Cricket pitches  
Football pitches  
Artificial Grass Pitches (AGPs)  
Hockey AGPs  
Rugby Union pitches  Tennis  
Bowls  
Athletics  
Golf 
Item No.  8.816. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 52 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   6.65 The Cannock Chase Open Space Assessment and Strategy (XX 2022 ) 
 
6.66 Financial contributions towards sports facilities ( including swimming pools and sports hall s) 
and playing pitches  will be calculated using Sport England ’s planning tools such as Sports 
Facilities Calculator and the Playing Pitch Strategy New Development Calculator (NDC)  
 
List of relevant evidence  
 
• White Paper ‘Plan ning for the Future’ (August 2020)  
• Joint Strategic Needs Assessment Annual Update (2019)  
• Cannock Chase District Council Playing Pitch Strategy & Action Plan (May 2019)  
• Cannock Chase Sport and Leisure Facilities Needs Assessment (August 2018)  
• Cannock Chase Open Space Assessment and Strategy ( XXX 2022)  
POLICY S O2.45: ALLOTMENTS A ND COMMUNITY  GARDENS  FOOD GROWING  
Introduction  
6.67 National planning policies (NPPF 2021) require local plans to create places which 
promote health and well-being, with a high standard of amenity for existing and future 
users, and  access to healthier food and allotments.  
POLICY S O2.4: ALLOTMENTS A ND COMMUNITY GARDENS  
 
Development proposals that provide, or contribute to the provision of, allotments and 
community gardens for the purpose of food growing will be supported.  
 
Development proposals that result in the loss, or reduction, of existing allotments and 
community  gardens  will be resisted unless there is an overriding sustainable 
development justification for the proposal, with replacement of the lost facilities in a 
location appropriate to demand.  
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.68 Protecting existing levels of access to high quality open space, including allotments and 
community food growing sites, is an important part of supporting healthy communities. If 
the quantity, quality and accessibility of provision in Cannock Chase is to b e maintained 
and enhanced, then it will be necessary to strictly control developments that would affect 
existing provision.  
 
6.69 Allotments and community gardens are likely to have a good level of community 
involvement, and be managed for the benefit of local community with emphasis on healthy 
living.  
 
6.70 The National Society of Allotment and Leisure Gardeners (NSALG) recommends a 
quan titative standard of  provision of  20 plots per 1,000 households  (about 9.1 plots per 
1,000 people  assuming an average household size of 2.2 people ). The size of an allotment 
plot is 250 square metres (0.025ha). This standard of provision would be equivalent to 0.23  
hectares  of allotments per 1 ,000 people.   
Item No.  8.826. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 53 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
6.71 Local standards have been adopted by the District Council, informed by nationally 
recognised standards, to guide developers of requirements.  
 
Typology and Definition of Primary Purpose  Size-
based 
standards  
(Hectares 
per 1,000 
population ) Distance -based 
standards  
(Walking Distance in 
metres)  
Allotments and community gardens  
Dedicated and secure site for the growing of non -
commercial fruit and vegetables. Likely to have a 
good level of community involvement. Managed for 
benefit of local community with emphasis on healthy 
living.  0.125  See CCDC Open 
Space Strategy  
 
6.72 National and local guidance on the general specification of allotments and community 
gardens should be followed in the design of the provision.  
 
6.73 There is a waiting list for allotments for rent from Cannock Chase Council. The current 
provision is at the following locations:     
• The Stadium, Pye Green – 14 plots;  
• Rumer Hill, Cannock - 20 plots;  
• Burn Street, Chadsmoor - 1 plot;  
• Girton Road, Cannock -15 plots;  
• School Close, Norton Canes - 4 plots;  
• Rear of St Johns Road, Cannock - 3 plots;  
• Oaks Drive, Cannock - 13 plots; and  
• Raven hill, Rugeley - 19 plots . 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
• The National Allo tment Society – www.nsalg.gov.uk  
• Open Space Assessment Study 2022  
 
POLICY S O2.5: PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HEALTHY LIVING A ND ACTIVITY  
THROUGH ACTIVE DESIGN  
Introduction  
6.74 National planning policies (NPPF 2021) require local plans to create places that are safe, 
inclusive  and accessible and which promote health and well -being, with a high standard of 
amenity for existing and future users. Local plan policies should ‘ enable and support 
healthy lifestyles, especially where this would address identified local health and well -being 
needs – for example through the provision of safe and accessible green infrastructure and 
layouts that encourage walking and cycling’ (NPPF paragraph 92(c) ). 
Item No.  8.836. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 54 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   6.75 The National Design Guide (2021) identifies the value of active travel , where p riority is 
given to pedestrian and cycle movements . In well -designed places, people should not need 
to rely on the car for everyday journeys, including getting to workplaces, shops, schools 
and other facilities, open spaces or the natural environment.  
 
6.76 The concept of ‘Active Design’ (add link) is rooted in Sport England’s aims to promote the 
role of sport and physical activity in creating healthy and sustainable communities. The 
principles of Active Design include walkable communities, connected walking & c ycling 
routes, networks of multifunctional open space, and high quality streets and spaces.  Local 
Plan consultation has demonstrated su pport for increasing the role of active travel (and 
public transport ).  
 
POLICY S O2.5: PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HEALTHY LIVING A ND ACTIVITY  
THROUGH ACTIVE DESIGN  
 
Major development proposals will, in accordance with the principles of Active Design 
and the relevant Local Design Guide , set out how opportunities to support healthy  
living and active travel would be created or enhanced, by:  
 
• Enabling activity for all ages and abilities by creating the conditions for active 
travel between all locations  by co-locating community and other facilities in 
accessible locations, and  creating  walkable communities, connected walking & 
cycling routes, networks of multifunctional open space, and high quality streets 
and m eeting spaces .  
• Providing infrastructure that will enable sport and physical activity to take place in 
a variety of locations b oth inside and around buildings.   
• Providing well designed, safe and convenient routes for walking and cycling which 
are integrated with green and blue infrastructure and connected to wider networks 
(in line with Policy SO5.1: Accessible Developm ent). 
• Encouraging more walking and cycling through an improved public realm, way 
marking and convenient access to local work, shopping, health, education, leisure, 
green infrastructure and other facilities (in line with Policy SO5. 4: Maintaining and 
Improving the Transport System).  
• Linking to  existing green infrastructure , safeguarding the ‘Strategic Green Space 
Network’ , or providing additional green  infrastructure (in line with Policy SO 7.8: 
Green Infrastructure) . 
 
Any development proposals that would result in a reduction in the provision of 
opportunities for active travel will only be supported where:  
 
• The proposed development  supports the delivery of the Open Spaces Strategy 
(XXXX 2022 ); or 
•  An assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown the facilities are 
surplus to requirements; or  
• The loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by 
equivalent or better provision in a suitable and accessible location . 
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.846. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 2: Creating Community Facilities  and Healthy Living Opportunities across 
the District  
 
Page. 55 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Explanat ion 
 
6.77 The principles of Active Design  include walkable communities , connected walking & 
cycling routes , network s of multifunctional open space , and h igh quality streets and 
spaces . As with any other green infrastructure, new and improved recreation facilities 
should be designed to serve other green infrastructure functions wherever possible, 
linking into the wider green infrastructure network.  
6.78 ‘Active Travel’ - walking and cycling – has obvious environmental, health, and economic 
benefits.  Promoting  active travel can contribute to reduced emissions of Nitrogen 
Dioxide, particulate matter and help to tackle climate change. It can also help people to 
meet recommended levels of physical activity and (by reducing road traffic congestion) 
also support loc al business.  
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Joint Strategic Needs Assessment Annual Update (2019)  
• Cannock Chase Open Space Assessment a nd Strategy (under preparation); and  
• Government White Paper ‘Planning for the Future’ (August 2020)  
• Open Spaces Assessment 2022  
 
  
Item No.  8.856. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 56 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3  
 
To deliver a sufficient supply of homes to provide for housing choice and ensure all 
people are able to live in a decent home which meets their needs by:  
 
• Facilitating sustainable housing provision;  
 
• Delivering sufficient housing to meet the District’s own need and an appropriate 
and sustainable contribution to the wider housing market area shortfall where 
justified in adopted plans;  
 
• Helping meet local need for affordable dwellings;  
 
• Providing housing choices for an ageing population;  
 
• Catering for the needs of different groups in the community.  
 
 
Introduction  
6.79 Local Plans must contain strategic policies that make sufficient provision for housing within 
their area. The minimum amount of new homes Cannock has to provide to meet its own 
need during the plan period has been calculated using the standard methodology set out 
in national  guidance. This requires the provision of 5,430 dwellings during the period 2018 -
2039. The Council monitors the provision of dwellings annually and 2103 dwellings have 
already been completed since 1st April 2018 to 31st March 2022, with further provision also 
under construction and with planning permission however there remains an unmet need 
and a need to provide flexibility to account for future fluctuations in the market.  
Neighbouring Authorities Housing Needs  
6.80 Local a uthorities must also co -operate with each other on strategic matters that cross local 
authority boundaries such as meeting housing need . The NPPF states that any housing 
needs which cannot be met within neighbouring areas should also be taken into account 
in establishing the amount of housing to be planned for.  
 
6.81 At the time of preparing the Issues and Options consultation, Birmingham City Council had 
identified a need for housing which it could not meet within its administrative boundary. 
Work had been unde rtaken (via the ‘duty to cooperate’) across the local authorities which 
share the same housing market as Birmingham in order to establish ways to assist 
Birmingham to meet the shortfall identified (up to 2031  and this is being monitored through 
a joint hou sing supply statement  
 
6.82 A number of  authorities have contributed additional housing to help meet this identified 
shortfall. Our neighbouring authorities of South Staffordshire and Lichfield, who share the 
Greater Birmingham and Black Country Housing Market Area (GBBCHMA) are proposing 
an ad ditional provision for 4,500 and 2,665  homes through their Local Plans. These 
proposals include sites being released from the Green Belt to help meet the shortfall. Our 
other neighbouring authority is Stafford Borough and they are not part of the GBBCHMA.  
Item No.  8.866. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 57 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
   
6.83 At present the Association of Black Country authorities (ABCA) are preparing a joint Local 
Plan for the areas of Walsall, Sandwell, Wolverhampton and Dudley. Studies undertaken 
by ABCA have identified a dwelling shortfall of 29,260 between 2019 -2038. AB CA has 
formally requested the authorities that share their housing market, including Cannock 
Chase District to assist in meeting their unmet housing needs.  
 
6.84 Discussions with other members of the GBBCHMA and our neighbouring authorities have 
also been under taken to ascertain whether they could accommodate some of the shortfall 
identified. As outlined previously both Lichfield and South Staffordshire Councils are 
already making a contribution to the shortfall. South Staffordshire have formally written to 
us asking if we are able to assist with the unmet housing need of the GB BCHMA and if we 
can provide sufficient land to enable them to reduce their proposed Local Plan Review 
housing target, they also advised that their evidence is indicating that ‘South Staffo rdshire 
will need to release further Green Belt land through the Local Plan Review in order to meet 
its own needs and to make a proportionate contribution to th e GB BCHMA’s unmet housing 
needs.’  
 
6.85 Lichfield District Council also wrote to us advising that they were certain that in order for 
them to deliver their spatial strategy and make a contribution to the wider housing needs 
arising from the GBBCHMA then they would not be able to accommodate all of the 
identified housing need on sustainable sites outside of the Green B elt. They therefore 
wrote to  their neighbouring authorities to ascertain if there were any ‘sustainable non -green 
belt sites or areas, in neighbouring authorities which meet your spa tial strategy and which 
could be brought forward to meet Lichfield District Council’s housing needs’ . Lichfield 
District Council are further advanced in the plan making process than ourselves and have 
now submitted  their plan. Their local plan does include removal of land from the Green 
Belt for residential development.  
Assessment of Urban Capacity  and De nsity 
6.86 The Cannock Chase District Development Capacity Study ( 2022 ) has been prepared and 
published alongside this consultation. The Capacity Study identifies additional sites 
(capable of accommodating 10 or more units) that could be brought into the housin g 
supply. A review of the existing employment sites has been incorporated, and the open 
space assessment has concluded that there is no surplus open space in the district.  
 
6.87 The Capacity Study also considers the potential to increase the density of develop ments,  
it found that there was limited potential to increase capacity due to many of the sites 
already having planning permission. The SHLAA monitors the density of developments 
and includes a target of 50dph in the urban town centres of Cannock, Rugeley and 
Hednesford, 35dph in the sub -urban areas which accords with the Greater Birmingham 
HMA Growth Study. The site density is linked to t he character area density zones in the 
Design SPD and site specific locations as many of the sites are small in area and the scope 
for increasing density can be  more constrained.  
Item No.  8.876. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 58 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
Viability Assessment  
6.88 A Local Plan is required to deliver the levels of grow th it identifies, so it needs to test if the 
sites within the plan and those that will be delivered through the policies in the plan are 
available, suitable and deliverable (NPPF paragraph 34). The draft Local Plan is therefore 
supported by evidence includ ing the SHLAA, sustainability appraisal and viability 
assessment.  
 
6.89 A viability assessment assesses if the development proposed through the Local Plan can 
be delivered given the policies which guide development. Sometimes the policies 
incorporated into the plan such as those requiring contributions to affordable housing 
provision and mitigating for the impacts of climate change involve additional costs to t he 
developers. To test the impact of the policies on the delivery of the levels of growth required 
a viability assessment is undertaken.  
 
6.90 The Viability Assessment is an iterative process and will be repeated at each stage of the 
local plan preparation.  
POLICY SO3.1: PROVISION FOR NEW HOMES  
Introduction  
6.91 National planning policies support the government’s objective of significantly boosting the 
supply of homes by ensuring that a sufficient amount and variety of land can come forward 
where it is needed. A local housing need assessment, conducted using the s tandard 
method in national planning guidance, has been used to inform the policies of this Local 
Plan. In addition to the local housing need figure, needs that cannot be met within 
neighbouring areas have been considered . Local planning policies should identify a 
sufficient supply and mix of sites, considering  their availability, suitability and likely 
economic viability . 
6.92 In rural areas, local planning policies should be responsive to local circumstances and 
support housin g developments that reflect local needs. Local planning authorities should 
also support opportunities to bring forward rural exception sites that will provide affordable 
housing to meet identified local needs.  
 
 
POLICY SO3.1: PROVISION FOR NEW HOMES  
 
The Local Planning Authority will plan, monitor and manage the delivery of housing 
from 2018 to 203 9 in accordance with the spatial strategy and the site allocations set 
out in this Local Plan. Housing provision will be made for a minimum of 5, 430 
dwelling s (net) to meet the objectively assessed local housing needs, and ensuring a 
sufficient supply of deliverable and developable land is available to deliver around 2 58 
dwellings each year.  
 
A further housing provision will be made for 500 dwellings to meet u nmet needs of 
neighbouring areas, and ensuring a sufficient supply of deliverable and developable 
Item No.  8.886. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 59 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
 
Sites under  Construction  
6.93 Table A  presents a list of the sites which were under construction at 01/04/202 2. These 
sites form part of the housing supply (2018 -39) and many of these sites have already 
delivered some of the completions to the housing supply for the District and form part of 
the current housing trajectory and five -year supply. As they have planning permissions 
which are being implemented, they do not have a specific site allocation policy .  
 
Table A: Sites under  Construction  land is available  where this be justified in an adopted Local Plan of Birmingham C ity 
Council, Walsall Council  or the Associat ion of Black Country Authoritie s.  
 
New housing allocations are concentrated within the existing urban areas, or within 
planned expansion to the urban areas in accessible and sustainable locations, in 
accordance with the Spatial Strategy.  
 
Priority has been given to the re -use of previously developed land, including the 
former Rugeley Power Station site, to meet housing needs.  
 
The allocated housing sites are shown on the Proposals Map and are listed in Tables 
B and C.  
 
There is a need to identify new locations adjacent to existing  settlements to 
accommodate the balance of dwellings which cannot be built on sites within the 
existing urban areas of the District.  The following sites include some or entire release 
of land within the Green Belt, they are therefore   strategic housing all ocations and are 
as follows;  
• SH1 South of Lichfield Road, Cannock 700 dwellings ;  
• SH2 East  of Wimblebury Road 410 dwellings ;  
• SH3 Land to rear of Longford House, Watling Street Cannock 45 dwellings ; 
• SH4 Land east of The Meadows Armitage Lane Brereton 33 dwellings; and  
• SH6 Former Ha rt School, (Hagley Park),  Burnthill Road, Rugeley: 145 dwellings  
 
Development will achieve an average site density of 50dph in Cannock, Rugeley and 
Hednesford town centres and 35dph in the suburban areas.  
 
In the rural areas only the following types of dwellings will be permitted:  
• Infill development within the defined settlement boundaries set out on the 
proposals map;  
• Affordable housing for local community needs  on  small  rural exception sites;  
• Change s of Use and conversion schemes ; 
• Development identified in Neighbourhood Plans reflecting local need and 
affordable housing provision respecting the local character and infrastructure 
of the area; and  
• Dwellings to serve the essential need for a n agricultural, forestry or other 
occupational worker in a rural area in accordance with national guidance.  
 
Item No.  8.896. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 60 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
SITE  
REF.  LOCATION  AREA  
HA CAPACITY 
(U/C AND 
N/S) 
H1 Land to the West of Pye Green Road, Hednesford (Northern 
end of site adj. Pye Green Road)  13.40  262 
H3 Land to the West of Pye Green Road, Hednesford - Common 
Farm (SE corner at cross roads with Lime Pit Lane)  1.50 3 
H4 County Grounds Depot,  
Cannock Road, Cannock  0.44 49 
H11 108, 102 -106 High Green Court, Cannock  0.10 8 
H12 Whitelodge, New Penkridge Road, Cannock  0.23 2 
H44 268, Bradbury Lane, Hednesford  0.31 10 
H55 77 Old Fallow Road, Cannock  0.25 11 
  Sub-total 345 
H21 Land between Wharf Road and Hardie Avenue, Rugeley  2.72 42 
H25 Main Road, Brereton (between Cedar Tree Hotel and Library)  0.53 27 
H56 Lea Hall Miners Welfare & Social Club, Sandy Lane, Rugeley  0.33 14  
  Sub total  83 
H13 Land off Norton Hall Lane and Butts Lane, Norton Canes  13.60  101 
  Sub-total 101 
 Minor /small sites under construction (SHLAA 202 2)  124 
  TOTAL  588 653 
 
Site Allocations  
6.94 Table B  lists the sites allocated for housing development within the Cannock Chase District 
during the period to 203 9. Development of t hese sites had not started at 1st April, 2022. 
Each site ha s a site specific  Local Plan policy drafted for them  in Chapter 8 Site Allocations  
- Table B   
 
6.95 The sites in Table B are considered suitable for residential development as they comprise 
sites which already have planning permission, are already allocated in an approved 
devel opment plan for housing, form parts of larger sites which have planning permission, 
Item No.  8.906. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 61 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
or are sites which the Council has already resolved to grant planning permission for 
housing.  
 
 
 
Table B:  Proposed allocations which already have planning permission, are already allocated or 
have a resolution to grant p lanning permission for housing.  
 
6.96 Table C  includes the sites which have been assessed as suitable for housing through the 
Cannock Chase District Development Capacity Study (2021) and Site Selection 
Methodology 2022 and which are considered as also able to provide housing during the 
plan period.  Most are already listed in the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment . 
Table C:  Proposed Allocations – Additional Sites from Development Capacity Study  SITE REFERENCE  LOCATION  CAPACITY 
FROM THE 
SHLAA  
H16 Land west of Pye Green Road, Hednesford Cannock (Land 
Northern end  of the larger site  80 
H17 Land west of Pye Green Road, Hednesford Cannock (Adj.. Pye 
Green Road. Part of larger site )  73 
H18 Land adjacent and to the rear of 419 -435, Cannock Road, 
Hednesford  25 
H45 23, Walsall Road, Cannock  12 
H57 Unit E & F, Beecroft Court, Cannock  20 
 Sub Total  210 
H20 Rugeley Power Station, Rugeley  1,000  
M6 Rugeley Market Hall and Bus Station, Rugeley  50 
M7 Land at Wellington Drive, Rugeley  20 
H24 Market Street garages, Rugeley (incorporating BT telephone 
exchange)  28 
H27 Heron Court, Heron Street, Rugeley  10 
H48 Former Aelfgar School, Taylors Lane, Rugeley  58 
 Sub-total 1,166  
 TOTAL  1,376  
Item No.  8.916. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 62 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
SITE 
REFERENCE  LOCATION  CAPACI
TY 
H29 Land at 521, Pye Green Road, Hednesford, Cannock  80 
H30 Land at Rawnsley Road, Hazel Slade  60 
M1 Multi Storey Car Park, Market Hall and Retail Units, Church Street, Cannock  40 
H32 Avon Road/Hallcourt Lane, Cannock  40 
M3 Beecroft Road Car Park, Cannock  35 
H34 Land at Chapel Street, Heath Hayes  30 
H35 Land at Girton Road/Spring Street, Cannock  28 24 
H36 Park Road Offices, Cannock  25 
H37 Police Station Car Park, Cannock  25 
H38 Land at Walsall Road, Avon Road, Hunter Road, Hallcourt Lane, Cannock  24 
H39 26 - 28 Wolverhampton Road, Cannock  21 
H40 Danilo Road Car Park, Cannock  20 
M4 Backcrofts Car Park, Cannock  20 
M2 Park Road Bus Station, Cannock  15 
H43 243, Hill Street, Hednesford, Cannock  13 
H46 St. Chad's Courtyard, Cannock Road, Chadsmoor  10 
H58 Cromwell House, Mill Street, Cannock  12 
H59 54, Lloyd Street, Cannock  12 
H60 41, Mill Street, Cannock  15 
H61 Cannock Chase High School, Lower Site, Cam pus, Hednesford Road  - 
H62 Springvale Area Service office, Walhouse Street, Cannock  10 
H63 Fmr. Rumer Hill Industrial Estate, Cannock  99 
 Sub-total 630 
Item No.  8.926. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 63 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
H49 Land at The Mossley, off Armitage Road  40 
H50 Nursery Fields, St Michaels Road, Brereton   35 
H51 Castle Inn, 141, Main Road , Brereton  27 
H52 Gregory Works, Armitage Road, Brereton  23 
H53 Land off Lichfield Road, Rugeley   20 
H64 The Fairway Motel, Horsefair, Rugeley  17 
 Sub-total  162 
   
 TOTAL  792 
 
 
Small Sites Contribution  
 
6.97 Small sites form part of the housing supply. These comprise the sites of under 10 units. 
Delivery of these sites is monitored annually through the SHLAA. Guidance permits the 
capacity that these provide to be inc luded within the trajectory for  the 2018 -2039 Local 
Plan.  As the plan period is so long it is acceptable to estimate the contribution that small 
sites will make to meeting the housing requir ement. These small sites are called windfall 
sites. There are some windfall sites which are currently known to us and these are listed 
in the SHLAA.  All of the minor sites which are currently under construction are counted 
towards the overall housing requ irement for the District during the plan period.  
Explanation  
6.98 The Council is required to meet the requirements identified in the housing delivery test. 
This requires provision to be made for 5, 430 dwellings within the plan period and to 
maintain a minimum supply of five years’ worth of housing sites throughout the plan period. 
The Council is also currently required to meet its duty to cooperate and has made provision 
which enables provision of dwel lings to meeting cross boundary needs within the housing 
market area which may arise  
 
6.99 Small sites and infill plots make a valuable contribution to the housing provision across the 
district and can help in meeting specific needs. However, within the non urb an areas there 
is poorer provision of services and facilities as most of the essential services and facilities 
to meet daily needs are located within the urban areas, additional housing in non urban 
areas should therefore be minimised to safeguard our cher ished countryside and should 
only be provided to support local needs where justified.  
 
Item No.  8.936. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 64 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.100  The Council recognises the valuable contribution made to the housing supply by those 
building their own homes and maintains an up to date register of those seeking plots  for 
self-build and custom housebuilding. The Council identifies single plots for residential 
development within the SHLAA and this is currently in excess of the demand on the self 
build and custom - housebuilding register.  
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Local Housing Needs Assessment (LHNA) 2019  
• Cannock Chase Green belt Harm Assessment (2020) ; and  
• Greater Birmingham and Black Country Housing Market Area (GBBCHMA) Housing  
• Need and Housing Land Supply Position Statement (July 2020)  
• Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment 2022  
• Development Capacity Study 2022  
• Site Selection Methodology Paper 2022  
 
POLICY SO3.2: HOUSING CHOICE  
Introduction   
6.101  National planning policies  (NPPF 2021)  require local plans to assess the size, type and 
tenure of housing needed for different groups in the community (including those who 
require affordable housing, families with children, older people, students, people with 
disabilities, service families, tr avellers , people who rent their homes and people wishing 
to commission or build their own homes).  
 
6.102  The National Design Guide (2021) acknowledges that well -designed neighbourhoods  need 
to include an integrated mix of tenures and housing types that reflect local housing need 
and market demand. This includes people who require affordable housing or other rental 
homes, families, extended families, older people, students, and people wi th physical 
disabilities or mental health needs . 
 
POLICY SO3.2: HOUSING CHOICE  
 
The Local Planning Authority will seek to deliver a wide choice of high quality 
homes which widen opportunities for home ownership, meet needs for social and 
rented housing, an d create sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities.  
 
A mix of housing sizes, types  and tenure appropriate to the area and as supported 
by local evidence should be provided, to ensure that there is a range of housing to 
meet the needs of existing and future residents.  All phases of development should 
require the percentage of affordable housing required by this policy, unless 
otherwise agreed by the Council . 
 
For developments above 10 homes, the percentage  of dwellings which should be 
affordable housing is set out in the Table D below, the Council will adopt the 
governments minimum percen tage for provision of First Homes45, with the 
 
45 The current breakdown is therefore 25% First Homes, 60% rented and 15% intermediate housing.  
Item No.  8.946. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 65 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
remaining provision of affordable homes providing 80% for rent and 20% for 
intermediate housing , prioritising the delivery of rented whenever possible.  
 
Where delivery on site is not feasible or viable,  sites of 10 -14 residential units and 
exceptionally on sites of 15 or more units financial contributions  instead of on site 
provision may be accepted, financial contribution will be based on a  formula in th e 
evidence on viability (in preparation ) which enables delivery on other sites  and as 
calculated by the Council’s Valuer . Where sites have a construction programme 
which is proposed to extend beyond 2 years, the planning obligation will provide 
for the affordable housing component of later phase s to be reviewed based on 
updated viability evidence which may result in an increase of the affordable 
housing requirement.  
 
The size, type  and tenure of homes on sites of 15 or more units (including 
conversions) will be specified in the site allocation policy or where not specified 
will be in accordance with Table E below or its subsequent revisions. The housing 
mix in Table D will not be ap plied to developments falling within Class C2 of the Use 
Classes Order.  
 
Self and custom build h ousing will be supported provided  they meet the 
sustainable development, general amenity  and design policies of this Local Plan.  
Table D: Affordable Housing Provision per site  
 
Ward   Affordable Housing  
Cannock and 
Bridgtown  All development  20% 
Hednesford  10 units - brownfield  20% 
 All other development  30% 
Rugeley  10 units - brownfield  25% 
 Allother development  35% 
Norton Canes & Heath 
Hayes  All development  35% 
 
 
 
 
Table E: Housing Mix46 
 1 
bedroom  2 
bedrooms  3 
bedrooms  4+ 
bedrooms  Total  
Market housing  4% 24% 72% 0%  100 % 
 
Affordable 
housing (rented 
and shared 
ownership)  12% 64% 16% 8% 100% 
Affordable 
housing/home 
ownership 
(those aspiring 17% 40% 38% 5% 100%  
 
46 Table D contains derived data from Appendix A, figure 63, and may not sum due to rounding.  
Item No.  8.956. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 66 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
Where market housing is supported by access to high quality digital infrastructure 
on first occupation47, a flexibility of 4% will be permitted across the dwelling sizes 
to facilitate homeworking.  
 to 
homeownership  
 
Explanation  
 
6.103  The latest evidence identifies t here is a need for affordable housing and t here is a need 
to restore the balance in the housing market by providing more  smaller dwellings suited 
to young and older people  and housing suitable for households with specific needs. The 
LHNA does identify the need of those with aspiration to enter the housing market but who 
would be unable to afford normal market housing. Some of this n eed is met by the 
private rented sector and through the provision for First Homes. The NPPF seeks a 
minimum level of provision of 10% for affordable home ownership unless local 
circumstances dictate otherwise.  
 
6.104  Evidence shows the need for affordable dwellings across the district will not be met in 
entirety by this plan it is therefore appropriate to require a higher level of provision and to 
safeguard the provision made by the plan to ensure the amount of dwellin gs which 
remain affordable in perpetuity delivers this strategic objective.  
 
6.105  The Viability Assessment prepared to support the Local Plan has demonstrated that the 
affordable housing provision shown in Table D is viable. All affordable units shall be 
provid ed on site unless robustly justified. Where robustly justified the requirement can be 
met by providing an off -site provision or commuted payment in lieu of an on -site provisi on 
to deliver affordable units.   Any financial contribution will be calculated by the Council’s 
Valuer prior to the planning permission being issued.  
 
6.106  Where a proportion of affordable housing is required - whether via on -site provision or 
off-site contribution - development proposals will include an Affordable Housing 
Statement. The Statement should include an explanation and/or plans as to how the 
proposal meets the relevant policy requirements in respect to tenure type, house type 
and location.  
 
6.107  Where a site has been sub -divided , phased  or is not being developed to its full potential 
so as to fall under the affordable housing threshold the Council will seek a level of 
 
47 Cannock  Chase  district is quite well served with superfast broadband at 99.54% and are currently 26.70% gigabit capable. It is 
highly likely suppliers such as Ope nreach and Virgin will start to address the gigabit capable service, given the majority of the 
premises in Cannock Chase  ought to be commercially viable. Openreach have already announced the Cannock exchange for 
upgrade to full fibre within their First Fib re programme.  
Item No.  8.966. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 67 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
affordable housing to reflect the provision that would have been achieved on the site as a 
whole had it come forward as a  single scheme for the allocated or identified site . On larger 
phased developments , affordable housing will be distributed evenly throughout the phases 
to avoid some phases being dominated by affordable or market housing . 
 
6.108  The tenure mix and type of afford able provision will be agreed with the Council’s housing 
manager on a site by site basis and secur ed through an appropriate legal agree ment . Such 
agreements will be expected to ensure the affordable housing will remain at an affordable 
price  for future eli gible households , or for the subsidy  or any receipts  to be recycled to 
alternative affordable housing provision . 
 
6.109  Self-build/custom house build ratio will be in accordance with the NPPF and monitored 
through the Authority Monitoring Report.  
 
 
6.110  Recent evidence showed levels of homeworking below the regional and national average, 
with only 7.9% of persons working from home, compared to nearly 12% across the West 
Midlands and 13% across the UK. Hom eworking supports the Council’s objective to 
address the c limate change emergency and local economy.  Connection to the latest high 
speed digital infrastructure  available locally is necessary to support efficient home working  
as well as other household requirements . The percentage of older persons in the district 
will increase during the plan period. Intergenerational living can promote health and well -
being especially in the older population and reduce the length of hospital stays. The level 
of demand within the district is currently unknown an d can be addressed t hrough delivering 
high quality housing  as set out in Policy SO3.3 . 
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
• Local Housing Needs Assessment  (2019 ) 
• Local Plan Viability Assessment (2022)  
 
POLICY SO3.3: DELIVERING HIGH QUALITY HOUSING  
Introduction  
  
6.111  National planning policy (NPPF 2021) requires local plans to set clear expectations for the 
quality of the places to be created and how this can be maintained. This can be achieved 
by ensuring that masterplans and design guides or codes are used to secure a variety of 
well-designed and beautiful homes to meet the needs of different groups in the community . 
 
6.112  The National Design Guide (2021) notes that well designed homes and buildings are 
efficient and cost effective to run. They should be designed to help t o reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions, have good ventilation, avoid overheating, minimise sound pollution and 
have good air quality. Well -designed homes and communal areas within buildings should 
provide a good standard and quality of internal space. This incl udes room sizes, floor -to-
ceiling heights, internal and external storage, sunlight, daylight and ventilation. Where a 
Item No.  8.976. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 68 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
need is identified, the National Design Guide advises that Local Plans may adopt the 
Nationally Described Space Standards and those for accessibility and water.  
 
 
POLICY SO3.3: DELIVERING HIGH QUALITY HOUSING  
 
Housing development should be of a high quality in terms of its design and resilience, 
and provide adequate space to achieve good living standards.  
 
New dwellings (including conversi ons of existing properties into flats) should be of 
sufficient size and layout to provide good quality accommodation to meet the needs 
of their occupants, with developers required to meet Nationally Described Space 
Standards. Sufficient external amenity sp ace or private gardens should also be 
provided.  
 
Developers will be required to provide suitable housing for households with health 
problems or disabilities. Developments which provide a minimum of 60% of their 
total number of units as suitable for households with health problems or disabilities 
will be supported. This could be through the provision of dwellings, single level 
accommodation such as bungalows and ground floor flats which comply with Part 
M(2) or Part M(3) of the current Building Regulations (as a minimum) or can be easily 
adapted to meet these standards.  
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.113  The Council has sought to enhance the attractiveness of the District and increase the 
number of workers residing in the district from the professional, financial and managerial 
sectors. The nationally described space s tandards will assist the aim of the authority by 
sending a clear message to developers that poor quality housing will not be tolerated and 
will enhance the health and well being of its residents, the standards will encourage greater 
numbers of persons to w ork from home which will also assist the Council in achieving its 
ambitions of zero carbon.  
6.114  Current standards for amenity  space are specified in the Design SPD , there is a need to 
consider a standard for care homes and 1 bedroom properties and increase the  density of 
development . It is appropriate to reconsider the local standard rather than just reflect the 
national standard , and this will be done through the preparation of the Local Design 
Guides.  
6.115  During the plan period t he age profile of the population is forecast to change with  a rise in 
the proportion of older residents, particularly those aged 70+ and a substantial growth in 
households which have health problems or disabilities which affect their housing 
requirement , whilst this type of need is  more prevalent amongst older persons it is not  
exclusive to them.  
6.116  The Local Housing Needs Assessment identifies that 60% of all new housing should be 
suitable for the needs of households with health problems or disabilities that affect their 
housing requ irement to meet future forecasts and deficiencies in the existing housing 
Item No.  8.986. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 69 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
stock. It supports the need for a target of 13% of all housing to meet M4(3) Category 3 
requirements which requires dwellings to be suitable for wheelchair users and supports 
the nee d for a target of 47% of all housing to meet M4(2) Category 2 requirements, which 
enable dwellings to be accessible and adapted in the future for persons with reduced 
mobility.  
6.117  Where conversion relates to listed buildings the protection and safeguarding of  the 
significance of the heritage asset will be prioritised over the need to deliver accessible and 
adaptable dwellings.  
 
List of Relevant E vidence  
• Local Housing Needs Assessment 2019  
POLICY SO3.4: GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS AND TRAVELLING SHOW PEOPLE  
Introduction  
6.118  National planning policies require local plans to assess t he size, type and tenure of housing 
needed for different groups in the community , including travellers. ‘Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites ’ (updated 2015) sets out the government’s policies on how travellers’ 
housing needs should be assessed . For the purposes of local planning policy, ‘Travellers ’, 
‘Gypsies  and Travellers’,  ‘Travelling Showpeople ’, ‘pitches’ and ‘plots’  are as defined in 
Annex 1 of th e national guidance.  
 
 
POLICY SO3.4: GYPSIES  AND  TRAVELLERS AND TRAVELLING SHOW PEOPLE  
 
The identified local needs for Gypsy and Traveller pitches (for those who meet the 
definition of travellers in national policy) and Travelling Showpeople plots will be 
met via:  
a) The safeguarding of existing authorised sites for Gypsies and Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople from development which would preclude their 
continued occupatio n by these groups, unless acceptable replacement 
accommodation can be provided, or the site is no longer required to meet an 
identified need.  
b) The delivery of sites with planning permission, allocated sites and other sites 
granted planning permission during the Plan period in accordance with the 
criteria set out within this Policy.  Additional pitches and plots will be 
delivered within the Distri ct at the following locations to meet the following 
local needs for at least the first five years of the Plan (from adoption):  
Site Reference/Site Address  Number of pitches or plots  Planning permission/allocation  
Land at Cannock Wood Road, 
Rawnsley  3 Allocation Policy GT1 
 
Item No.  8.996. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 70 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
To meet the longer term need (identified in the GTAA 2019) for a further 7 residential 
pitches , proposals for new sites for Gypsies  and Travellers and 9 plots for  Travelling 
Show  people outside of the Green Belt will be supported provided that:  
 
• The site is suitable in terms of highway safety, vehicular access , parking, turning  
and has access to essential services such as water supply, sewerage, drainage, 
and waste disposal;  
• There is adequate provision for on -site facil ities including storage, play, and on -
site utility/amenity blocks for the number of pitches or plots proposed;  
• The site is well designed to ensure that a high standard of residential amenity is 
maintained for the occupiers of the site and the occupiers of existing 
neighbouring properties.  
• The site is landscaped to give privacy between pitches for satisfactory residential 
amenity both within the site and with neighbouring occupiers.  
• The site does not detrimentally affect the amenity of local residents by rea son of 
on-site business activities, noise, disturbance, or loss of privacy.  
• Proposals for sites accommodating Travelling Show people should additionally 
allow for a mixed use yard with areas for residential provision and the storage 
and maintenance of equi pment. All other proposals for mixed residential and 
business activities will be assessed on a site specific basis, taking t he above 
criteria into account.  
 
Proposals for new sites for Gypsies  and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople in the 
Green Belt will not be allowed unless the applicant has demonstrated that very 
special circumstances exist that clearly outweigh the harm to the Green belt and any 
other harm having had regard to the criteria set  out above, national policy 
requirements  and any other material planning considerations, including being:  
 
• Proportionate to the scale of the nearest settlement, its local services and 
infrastructure.  
• Located with reasonable access to a range of services, s uch as shops, schools, 
welfare facilities or public transport  and/ or is in proximity to the A5 transport 
corridor . 
• Compatible with landscape, environment, biodiversity and heritage assets as well 
as physical and visual character of the a rea. 
 
Any development granted planning permission under this policy will be subject to a 
condition limiting occupation to Gypsies and Travellers or Travelling Showpeople, as 
appropriate.  
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.119  Gypsies  and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  are recognised as having specific 
housing needs. The GTAA 2019 has identified that the A5 is still a main travelling route.  
In recent years the gypsy and travelling community have been successful in securing 
sites in the District. Due to the need to be f lexible to enable the gypsy and travelling show 
persons community to meet their needs  throughout the plan period  a criteria based policy 
is also considered appropriate at this time.  
 
Item No.  8.1006. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 3: Delivering a Sufficient Supply of Homes To Provid e for Housing Choice  
 
Page. 71 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.120  Local circumstances have resulted in sites being located beyond the urban areas and 
settlement boundaries of the District, much of which is Green Belt. The policy has been 
established through work undertaken to inform the Council’s Design SPD and GTAA. The  
Design SPD provides further detailed guidance for example in relation to the size of on -
site facilities, lighting and boundary treatments. The policy will enable the gypsy and 
travelling show people’s community to maintain their nomadic lifestyle and safe guards 
their health and well being. The SPD will be updated as appropriate and delivery of 
sufficient pitches/plots will be monitored through th e Authority Monitoring Report.  
 
6.121  Other policies will be relevant to the consideration of proposals, such as Cann ock Chase 
SAC and sites which are prone to flooding.   
List of Relevant E vidence  
• Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Show people Accommodation Assessment 2019  
• Green Belt review Part 1  
• Gypsy, Traveller  and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Background Paper  2022  
• Site Selection Methodology Paper 2022  
 
 
Item No.  8.1016. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 72 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 4:  
 
To encourage a vibrant local economy and workforce by:  
• Championing clean growth principles to support a highly productive, clean and 
resilient economy;   
 
• Safeguarding existing employment areas for employment uses;  
 
• Providing employment opportunities in locations which best respond to market 
demands and which w ill attract inward investment;  
 
• Ensuring that business locations and centres are accessible by public transport 
from all areas of the District, reducing travel needs where possible;  
 
• Supporting the development of town centres as hubs for commercial uses su ch 
as offices,  leisure and culture uses, residential opportunities and community 
activities;  
 
• Providing a range of sizes and types of employment sites to meet modern 
business needs ; 
 
• Supporting sustainable tourism and the rural economy, balanced with the 
protection of the AONB and the District’s two SACs;  
 
• Ensuring the land based economies of the District, including agriculture and 
forestry, can continue to operate, diversify and prosper;  
 
• Encouraging the development of Live Work units;  
 
• Providing for local employment and the development of skills.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO4.1: SAFEGUARDING EXISTING EMPLOYMENT AREAS FOR EMPLOYMENT 
USES  
Introduction  
 
6.122  National p lanning policies acknowledge the role of local plans in the creation of the 
conditions in which businesses can invest, expand and adapt. Significant weight 
should be placed on the need to support economic growth and productivity, taking into 
account both local business nee ds and wider opportunities for development.  
 
 
POLICY SO4.1: SAFEGUARDING EXISTING EMPLOYMENT AREAS FOR 
EMPLOYMENT USES  
 
The existing Employment Areas (listed in the Explanatory Text) will be safeguarded  
and their redevelopment for non -town centre offices, industry and warehousing 
(formerly Class B of the Use Classes Order)  will be supported.   
 
Proposals for the change of use of the existing and future Employment Areas 
(including vacant sites with a lawful use for employment purp oses) will only be 
Item No.  8.1026. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 73 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
permitted if  there are overriding and demonstrable economic, regeneration and 
sustainable community benefits from doing so : 
• There is a demonstrable ongoing availability of land supply at other suitable 
locations for employment use; and  
• There is no reasonable prospect of the site being used for employment use in the 
future, due to the poor quality of the site/unit, the extent to which the site/unit is no 
longer viable for use or redevelopment for employment use.  As shown by evidence 
of comprehensive marketing of the site for at least 12 months which demonstrates 
that there is no reasonable prospect of a manufacturing or warehousing use 
continuing; and  
• The redevelopment of part of the site for other uses does not affect the viability of 
existing businesses on the remainder of the  employment area  site; and  
• There are demonstrable benefits arising from the proposal, including 
improvements to local residenti al amenity (where applicable) and environmental 
amenity.  
All employment sites will be protected from inappropriate neighbouring development 
that will adversely affect the employment operations taking place on the site.  
 
Explanation  
6.123  The Council seeks to retain primarily employment generating uses on sites where 
evidence demonstrates that the sites is still viable for employment use and that 
redevelopment will not provide the benefits  where relevant , defined above.  The Council 
wishes t o support inward investment, economic development and regeneration and 
have a balanced portfolio of employment land and recognises this will include a variety 
of size, type, location and quality of employment sites.  High quality employment sites 
exist in t he district at Kingswood Lakeside and Towers Business park and their 
retention for employment generation and higher job density are particularly important 
to the district.  
 
6.124  The assessment of the existing employment areas, EDNA update 2021, ELAA and a 
revie w of the sites for the development capacity work identified that the District ’s 
employment areas are still performing important economic roles and providing a 
mixture of land and premises for a range of users . Evidence suggests they can 
currently contribut e approximately 17 hectares of land to the employment land supply . 
For sites where there are quality issues to be addressed elements of these areas may 
be appr opriate for non -employment uses, particularly those listed in policy  SO4.2  
which can support the enhancement and attractiveness of the employment area.  
 
6.125  The Existing Employment Areas (a t July 202 2) are listed below:  
Cannock, Hednesford and Heath Hayes Employment Areas:  
 
• Kingswood Lakeside;  
• A5 Corridor North;  
• A5 Corridor South;  
Item No.  8.1036. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 74 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Bridgtown Business Area;  
• Hawks Green North;  
• Hawks Green South;  
• Hollies Business Park;  
• Intermodal Site;  
• Keys Business Park;  
• Park Plaza/Heritage Park;  
• Walsall Road;  
• Anglesey Business Park;  
• Watling Street Business Park;  
• Chasewood Park Busin ess Centre;  
• Cannock Wood Industrial Estate; and  
• EDS Couriers, Wimblebury Road.  
 
Rugeley and Brereton Employment Areas:  
• Towers Business Park;  
• Brereton Business Park; and  
• Power Station Road Business Area.  
 
Norton Canes Employment Areas:  
• Norton Canes Business Area; and  
• Lime Lane.  
List of Relevant E vidence  
• Economic Development Needs Assessment ( 2019 ) 
• Economic Development Needs Assessment  Update July 2020  
• Employment Land Availability Assessment  2020  
 
 
POLICY SO4.2: PROVISION FOR NEW EMPLOYMENT USES  
Introduction  
6.126  National planning policies (NPPF 2021) require local plans to set out a strategy which 
encourages sustainable economic growth, having regard to Local Industrial Strategies 
and other local policies for economic development and regeneration. Loc al plans 
should identify strategic sites, for local and inward investment to meet anticipated 
needs over the plan period. Planning policies should recognise and address the 
specific locational requirements of different sectors. This includes making provisi on for 
clusters or networks of knowledge and data -driven, creative or high technology 
Item No.  8.1046. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 75 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
industries; and for storage and distribution operations at a variety of scales and in 
suitably accessible locations.  
 
6.127  The EDNA (2019) recommends that a range of employmen t land of 46 to 66 hectares 
(net) including flexibility is made available during the period 2018 -38 split between the 
following uses:  
• 80% industrial/distribution and warehousing;  
• 20% office Class E (g) (i)/(ii) office/ and D and Class E (g) (iii) light industrial.  
 
6.128  The Employment Land Availability Assessment 202 2 (ELAA) monitors the supply of 
employment land in the district. It provides a list of sites which are readily available for 
employment such as sites which have planning permission and also includes sites put 
forward for consideration for employment purposes. The ELAA identified that there 
have been 16.59 hectares of employment land completed since 2018.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO4.2: PROVISION FOR NEW EMPLOYMENT USES  
 
A flexible supply of employment land and premises will be maintained to support 
investment and expansion of existing businesses as well as for new inward investment 
by businesses.  
The Local Planning Authority will provide for up to 66 hectares of land for  office, 
manufacturing and distribution employment development during the period to 203 9. This 
will provide for a range of sizes and types of employment to meet business needs and 
encourage inward investment, resilience and new investment and create a bala nced 
portfolio of employment land. It will grow sectors which promote clean growth pri nciples 
and renewable technologies.  
The following emplo yment sites (22 hectares) are allocated to protect them for 
employment uses and are shown on the Proposals Map.  
In order to accommodate our local need there is a need to remove land from the Green 
Belt, the site SE1 at Kingswood Lakeside, Cannock is therefore a strategic employment 
allocation.  
Site specific policies for the following sites are in Chapter 8  
 
Table F: Employment site allocations  
 
Site  
Ref.   Site 
 
 
 
SE1       Kingswood Lakeside Extension 2, Norton Canes  
E4      Former Power Station off A51(adjacent to Towers Business Park), Rugeley  
 
E5      Rugeley Power Station, Rugeley  
 
E6      Land at the Academy Early Years Childcare (Former Talbot Public House), Main Road, Brereton  
 
E7      Power Station Road (Land South of Rugeley Eastern By -pass), Rugeley  
 
E8      Power Station Road, Rugeley  
 
    E14       Hill Farm, 84, Hayfirld  Hill, Cannock Wood, Rugeley  
Item No.  8.1056. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 76 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
    E15       Cannock Elim Church, Girton Road, Rumer Hill, Cannock  
 
    E16       Land Off Norton Green Lane, Norton Canes  
 
    E17       Land off Norton Hall Lane, Butts Lane, Norton Canes  
 
Proposals for ne w employment development should s afeguard and enhance active 
travel and sustainable travel opportunities, and accessibility to green infrastructure . 
 
Proposals for new employment development within Use Class E will be directed to the 
town centres. Proposals for office uses in non -town centre locations will need to 
demonstrate that sites in the town centre are not su itable and viable.  
 
Proposals for new employment development providing new units of between 1,000 -
3,000sqm for manufacturing and di stribution will be encouraged.  
 
Proposals for new employment development involving distribution (B8) uses and large 
numbers of HGV movements will be directed to a reas with good access to the parts of 
the Strategic Road Network where impacts upon air quality can be avoided and 
mitigated.  
 
Proposals which e nhance  the existing employment areas through  provision of 
supporting infrastructure including nurseries, aftersc hool clubs and other  uses which 
enable the working population to have easily accessible net work of family care and 
support will be encouraged.  
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.129  The Local Plan will support the District Council’s Economic Growth Strategy in 
providing opportunities for inward investment by new employers. In addition to the land 
at the West Midlands Interchange, t his will widen the economic base and strengthen 
the re silience of the area.  
 
6.130  Evidence shows a need for small units to support economic development of the small 
scale manufacturing and indigenous businesses to help insulate the District from future 
economic downturns.  
 
6.131  Enhancements to and the development of infrastructure can assist employment areas 
adapt to change and support the health and well being of employees and their families 
and support the move to zero carbon.  
 
6.132  Sites are available for offices and other Class E uses within the town centres in 
sustain able and accessible locations and footfall will increase vitality and viability of 
centres. For the purposes of this policy offices are classed as those falling within Class 
E (g) (i)/(ii) office/ Rand D and Class E (g) (iii) light industrial.  
 
6.133  The followi ng sites are c onsidered able to contribute to the employment land supply 
within  the existing employment areas  and further land is likely to become available  
during the plan period, the  sites below  total approx. 16 hectares.  
Item No.  8.1066. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 77 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
Table G Sites within the existing employment areas  
Ridings Park (plots 8 -10), Eastern Way, Hawks Green, Cannock  
Former Hawkins Works, Watling Street, Bridgtown, Cannock  (2 sites)  
Gestamp, Watling Street/Wolverhampton Road, Cannock  
Delta Way Business Park, Longford Road, Cannock, WS11 0LJ  
Albion Works, Gestamp Tallent, Wolverhampton Road, Cannock, WS11 1LY  
Towers Business Park Phase II, Wheelhouse Lane, Rugeley   
Granurite Ltd and Rugeley Tyre Service, Bostons Industrial Estate, Power Station Road, 
Rugeley  
Power Station  Road, Rugeley (ELAA site RE8, RE7 , RE4a ) 
The Lead Mill, Rolling Mill Road, Cannock, WS11 9UH  
Former JCB, Rugeley  
Former Porcelain Works, Old Hednesford Road, Hednesford  
Former ATOS Origin Site, Walsall Road, Cannock  
Northwood Court, Hollies Avenue, Cannock  
Unit 12, Conduit Road, Norton Canes  
Lakeside Business Park, Cannock  
Progress Drive, Cannock  
Orbital Way, Cannock  
Cannock Wood Industrial estate  
Yates Bros Sports and Social Club, Lime Lane, Pelsall WS3 5AS  
 
List of R elevant Evidence  
• Economic Development Needs Assessment (2019)  
• Economic Development Needs Assessment Update July 2020  
• Employment Land Availability Assessment 20 22 
POLICY SO4.3:  SUSTAINABLE TOURISM AND THE  RURAL ECONOMY  
Introduction   
6.134  National planning policies (NPPF 2021) require local planning policies to enable the 
sustainable growth and expansion of all types of business in rural areas, both 
through conversion of existing buildings and well -designed new buildings.  Local 
planning pol icies should also enable sustainable rural tourism and leisure 
developments which respect the character of the countryside, and the development 
and diversification of agricultural and other land -based rural businesses . 
 
6.135  Planning policies and decisions shou ld recognise that sites to meet local business 
and community needs in rural areas may have to be found adjacent to or beyond 
existing settlements, and in locations that are not well served by public transport. In 
these circumstances it will be important to  ensure that development is sensitive to its 
surroundings, does not have an unacceptable impact on local roads and exploits any 
opportunities to make a location more sustainable (for example by improving the 
scope for access on foot, by cycling or by publi c transport). The use of previously 
Item No.  8.1076. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 78 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
developed land, and sites that are physically well -related to existing settlements, 
should be encouraged where suitable opportunities exist.  
 
POLICY SO4.3:  SUSTAINABLE TOURISM AND THE  RURAL ECONOMY  
 
Support will be given to development proposals in suitable locations within the rural 
areas of the District which support the rural economy and which safeguards and/ or 
enhances the character and openness of the rural area.  
 
Subject to the provisions of th is Local Plan, proposals in the rural areas for the 
following types of development will be considered favourably:  
 
• Appropriate and proportionate expansion of existing employment sites in order 
to support the retention of existing employment opportunities;  
• Proposals to reuse suitable buildings for employment uses and tourist 
accommodation;  
• Development which assists in the sustainable diversification and development of 
agriculture, forestry and other land based rural businesses;  
• Visitor and recreational facil ities of an appropriate scale and nature which 
contribute positively to the long term sustainability and vitality of the rural 
economy;  
• The use of the local canal network and the abandoned canal network to support 
economic growth that is proportionate to the scale and nature of their location.  
 
The canal network and the abandoned canal network will be safeguarded along with 
sufficient spa ce to enable the associated infrastructure such as locks and bridges to 
be reinstated so the long term potential can be realised . 
 
Development proposals should demonstrate that:  
• There are no adverse impacts on designated environmental assets (as defined in 
Policy SO7.1: Protecting, Conserving and Enhancing Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity, and Policy SO7.3: Special Areas of Conservation);  
• The development would protect, conserve and e nhance the Cannock Chase Area 
of Outstanding Natural Beauty, (as required by Policies SO 7.4, SO7.5) and the 
Green Belt S O7.6 ); 
• All tourism and visitor developments will display educational material on how 
visitors can access local attractions and use the C annock Chase in ways that 
respect the natural beauty, biodiversity and history of the area as part of the 
mitigation package required to meet the objectives of the habitat regulations.  
 
Explanation  
  
6.136  Around 40 % of the District area is designated as part of the Cannock Chase Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty and attracts many visitors each year. Agriculture and 
forestry are an integral part of the District landscape and economy and a round 60% of 
the Dis trict is designated Green Belt.  The heritage of the area and the heritage sector 
has an important role in supporting sustainable tourism and the rural economy.  
 
Item No.  8.1086. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 79 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.137  The policy supports the growth of sustainable tourism and the rural economy and 
balances this with the protections and en hancement of the AONB, the District’s 2 
SAC’s and its other natural and historic assets, including the canal network and historic 
landscapes.  
 
6.138  The reuse of rural buildings can support the rural economy, and the retention of 
attractive buildings which resp ect the local vernacular enhances the landscape and 
providing opportunities for local employment.  
 
6.139  Opportunities exist in the district such as at the f ormer Grove colliery which offer longer 
term opportunities for restoration of landscapes and other heritage assets through the 
development of open recreation uses, leisure and tourism focused activities . 
 
List of Relevant E vidence  
• Cannock Chase AONB Management Plan2019 -2024  
 
POLICY SO4.4: LIVE WORK ACCOMMODATION  
Introduction  
6.140  National planning policies require local plans be flexible enough to accommodate 
needs not anticipated in the plan, allow for new and flexible working practices (such as 
live-work accommodation), and to enable a rapid response to changes in economic 
circumstances.  
 
POLICY S O4.4: LIVE WORK ACCOMMODATION  
 
Within residential areas, proposals for the development of live -work  accommodation  
for residential (Use Class C3) and operational or administrative functions (Use Class 
E g (i)) will be supported to encourage entrepreneurship and regeneration.  
Residential amenity in the surrounding areas will be protected . 
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.141  Whilst Class E uses will in general be directed towards our town centres, within the 
District there are instances of isolated buildings in employment use often within largely 
residential areas which can  provide opportunities for live -work accommodation .  
 
6.142  Much of the economy is indigenous to Cannock and highly localised. By enabling a 
variety of workspaces and ways of working such as live work accommodation,  the 
Local Plan will encourage entrepreneurship and inward investment and reduce the  
need to travel for work. There has been an increase in the levels of working from home 
Item No.  8.1096. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 80 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
and creation of local employment opportunities can provide support to the wider local 
economy and local centres.  
 
6.143  The combination of uses has the potential to cause con flict from matters such as  hours 
of operation and visits to the site so will need to be carefully considered to ensure a 
safe and attractive environment for existing and future residents.  
List of Relevant E vidence  
• EDNA (2019 and 2020)  
 
 
 
 
POLICY SO4.5: PROVISION FOR LOCAL EMPLOYMENT AND SKILLS  
Introduction  
6.144  The District Profile identifies there is a skills imbalance and a low level of educational 
achievement.  Cannock Chase District Council, Staffordshire County Council and 
South Staffordshire College work in partnership with employers to develop 
employment a nd skills plans to help local people get into work or access training 
opportunities to upskill and reskill.  
 
 
POLICY SO4.5: PROVISION FOR LOCAL EMPLOYMENT AND SKILLS  
 
Proposals for major development where over 50 full time equivalent (FTE) jobs will be 
created during the construction phase will be accompanied by an Employment and 
Skills Plan.  
Where 50 full time equivalent (FTE) jobs may be created by the proposed occupiers of 
the development , prior to the first operational phase of the property and Employment 
and Skills Plan  will be submitted and agreed with the Authority . 
The Employment and Skills Plan s will demonstrate how the development will 
contribute to the training and employability of residents , especially young people.  
This requirement wil l apply to changes of use as well as new build development,  and 
includes temporary jobs such as those during the construction phase and permanent 
jobs/apprenticeships. The delivery of the Employment and Skills Plan will be secured 
through a legal agreement  or planning condition as appropriate . 
 
 
Explanation  
 
Item No.  8.1106. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 4: Encouraging a  Vibrant Local Economy and Workforce  
 
Page. 81 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.145  Many large companies already engage with the District Council when creating jobs 
within the District  and actively encourage local training and employment creation. The 
District Council wants to work positively with employers and developers in the area to 
deliver a local skilled workforce  during the construction phase and with future occupiers 
of premises . As the future  occupiers are not always known at the time of submission 
of the planning application  an employment and skills plan prior to commencement for 
the construction workforce and a separate employment and skills plan will be required 
for the pre -occupation for the operational workforce.  
 
6.146  Employment and Skills Plans provide opportunities to provide local people with 
available vacancies, through mechanisms such as Jobs Fairs, and enable the FE 
colleges to ensure that relevant training opportunities and apprenticeships can be 
promoted . 
 
6.147  It is an aim of the Council to support economic recovery and improve employability and 
training opportunities for local people to increase skill levels in order to  promote 
resilience, reduce poverty , redu ce the distance to travel for work, increase propensity 
to walk/cycle to work  and contribute positively to the health and wellbeing of the 
population. The area has experienced a  high proportion of young people with poor 
skills and educational attainment le vels and the youth unemployment figure during the 
COVID -19 pandemic grew disproportionally.  
 
6.148  It is acknowledged that different types of major development create very different 
numbers of jobs. For example supermarkets create more jobs per square metre than 
warehouse and distribution hubs. Further good practice guidance will be prepared by 
the Counci l. 
 
Item No.  8.1116. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 82 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 5  
 
To support the provision of sustainable transport and communications 
infrastructure by:  
 
Managing the need to travel by:   
 
• Providing for major new development in accessible locations that can provide 
access for all sections of the community to work, shopping, health, education, 
leisure, green space and other facilities ; 
• Clustering the development of services and facilities in locations that can provide 
convenient access to all sections of the community ; 
• Ensuring major new developments provide for safe pedestrian and cycle 
movement within the scheme and to neighbouring are as, and are designed to 
accommodate high quality public transport services ; 
• Supporting the installation of high quality and resilient digital communication 
technologies to facilitate business development and remote working.  
 
Supporting low carbon transport  systems:  
 
• Supporting the provision of electric vehicle charging points, and other 
infrastructure that may be required for alternative low and zero carbon transport 
options, including hydrogen vehicles ; 
• Supporting changes to the road network where they are  related to the reduction of 
environmental impacts and the enhancement of public transport ; 
• Supporting sustainable freight distribution by road and rail.  
 
Maintaining and improving the transport system:  
 
• Achieving improvements to walking and cycling route s and supporting increased 
use of the canal network and towpaths as part of the integrated transport network ; 
• Securing the continued development of the Chase Line rail services , facilities  and 
infrastructure as the preferred means of transport ; 
• Safeguardin g land that is required for sustainable transport schemes, including 
road, rail, cycle ways an d footpaths;  
• Supporting the safe and efficient use of the highway network through traffic 
management schemes ; 
• Establishing standards for the provision of car and lorry parking.  
 
 
POLICY SO 5.1: ACCESSIB LE DEVELOPMENT  
 
Introduction  
6.149  The NPPF (2021) notes that an  appropriate scale and mix of uses can help to minimise  
the journeys needed to access employment, shopping, leisure, education and other 
activities. Development proposals should  give priority first to pedestrian and cycle 
movements  and where  possible facilitat e access to high quality public transport . 
Proposal s should address the needs of people with disabilities and reduced mobility , and 
create places that are safe, secure and attractive . Development should also allow for the 
Item No.  8.1126. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 83 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
efficient delivery of goods, and access by service and emergency vehicle , and enable 
charging of plug -in and other ultra -low emission vehicles . 
6.150  The National Design Guide (2021) states that p atterns of movement for people are 
integral to well -designed places. Successful development depends upon a movement 
network that makes connections to d estinations, places and communities, both within the 
site and beyond its boundaries.   
6.151  The National Design Guide suggests that a well-designed movement network defines a 
clear pattern of streets that:  
• is safe and accessible for all;  
• functions efficiently to get everyone around, takes account of the diverse needs of all its 
potential users and provides a genuine choice of sustainable transport modes;  
• limits the impacts of car use by prioritising and encouraging walking, cycling and public 
transport, mitigat ing impacts and identifying opportunities to improve air quality;  
• promotes activity and social interaction, contributing to health, well -being, accessibility 
and inclusion; and  
• incorporates green infrastructure, including street trees to soften the impact of car parking, 
help improve air quality and contribute to biodiversity.  
 
 
POLICY SO 5.1: ACCESSIB LE DEVELOPMENT  
 
All major development proposals will be in  locations that can provide convenient 
access for all sections of the community to work, shopping, health, education, 
cultural, leisure, green space and other facilities. Developments which, individually 
or cumulatively, cause an unacceptable impact on the  highway network in terms of 
safety, air quality, capacity or congestion will not be supported, unless it can be 
demonstrated that they can be satisfactorily mitigated . 
 
Development p roposals will set out , as appropriate, how and when the development 
will contribute to the delivery of:  
 
• A reduction in the reliance on private cars, by locating the development where it 
can provide a full choice of viable, sustainable travel options, including walking, 
cycling and public transport, to access c ommunity services and facilities.    
• Co-located shopping, education, and leisure facilities at convenient ‘hubs’ within 
a network of footpath and cycle routes . 
• Well designed, safe and convenient routes for active travel , walking and cycling 
within the schem e and to neighbouring areas , and which are integrated with 
green and blue infrastructure and linked with wider networks . 
• Sustainable and frequent public tra nsport services to nearby Town and Local 
Centres which are accessible to all people,  
• Layouts which have the capacity for public transport access along with high 
quality and well sign -posted walking connections to safe boarding points .   
• Layouts which provide for s afe traffic movement and vehicular access to, from 
and within the development , including the delivery of goods and access by 
service and emergency vehicles . 
Item No.  8.1136. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 84 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Travel options , in relation to all modes of transport, that are accessible to people 
with disabilities and people whose mobility is impaired by other circumstances.  
• The use of technology and innovation to inform those travelling and provide 
integrated travel options in line with Policy SO5.2: Communication Technologies .  
• The infrastructure required to support the use of low and zero carbon emission 
vehicles (in line with Policy SO5.3:  Low and Zero Carbon Transport) . 
• A design and layout of the development which will prioritise and promote walking 
and cycling (in line with Policy SO5.3: Low Carbon Transport) and create new 
green infrastructure within the development which links to the ‘Strategic Green 
Space Network’  (as required by Policy SO7.8) . 
• The provision of appropriate communi ty infrastructure within the development in 
line with Policies SO2.1: Safeguarding the Provision of Community Infrastructure 
and SO2. 3: Provision of Active Leisure and Sports Facilities .  
 
All major developments will set out how the development will meet t he requirements 
of this Policy as part of a Design and Access Statement. Larger developments will be 
required to submit Transport Assessments and Travel Plans to set out clearly how 
the proposals they include will be implemented, monitored and evaluated.  
 
 
Explanation  
6.152  The Local Plan policies guide significant development to locations which are (or which 
can be made) sustainable. This means that the locations are better able to:     
• Provide an inclusive network of transport options and choices so that everyone 
(including the one fifth of people who identify as having some sort of disability) is able 
to access the economic and social opportunities that are essential to physical and 
mental well -being;  
 
• Widen transport choice including the provision of high quality walking and cycling 
networks; where cycling infrastructure is segregated from the highway to increase safety 
and uptake of Active travel  
 
• Mitigate the impacts that the developm ent has on the transport network (in terms of 
capacity, safety, pollution and congestion); and  
 
• Minimise the number and length of journeys needed for employment, shopping, leisure, 
education and other activities.  
 
6.153  In line with national planning policies and design guidance , Local Plan Policies aim to 
ensure that development gives priority to pedestrian and cycle movements , and where 
possible  facilitat es access to public transport . Development will address the needs of 
people with disabilities and reduced mobility in relation to all modes of transport . 
Development will contribute to the creation of p laces that are safe, secure and 
attractive , and which acknowledge local  character and design standards . 
 
6.154  The NPPF (2021)  states that development should only be prevented or refused on 
highways grounds if there would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety, or the 
residual cumulative impacts on the road network would be severe (paragraph 111).  
Item No.  8.1146. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 85 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
6.155  A Transport  Assessment  and Travel  Plan will be required  for all major  developments  
(over 200 dwellings , all major  developments  of A1-A5 uses  over 800sqm,  B1-B8 uses  
over 2500sqm , D1/D2  uses  over 1500sqm ). A Transport  Assessment  identifies  
measures  required  to improve  accessibility  and safety  for all modes  of travel,  
particularly  for alternatives  to the car such  as walking,  cycling  and public  transport,  and 
the measures  that will be needed  deal with the anticipated  transport  impacts  of the 
development . A Travel  Plan is a management  strategy  to deliver  sustainable  transport  
objectives  and should  be regularly  reviewed .  
 
6.156  A Transport  Statement  will be required  for any development  generating  or having  a 
significant  effect  on vehicle  or pedestrian  movement  or other  transport  movement .  
 
6.157  The national  Planning  Practice  Guidance  sets out the content  of a Transport  Assessment  
and Transport  Statement .  
 
6.158  The thresholds for preparing Transport Assessments and Travel Plans will be set out in 
the relevant Local Design Guides  and seek to be consistent with  Department for 
Transport guidance set out in ‘Cycle Infrastructure Design’ (Local Transport Note 2020 
LTN 1/20).  
 
6.159  The National Bus Strategy and TfWM's  Bus Vision document highlight that a high -quality 
bus network is essential for promoting sustainable travel patterns, with bus infrastructure 
(including bus priority measures, improved frequencies, good accessibility standard 
requirements and increased ca pacity) being key considerations. Good inter -modal 
connectivity and interchange facilities will ensure all modes (including cycling and walking 
networks, the rail network and the bus network) are joined up to create seamless 
journeys.  
 
6.160  The growth in on -line retailing and has resulted in a sharp increase in the numbers of 
deliveries, particularly by vans, and the ways deliveries can be consolidated, the use of 
low and zero emission vehicles, cargo/E -cargo bikes and avoiding the need for repeat 
delivery atte mpts will be further investigated.  
 
6.161  Cannock Chase District Council will continue to work closely with TfWM in the delivery of 
the developing West Midlands Key Route Network.  
 
6.162  The Cannock Station Upgrade project and further improvements to Rugeley Train 
Station, Rugeley Trent Valley Train Station and its bus station will also bring benefits 
during the plan period.  
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• National Planning Policy Framework (2019)  
• Government White Paper ‘Planning for the Future’ (August 2020) ; and  
• Government Consultation ‘National Planning Policy Framework and National Model 
Design Code’ ( January 2021)  
• DfT LTN 1/20 Cycle Infrastructure Design Guidance  
Item No.  8.1156. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 86 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Cannock Chase Integrated Transport Strategy supported by the Staffordshire LCWIP 
and sub sequent revisions  
 
 
POLICY SO 5.2: COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES  
 
Introduction  
 
6.163  The NPPF (2021) acknowledges advan ced, high quality and reliable communications 
infrastructure as essential for economic growth and social well-being and  requires 
planning policies and decisions to support the expansion of electronic communications 
networks, including next generation mobile technology , and  full fibre broadband 
connections.  The number of radio and electronic communications masts, and the si tes 
for such installations, should be kept to a minimum consistent with the needs of 
consumers, the efficient operation of the network and providing reasonable capacity for 
future expansion.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO 5.2: COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES  
 
 
The location and design of structures associated with the delivery of digital 
infrastructure shall be sympathetic to the ir surrounding area.  
 
Applicants will be required to provide information that :  
 
• demonstrates what alternative sites and design solutions have been considered 
and discounted; and  
• sufficient information in the form of streetscene or contextual plans and 
wireframe images to allow a full assessment of the visual impact of the proposal 
on the character of the area  and how this is moder ated; and  
• the public benefits of the proposed development in enhancing access to digital 
services.  
 
All development proposals must incorporate high quality digital connectivity  where 
appropriate .  
 
Applicants will be required to  demonstrate how they will deliver  high quality digital 
connectivity through:   
 
• The provision of plans and a statement, including a technical specification, 
demonstrating how the technology is to be incorporated in the development  at 
the point of first occ upation . 
• Facilitating technologically advanced methods of communication for businesses 
and residents to allow remote working and reduce the need to travel ;  
• Providing and future proofing the infrastructure that is required to enable access 
to high quality and resilient digital connectivity ; 
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.1166. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 87 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
Explanat ion 
 
 
6.164  Connectivity between people and communities can be achieved through physical 
connections between different areas, usually by transport modes, but also by digital 
means the latest being  Gigabit broadband connections  and Full Fibre to Premises . 
Advanced, high quality and reliable communications infrastructure is essential for 
economic and social well -being. An increase in the distribution and effectiveness of digital 
connectivity supports the use of integrated journey planning and can often reduc e the 
need to travel – for example by enabling remote working and virtual meetings. High speed 
digital connectivity is an important facility for business and residential property occupants, 
as well as those on the move. Our district currently has a lower p roportion of persons 
working from home and has a high percentage of access to high speed broadband  with 
99.54% of premises being currently 26.70% gigabit capable48. . The local authorities 
throughout Staffordshire have collaborated to ensure a high level o f superfast broadband 
is available throughout Staffordshire. To increase the sustainability of the district it is 
important this level of high quality and resilient digital connectivity continues to improve. 
It is therefore essential that development suppo rts the provision and improvement of the 
most up to date  communications infrastructure that can serve residents and local 
businesses, including town centre services  and sustainable transport . Where th e delivery 
of the latest technology, currently gigabit – capable connectivity is not considered 
achievable the next best alternative technology should be provided . As a minimum 
appropriate ducting should be provided to future proof the development and which 
facilitates a provider delivering a service at a later date.  Provision during the initial 
construction enables the new development to function sustainably and prevents the need 
to excavate in newly completed surfaces which is a waste of materials and damages the 
appea rance/vision/beauty of the area.   Staffordshire County council have indicated that 
they are willing to accommodate  ducting within the highway, further guidance with regard 
to locating appropriate ducting within the highway will be issued by the highway au thority.  
 
6.165  Integrated journey planning and travel information enables residents and visitors to plan 
journeys and encourages the use of sustainable transport especially when using real -
time information, the provision of ducting which enables provision for r eal time information 
encourages the use of sustainable transport.  
 
6.166  Structures associated with the delivery of digital infrastructure will be located throughout 
the District , including within our town centres and other historic and sensitive 
environmental locations, The design of the technology is recognised as often stark in 
appearance and governed by operational constraints, the design and location of 
structures will need t o respect the character of the area and be sympathetic to the 
surrounding area , unless the public benefits arising from that infrastructure outweigh the 
harm to the character of the area.   
 
List of relevant evidence  
 
 
48 Cannock district is quite well served with superfast broadband at 99.54% and are currently 26.70% gigabit capable. It is high ly 
likely suppliers such as Openreach and Virgin will start to address the gigabit capable service, given the majo rity of the premises 
in Cannock ought to be commercially viable. Openreach have already announced the Cannock exchange for upgrade to full fibre 
within their First Fibre programme.  
 
Item No.  8.1176. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 88 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• National Industrial Strategy (2017)  
• Stoke-on-Trent and Staffordshire LEP Local Industrial Strategy (January 2020)  
• Cannock Chase Economic Prosperity Strategy 2020 -2030 (January 2020)  
• Giga fast Staffordshire  
 
POLICY SO5.3: LOW AND ZERO CARBON TRANSPORT  
 
Introduction  
 
6.167  National planning policy states that local planning policies should reduce our reliance on 
carbon -intensive modes of transport , and that  development be designed to enable 
charging of plug -in and other ultra -low emission vehicles in safe, accessible and 
convenient locations . ‘Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation’ (Staffordshire County 
Council 2020) was commissioned to support the develop  of an evidence base for new 
energy and sustainability policies being considered for Staffordshire County Council and 
its eight constituent Local Authorities. The Report found that the main source of emissions 
is related to heating buildings and transport.  The report also identified a number of 
opportunities for reducing the carbon emissions that are caused by transport . 
 
 
 
POLICY SO5.3: LOW A ND ZERO CARBON TRANSPORT  
 
All major development proposals will contribute to the reduction of the reliance on 
carbon -intensive modes of transport, for example by supporting the take -up of ultra 
low emission vehicles,  hydrogen vehicles, developing electric vehicle charging 
networks,  accelerating the uptake of low emission taxis and buses in vesting in 
cycling and walking, and moving freight from road to rail.  
   
All major developments will set out as part of the Design and Access Statement how 
they will:  
 
• Support changes to the road network where they are related to the reduction of 
environmental impacts and the enhancement of public transport . 
• Include the provision of electric vehicle charge points and , where appropriate  and 
proportionate , other infrastructure that may be requir ed for alternative low and 
zero carbon transport options, designate parking spaces for low emission 
vehicles, and facilitate low emission bus service operations . 
• Support, as appropriate, sustainable freight distribution by road and rail . 
• Ensure that the design and layout of the development will reduce reliance on 
private vehicles while promoting walking, cycling and public transport  (as 
required by Policy SO5.1 ‘Accessible Transport’).  
 
 
Explanat ion 
 
6.168  Evidence has shown that emissions from transport are a major factor which detrimentally 
impacts upon the health and well-being , economy, and environment of our District and 
Item No.  8.1186. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 89 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
beyond. The District is part of not only a local transport network but also part of  the 
strategic highway network. Changes to the Building Regulati ons in June 2022 now 
require electric vehicle charging points to be incorporated in many types of development. 
By further facilitating low carbon transport,  the District will be able to benefi t from the 
improvement to the health and wellbeing of our residents, environment, and economy 
which can be secured through the delivery of low carbon transport in the short term and 
beyond the plan period. The development of low carbon infrastructure will enable the 
sustainable regeneration of the District and deliver a resilient economy as we move 
towards the national target of net zero carbon by 2050 , and achieving the Council’s 
ambition  of net zero carbon by 2030.  
 
6.169  Cannock has the mid -Cannock rail freight depot and promotion of this will be supported 
where there is capacity on the rail network and consideration of the impact upon the local 
and strategic road network.  
6.170  49 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Government White Paper ‘Planning for the Future’ (August 2020) ; and  
• ‘Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation’ Staffordshire County Council (AECOM 
October 2020)  
 
POLICY S O5.4: MAINTAINING AND IMPROVING THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM  
 
Introduction  
6.171  National planning policy requires that transport issues are considered from the earliest 
stages of plan -making and development proposals, so that the potential impacts of 
development on transport networks can be addressed, and opportunities from existing o r 
proposed transport infrastructure are realised – for example in relation to the scale, 
location or density of development that can be accommodated . 
 
 
POLICY S O5.4: MAINTAINING A ND IMPROVING THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM  
 
The District Council will work in partners hip with the local highway authority, 
transport stakeholders, developers, key funding partners and investors,  and the 
local community to maintain and improve the transport system.  
 
Development proposals will:  
• Incorporate safe and accessible connections to sustainable modes of transport, 
having regard to the nature and location of the development site, and contribute 
towards the improvement of  existing , and the provision of new , public transport 
services to maximise accessibility by non -car mo des to essential services and 
facilities.  
• Contribute towards transport infrastructure improvements that are necessary to 
mitigat e the  demonstrable impacts of the development upon the strategic and 
 
49  
Item No.  8.1196. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 90 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
local highway network, public transport services, and cycle  and footpath links 
within and beyond the site.  
• Avoid compromis ing, and support where appropriate, the delivery of the 
transport infrastructure improvements that are associated with the development 
of other allocations made in the Local Development Plan.  The Local Highway 
Authority will provide the Local Planning Authority with appropriate advice in thi s 
regard.  
 
The District Council will:  
 
• Support proposals for traffic management and transport infrastructure that will : 
alleviate pinch points on the network ; facilitate the delivery of planned 
development ; provide for the safe and efficient use of the local highway network ; 
reduce transport pollution and carbon emissions ; protect the natural 
environment ; and promote improved public health and wellbeing.  
• Facilitate accessible non -car travel options, including the improve ment of 
walking and cycling routes, cycle storage facilities, public realm and wayfinding 
signage, and the promoti on of  an increased use of the canal network and 
towpaths as part of the int egrated transport network.  
• Facilitate strategic partnerships with bus operators to deliver a high quality, high 
frequency bus services, and the continued development of rail services and 
associated facilities as the preferred means of transport to other a reas, including 
Walsall, Birmingham, Stafford and Lichfield.  
• Enabl e demand responsive transport services, including taxis and minibuses, to 
provide mobility at times and in locations where timetabled public transport 
services are not sustainable .       
• Ensure that schools, higher education, GP & Hospital services and key 
employment locations are acce ssible by sustainable transport.  
• Support improvements that will meet the transport needs of business - including 
the storage, distribution and delivery of goods  – in more en vironmentally 
sustainable ways.  
 
 
Explanat ion 
 
 
6.172  Good accessibility is key to delivering sustainable development. By requiring 
development to maintain the current functioning of the transport system and supporting 
improvements to it the Local Plan will deliver economic, environmental and social net 
gain.  In accordance with national  planning policies and guidance, the Local Plan favours 
the development and improvement of sustainable modes of travel to services and 
facilities.  
 
6.173  The requirement for new development to address the impacts it will have on the 
strategic and local highway network is an accepted part of the planning and delivery 
process. The mitigation of the impacts of new development can be achieved th rough 
on-site design and developer cont ributions to off -site traffic management and highway 
improvement  schemes. A  good example of the latter is provided by the sites allocated 
in this Local Plan that would, without mitigation,  have adverse impacts on the existing 
Item No.  8.1206. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 91 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
levels congestion at Five Ways  island . The Site Specific Policies set out the 
requirements to establish proportionate funding arrangements to deliver the necessary 
improvements  to Five Ways island.  
 
6.174  It is also essential that future development proposals do not inadvertently compromise  
the delivery of planned highway improvements. The local planning authority (in liaison 
with the local highway authority) will therefore assess all development proposals to 
safeguard the effective delivery of proposed  highway  improvements .  Development 
proposals that include transport infrastructure or other elements that would ease 
existing levels of congestion would be considered favourably, subject to the other 
provisions of the Local Plan.  
 
6.175  Walking and cycling (which also have obvious health benefits) a re the most desirable and 
environmentally sustainable method of travel.  There is potential to make better use of 
the canal network to increase the footpath and cycleway networks.  
 
6.176  The next best option is to use public transport – rail and bus. The plan will facilitate the 
transformation of our current facilities to increase  their accessibility, quality, 
attractiveness, distribution and frequenc y of public transport services a s the se are  key to 
reducing dependence on the private car to access jobs, s hops, leisure and recreation 
and services.   
  
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Government White Paper ‘Planning for the Future’ (August 2020)  
 
 
 
POLICY SO5.5: HATHERTON CANAL RESTORATION CORRIDOR  
 
Introduction  
 
6.177  The historical development of the District has provided a wealth of canal network assets 
which provide opportunities for cycling and walking as well as other benefits (e.g. 
tourism, green infrastructure and biodiversity). Ongoing initiatives by the Lichfie ld and 
Hatherton Canals Restoration Trust, propose the phased restoration of the Hatherton 
Canal, partly on a new alignment.  
 
POLICY SO5.5: HATHERTON CANAL RESTORATION CORRIDOR  
 
The proposed Hatherton  Canal Restoration Corridor, as shown on the Proposals  
Map, will be protected from development that would prevent the future 
implementation of the canal restoration project.  
 
The Restoration C orridor will be protected to enable the development of the canal  
waterway and associated infrastructure, including locks, bridges, boat turning areas 
and towpaths.  
 
Item No.  8.1216. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 92 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
The implementation of the restoration project will  provide opportunities for 
sustainable transport links and improved biodiversity along the length of the 
safeguarded route.  
 
Proposals for development a djacent to the protected Corridor will  respect and 
enhance the setting of the canal. Development will be designed to use the canal 
frontage in order to reduce fear of crime and achieve good design in an attrac tive 
and safe environment.  
 
The implementation of the restoration project w ill need to take into account the 
advice of statutory bodies on water quality, water supply and environmental issues.  
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.178  Cannock Chase Council has protected the alignment of the Hatherton Canal since 1997 
through a safeguarded route policy in the Cannock Chase Local Plan 1997 and 
publication of the route (with amendments) in the Key Diagram of the Cannock Chase 
Local Plan (P art 1) 2014.  
 
6.179  The route is being promoted and developed by the Lichfield and Hatherton Canals 
Restoration Trust who have land ownership and substantial infrastructure in place along 
parts of the route, in and adjacent to Cannock Chase District.  The route corridor is also 
protected via cross boundary co -operation with the neighbouring Council areas of South 
Staffordshire and Walsall Metropolitan Borough.  
 
6.180  The Lichfield and Hatherton Canals Restoration Trust and the Inland Waterways 
Association supported the  continued protection of the route during the Local Plan Review 
- Issues and Options Consultation and in previous Local Plan consultations.  The original 
restoration route is set out in a Feasibility Study commissioned by the Trust, with the later 
route am endments incorporated within a supplementary study.  
 
6.181  The Canal Restoration is a long term project and the continuing protection of the corridor 
has the potential to provide interlinked journeys for sustainable and healthy modes of 
transport including boate rs, walkers and cyclists.  The route is adjacent, but largely 
segregated from the busy A5 east to west transport corridor.  
 
6.182  There are a number of broader economic benefits to be derived from the restoration of 
the canal, including heritage -based tourism vi sits. It will also enable the creation of a 
green corridor to benefit wildlife and associated habitats.  Cannock Chase Council has a 
series of green spaces and corridors, which can link into this route and the wider 
countryside.   
 
6.183  The Cannock Chase District Nature Recovery Network Mapping denotes the line of the 
canal restoration route on the combined habitat connectivity opportunity area map as an 
opportunity area for wetland habitats.  
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Hatherton Canal Restoration Feasibility Report  (Ove Arup & Partners Ltd, September 
2006) - commissioned by British Waterways on behalf of the Lichfield and Hatherton 
Canals Restoration Trust (LHCRT)  
Item No.  8.1226. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 93 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Hatherton Canal Restoration Supplementary Feasibility Report  (Atkins Ltd, February 
2009) – Produced for the Lichfield and Hatherton Canals Restoration Trust (LHCRT)  
• Cannock Chase District Nature Rec overy Network Mapping (Staffordshire Wildlife 
Trust, 2020)  
• Cannock Chase District Nature Recovery Network Mapping report (2020)  
 
POLICY SO5.6: SAFEGUARDING PROPOSED RECREATIONAL FOOTPATH AND CYCLE 
ROUTES  
 
Introduction  
6.184  National planning policy requires opportunities to promote walking and cycling to be 
identified and pursued, and that provision is made for attractive and well -designed 
walking and cycling networks with supporting facilities such as secure cycle parking.  
 
6.185  The Cannock Chase Distric t Nature Recovery Network Mapping shows the potential for 
improving links between types of habitat and emphasises the importance of cross 
boundary habitat linkages.  Woodland and wetland corridors linking habitats often follow 
existing recreational routes along green lanes and canal towpaths while open spaces 
contain grassland and heathland which are also crossed by many recreational routes. 
This provides opportunities for recreational and habitat improvements to be undertaken 
together.  
 
 
POLICY SO5.6: SAFE GUARDING PROPOSED RECREATIONAL FOOTPATH AND 
CYCLE ROUTES  
 
The proposed recreational footpath and cycle routes , as shown on the proposals 
map, will be protected from development that will prevent the future implementation 
of the proposed schemes.  
 
The Corridors will be protected to enable the development of the footpaths and cycle 
routes, including any related infrastructure such as highway crossing points  and 
their upgrading to bridleways where there is a shortfall in available access routes . 
 
Implement ation will provide opportunities for  links to active  transport links and 
improved biodiversity along the length of the safeguarded route.  
 
The routes should provide an attractive and safe environment that will create a 
network linking the rural villages and countryside to the main urban areas to provide 
opportunities for healthy living  and enhance wellbeing . 
 
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.186  Cannock Chase Council has protected the alignment of the potential off road footpath 
and cycle routes since 1997 through a safeguarded route policy in the Cannock Chase 
Local Plan 1997 and publication of the routes on the Key Diagram of the Cannock Chase 
Local Pla n (Part 1) 2014.  There is a well established network of local and national walking 
and cycling routes across the district which is expanding.  
Item No.  8.1236. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 94 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
6.187  The routes are largely former mineral railway lines that carried coal from the coalfields on 
Cannock Chase to the main line railway for onward distribution to local customers and 
markets further away.  Some routes have been restored as opportunities allow, but  the 
remaining protected routes may, where no longer needed for railway use ,  provide an 
opportunity for a wider network of off road  active transport corridors.  They also link with 
other local off -road routes including the Cannock Chase Heritage Trail fr om Cannock to 
Rugeley via Hednesford and phase 1 of the Brereton and Ravenhill Way  from Rugeley 
Town Railway Station to Brereton.  
 
6.188  Many of the routes are now unsurfaced green lanes bordered with hedgerows and trees 
that form linear green corridors to connect the urban areas with the wi der countryside. 
Many are wide and have a relatively flat gradient.  The routes provide opportunity to 
enhance the health and wellbeing for  all residents and sustainable economic tourist 
growth which promotes the heritage and biodiversity of our district.   
 
6.189  Opportunities for the creation and promotion of short circular walks to promote the health 
benefits of walking and the replacement of stiles with gaps (where there are no stock) or 
gates in line with S taffor dshire County Council  Least Restrictive Principle for path 
furniture Public path network should be protected.  and non -definitive routes across 
proposed development sites should be considered by applicants in the overall layout and 
design of schemes to enco urage continued activity and health benefits of walking.  
 
6.190  The District has a number of livery stables and to support an increase in physical activity 
and increase the provision for cyclists and horse  riders the creation of bridleways or the 
upgrading of pu blic footpaths to bridleways where there is currently a shortfall in available 
access  routes  and other impacts can be mitigated.  
 
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Cannock Chase Heritage Trail  
• Brereton and Ravenhill Parish Plan/ Trail Booklet  
• SCC Rights of Way Improvement Plan  
• SCC Least Restrictive Principle for path furniture  
 
 
 
POLICY SO5.7: PARKING PROVISION  
Introduction  
6.191  National planning policy (NPPF 2021) states that in setting local parking standards for 
residential and non -residential development planning policies, policies should take into 
account:  
• the accessibility of the develop ment;  
• the type, mix and use of development;  
• the availability of and opportunities for public transport;  
• local car ownership levels; and  
• the need to ensure an adequate provision of spaces for charging plug -in and other ultra -
low emission vehicles.  
Item No.  8.1246. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 5: Supporting the Provision of Sustainable Transport and Communications 
Infrastructure   
 
Page. 95 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.192  Planning policies and decisions should also recognise the importance of providing 
adequate overnight lorry parking facilities, taking into account any local shortages, to 
reduce the risk of parking in locations that lack proper facilities or could cause a 
nuisance.  
 
 
POLICY SO5.7: PARKING PROVISION  
 
All major development proposals will make appropriate off -street parking in 
accordance with the relevant Local Design Guide  and an assessment of  the: 
 
• Anticipated demand for lorry, car, and cycle parking arising from the use 
proposed, or the other purposes  that the development might be used for under 
Permitted Development Rights ; 
• Scope for encouraging alternative means of travel to the development that would 
reduce the need for on -site parking, particularly in areas well served by public 
transport ; 
• Provisio n that will be made for private and public charging points for electric 
vehicles ; 
• Impact that parking might have on road safety and residential amenity ; and,  
• Provision of adequate and conveniently placed parking for people who are 
disabled or have restrict ed mobility . 
 
 
 Explanation  
    
6.193  The provisions of Policy SO5.7 ‘Parking Provision’ will be used to guide further guidance 
that will  include standards for provision of lorry parking which provides on site provision 
for early arrival, loading, unloading and parking with welfare facilities to enable rest 
breaks for drivers to be undertaken.  
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• National Model Design Code (2021) ; and  
• Guidan ce notes for Design Codes (2021)
Item No.  8.1256. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 96 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
 
 
 
POLICY SO6.1 HIERARCHY OF TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES  
Introduction  
6.194  National planning policies (NPPF 2021) require local pl anning policies to support town 
centres by taking a positive approach to their growth, management and adaptation. 
Local p lanning policies should  define a hierarchy of town centres and primary shopping 
areas . 
 
6.195  The Council’s Economic Prosperity Strategy (2020) sets out an ambitious vision for the 
District to 2030 based on clean growth principles to support a highly productive, clean, 
and resilient economy. The vision will be delivered through 5 themes, which refe rence 
the important role of the new West Midlands Designer Outlet at Mill Green  to enhance 
the District’s reputation and profile; the need to create a positive and entrepreneurial 
environment in which businesses can grow and thrive, and the need to ensure that the 
District’s main towns are more vibrant and sustainable and act as hubs for leisure and 
culture uses, residential opportunities and community activities.  
 
6.196  The Retail and Town Centre Services Study (2020) provides a comprehensive 
assessment of the p erformance of the three town centres within Cannock Chase District 
regarding retail and other service provision.  The Study finds that the District’s town 
centres continue to face challenges, which have been compounded by the Covid -19 
pandemic. Centre Stra tegies need to be able to support the continued 
development/changes in the ‘high street’ if they are to successfully compete.  Such 
strategies may seek to:  
 
• provide a good mix/variety of retail and leisure uses;  
• attract a mix of additional land uses beyond retail/leisure, including residential, 
educational, community and office uses;  
• support and improve existing cultural/heritage/tourist attractions;  
• enhance existing town centre markets and speciality retailing;   STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 6  
 
To create attractive Town and Local Centres by:  
 
• enhancing the Town, and Local Centres in order to protect and improve their 
vitality and viability;  
• maintaining a hierarchy of Town and Local Centres;  
• supporting growth of shops, offices, business, education , leisure, arts, 
cultural and tourism in Town Centres, and improving access to employment 
and housing in order to achieve Town Centres with good vitality and viability;  
• supporting the development of Town Centres as hubs for comparison goods 
shopping, leisu re and culture uses, residential opportunities and health and 
community activities;  
• supporting the development of Local Centres mainly for local food shopping 
and local services; and  
• supporting the direction of new investment to the Town and Local Centres via 
a range of means as most appropriate to the local context.  
 
Item No.  8.1266. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 97 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • provide a high quality shopping/leisure experience;  
• provide convenient, affordable and accessible town centre parking;  
• promote and encourage events in the town centre;  
• embrace, and not compete against, multi -channel retailing; and  
• be responsive to changes in technology (the ‘digital high street’).  
 
6.197  The key purpose of Town Centre Strategies should be to seek to promote the existing 
individuality of centres, ensuring cen tres are a focus/hub for their communities, and 
extend the ‘dwell time’ and spend of visitors/residents visiting the town centre which in 
turn will support their vitality and viability.  
 
6.198  The existing hierarchy of centres is appropriate and should be perpet uated. Cannock 
is the principal centre and serves the widest catchment for retail, other services and 
facilities. Rugeley and Hednesford have a more localised catchment serving local 
residents. All centres are following national trends of a shrinking retai l sector and will 
need to diversify to attract investment and maximise their assets and advantages. 
Cannock town centre has the greatest potential for this.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO6.1 HIERARCHY OF TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES  
 
Development proposals for Main Town Centre Uses will be appropriate to the role, 
scale, and historic character of the settlement, and not conflict with other policies 
within this Plan.  
 
• Cannock Town Centre is designated, and shown on the Proposals Map, as the 
principal Town Centre, with the role to provide the focus for District Town Centre 
Services and be the District focus for a night time economy ; 
• Rugeley and Hednesford, are designated , and shown on the Proposals Map as 
Town Centres with the role to provide Town Centre Services to serve their local 
catchments and providing for main weekly food shopping ;  
• Hawks Green, Norton Canes, Heath Hayes, Chadsmoor, Bridgtown, Fernwood 
Drive and Br ereton, are designated as Local Centres with the role to provide 
small scale Town Centre Services to serve the local needs in their catchment.  
 
The Primary Shopping Areas of Cannock, Rugeley and Hednesford are designated 
and shown on the Proposals Map.  
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.199  The designated hierarchy of centres represent the District’s  most sustainable locations 
which include many assets, infrastructure and services which should be safeguarded. 
The hierarchy reflects the needs of the settlements they serve. Central Cannock 
provides the focus for administration of the District and is abl e to accommodate 
sustainably the largest number of visitors to the area.  
 
6.200  Maintaining the designated hierarchy will promote the long term  vitality and viability of 
the centres and sustainability of the area.  
 
6.201  Increased residential use within the town centre can add to its vibrancy and vitality, 
although the princip al role of our centres is to provide a concentration of a variety of 
uses suc h as comparison and convenience retailing, services and facilities to visiting 
Item No.  8.1276. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 98 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   members of the public. Our centres have evolved to meet these needs and have the 
infrastructure such as  transport  interchanges and attractive and safe environments with 
civic sp aces and the opportunity to enjoy our heritage in use for large visiting members 
of the public in a sustainable way. The authority supports the wider range of town 
centre services,  and the diversification of the centres however will monitor through the 
AMR  the impact of these changes and may seek an Article 4 Directions to safeguard 
the vitality and viability of its centres.  
 
6.202  Design guidance  will be prepared for each of the centres.  
 
6.203  ‘Town Centre Services’, as defined in the Glossary, include:  
• ‘Commercial , Business and Service’ (Class E);  
• ‘Learning and Non -Residential Institutions’ (Class F1);  
• ‘Local Community’ (Class F2) Uses;  
• ‘Hotels ’ (Class C1) ; and 
• Other town centre uses which fall outside the defined use classes, including  
drinking establishments, hot food takeaways, cinemas, concert halls, dance 
halls and bingo halls.  
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• ‘Planning for the Future’ White Paper (August 2020) ; and  
• Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study ( January 2021 ) 
• Build Back Better High Streets  (2021)  
• New Model Design Code  (2021)  
 
 
POLICY SO6.2: PROVISION OF MAIN TOWN CENTRE USES AND TOWN CENTRE 
SERVICES  
Introduction  
 
6.204  National planning policies (NPPF 2021) require local p lanning policies to support town 
centres by allowing them to respond to rapid changes in the retail and leisure industries  
by allow ing a suitable mix of uses (including housing) as part of a positive strategy for 
the fut ure of each centre . Local planning authorities are required to apply a sequential 
test to planning applications for main town centre uses . Main town centre uses should 
be located in town centres, then in edge of centre locations . Only if suitable sites are  
not available (or expected to become available) should out of centre sites be 
considered.  When considering edge of centre and out of centre proposals, preference 
should be given to accessible sites which are well connected to the town centre.  
 
6.205  When asses sing applications for retail and leisure development outside town centres, 
which are not in accordance with the local plan , local planning authorities should require 
an impact assessment if the development is over a proportionate, locally set floorspace 
threshold . 
 
6.206  The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Regulations 
202050 came into force on 1st September 2020. The Regulations  created a new Use 
 
50 The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Re gulations 2020 ( pdf) (link ). (SI 2020 No. 757)  
Item No.  8.1286. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 99 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Class E ‘Commercial, business and service’. Use Class E ‘Commercial, business and 
service’ incorporates the former use classes A1 ‘shops’, A2 ‘financial and professional 
services’ A3 ‘restaurants and cafes’, and B1 ‘offices’. Uses such as gyms, nurseries 
and health centres (previously in use classes D1 ‘non -residential institutions’ and  D2 
‘assembly and leisure’) and other uses which are suitable for a town centre area are 
also included in the new Use Class E.  
 
6.207  The Cannock Chase Retail and Town Centre Uses Study (2020) reviewed the existing 
evidence and the current health, performance, u nit and floor space composition of each 
of the town centres; increasing competition from the internet; and availability of units in 
the main shopping areas capable of meeting potential national multiple occupiers in 
each of the centres which accords with t he criteria set out in the NPPF. The Study 
recommended a more cautious approach than previously recommending an 
assessment of impact be undertaken for proposals of over 500sqm which lie beyond 
Cannock, Rugeley and Hednesford Town centre boundaries and for the local centres 
and elsewhere in the District a threshold of 200sqm is recommended.  
 
 
 
 
POLICY SO6.2: PROVISION OF MAIN TOWN CENTRE USES AND TOWN CENTRE 
SERVICES  
 
Proposals for Main Town Centre Uses which are located outside the designated 
Strategic Town Centre and Town Centres should be supported by a sequential test 
that demonstrates that there are no other sequentially preferable, suitable and 
available sites wit hin or on the edge of an appropriate centre within the hierarchy of 
centres.  
 
Propos als for Retail and Leisure Uses which are located outside designated Primary 
Shopping Areas must be accompanied by an appropriate and qualified  impact 
assessment where the floorspace exceeds the thresholds set out below. Any 
proposal that is likely to have a significant adverse impact on the investment in 
and/or the vitality and viability of an existing centre will not be permitted.   
 
• Development  proposals creating new or a dditional floorspace greater than 500 
square metres (gross) outside of the designated Primary Shopping Areas within 
the Strategic Town Centre of Cannock and the Town Centres of Rugeley and 
Hednesford.  
• Development proposals creating new or additional floors pace greater than 200 
square metres (gross) outside of the Local Centres.  
 
The thresholds shall apply to all new developments requiring planning permission 
including applications for new floorspace, changes of use and variations of 
condition.  
 
The impact assessment will be proportionate to the scale of the development 
proposed and undertaken by a suitably qualified person to enable the Council to 
have confidence in the findings.  
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.1296. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 100 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Explanation  
 
 
6.208  The designated hierarchy of centres provide important services and facilities for their 
communities, and their vitality and viability will be safeguarded. The NPPF permits local 
thresholds to be set within Local Plans where these can be justified. Evidence has 
shown that Cannock, Rugeley, Hednesford  and the District and Local Centres are 
relatively small centres compared to national town centre policy and their consequent 
position at the lower end of the retail hierarchy means they have a greater susceptibility 
to likely significant adverse effects f rom alternative out of centre provision.  
 
6.209  The West Midlands Designer Outlet at Mill Green51  has performed strongly since 
opening attracting additional footfall to the district, but it will take time to gather data on 
the  cumulative impacts of the development within the District.  
6.210  The Town Centres have a range of opportunities available within the m and 
considerable assets which need to be safeguarded and infrastructure which should 
continue to be utilised to support the sustainability of the communities they serve.  Our 
town centres also provide opportunities for heritage led regeneration to bring n ew life 
into town centres and historic commercial buildings.  By utilising existing assets and 
infrastructure t o promote  regeneration . 
 
6.211  In order to take a proportionate approach where a retail assessment is required the 
scope of the assessment should be dis cussed with the planning authority to ensure it is 
of the appropriate scale and nature and identifies any specific local issues or cross 
boundary centres which may need to be considered.  
 
6.212  ‘Town Centre Services’ are defined in the Glossary.  
 
6.213  Within the bro ader Use Class E ‘ Commercial, Business and Service Uses ’, a building 
can be in a number of uses concurrently, or  used for different uses at different times of 
the day. Changes to another use, or mix of uses, within this Use Class do not require 
planning permission. At present the sequential test and threshold can only be applied to 
retail and leisure uses.    
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendm ent) (England) Regulations 
2020; and  
• Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study ( January 2021 ) 
 
 
POLICY SO6.3: SAFEGUARDING EXISTING TOWN CENTRE SERVICES   
Introduction  
6.214  National planning policies (NPPF 2021) requires local planning policies to take a 
positive approach to town centre growth, management and adaptation.  
 
51 Planning permission CH/15/0048  
Item No.  8.1306. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 101 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   6.215  The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Regulations 
202052 came into force on 1st September 2020. The Regulations created:  
 
• Use Class E ‘Commercial, business and service’;  
• Use Class F1 ‘Learning and non -residential institutions’; and  
• Use Class F2 ‘Loc al community’.  
 
6.216  The Regulations remove the former use classes A4 ‘drinking establishments’ and A5 
‘hot food takeaway’. However, these uses have been included  in the list of uses (Use 
Classes Order Article 3(6)) as uses which do not now fall within any use class (sui 
generis uses). The same approach has been taken with cinemas, concert, dance and 
bingo halls which fell within the former D2 use class . Any materia l change of use from a 
sui generis use, or to a sui generis use, will require planning permission.  
 
6.217  The Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study (January 2021) considers the 
potential for growth in retail and other town centre uses across the district  and its 
centres and considers the role of the centres and the potential within the centres to 
enhance their vitality and viability.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO6.3: SAFEGUARDING EXISTING TOWN CENTRE SERVICES   
 
Proposals for changes of use to retail uses (Class E (a)) within the primary shopping 
area will be supported.  
 
Where they occupy active street frontages/ground floor level within a designated 
Primary Shopping Area, proposals for changes of use from:  
 
• Commercial, Business and Service Uses (Use Class E);  
• Lear ning and Non -Residential Institutions (Use Class F1);   
• Local Community Uses (Use Class F2);  
• Hotel (Use Class C1); or  
• Drinking establishments, hot food takeaways, cinemas, concert halls, dance 
halls, bingo halls (Sui Generis).  
 
will only be supported where they support the strategy set out in this Plan for the 
centre and where;  
 
• there is no significant adverse harm to the level of service, role and vitality of the 
centre; or  
• there is no reasonable prospect of the current use cont inuing or other alternative 
town centre service uses occupying the unit/site; or  
• the proposal supports the delivery of an approved  masterplan/ Local D esign 
Guide   for the area.  
 
Evidence which demonstrates that there is no reasonable prospect of a town cen tre 
service use ( a -e above) continuing will be an assessment showing details of 
comprehensive marketing of the site for at least 12 months and appropriate 
prevailing market conditions.  
 
 
 
52 The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Regulations 2020 ( pdf) (link ). (SI 2020 No . 757)  
Item No.  8.1316. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 102 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Explanation  
 
 
6.218  Town Centre retail is changing and our town centres are some of our greatest assets. 
They provide an attractive environment which has evolved to provide a sustainable 
location for people to visit and shop which can be accessed by sustainable transport 
options and provides opportunities for many entrepreneurs offering goods and services. 
Uses within Class E(a) thrive when similar uses are in close proximity to them, hence 
the name comparison goods. Whilst there is almost 30 % of retailing undertaken online 
there is still a need for high street shopping and growth in sectors such as ‘brick and 
click’ retailing.  Town centres have evolved to enable local entrepreneurs and large 
scale multi -national operators to have equal access to local markets and town centre s 
need  to be given opportunity to adapt to meet the changing demands.  
 
6.219  Encouraging active frontages especially at ground floor level safeguards accessibility 
for persons with restricted mobility and aids legibility of the centre  to those who are new 
visitors or need familiarity to their environment. Inclusion of some sui generis uses 
encourages their location into centres which have adapted to provide sustainable 
access to large numbers of visiting members of the public and adds v itality to the town 
centre.  
 
6.220  The Council will prepare a  strategy for  Cannock Town Centre and work with local 
communities to develop Local Design Guides or Neighbourhood Plan policies to 
support the vitality and vibrancy of Rugeley and Hednesford Town Cent res. 
 
6.221  ‘Commercial, Business and Service Uses’  are defined as u se, or part use, for all or 
any of the following purposes —  
 
(a) for the display or retail sale of goods, other than hot food, principally to visiting 
members of the public,  
(b) for the sale of food and drink principally to visiting members of the public where 
consumption of that food and drink is mostly undertaken on the premises,  
(c) for the provision of the following kinds of services principally to visiting members of 
the public — 
(i) financial services,  
(ii) professional services (other than health or medical services), or  
(iii) any other services which it is appropriate to pr ovide in a commercial, business 
or service  locality,  
(d) for indoor sport, recreation or fitness, not involving motorised vehicles or firearms, 
principally to visiting members of the public,  
(e) for the provision of medical or health services, principally to visiting members of 
the public, except the use of premises attached to the residence of the consultant 
or practitioner,  
(f) for a crèche, day nursery o r day centre, not including a residential use, principally 
to visiting members of the public,  
(g) for— 
(i) an office to carry out any operational or administrative functions,  
(ii) the research and development of products or processes, or  
(iii) any industrial process,  
being a use, which can be carried out in any residentia l area without detriment to the 
amenity of that area by reason of noise, vibration, smell, fumes, smoke, soot, ash, dust 
or grit.  
Item No.  8.1326. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 103 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   6.222  ‘Learning and non -residential institutions’  are defined as a ny use not inclu ding 
residential use —  
 
(a) for the provision of education,  
(b) for the display of works of art (otherwise than for sale or hire),  
(c) as a museum,  
(d) as a public library or public reading room,  
(e) as a public hall or exhibition hall,  
(f) for, or in connection with, public worship or religious instruction,  
(g) as a law court.  
 
6.223  ‘Local Community Uses’  appropriate to Town Centres are defined as:  
 
(a) a hall or meeting place for the principal use of the local community,  
(b) an area or place for outdoor sport or recreation, not involving motorised vehicles 
or firearms,  
(c) an indoor or outdoor swimming pool or skating rink.  
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Regulations 
2020  
 
 
POLICY SO6.4: TOWN CENTRE DESIGN   
Introduction  
6.224  The National Design Guide (2021) notes that b uilt form  (the three -dimensional pattern 
or arrangement of development blocks, streets, buildings and open spaces ) and the 
interrelationship between these elements  creates an attractive place to live, work and 
visit. This is particularly relevant to to wn centres , where well -designed places have:  
• compact forms of development that are walkable, contributing positively to well -being 
and placemaking;  
• accessible local p ublic transport, services and facilities, to ensure sustainable 
development;  
• recognisable streets and other spaces with their edges defined by buildings, making it 
easy for anyone to find their way around, and promoting safety and accessibility; and  
• memorable features or groupings of buildings, spaces, uses or activities that create a 
sense of place, promoting inclusion and cohesion.  
 
 
POLICY SO6.4: TOWN CENTRE DESIGN   
 
Creating an attractive and safe environment is vital to ensuri ng the growth and 
resilience of our town centres. Development within the Strategic Town Centre, Town  
and Local Centres will be of high quality and consider:  
 
• The Local Historic Environment including Conservation Areas and the proximity to 
Listed Buildings to ensure that local heritage is conserved and enhanced whilst 
enabling new, vibrant and attractive uses;  
 
Item No.  8.1336. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 104 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Shop fronts and adverts, preserving historic shop f ronts and design respects 
historic context where appropriate  
 
• Navigable features for those with visual, mobility and other needs ; 
 
• Create attractive gateways between centres and nearby public transport 
interchanges to encourage greater use of sustainable transport;  
 
• Use of different spatial characteristics, including building typologies and building 
to street relationships to differentiate principal and minor streets to help people 
find their way around a place;  
 
• Security measures required by businesses w hilst ensuring they provide an 
attractive and interesting visual appearance and do not make an area appear 
unappealing and unsafe at night -time;  
 
• The wide mix of uses within a town centre, enabling them to co -exist and form a 
busy, vibrant area whilst not being of detriment to extant or future occupiers;  
 
• Accessibility of streets, pathways and buildings for the benefit of everyone, 
including opportunities to enhance access for people with additional visual, 
mobility and other needs ; 
 
• Active frontages, which  where appropriate, may include front doors, balconies and 
terraces to enliven and add interest, and provide natural surveillance opportunities 
to the streetscene;  
 
• Promoting well -lit streets and areas to ensure a feeling of safety for both day and 
night -time users;  
 
• Streets for people, sharing street space fairly between pedestrians, cyclist s and 
motor vehicles;  
• Servicing of properties and storage of refuse;  
 
• Clear windows along the ground floor of non -residential buildings (avoid obscured 
windows); and,  
 
• Frequent benches to assist those with mobility difficulties to walk more easily 
between places.  
 
Local Design Guides should be used in conjunction with other relevant policies within 
the Local Plan.  
 
Explanation  
6.225  Our strategic town centres , town centres and local centres  need to be adaptable in their 
use to remain vital and vi able, however they also need to be attractive and safe places 
to be. A quality environment which promotes a sense of place and a desire to visit and 
dwell will support the changing use of t hese centres and their resilience. Our centres 
are our most sustainable locations. They provide the focus for services and facilities to 
meet the needs of our local residents throughout their lifetime and the legibility, 
access ibility and attractiveness of each centre for the frequent and infrequent visitors 
should be something the district can be proud of. Our centres show our history as 
people and reflect our needs for goods and services at a moment in time, the continued 
Item No.  8.1346. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 105 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   ability of the centres  to adapt , improve  and to meet the needs of current and future 
generations can be safeguarded through high quality design.  
TOWN CENTRE POLICIES  
 
Introduction  
 
6.226  Traditional town centre retailing is undergoing structural change with the growth of the 
internet fuelled by the coronavirus pandemic and pressure on the fashion industry to 
become more environmentally aware. However our centres still offer the greatest 
potential for supporting concentrations of retailers selling comparison goods in an 
attractive and sustainable location. The potential of our town centres to provide a focus 
for convenience and comparison retailers and the variety of facilities they offer sh ould 
thus be protected and enhanced. Accessibility and legibility will be fundamental factors 
in supporting the town centres. Providing sufficient and easily accessible car parks and 
active travel links with attractive, safe routes and signposting will hel p to make the town 
centres attractive and promote our District as a place where people will want to live, 
work and visit.  
 
6.227  More residential uses in the town centres can increase access to the housing market 
and secure a greater variety in accommodation, fo r example by providing 
accommodation for residents with reduced mobility in close proximity to services. More 
town centre accommodation means more footfall and people utilising the town centres 
for day to day shopping and service needs alongside the office  workers and visitors and 
supporting food and beverage venues. Increased residential use within the town centre 
will be supported, especially on upper floors and where this will not lead to a 
fragmentation of town centre uses.  
 
6.228  The West Midlands Designer Outlet  at Mill Green will provide a specialist retail offer and 
support the town by encouraging greater visitors to Cannock town centre. The new 
town centre boundary will enable flexibility in uses and land prices to encourage our 
dynamic small businesses access to a variety of sites. Our primary shopping area will 
be safeguarded to protect the retail function of Cannock town centre. Careful design to 
provide safe and attractive environments throughout the day and night. The historic 
environment will play a n integral part in supporting the town centre.  
 
6.229  Sites are available within the town centre boundary which can meet the growth need 
identified for town centre services and are of the scale and type of development 
required to deliver a vibrant and vital town  centre . 
 
CANNOCK TOWN CENTRE – STRATEGIC TOWN CENTRE  
 
6.230  The Cannock Chase Economic Prosperity Strategy (2020 -30)53 seeks to ensure that the 
District’s  main towns are more vibrant and sustainable and act as hubs for leisure and 
culture uses, residential opportunities and community activities. The role of the West 
Midlands D esigner Outlet at Mill Green is seen to enhance the District’s reputation and 
profile. 
 
6.231  The Economic Prosperity Strategy identifies a number of opportunities within Central 
Cannock including:  
 
 
53 https://www.cannockchasedc.gov.uk/business/economic -development/cannock -chase -economic -prosperity -strategy -2020 -2030 
Item No.  8.1356. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 106 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • development opportunities in and around Cannock Town Centre, which is 
designated as the Strategic Town Centre;  
 
• beneﬁts of investment at the adjacent West Midlands  Designer Outlet at Mill 
Green development, which is identified as a Strategic Retail Outle t; 
 
• potential transformation of Cannock Railway Station;  
 
• potential to develop the visitor economy offer;  
 
• developing Cannock Campus of South Staffordshire College; and  
 
• repurposing the town centre to become a hub for leisure and cultural uses, 
residential opportunities and community activities.  
 
6.232  The Economic Prosperity Strategy identifies a number of priorities for action, including:  
 
• Cannock Town Centre Regeneration & Prospectus;  
 
• The  West Midlands Designer  Outlet at Mill Green and Retail Training Academy;  
 
• Skills and Innovation Hub & Engineering Skills Academy; and  
 
• Station Improvements / Upgrades. Long term transformational upgrade of 
Cannock Railway Station and short term enhancements to Cannock Town.  
 
6.233  The Cannock Culture and Leisure Hub Development Prospectus (2019)54 was prepared 
to provide an opportunity for developers to see how Cannock Town Centre is changing 
and to promote dev elopment opportunities.   
 
6.234  Cannock is the principal shopping and leisure destination in Cannock Chase and is 
located in the south west  of the District. The town centre provides a mixture of retail, 
service and leisure facilities including some 31,960sq m gross retail floorspace, 4,130sq 
m retail service floorspace, 10,300sq m leisure service floorspace and 4,850sq m 
financial and busines s service floorspace (source: Experian Goad Survey).  
 
6.235  The Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study ( January 2021 ) includes a 
Cannock town centre health check. The health check considers the town centre is 
currently displaying relatively poor levels of  vitality and viability. It has a good 
convenience goods offer, with several large foodstores located on its edge. A 
reasonable retail service and financial and business offer, a hospital, college, library 
and theatre and several attractive historic buildi ngs. Several opportunities for 
investment and potential for more commercial office space, a hotel, cinema and/or other 
key leisure uses, more retail including an anchor store and more national multiple 
operators.  
 
 
 
 
POLICY SO6.5: CANNOCK TOWN CENTRE RE DEVELOPMENT  AREAS:  
 
The following sites in Cannock Town Centre are suitable for redevelopment  for the 
purposes outlined : 
 
• Site Allocation M1 -Multi -storey car park, Market Hall and retail units, Church 
Street (0.78ha ) – retail, leisure use, food and beve rage uses, upper floors 
could also provide residential apartments, hotel or office space.   
 
54 https://www.cannockchasedc.gov.uk/business/economic -development/cannock -town -centre -development -prospectus  
Item No.  8.1366. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 107 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Site Allocation M2 -Bus Station (0.11ha) –hotel and conferencing facilities or 
residential uses and an improved intermodal interchange.  
• Site Allocation M 3-Beecroft Road Car Park (0.68ha) –mixed use including 
residential, retail or commercial office use, and a new car park  
• Site Allocation M 4-Backcrofts Car Park (0.26ha) –offices, ancillary retail and 
leisure or residential.  
• Site Allocation M 5- Avon Road / Hallcourt Lane – (0.37ha) - leisure facilities, 
retail, food and beverage uses and/or residential.  
 
Cannock includes the  Strategic Town Centre Conservation Area (2014) , civic square 
and areas of green space which add to the character of the centre  and should be 
preserved  and enhanced . 
 
Development within the Town Centre  will be of high quality and will conform to the 
guidance set out in Policy SO6.4: ‘Town Centre Design’, and relevant Local Design 
Guidance.  Development proposals will incorporate high quality digital connectivity 
where appropriate as required by Policy SO5 .2 ‘Communication Technologies’.  
 
Active travel links will be promoted to the rail station and the West Midlands 
Designer Outlet at Mill Green.  
 
 
Explanatory Text  
 
6.236  Cannock town centre is the princip ale town centre of the District  and has a variety of 
renewal opportunities within its boundary. The redevelopment of these sites will support 
the viability and vitality of the town centre.  
 
6.237  The sites available within the town centre can meet the identified growth needs and 
offer opportu nities to diversify the town centre which will increase its resilience. Their 
development will be guided by a masterplan , strategy  or design guide as appropriate  
and site allocation policies  in Chapter  …….   
6.238  Active travel links between the rail station and the West Midlands Designer Outlet at Mill 
Green will facilitate sustainable active travel methods which support the health and well 
being of existing and future residents and the support the economy and the vitality and 
viability for the town centre.  The ability to access real -time information for sustainable 
transport services promotes their use by visitors and can promote dwell time in the 
strategic town centre.  
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Town Centre Prospectus  
• Retail and Leisure Study 2015  
• Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses  Study  (January 2021 ) 
 
Cannock Town Centre Design Guide: 
 
• Setting of St Luke and St Thomas Church  
• Setting to The Whitehouse  
• Prince of Wales theatre is a key asset  
• Cannock College, Library, hospital  
• Improve active travel  connectivity to the north of the town and train station  
• Improve the public realm  
Item No.  8.1376. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 108 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   • Increase the food and drink and leisure offer in the town centre  
• Redevelop the multi storey car park  
• Define active frontages  
• Encourage a bricks and clicks environment  
• Consider provision of ULEV taxi rank  
 
RUGELEY TOWN CENTRE  
 
 
Introduction  
 
6.239  Rugeley is situated in the north of the District, some 10km from Cannock. The centre 
contains 198 retail and commercial leisure units, accommodating a total of 32,870sq m 
gross floorspace. Of the retail floorspace in the town centre, 6,520sq m is occupied by 
convenience retailers, 9,560sq m by comparison retailers and 3,670sq m by retail 
service providers. Additi onally, 8,090sq m of floorspace is occupied by commercial 
leisure providers and 1,720sq m by financial and business service providers.  
 
Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study ( January 2021 ) 
 
6.240  The Study includes a health check for Rugeley town centre.  The health check shows 
that Rugeley has reasonably good levels of vitality and viability. It is an attractive centre 
with a good range of independent businesses, bricks and clicks digital offer and good 
provision for leisure facilities for both daytime an d night – time. It has opportunities for 
investment and redevelopment and a vacancy rate below the national average, 
although this is currently increasing in response to the impact upon retail habits from 
increased on -line shopping and the Coronavirus. It has good connectivity to nearby 
residential areas and potential to improve connectivity to the railway stations, canal 
towpath and to the north of the town.  
 
 
POLICY SO6.6: RUGELEY TOWN CENTRE REDEVELOPMENT AREAS  
 
The following sites in Rugeley Town Centre are suitable for mixed use development: •  
• Site Allocation M 6-Rugeley Market Hall/Bus Station and Surrounding Area  
• Site Allocation M 7-Land at Wellington Drive  
• Site Allocation M 8-Leathermill Lane/Trent and Mersey Canal Corridor  
 
The Conservation Areas , civic space  and green spaces within Rugeley Town Centre 
add to the character of the centre . 
 
Development within the Town Centre  will be of high quality and will conform to the 
guidance set out in Policy SO6.4: ‘Town Centre Design’, and relevant Local Design 
Guidance. De velopment proposals will incorporate high quality digital connectivity 
where appropriate as required by Policy SO5.2 ‘Communication Technologies’.  
 
Active travel links will be  promoted to the rail stations , canal  and the allocation  at 
the former Rugeley Power Station (Policy H20) .  
 
 
 
Explanatory Text  
 
6.241  Considerable public investment has been delivered within Rugeley Town Centre and 
recent retail developments have enhanced the convenience retail market. Safeguarding 
of the existing town centre whilst changing shopping habits are accommodated will 
Item No.  8.1386. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 109 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   ensure t he public investment and existing opportunities for redevelopment which are 
currently detracting from the attractive nature of this important centre for tourists and 
residents are deliverable within the plan period.  
 
6.242  Active travel links between the rail s tations , canal  and the Rugeley Power Station site 
will facilitate sustainable active travel methods which support the health and well being 
of existing and future residents and the support the economy and the vitality and 
viability for the town centre. The concept of ‘Active Design’ (add link) is rooted in Sport 
England’s aims to promote the role of sport and physical activity in creating healthy and 
sustainable communities. The principles of Active Design include walkable 
communities, connected walking & c ycling routes, networks of multifunctional open 
space, and high quality streets and spaces (see Policy SO2.3).  
 
6.243  A design guide will enable the town centre to respond to change more rapidly and 
enable community engagement.  
 
6.244  Site Allocation Policies  in …………………..   
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
• Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study ( January 2021 ) 
 
 
RUGELEY TOWN CENTRE DESIGN GUIDE  
 
• Safeguard and deliver active travel links to the rail station, canal towpath, edge of 
centre convenience food store, power station site.  
• Preserve and enhance the conservation area  and heritage assets  
• Encourage provision of ULEV parking points.  
 
 
HEDNESFORD TOWN CENTRE  
 
Introduction  
 
6.245  Hednesford is the smallest of the town  centres in Cannock Chase District. It is situated 
within the same urban area as Cannock and lies approximately 3km to the north -east. 
Hednesford Town Centre has a total of 117 retail and commercial leisure units, 
acco mmodating a total 26,209sq m (gross) floorspace. 10,674sq m of this floorspace is 
given over to convenience retailing, 4,070sq m to comparison shopping and 2,150sq m 
to retail service providers. The town centre accommodates 5,395sq m of commercial 
leisure floorspace and 830sq m of financial and business service floorspace.  
 
6.246  The Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study ( January 2021 ) includes a 
Hednesford town centre health check. The health check considers the town centre 
serves an important retail and  service centre for residents in the north eastern part of 
Cannock. It currently has a reasonable level of vitality and viability and has benefited 
from investment over the past decade. It is a compact town with a small catchment area 
and currently has a g ood range of retail services and leisure offer with a ball 
room/function room and a bingo hall. It has an attractive built form with numerous 
buildings of historical interest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item No.  8.1396. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 6: Creating Attractive Town and Local Ce ntres  
 
Page. 110 
 
Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
 
 
POLICY SO6.7: HEDNESFORD TOWN CENTRE REDEVELOPMENT AREAS  
 
The following sites in Hednesford Town Centre are suitable for mixed use 
development:  
 
• Site Allocation M 9-Corner of Uxbridge Street and Market Street  
• Site Allocation M10 Former co -op supermarket building, Anglesey Street  
 
Hednesford Town Centre has important civic spaces and green spaces which add to 
the character of the area and which provide important links between the train 
station, centre and wider  open space / green infrastructure network including being 
an important visitor gateway to Cannock Chase .  
 
Development within the Town Centre  will be of high quality and will conform to the 
guidance set out in Policy SO6.4: ‘Town Centre Design’, and relevant Local Design 
Guidance. De velopment proposals will incorporate high quality digital connectivity 
where appropriate as required by Policy SO5.2 ‘Communication Technologies’.  
 
 
Explanat ion 
 
6.247  Recent retail developments have enhanced the retail offer. Restricting the levels of 
convenience and comparison goods will safeguard the existing town centre whilst 
changing shopping habits are accommodated will ensure inward investment in this 
important c entre for tourists and residents is deliverable within the plan period 
safeguarding the vitality and viability of this centre. Limited opportunities exist for 
redevelopment in the town centre, however opportunities for town centre uses exist on 
redevelopme nt sites in Rugeley and Cannock and given the close proximity and shared 
catchment consideration of these sites should be given before out of centre locations 
are considered.  
 
6.248  Hednesford Town Centre is an important visitor gateway to Cannock Chase. 
Hednesf ord train station provides a n opportunity to access Cannock Chase by 
sustainable transport. Accessibility between the train station, town centre and wider 
open space network will promote the vitality and viability of the centre.  
 
6.249  A design guide will enable the town centre to respond to change more rapidly and 
enable community engagement.  
 
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Cannock Chase Retail & Town Centre Uses Study ( January 2021 ) 
• Hednesford Neighbourhood Plan  (2018)  
 
HEDNESFORD DESIGN GUIDE  
 
• Safeguard and deliver active travel links to the rail station  
• Preserve and enhance the conservation area and heritage assets  
• Encourage provision of ULEV parking points.  
 
 
Item No.  8.1406. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 111 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 7  
 
To protect and enhance the natural environment , development will:  
 
• minimise impacts on, and provide net gains for, biodiversity, including by 
conserving, expanding and linking natural habitats through habitat creation and  
improvement to ensure a robust and  coherent ecological network of sites that 
provides wildlife with the opportunity to prosper;  
 
• protect, conserve and enhance the District’s  natural environment assets, valued 
landscape and townscape, sites of biodiversity or geological value and soils. The 
highest degree of protection will be given to the protected landscapes of the 
Cannock Chase Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  and the Gre en Belt ; and  
 
• avoid any harmful impacts on the integrity of the Cannock Chase Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC) and the Cannock Extension Canal Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC).  
 
 
POLICY SO7.1: PROTECTING, CONSERVING A ND ENHANCING BIODIVERSITY AND 
GEO DIVERSITY  
Introduction  
 
6.250  National planning policy (NPPF 2021) requires that local planning policies contribute to 
and enhance the natural and local environment by protecting and enhancing sites of 
biodiversity or geological value, and minimising impacts on and providing net gains for 
biodiversity, including by establishing more resilient, coherent ecological networks. To 
protect and enhance biodiversity and geodiversity, local plans should:  
• safeguard components of local wildlife -rich habitats and wider ecological networks, 
includin g the hierarchy of international, national and locally designated sites of 
importance for biodiversity; wildlife corridors and stepping stones that connect them; 
and areas identified by national and local partnerships for habitat management, 
enhancement, r estoration or creation; and  
• promote the conservation, restoration and enhancement of priority habitats, ecological 
networks and the protection and recovery of priority species; and identify and pursue 
opportunities for securing measurable net gains for bio diversity.  
 
6.251  ‘Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation’ (Staffordshire County Council 2020) was 
commissioned to support the development of an evidence base for new energy and 
sustainability policies being considered for Staffordshire and its eight constitue nt Local 
Authorities. The report identifies a number of opportunities for offsetting and mitigating 
the carbon emissions that are caused by existing developments. These include 
offsetting emissions through more tree planting, enhanced biodiversity provisio n, and 
increasing sequestration on Council -owned land (e.g. areas of green  space).  
 
 
POLICY SO7.1: PROTECTING, CONSERVING AND ENHANCING BIODIVERSITY AND 
GEODIVERSITY  
Item No.  8.1416. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 112 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
Development proposals will support the protection, conservation, enhancement and 
restoration of designated biodiversity and geodiversity sites.  Development proposals 
whose primary objective is to conserve or enhance biodiversity will be supported.  
Opportunities to improve biodiversity  in and around the development  will be 
considered  as part of the design, especially where this can secure measurable net 
gains for biodiversity or enhance public access to nature where this is appropriate.   
All development proposals will deliver measurable net gains for biodiversity . Major 
development proposals will provide a minimum 10% net gain in biodiversity through 
the restoration and re -creation of priority habitats and ecological networks , and the 
creation of ‘stepping stones’ to connect them.  Biodiversity net gain will be deliv ered 
on site through habitat provision or enhancement wherever practicable, followed by 
off site where not practicable.  
 
The delivery of net gains in biodiversity will be designed to support the delivery of a 
District -wide biodiversity network based on the  designated biodiversity sites.  
Major development schemes will provide for the long term management of 
biodiversity features retained and enhanced within the development site and of  those 
features created off site to comp ensate for development impacts.  
The existing, or potential, international, national and locally designated sites of 
importance for biodiversity or geodiversity are shown on the Proposals Map , but may 
change over time. The designated sites include:  
• Special Areas of Conservation  
• Sites of Spec ial Scientific Interest  
• Ancient Woodland  
• Ancient and Veteran Trees  
• Local Sites of Biological Interest  
• Local Nature Reserves  
• Local Geological Sites  
Development proposals which are likely to have an adverse effect on a Special Area 
of Conservation or a Site of Special Scientific Interest  (either individually or in 
combination with other developments)  will only be supported where the benefits of 
the development in the location (s) proposed clearly outweigh both its likely impact 
on the features of the site that make it of special conservation or scientific interest . 
 
Development proposals which are likely to result in the loss or deterioration of 
irreplaceable habitats ( including ancient woodland and ancient or veteran tree s) will 
only be supported where imperative reasons for overriding public interest, and a 
suitable compensation strategy exists.  
 
Development proposals which would result in significant harm to the biodiversity  
and geodiversity of designated sites, either alone or in combination with other 
developments and which have not considered alternative sites or designs with less 
harmful impacts, or provided adequate proposals for the mitigat ion or compensat ion, 
will not be supported.  
Item No.  8.1426. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 113 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
Explanation  
 
6.252  The District contains some of the most important habitats and is working hard towards 
creating a resilient and coherent ecological network to ensure the long term protection 
and enhancement of the natural environment.  
 
6.253  Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) are protected areas which aim to conserve the 
high quality habitats and species which are considered to be most in need of conservation 
at the European level. The District includes two Special Areas of Conservation: Can nock 
Chase; and the Cannock Extension Canal.  
 
6.254  The District includes three Sites of Special Scientific Interest. The importance of Cannock 
Chase for wildlife was recognised when it was designated as a Site of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSI) in 1951. The area is therefore protected from harm and neglect under UK 
law. The other two SSSI’s partly or wholly in the District are the ‘Chasewater and the 
Southern Staffordshire Coalfield Heaths’, and the ‘Cannock Extension Canal’.  
 
6.255  Ancient Woodland, ancient or veteran trees provide irreplaceable habitat and their loss 
should be avoided unless there are wholly exceptional reasons.  
 
6.256  There are also over thirty local Sites of Biological Interest, three Local Nature Reserves, 
and one Local Geological Site.  
 
6.257  For the p urposes of applying Policy SO7.1: ‘ Protecting, Conserving and Enhancing 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity’ , ‘imperative reasons of overriding public interest’ are set 
out in national guidance, and will be given considerable weight in the consideration of 
plann ing matters. They currently include:  
 
• the requirement to maintain the nation’s health, safety, education, environment 
(sustainable development, green energy, green transport)   
• complying with planning policies and guidance at a national,  regional and loca l level  
• requirements for economic or social development (Nationally Significant Infrastructure 
Projects, employment, regeneration, mineral extraction, housing, pipelines  etc.) 
 
6.258  An Ecological Assessment should be submitted with any development proposals whe re 
there is a potential impact on protected areas, habitat or protected species (for example, 
to demonstrate the presence or absence of protected species such as bats, badgers, 
great crested newts etc).  
 
6.259  The Environment Act will set out the requirements for different types of development 
biodiversity net gain when enacted, however in light of current evidence and future 
publication of guidance Cannock Chase have chosen to adopt the minimum standard.  
 
6.260  Opportunities for off -site provision will be identified in future guidance to ensure 
biodiversity net gain is provided within the District where the loss occurs. The District has 
identified through existing evidence in the Nature Recovery mapping considera ble need 
and opportunities for the beneficial enhancement of the biodiversity connectivity 
throughout the District and has an important role in protecting the Cannock Chase SAC 
which lies mostly within the district and the connectivity to it from neighbour ing areas. 
There have been long term projects to connect Cannock Chase to Sutton Park and the 
Item No.  8.1436. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 114 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
future Nature Recovery Network Strategy will assist in identifying cross boundary 
corridors for long term protection.  
 
6.261  Many residents in the district are passiona te about Cannock Chase and accessibility to 
semi natural green space. Landscape links throughout the district via green infrastructure 
and strategic green space network can assist in managing the impacts of recreation on 
Cannock Chase and designated sites,  it is important their character and attractiveness 
for such use is maintained and enhanced where practicable and is not in conflict with 
their primary purpose/function.  
 
6.262  An Urban Forestry Strategy 2019 -2024 has been adopted by the Council which seeks to 
maintain, improve and expand the quality of the existing tree and woodland cover, in a 
sustainable way across the district and enhance the retention of tree planting and 
landscaping. It recognises the benefits of tree planting and its contribution to addres sing 
climate change, biodiversity, social and health benefits and economic benefits. It 
considers the management of Council’s stock, protected trees and new tree planting and 
landscaping offering advice on locations and the type of trees to be planted so t he right 
trees are planted in the right place.  
 
6.263  The Nature Recovery Network Mapping (March 2020) outlines the existing picture of the 
District’s nature network and describes key locations where habitats may be created or 
enhanced to contribute to nature’s recovery as well as delivering against objectives set 
out in national planning policy legislation. It looks at a strategic scale, including cross 
boundary and uses biodiversity metrics to identify areas which have good habitat 
connectivity, and where has t he potential for future habitat creation or restoration to 
contribute to a more successful nature recovery network. It identifies 6 habitat 
connectivity opportunity areas in the district.  
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• White Paper ‘Planning for the Future’ (A ugust 2020)  
• Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation (SAC EU Code UK0030107)  
• Cannock Extension Canal Special Area of Conservation (SAC EU Code UK0012672)  
• Nature Recovery Network Mapping (March 2020)  
 
 
POLICY SO7. 2: SPECIAL AREAS OF CONSERVATION  
 
Introduction  
 
6.264  Cannock Chase District  contains two Special Areas of Conservation (SAC), which were 
both designated in April 2005 - Cannock Chase SAC and Cannock Extension Canal SAC.   
 
• The Cannock Chase SAC (1,244 ha) is one of the best areas in the UK for European 
dry heath land and is the mo st extensive in the Midlands. The Council is part of a SAC 
Partnership which works together to prevent damage to the Cannock Chase SAC . 
• The Cannock Extension Canal SAC (5 ha) is an example of anthropogenic, lowland 
habitat supporting floating water -plantai n (luronium natans ) at the eastern limit of the 
plants natural distribution in England.  
 
Item No.  8.1446. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 115 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.265  Cannock Chase District Council has a duty under the Conservation of Habitats and 
Species Regulations 2017 (Habitat Regulations) to ensure that a competent authority 
undertakes a Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA), including Appropriate 
Assessment (AA), where it is considered that approving an application, plan or project 
will, or may potentially, result in a negative impact upon the reasons of designation of a 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC).  
 
6.266  To protect the Cannock Chase and Cannock Extension SACs the effective avoidance 
and/or mitigation of any impacts will need to be demonstrated in accordance with the 
Habitat Regulations .  In order to permit developm ent, it must be demonstrated that alone 
or in combination with other development it will not have an adverse effect, whether direct 
or indirect upon the integrity of the SAC having regard to avoidance or mitigation 
measures.  
 
6.267  For both SACs monitoring is ta king place to enable plans to be implemented to manage 
any increase in Nitrogen levels as a result of the impact of new development.  This may 
include energy use and production, agriculture and increased motorised vehicle use.  Any 
development that would h ave an adverse impact on a SAC prior to a partnership 
mitigation scheme being implemented will need to address this issue via a case specific 
action plan.  The permitted scheme at Rugeley Power Station provides a case study 
example.  
 
6.268  Other matters which ma y arise through the life of the plan period and development may 
prompt a requirement to undertake further assessment in order to meet the requirements 
of the habitat regulations.  
 
6.269  This will also apply to any new SAC designated during the lifetime of the Lo cal Plan.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO7. 2: SPECIAL AREAS OF CONSERVATION  
 
Development will not be permitted where it would lead directly or indirectly to an 
adverse impact upon a Special Area of Conservation ( SAC ) and the effects cannot be 
mitigated.  
 
The effective avoidance and/or mitigation of any identified adverse effects mu st be 
demonstrated to the Council as competent authority, and secured by means of a 
suitable mechanism ( for example, a  legal agreement) prior to the approval of the 
development.  
 
Cannock Chase SAC  
 
To ensure the integrity of Cannock Chase SAC is not harmed, all development that 
results in a net increase in homes, or an increase in tourism or visitor use of 
Cannock Chase SAC, will be required to undertake a Habitats Regulations 
Assessment (HRA) or make a financial contribution before development takes place .   
 
This mitigation may include:  
 
• contributions to habitat management and creation;  
• access management and visitor infrastructure ; 
Item No.  8.1456. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 116 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• publicity, education and awareness raising ;  
• provision of additional recreation space within development sites where they can 
be accommodated , and where they cannot   by contributions to off -site alternative 
recreation space; and measures to encourage sustainable travel.  
 
Cannock Extension Canal SAC  
 
Any development within the water catchmen t area of the Cannock Extension Canal 
SAC will be deemed to have an adverse impact on the Cannock Extension Canal 
SAC. Mitigation for any identified adverse effects must be demonstrated and 
secured prior to approval of development and on -going monitoring o f impact on the 
SAC will be required.  
 
Developments outside the water catchment area may be required to demonstrate 
that they will have no adverse effect on the integrity of the SAC.  
 
 
Explanation  
6.270  The evidence shows that any development which would increase the human population, 
tourism or visitor use within 15km of the Cannock Chase SAC may have a significant 
impact. Cannock Chase District Council, along with other local authorities within the 15km  
radius of Cannock Chase SAC, has agreed to collect financial contributions from 
developments within 15km zone and to spend these on a package of mitigation measures 
to prevent harm arising to the SAC. As the entire district is within 15km of the Cannock 
Chase SAC, any development which would produce a net increase in the number of 
homes or increase tourism or visitor use of Cannock Chase SAC will be required to 
undertake a Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) or make a financial contribution 
before develo pment takes place.   
 
6.271  The types of development affected includes any development which would produce a net 
increase in the number of homes, new homes arising through the conversion of existing 
buildings, houses in multiple occupation, sheltered accommodati on and care homes 
falling within Use Class C3 and gypsy and traveller pitches.  Hotels, holiday lets, and 
camping & caravan sites will also need to undertake a Habitats Regulations Assessment 
(HRA) or provide a financial contribution if they could generate  visitors to Cannock Chase 
SAC.   
 
6.272  Where local residents are in close proximity to the Cannock Chase SAC and able to walk 
directly onto it, evidence shows residents are likely to use it in a very different way to 
those who make a choice to visit and travel some distance , bespoke mitigation may be 
required in these instances.  
 
6.273  The habitat which Cannock Chase SAC is designated for (European Lowland Heathland) 
is also known to be harmed by increases in the level of atmospheric deposition of 
Nitrogen Oxid e, Nitrite & Nitrate (collectively referred to as NO x). A number of different 
Item No.  8.1466. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 117 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
types of development can increase the levels of NO x deposition on Cannock Chase SAC; 
both directly (via increasing industrial and agricultural emissions) or indirectly (via 
incre asing traffic usage on main roads than run within 200m of the boundary of the SAC). 
Where it is possible that a development may result in harm to Cannock Chase SAC via 
significantly increasing the level of NO x deposition (directly or indirectly, alone or i n 
combination with other developments) then the Council will be required to conduct a 
Habitats Regulations Assessment prior to determining the application. If it is determined 
that the application could  cause harm to the SAC then the developer will need to  avoid 
their impact and/or provide mitigation proportional to their harm or else the application 
will need to be refused. Guidance will be provided by the Council to the developer on a 
case by case base where NO x deposition is determined to be an issue.  
 
6.274  Prior approval and permitted developments, such as conversion of offices into new 
homes, are also affected by the Cannock Chase SAC requirement.  The HRA process 
and consultation with Natural England must be undertaken before Cannock Chase 
District Council can determine if a development is permitted development or if prior 
approval can be granted.   
 
6.275  The water catchment for the Cannock Extension Canal SAC includes Chasewater as it 
connects to the Cannock Extension canal via the Wyrley and Essington Canal, al though 
other hydrological pathways also exist.  The impact of air pollution on the integrity of the 
Cannock Extension canal SAC and its qualifying features is currently unknown.  
List of Relevant Evidence    
• Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017  
• Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation Site User Implementation Plan March 
2020  
• Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation Car Parking Implementation Plan March 
2020  
• Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation (SAC) Guidance to Mitigate  the Impact of 
New Residential Development (1st April 2022)  
 
POLICY SO7. 3: PROTECTING, CONSERVING AND ENHANCING LANDSCAPE CHARACTER  
Introduction  
6.276  National p lanning policies require local plans to contribute to and enhance the natural 
and local environment by  protecting and enhancing valued landscapes  in a manner 
commensurate with their statutory status or identified quality  (NPPF 2021 paragraph 
174).  
 
 
POLICY SO7. 3: PROTECTING, CONSERVING AND ENHANCING LANDSCAPE 
CHARACTER  
 
All development proposals in the District will protect, conserve and enhance 
landscape character by:  
 
Item No.  8.1476. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 118 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Protecting and conserving local distinctiveness, scenic qualities, rural openness 
and sense of place . 
• Maximising opportunities to conserve and enhance exi sting landscape features 
of the site including trees, hedgero ws, woodlands, and watercourses  especially 
where these form part of the historic environment . 
• Locating and designing the development to respect the surrounding scenic 
quality and providing sensit ive edges to the adjacent areas . 
• Locating and designing the development to avoid  the erosion of relative  
tranquillity and prevent impacts of  light pollution from  artificial light on 
intrinsically dark landscapes . 
• Protecting, conserving  and enhancing the Cannock Chase Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty, as required by Policies SO7. 4 and  SO7. 5 and the Green Belt . 
• Creating new green infrastructure within the development which links to the 
‘Strategic Green Space Network’  (as required by Policy SO7. 7). 
 
All major development proposals must be supported by a Landscap e and Visual 
Impact Assessment.  
 
 
Explanation  
6.277  Cannock Chase District includes a wide range of landscapes and townscapes, including 
the nationally designated AONB and Green Belt. Without adequate planning controls over 
development, these assets could be diminished.  Areas of tranqui llity add to the health 
and well -being of the population of Cannock District and beyond and along with dark 
skies contribute positively to the biodiversity of the district.  
 
6.278  The area is densely populated and areas between settlements are important to the retain  
the identity of the individual areas and provide corridors of movement for biodiversity. 
Development proposals should be designed to make a positive contribution to townscape 
and landscape (as required by Policy SO1.2: Enhancing the Quality of the Built 
Environment). Additional guidance will be included in the relevant Local Design Guide.  
 
6.279  Landscape and Visual Impact Assessments will be required for major developments with 
wider landscape impacts, and m ay be required for minor developments that are within , 
or visible from, the Cannock Chase Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty or Special Area 
of Conservation .  
 
6.280  Landscape and Visual Impact Appraisals should be carried out by an appropriate 
professional in accordance with the “Guidelines for Landscape and Visual Impact 
Assessment 3rd Edition ” published by the Landscape Institute and IEMA 2013 (or any 
subsequent revisions to the Guidelines).  
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Environment Bill 2020  
• White Paper ‘Planning for the Future’ (August 2020)  
    
 
 
 
Item No.  8.1486. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 119 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
POLICY SO7. 4: PROTECTING, CONSERVING AND ENHANCING THE CANNOCK CHASE 
AREA OF OUTSTANDING NATURAL BEAUTY  
 
Introduction  
 
6.281  National planning policies give g reat weight to conserving and enhancing landscape and 
scenic beauty in Areas of Outstanding Natural Beau ty (AONB) , and indicate that planning 
permission should be refused for major development other than in exceptional 
circumstances, and where it can be demonstrated that the development is in the public 
interest.  
 
6.282  The Cannock Chase AONB was designated in 1958 to conserve and enhance its natural  
beauty.  There are many special sites within the AONB that are recognised as being 
important internationally, nationally and locally including 1,237 ha of the heathland which 
is designated as a Special Area for Conservation (SAC).  
 
6.283  Around 40% of the Distri ct is designated as part of the AONB, which extends into the 
adjacent districts of Lichfield, South Staffordshire and Stafford. The part of the AONB that 
is in the District lies within the boundary of the Green Belt.  The AONB provides a strategic 
area of a ccessible countryside with conservation, recreation, economic and tourism 
benefits.  
 
6.284  The AONB contains heritage such as World  War  I military training camp,  Commonwealth 
cemeter y and a German War Cemetery and across the site has over 600 non -designated 
heritage assets .  
 
 
 
POLICY SO7. 4: PROTECTING, CONSERVING AND ENHANCING THE CANNOCK 
CHASE AREA OF OUTSTANDING NATURAL BEAUTY  
 
 
The protected landscape areas of Cannock Chase Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
(AONB) are shown on the Proposals Map and will receive the highest degree of 
protection from damaging or inappropriate development.   
 
Development proposals within or on land forming the setting of the AONB will be 
expected to positively contribute to the setting  special qualities of the AONB. 
Development proposals which, individually or cumulatively, adversely impact on the 
landscape and scenic beauty of the AONB or its setting will be re sisted.  
 
All development proposals within the AONB will set out how the development would 
contribute to mee ting the objectives of the AONB Management Plan (2019 -2024 and 
subsequent plans) in regard to:  
 
• Landscape character;  
• Wildlife and nature;  
• Historic environment and culture;  
• Experience and enjoyment; and  
• Communities and business.  
 
 
 
Item No.  8.1496. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 120 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.285  National planning policy (NPPF 2021 paragraph 177) requires that consideration of 
applications for development within Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty should include 
an assessment of:  
• the need for the development, including in terms of any national consi derations, and the 
impact of permitting it, or refusing it, upon the local economy;  
• the cost of, and scope for, developing outside the designated area, or meeting the need 
for it in some other way; and  
• any detrimental effect on the environment, the landsca pe and recreational opportunities, 
and the extent to which that could be moderated.  
 
6.286  The Cannock Chase AONB , the smallest inland AONB in the UK, lies at the heart of the 
West Midlands where it connects landscapes, habitats and communities. Its influence 
extends far beyond its boundary , and it has visual prominence and wide -ranging 
uninterrupted views outward, whi ch are recognised in the AONB Management Plan. 
Views towards the distinctive profile of Cannock Chase are also an important attribute 
within the surrounding area. The AONB Views and Setting Guide describes 
representative views from and towards the AONB and  offers viewpoint specific advice 
and spatial advice to help ensure that the surroundings of the AONB are developed and 
managed in ways that conserve and enhance the AONBs significance and special 
qualities.  
 
6.287  Local communities highly value the AONB and its  protection, conservation and 
enhancement contributes directly to the health and well -being of the population and 
identity of the District.  
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• White Paper ‘Planning for the Future’ (August 2020)  
• Cannock Chase AONB Management Plan2019 -2024  
• Cannock Chase AONB Views and Setting Guide (July 2020)  
 
 
POLICY SO7. 5: PROTECTING, CONSERVING AND ENHANCING THE GREEN BELT  
Introduction  
6.288  Green Belt serves 5 purposes:  
• to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built -up areas;  
• to prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another;  
• to assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment;  
• to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns; and  
• to assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other 
urban land.  
 
6.289  National planning policies (NPPF 2021) advise that  local planning authorities should 
ensure that substantial weight is given to any harm to the Green Belt.  
Item No.  8.1506. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 121 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.290  The N PPF advises that strategic policies should establish the need for any changes to 
green Belt boundaries, having regard to their permanance in the long term, so they can 
endure beyond the plan period.   
 
6.291  When defining Green Belt boundaries, plans should:  
a) ensure consistency with the development plan’s strategy for meeting identified 
requirements for sustainable development;  
b) not include land which it is unnecessary to keep permanently open;  
c) where necessary, identify areas of safeguarded land between the urban area and the 
Green Belt, in order to meet longer -term development needs stretching well beyond 
the plan period;  
d) make clear that safeguarded land is not allocated for development at the present time. 
Planning permission for the permanent developm ent of safeguarded land should only 
be granted following an update to a plan which proposes the development;  
e) be able to demonstrate that Green Belt boundaries will not need to be altered at the 
end of the plan period; and  
f) define boundaries clearly using physical features that are readily recognisable and 
likely to be permanent.  
6.292  Around 60% of the District is designated Green Belt as part of the larger West Midlands 
Green Belt that extends to around 580 square miles around the Black Country, Coventry, 
Birmi ngham and Solihull. The Green Belt contains 2 SAC and plays an important role in 
providing for recreation, maintaining the District’s character and its wildlife, and 
safeguarding the wider open countryside.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO7. 5: PROTECTING, CONSERVING AND ENHANCING THE GREEN BELT  
 
The Green Belt area within the Cannock Chase District , as shown on the Proposals 
Map, will receive the highest degree of protection from development.  Development 
will protect the character and openness of the Green Belt.  
 
Inappropriate d evelopment proposals within the Green Belt will be refused, except in 
‘very special  circumstances ’. ‘Very special circumstances’ will not exist unless the 
potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm 
resulting from the proposal, is clearly outweighed by other considerations.  
 
Opportunities to enhance the beneficial uses of the Green Belt will be supported. 
This may include opportunities to provide access, for outdoor sport and recreation, 
to retain and e nhance landscapes, visual amenity and biodiversity, or to improve 
damaged and derelict land.  
 
In association with the large strategic site allocations at South of Lichfield Road, 
Cannock , Wimblebury Road and Kingswood Lakeside, land indicated on the 
proposals map will be safeguarded for the delivery of public open space as a 
community  park  and green infrastructure links and pedestrian and cycle links to 
adjacent safeguarded land . 
 
 
 
Explanation  
 
Item No.  8.1516. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 122 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.293  The Green Belt area within the Cannock Chase District Council area is shown on the 
Proposals Map. This designation will be confirmed at the point that the Cannock Chase 
Local Plan is adopted. The Local Plan policies relating to Green Belt will apply to the 
boundaries that are designated  in the Local Plan.  
 
6.294  The co mmunity  park proposed to be delivered alongside the strategic housing site on 
land south of Lichfield Road is an example of enhancing the Green Belt and provides 
opportunities to link open spaces and habitat and deliver large sc ale tree planting which 
will help address climate change. It is therefore important that this opportunity is 
protected  along with similar opportunities at Wimblebury Road and Kingswood 
Lakeside . 
 
6.295  Future opportunities exist to create a landscape scale green  infrastructure network on 
land identified in the plan and adjacent to that proposed to be safeguarded from 
development within this plan period.   
 
    
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Cannock Chase Local Plan Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
 
 
 
POLICY SO7. 6: AMENDMENTS TO THE GREEN BELT  
Introduction  
 
6.296  Once established, Green Belt boundaries should only be altered where exceptional 
circumstances are fully evidenced and justified, through the preparation or updating of 
plans.  
 
6.297  The Local Plan provides the first opportunity to check and verify the existing boundary 
is clear  and uses features which are readily recognisable and likely to be permanent  
following the publication of Ordnance Survey base mapping for the district.  
 
 
 
POLI CY SO7. 6: AMENDMENTS TO THE GREEN BELT  
 
Amendments to the Green Belt boundary are proposed in this Local Plan to 
accommodate the growth requirements of the District, these are shown on the 
proposals map and are at:  
 
• South of Lichfield Road, Cannock ;  
• East  of Wimblebury Road ; 
• Land to rear of Longfor d House, Watling Street Cannock;  
• Kingswood Lakeside Extension 2, Blakeney Way  
• Land east of The Meadows Armitage Lane Brereton;  
• Hagley Park Academy, Burnthill  Road, Rugeley (southern site - part)  
 
Suitable  mitigation  will be identified and detailed boundaries are shown  in the site 
specific policies . .  
 
Item No.  8.1526. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 123 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
Amendments to the Green Belt boundary are proposed in this Local Plan to 
accommodate growth requirements of the District beyond the plan period or 
following a review of this Plan at:  
 
Site Allocation S 1-East of Wimblebury Road, Heath Hayes (southern site)  
Site Allocation S 2 -Land at Newlands Lane, Heath Hayes,  Cannock (former golf 
driving range)  
Site Allocation S 3-Land to the west of Hednesford Road, Norton Canes  
Site Allocation S4 -Jubilee Field, Watling Street  
Site Allocation S5 -Watling Street Business park and extension  
 
 
In all cases, appropriate mitigation will be made to compensate for the loss of Green 
Belt land. This would include:  
 
• new or enhanced green infrastructure ; 
• woodland planting;  
• landscape and visual enhancements (beyond those needed to mitigate the 
immediate impacts of the proposal);  
• improvements to biodiversity , habitat connectivity and natural capital;  
• new or enhanced walking and cycle routes; and  
• improved access to new, enhanc ed or existing recreational and playing field 
provision.  
 
 
Explanation  
   
6.298  Evidence has shown that the Green Belt still performs well and meets the purposes set 
out in the NPPF (checking urban sprawl, preventing the merging of towns, safeguarding 
the countryside, preserving the setting of historic towns, and assisting urban 
regeneration).  
 
6.299  The Green Belt performs many functions within Cannock. Much of it is part of our historic 
mining legacy and large tracts of it have been reclaimed to provide an attractive setting 
to our settlements, strengthening local distinctiveness and sense of place, enhancing 
access to the natural open space, health and well-being  and enhancing the landscape 
setting to the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . The Green Belt also provides 
opportunities to protect and enhance the SAC and other important habitats and deli ver 
long term biodiversity networks as identified in the network recovery mapping.  
 
6.300  The NPPF makes clear that changes should only be made to the Green Belt in 
exceptional circumstances,  and they should set out ways in which the impact of removing 
land from  the green belt can be offset through compensatory improvements to the 
environmentally quality and accessibility of remaining Green Belt land . 
 
6.301  The areas of land identified as safeguarded are not allocated for development at the 
present time and should be safeguarded from development which would prevent their 
long term potential  to assist in delivering the future economic and housing needs of the 
district and  strategic network of green infrastructure .   
6.302  When the development sites south of Lichfield Road and Wimblebury Road are 
completed potential will exist to expand the community park to the south of Lichfield Road 
with new areas of green infrastructure. Sites S1 -East of Wimblebury Road, Heath Hayes 
(southern site), S2 -Land at Newlands Lane, Heath Hayes, Cannock (former golf driving 
Item No.  8.1536. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 124 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
range) and S3 - Land at west of Hednesford Road, Norton Canes have the potential to 
deliver sustainable development and deliver the compensation required in addition to 
mitiga ting their own impact.  
 
6.303  Site Allocations S1 -S3 should be safeguarded to provide enhanced connectivity for active 
travel and biodiversity between Newlands Lane and Cannock Chase, including Fairlady 
Coppice,  and across Hednesford road through to Wimblebury R oad, Wimblebury mound 
and the former Bleak House open cast site  and Chasewater  and the Southern 
Staffordshire Coalfield Heaths SSSI . Site S1 also has the potential to and help with flood 
mitigation downstream in Norton Canes . Site S2 has the potential in t he long term to 
expand the green infrastructure to provide biodiversity links to the currently active landfill 
site on Lichfield Road as the areas which are reclaimed expand and the potential for 
future recreational access to the landfill site which should  be investigated in subsequent 
reviews.  
 
6.304  Sites S4 and S5 have the potential to deliver sustainable employment development and 
deliver the compensation required in addition to mitigating their own impact. Sites S4 and 
S5 can provide enhanced connectivity for recreation and walking and cycle routes  along 
with a safe crossing between the area of the former Grove Colliery and Norton Canes 
village across the A5. There is potential to deliver enhancements to the biodiversity and 
strategic green infrastructure links to the Cannock Extension Canal SAC and  enhance 
the habitat connectivity to Wyrley Common, the SBI fronting the A5 and the dismantled 
railway line  which forms the district boundary  and is identified in the open space 
assessment as a landscape link.  
 
6.305  The amendments to the Green Belt boundary proposed in this Local Plan will be 
approved through the local plan process. Further changes to the Green Belt boundary, 
if required, will need to be made through a formal review of the Local Plan policies, or 
through a Neighbourhood Plan.  
List of  Relevant Evidence  
 
• Cannock Chase Local Plan Issues and Options Consultation (2019)  
• Nature Recovery Network Mapping report 2020  
 
 
POLICY SO7. 7: PROTECTING  AND IMPROVING GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE  
Introduction  
6.306  Green infrastructure is defined (NPPF 2021) as  ‘a network of multi -functional green and 
blue spaces and other natural features, urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a 
wide range of environmental, economic, health and wellbeing benefits for nature, climate, 
local and wider communities and prospe rity’. The multi -functional nature of green 
infrastructure within Cannock Chase District is attested by the diverse range of 
designations and typologies of land within its extent. Green infrastructure includes:  
• Designated and non -designated heritage assets (including Conservation Areas; Listed 
Buildings; Scheduled Monuments; locally listed buildings and features, and locally 
important parks and gardens) and their settings  (see Policy SO1.1).  
Item No.  8.1546. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 125 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Designated sites of importance for biodiversity or geodiversity (Special Areas of 
Conservation; Sites of Special Scientific Interest; Ancient Woodland; Local Sites of 
Biological Interest; Local Nature Reserves; and Local Geological Sites) and their 
settings  (Policy SO7.1).  
• Cannock Chase Area of Outstanding  Natural Beauty (AONB)  (Policy SO7.5).   
• Green Belt land  (Policy SO7.6).   
• Cycleways and footpaths, bridleways, public transport networks, and the road network  
(Policy SO1.2).  
• Open space (including parks and gardens, semi -natural spaces, landscape links and 
amenity green spaces), outdoor sports and recreation land (including playing fields and 
green spaces for children and young people) (Policy SO2.3).  
• Allotments and community gardens  (Policy SO2. 4). 
• Agriculture, forestry  and other land based rural businesses  (Policy SO4.3).  
• The local canal network and the abandoned canal network (Policy SO 4.3). 
• Wildlife corridors and ‘stepping stones’  (Policy SO 7.1). 
• Landscape features trees, hedgerows, woodlands, and watercourses  (Policy  SO7.4).  
• Flood protection features such as trees and planting, water bodies, retention ponds and 
filter beds, and sustainable drainage systems  (Policy SO8.4) . 
6.307  Local Plan policies seek to  ensure that all parts of the District  can benefit from the 
provision of accessible and high quality green infrastructure, including the more densely 
developed areas. To be accessible to some communities, the green infrastructure 
network needs to ‘reach into’ the urban areas. This will be achi eved by:  
• designating  the ‘Strategic Green Space Network’ , which is of the greatest significance 
in terms of existing or potential purpose, value and accessibility to urban communities, 
and where appropriate protection and improvement measures will be put into place . 
• encouraging new development to enhance existing areas of green infrastructure, and 
where possible, provide new areas of green infrastructure.   
 
 
POLICY SO7. 7: PROTECTING, CONSERVING AND ENHANCINGGREEN 
INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
 
The Policies of this Local Plan seek to protect , conserve and enhance existing green 
infrastructure in accordance with its importance to heritage, biodiversity, 
geodiversity, landscape beauty, and its value to facilitate movement, sport and 
recreation.  
 
The sites which have been designated as part of the ‘Strategic Green Space Network’  
within  and adjacent to  the built -up areas of the District are shown on the P olicies  Map 
and these will receive a higher degree of protection from development.  Development 
in these areas will normally be only permitted where it enhances the value of the green 
space, for example through : enhancing the quality of the townscape and landscape; 
providing cy cling and walking routes and sport and recreation opportunities; 
enhancing natural habitats; providing opportunities for local food production; and 
mitigating the risks and impacts of flooding and pollution.  
 
Item No.  8.1556. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 126 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
Development that would result in an unacceptabl e conflict with the functions or 
characteristics of the ‘Strategic Green Space Network’   will be resisted except where:  
 
• Where this supports the Open Spaces Strategy ;  
•  An assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown the ‘Strategic 
Green Space Network’   no longer fulfils that purpose ; or 
• The loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by 
equivalent or better provision in a su itable and access ible location.  
 
New development proposals will set out how the development will impact  or enhance 
the directly affected and adjacent areas of green infrastructure, including the 
‘Strategic Green Space Network’ . New a reas of green infrastructure , with links to 
existing green infrastructure, should be created within the development wherever 
possible .  
 
Additional areas of green space of particular importance to local communities which 
have been allocated in neighbourhood plans as Loc al Green Space will be afforded 
the same level of protection as the  Green Belt.  Neighbourhood plan proposals to 
allocate Local Green Space within the designated ‘Strategic Green Space Network’  
will be supported.  
 
Explanation  
 
6.308  Protecting, conserving and enhancing green infrastructure will help to maintain the 
value of the District’s heritage , biodiversity, geodiversity, landscape assets. It can also 
enhance the quality of life for residents by improving physical and mental health, 
reducing the impact of climate change, mitigating flooding and pollution and providing 
recreational opportunities , including  walking and cycling routes.  The effective 
stewardship of the District’s green infrastructure will be managed in accordance with a 
range of Local Plan Policies . 
 
6.309  Sites designated as part of the ‘Strategic Green Space Network’  have been identified 
by taking account of how parts of the existing provision of green infrastructure can 
contribute to the:  
• separation of individual developments and settlements, and enhancement of the 
distinctive quality of townscapes and landscapes;  
• provision of attractive walking and cycling rout es, and accessible sport and recreation 
opportunities;  
• provision of habitats for plants and animals, and corridors and ‘stepping stones’ for their 
movement;  
• provision of opportunities for food production, including allotments; and  
• mitigation of the risks a nd impacts of flooding, and air, water and noise pollution.  
6.310  The designation of land as Local Green Space through neighbourhood plans (or future 
local plans) allows communities to identify and protect green areas of particular 
importance to them. Local Green Spaces should only be designated when a plan is 
prepared or updated, and be capable of enduring beyond the end of the plan period.  
Future designations of L ocal Green Space may, or may not, be within Local Plan 
designations of ‘Strategic Green Space Network’ . Any designations of Local Gre en 
Space will supersede  ‘Strategic Green Space Network’  designation given the greater 
protection afforded by the former.  
 
Item No.  8.1566. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 7: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment  
 
Page. 127 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.311  The Local Green Space designation should only be used where the green space is:  
• in reasonably close proximity to the community it serves;  
• demonstrably special to a local community and holds a particular local significance, for 
example because of its beaut y, historic significance, recreational value (including as a 
playing field), tranquility  or richness of its wildlife; and  
• local in character and is not an extensive tract of land.  
 
6.312  Policies for managing development within a Local Green Space should be consistent 
with those for Green Belts.  
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Cannock Chase Local Plan Issues and Options Consultation (2019 ) 
• Open Space Assessment 2022 ) 
Item No.  8.1576. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 128 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 8  
 
To support a greener future, development will:  
 
• Increase production of low and zero carbon energy and heat;  
• Promote sustainable building design, and increase Low and Zero Carbon 
development;  
• Offset and mitigate any carbon emissions that cannot be avoided;  
• Reduce the risk of flooding, manage surface wat er and drainage, maximise flood 
protection and manage the effects of flooding;  
• Avoid air, water, soil, noise and light pollution;  
• Ensure development makes efficient use of previously developed land and 
buildings;  
• Safeguard potential minerals reserves;  
• Minimise waste: and,  
• Encourage and facilitate the use of sustainable modes of transport.  
 
 
 
National Policy Context  
6.313  The Environment Bill 202055 sets out how the Government plans to protect and improve 
the natural environment in the UK. The Environment Bill will help deliver the vision set 
out in the 25 Year Environment Plan.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.1: LOW AND ZERO CARBON ENERGY AND HEAT PRODUCTION  
Introdu ction  
6.314  The 25 Year Plan for the Environment56 was published by Department for the 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) in 2018. The 25 Year Plan sets out the 
Government’s long -term approach to protecting and enhancing natural landscapes and 
habitats in England. The goals of the 25 Year Plan ar e to achieve:     
• Clean air  
• Clean and plentiful water  
• Thriving plants and wildlife  
• A reduced risk of harm from environmental hazards such as flooding and drought  
• Using resources from nature more sustainably and efficiently  
• Enhanced beauty, heritage and en gagement with the natural environment  
   
6.315  National planning policies seek to achieve an environmental objective , including  
mitigating and adapting to climate change, including moving to a low carbon economy.  
National policy requires t he planning system to support the transition to a low carbon 
future in a changing climate, including support for renewable and low carbon energy  and 
associated infrastructure.  To help increase the use and supply of renewable and low 
carbon energy and heat, plans should  provide a positive strategy for energy from these 
sources  and also s upport community -led initiatives for renewable and low carbon energy . 
 
6.316  Planning applications for renewable and low carbon development  will not require 
applicants to demonstrate the overall need for renewable or low carbon energy . 
 
55 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/environment -bill-2020  
56 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/25 -year -environment -plan  
Item No.  8.1586. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 129 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.1: LOW AND ZERO CARBON ENERGY AND HEAT PRODUCTION  
 
 
Development proposals for appropriate low and zero carbon (LZC) energy and heat 
production installations (including solar photovoltaic (PV), wind energy, and air and 
water source heat pumps) will be supported where they can demonstrate that:  
 
• The impacts arising from the construction, operation and de -commissioning of 
solar and wind farms and other LZC energy and heat generating installations 
(both individually and cumulatively) can be mitigated . 
• The impacts of the development proposals (both individually and cumulatively) 
on designated landscapes and heritage assets  including their setting , the natural 
environment, and on local amenity have been assessed and shown to be 
acceptable . 
• The development proposal has been informed by the outcome of consultation 
with the communities that would be affected by the development . 
• There are appropriate plans in place for the removal of the installations at the end 
of their lifetime and for the restora tion of the site to an acceptable alternative use.  
 
Development proposals to install LZC energy and heat production into existing built 
infrastructure, including housing estates, employment areas, retail sites and car 
parks, will be supported where they ca n demonstrate that:  
 
• The installation promotes good design and is in line with the relevant Local 
Design Guide ; 
• The installation has been designed to allow for adaptability to new LZC 
technologies that may emerge.  
• The installation has been informed by the outcome of consultation with the 
communities that would be affected by the installation; and,  
• There are appropriate plans in place for the removal of the installation at the end 
of its lifetime and for the restoration of the site to an acceptable condi tion.  
 
 
 
 
Explanation  
 
 
6.317  National Planning Policy Guidance supports the use and supply of renewable and low 
carbon energy and heat, and the Local Plan provides a positive response to development 
proposals which increase the production of renewable and low carbon energy and heat 
within the District.  
 
6.318  The Staffordshire ‘Climate Change Adaptation & Mitigation’ Study (AECOM October 
2020) recommends that Local Authorities should consider adopting a policy stance with 
a presumption in favour of appropriate low and zero carbon (LZC) technologies - onshore 
wind and PV farms.  The report has confirmed the findings of earlier studies which found 
that there is considerable wind resource across the County. However, due to the 
constrained land area in Cannock Chase (and Tamworth) these areas  will inevitably rely 
on renewable energy generated elsewhere. However, the opportunities to incorporate 
Item No.  8.1596. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 130 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
solar photovoltaic (PV) arrays into existing built infrastructure, including industrial 
sites and car parks should be investigated.  
 
6.319  The Study recommends that Local Authoriti es should support the use of efficient heating 
technologies powered by renewable electricity (e.g. heat pumps), and identifies that there 
may be opportunities to utilise water source heat pumps (WSHPs) in wastewater 
treatment works, legacy mining assets, a nd rivers or other waterbodies (although a 
detailed assessment was outside the scope of the report).  
List of Relevant Evidence  
• ‘Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation’ Staffordshire County Council (AECOM 
October 2020).  
 
POLICY SO8.2: ACHIEVING NET ZERO CARBON DEVELOPMENT  
Introduction  
6.320  National planning policies (NPPF 2021) requires new development to be planned for in 
ways that avoid increased vulnerability to the impacts arising from climate change. 
When new development is brought forward risks shou ld be m anaged through suitable 
adaptation measures, including through t he planning of green infrastructure , and 
through its location, orientation and design.  
 
6.321  National Design Guidance (2021) supports the development of well -designed places 
and buildings to conserve natural  resources  including land, water, energy and 
materials.  Their design should respond to the impacts of climate change by being 
energy efficient and minimising carbon emissi ons to meet net zero by 2050.  
 
6.322  The National Design Guidance suggests that a compact and walkable neighbourhood 
with a mix of uses and facilities reduces demand for energy and supports health and 
well-being. It uses land efficiently so helps adaptation by increasing the ability for CO2 
absorption, sustaining natural ecosystems, minimising flood risk and the potential 
impact of flooding, and reducing overheating and air pollution. The Guidance notes that 
well-designed places  are likely to : 
• have a layout, for m and mix of uses that reduces their  resource requirement, including for land, 
energy and water;  
• be fit for purpose and adaptable over time, reducing the need for redevelopment and 
unnecessary waste;  
• use materials and adopt technologies to minimise their environmental impact.   
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.2: ACHIEVING NET ZERO CARBON DEVELOPMENT  
 
All development proposals should strive to achieve the highest level of building 
performance standards for cooling, ventilation and energy use and achieve the 
lowest carbon emissions that can practically and viably be achieved.  
 
Item No.  8.1606. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 131 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
All major development prop osals will deliver, in priority order:  
 
• Zero carbon emission development;  
• Low carbon emission development with on -site mitigation to achieve net -zero 
carbon emissions;  
• Low carbon emission development with off -site mitigation  which is within 
Cannock District  to achieve net -zero carbon emissions;  
• Low carbon emission development with compensatory contributions to an 
appropriate carbon offsetting fund to achieve net -zero carbon emissions.  
 
All major development proposals will in clude evidence in a Sustainability Statement 
(part of the Design and Access Statement) that the development has achieved the 
lowest carbon emissions that can pract ically and viably be achieved.  
 
 
 
Explanation  
 
 
6.323  Planning plays a key role in delivering reductions to greenhouse gas emissions, 
minimising vulnerability and providing resilience to climate change. The achievement of 
national and local carbon targets  will require mitigation and carbon offsetting as well a s 
new low and zero carbon development.  Further local advice will be included in a Design 
SPD and Local Design Guides.  Historic England produce technical advice with regard to 
evergy efficiency and mitigating and sustainable design at : xxxx 
 
6.324  The Staffordshire ‘Climate Change Adaptation & Mitigation’ Study (AECOM October 
2020) made a number of recommendations about reducing CO2 emissions in the built 
environment. In relation to Local Plans, these included:     
• Setting the highest level of buildi ng performance standards for energy use and CO2 
emissions that can practically and viably be achieved, and looking to implement an 
Energy and Heat Hierarchy. In addition to regulated emissions, which are covered by 
Building Regulations, policies should als o seek to reduce unregulated emissions and 
embodied carbon.  
 
• Considering establishing a Carbon Offset Fund that developers can contribute to in 
lieu of on -site mitigation. This fund would be used to deliver carbon offsetting and 
reduction projects such as  large -scale LZC installations and / or installations on 
existing built infrastructure (e.g. solar car parks), afforestation, and peatland 
restoration.  
  
6.325  Accredited UK offset schemes are currently run by the Woodland Carbon Code (WCC) 
and the Woodland Tru st. The District Council will also consider establishing a Cannock 
Chase Carbon Offset Fund as part of a reformed Community Infrastructure Levy.  
 
6.326  The offset schemes will be used to support initiatives to increase carbon sequestration in 
the District. These initiatives may include:     
• Woodland creation, green infrastructure, and ‘rewilding’ underutilised land;  
 
• Developing carbon management and reduction plans, including promoting energy 
efficiency measures and the increasing the uptake of low and zero carbon 
technologies;  
 
Item No.  8.1616. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 132 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Retrofitting existing housing stock with low and zero carbon energy and heating 
systems, an d enhancing existing performance of the stock;  
 
• Projects that achieve a reduced use of energy, supply energy more efficiently, and 
increase the use of renewable energy;  
 
• Introduction of carbon storage technologies.  
 
 
    
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• ‘Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation’ Staffordshire County Council (AECOM 
October 2020).  
 
 
POLICY SO8.3: SUSTAINABLE DESIGN  
 
Introduction  
6.327  The Staffordshire ‘Climate Change Adaptation & Mitigation’ Study (AECOM October 
2020) made a number of recommendations about reducing carbon emissions in the built 
environment. In relation to Local Plans, these included:     
• Setting the highest level of bui lding performance standards for energy use and carbon 
emissions that can practically and viably be achieved, and looking to implement an 
Energy and Heat Hierarchy. In addition to regulated emissions, which are covered by 
Building Regulations, policies shou ld also seek to reduce unregulated emissions and 
embodied carbon.  
 
• Ensuring that proposals are ‘futureproofed’ to facilitate the uptake of LZC technologies; 
particularly those that deliver low carbon heat (such as air source heat pumps - 
ASHPs) and provid ing on -site renewable electricity generation and storage (such as 
PV and battery technologies).  
 
• Considering requiring applicants to undertake a BREEAM or HQM assessment (or 
similar).    
• Requiring applicants to describe their sustainability strategy in a standalone 
Sustainability Statement or as part of the Design and Access Statement.    
• Identifying opportunities for holistic sustainability interventions (for example: co -
locating green corridors with pedestrian and cycle routes, and integrating these with 
sustainable drainage systems and blue infrastructure; and integrating LZC 
technologie s with the built environment).  
 
• Incorporating circular economy principles such as: designing out waste; lean design; 
designing for flexibility and adaptability; and designing for deconstruction and reuse.  
 
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.3: SUSTAINABLE DESIGN  
 
All residential development proposals should meet or exceed the standards set out 
by the Home Quality Mark, or equivalent , and deliver the optional water efficiency 
standards for new developments set out in the Planning Practice Guidance  
Item No.  8.1626. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 133 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
All non -residential d evelopment proposals of more than 500m2 gross (new build and 
conversions) should meet or exceed BREEAM ‘excellent’ rating, and be 
accompanied by an independent and validated assessment of the net carbon 
emissions or reductions that are expected to result f rom the development, together 
with details of the monitoring system that will be put into place to monitor impacts.  
 
 
All major development proposals  must incorporate sustainable design. Applicants 
will be required to provide  a Sustainability Statement (as part of the Design and 
Access Statement) to set out how the design will:  
 
• Meet the requirements of Policy SO8.2: ‘Achieving Net Zero Carbon 
Develop ment’;  
• Maximise opportunities for on -site production and use of low and zero carbon 
energy and heat (including air and water source heat pumps and solar 
photovoltaic arrays);   
• Incorporate, and/or link to, low and zero carbon energy and heat systems;  
• Take account of projected changes in temperature, rainfall and wind to ensure 
that the development remains resilient to the effects of climate change;  
• Protect, improve and enhance existing woodlands and habitats, and integrate 
new green and blue infrastructure with sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) and 
pedestrian and cycle routes;  
• Provide a contribution to the creation of urban forests, woodlands and street 
trees as an integral p art of the development or as part of a linked off -site scheme.  
• Conform to the relevant Local Design Guide ; 
• Make effective use of previously developed land, existing buildings and 
infrastructure (in line with Policy SO8.6: Brownfield and Despoiled Land and 
Under -Utilised Buildings).  
• Use materials with a low environmental impact, minimise the use of non -
renewable natural resources, and maximise the reuse and recycling of materials 
in construction and deconstruction (in line with Policy SO8.8 ‘Managing Waste’) ; 
and 
• Provide electric vehicle  recharging infrastructure within new development, 
designate parking spaces for low emission vehicles;  provide opportunities for 
local walking and cycling, and facilitate low emission bus service provision (in 
line with Polic y SO5.3 ‘Low and Zero Carbon Transport’).  
 
 
 
 
Explanation  
 
 
6.328  National Planning Policy Guidance supports appropriate measures to ensure the future 
resilience of communities and infrastructure to climate change impacts.  
 
6.329  Partnership working will be required to deliver the aspiration to achieve the national target 
to achieve net zero carbon by 2050 , and the Council’s ambition to be net zero carbon by 
2030 . An important part of the partnership effort will be to ensure that all new 
developments make a c ontribution by minimizing their impacts during their lifetimes, 
including construction. All new development must therefore achieve the appropriate 
Item No.  8.1636. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 134 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
standards set out in national guidance and the Local  Development  Plan and the 
Local Design Guides .  
 
6.330  The Home  Quality Mark is one way of demonstrating the standard of a new residential 
dwelling, which includes measures for low carbon dioxide, sustainable materials, good 
air quality and natural daylight. If HQM is replaced or amended during the lifetime of the 
plan, the equivalent replacement requirements will be applied . 
 
6.331  The optional water efficiency standards currently set  a  target of 110l/p/d this should be 
seen as a maximum as examples already exist in the district where 105 l/p/d and 95 l/p/d 
can be achieved on new build properties.  
 
6.332  The BREEAM (Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method) 
applies to no n-residential developments, non -self-contained housing and residential 
development arising from conversions and changes of use. This method provides an 
assessment of the environmental sustainability of a development. If BREEAM is replaced 
or amended during  the lifetime of the plan, the equivalent replacement requirements will 
be applied.  
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• ‘Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation’ Staffordshire County Council (AECOM 
October 2020).  
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.4: MANAGING FLOOD RISK  
Introduction  
6.333  National planning policies require local planning authorities to ensure that flood risk is 
not increased by development, and that, w here appropriate, applications should be 
supported by a site -specific flood -risk assessment. Development should only be 
allowed in areas at risk of flooding where, in the light of this assessment it can be 
demonstrated that:  
o within the site, the most vulnerable development is located in areas of lowest flood 
risk, unless there are overriding reaso ns to prefer a different location;  
o the development is appropriately flood resistant and resilient such that, in the event of 
a flood, it could be quickly brought back into use without significant refurbishment;  
o it incorporates sustainable drainage systems,  unless there is clear evidence that this 
would be inappropriate;  
o any residual risk can be safely managed; and  
o safe access and escape routes are included where appropriate, as part of an agreed 
emergency plan.  
 
6.334  Major developments should incorporate sustainable drainage systems unless there is 
clear evidence that this would be inappropriate. The systems used should:  
o take account of advice from the lead local flood authority;  
o have appropriate proposed minimum operational standards;  
o have mai ntenance arrangements in place to ensure an acceptable standard of 
operation for the lifetime of the development; and  
o where possible, provide multifunctional benefits.  
Item No.  8.1646. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 135 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
 
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.4: MANAGING FLOOD RISK  
 
The Local Planning Authority will manage flood risk within the Plan Area by directing 
development away from areas at highest risk.  
 
Development proposals on sites known to be at risk from any form of flooding will 
be resisted if alternative sites are avai lable for the proposed development in areas 
with a lower probability of flooding.  
 
Where it is not possible for the development to be located in areas with a lower 
probability of flooding, an Exception Test must be undertaken to demonstrate that 
there are overriding sustainability benefits to the community to be gained from 
allowing the development.  
 
All major development proposals will:  
 
• Incorporate sustainable water management measures to reduce water use, and 
increase its reuse, minimise surface water ru n-off, and ensure that it does not 
increase flood risks or impact water quality elsewhere.  
 
• Reduce the risk of flooding and maximise flood protection by including features 
such as trees and planting, water bodies, retention ponds and filter beds, and 
permeable paving. Surface drainage requirements should work with the local 
topography to create low maintenance sustainable drainage systems.  
 
All major development proposals at sites which fall into Flood Zones 2 or 3 (in whole 
or in part) will as a minim um: 
 
• Be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment and a comprehensive and deliverable 
strategy to minimize flood risk.  
 
• Be resilient to flooding through design and layout, incorporating sensitively 
designed mitigation measures. These may take the form of on -site flood defence 
works and/or a contribution towards, or a commitment to undertake such off -site 
measures as may be necessary to meet required flood protection standards, for 
example, as set out in the Local Flood Risk Management Strategy.  
 
• Provide sufficient space for drainage and flood alleviation schemes.  
 
• Promote the safety of people in consultation wi th emergency planning services.  
 
 
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.335  Staffordshire County Council is the Lead Local Flood Authority and has produced a Local 
Flood Risk Management Strategy. Both Cannock and Rugeley feature in the list of the 
top 10 communities at risk of flooding from surface water and small watercourses 
(Cannock 1292 and Rugeley 729 properties at risk). The County Council’s ‘Sustainable 
Drainage Systems Handbook’ (2017) includes advice on the planning process, and 
design guidance incorporating national and local standards and best practice examples.  
Item No.  8.1656. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 136 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.336  Potential is thought to exist within the District for the canal network to 
assist in mitig ating the impact of flooding however the network also contains a SAC and 
thus significant biodiversity resource so further research is considered necessary.  
 
 
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Staffordshire Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (2015)  
• Staffordshire Sustainable Drainage Systems Handbook (2017)  
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.5: AVOIDING AIR, WATER, NOISE OR  LIGHT POLLUTION  AND SOIL 
CONTAMINATION  
Introduction  
6.337  National p lanning policies require local planning policies to ensure that  a site is suitable 
for its proposed use taking account the ground conditions and any risks arising from land 
instability and contamination. Local p lanning policies should also ensure that new 
development is appropriate for its location taking into account the likely effects (including 
cumulative effects) of pollution on health, living conditions and the natural environment . 
Development should, wherever possible, help to improve local environmental conditions 
such as air and water quality . 
6.338  The District  curre ntly has three Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA’s) to 
address elevated nitrogen dioxide concentrations primarily caused by road traffic. 
These are on the A5 Watling Street and A5190 Cannock Road, Heath Hayes. Air 
quality at these locations is showing som e signs of improvement. Air Aware 
Staffordshire was launched in 2019 to raise awareness about air quality and 
influence commuting behaviour for businesses and schools near to the AQMA’s.  
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.5: AVOIDING AIR, WATER, NOISE OR  LIGHT POLLUTION  AND SOIL 
CONTAMINATION  
 
 
All major development proposals will:  
 
• Set out how any air, water, noise ,light pollution or soil contaminaton that may 
arise from the development will be avoided (or, if it is not possible to avoid it how 
it will be  mitigated);  
 
• Set out  in an Air Quality Assessment  (where relevant) how they will avoid any 
adverse impacts on an Air Quality Management Area. If it is not possible to avoid 
adverse impacts, the proposals will set out how the impacts on the Air Quality 
Management Area will be mitigated through the impleme ntation of measures 
contained within air quality action plans and transport plans, and through green 
infrastructure provision and enhancements, or building layout and design which 
will help to minimi se harmful air quality impacts.  
 
Item No.  8.1666. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 137 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Protect (and where appro priate enhance and restore) water quality.  Development 
will not be permitted without confirmation that the existing or improved sewage 
and wastewater treatment facilities can accommodate the new development;  
 
• Protect and conserve soil resources, and safegu ard the best and most versatile 
agricultural land;  
 
• Ensure that public lighting and signage is designed and maintained in a way that 
will limit the impact of light pollution on local amenity, nature conservation, 
wildlife habitats, and intrinsically dark l andscapes and skies; and  
 
• Maintain and improve the noise environment through good design which takes 
account of the acoustic environment (in line with the Noise Policy Statem ent for 
England).  
 
 
 
Explanation  
 
6.339  An Air Quality  Assessment  will be required  where  new residential  development  
proposals  are in Air Quality  Management  Areas.  An Assessment  will also be required  
for applications  for 10 or more  dwellings,  where  the scale  of development  could  
potentially  contribute  to a significant  worsening  of local air quality.   
 
6.340  Air quality mitigation can include: providing electric vehicle recharging infrastructure 
within new development; designating parking spaces for low emission vehicles; 
contributing to low emission vehicle refuelling infrastructure; supporting local walking and 
cycling initiatives; providing low emission bus service provision or waste collection 
services.  
 
6.341  Any additional contribution of emissions from new development may worsen air quality 
and cause the creation of a new Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) and therefore a 
small change in polluta nt concentration can be as much a cause for concern as a large 
one. The areas of concern to consider are:  
 
• Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) ; 
• Areas near to or adjacent to AQMAs and candidate AQ MAs; and  
• Developments that require Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) . 
 
6.342  The Council undertakes air quality monitoring through an air quality monitoring station, 
currently located on the A5190 Cannock Road in Heath Hayes, and diffusion tubes that 
are located across the District.   Site details and summary of monitoring data can be 
viewed  here. 
 
6.343  The Council has declared three Air Quality Management Areas within the District.   This 
is because levels of nitrogen dioxide (NO 2) in those areas exceed the national air quality 
objectives, mainly due to road traffic on the A5 Watling Street and A5190 Cannock 
Road.   Maps of the three Air Quality Management Areas can be found here, and more 
general information is available here.    
 
6.344  The District Air Quality Action Plan is available on the Council’s website  along  with further 
local advice on air quality and planning   
 
Item No.  8.1676. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 138 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.345  National Planning Practice Guidance57 requires noise to be considered 
when development may create additional noise or would be sensitive to the prevailing 
acoustic environment. The Noise Policy Statement for England (2010) sets out the long - 
term vision of national noise policy to promote goo d health and a good quality of life 
through the management of noise.  
 
6.346  The Cannock Chase AONB in particular includes a largely intact landscape which offers 
a haven of tranquillity and wildness. The AONB and the other areas designated as 
protected areas are  particularly vulnerable to the impacts of air, water, noise and light 
pollution  and soil contamination . 
 
6.347  Soil should be managed in a sustainable way the Defra Code of Practice for the 
sustainable use of soils in construction provides advice on the use and protection of soil 
in construction projects.  
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Cannock Chase AONB Management Plan 2019 -2024  
• The developers Guide to Land Contamination in Staffordshire  ) the link is 
https://www.cannockchasedc.gov.uk/sites/default/files/developers_guide_2021_0.pdf ) 
• Defra Code of Practice for the sustainable use of soils in construction  
 
    
POLICY SO8.6: BROWNFIELD AND DESPOILED LAND AND UNDER -UTILISED BUILDINGS  
Introduction  
6.348  National planning policies promote the effective use of land and making as much use as 
possible of previously -developed or ‘brownfield’ land . Local planning policies should 
promote and support the development of under -utilised land and buildings, for example 
converting space above shops, or support ing opportunities to use the airspace above 
existing residential and commercial premises for new ho mes.  
 
6.349  National planning policies also recognise that some undeveloped land can perform 
many functions, such as for wildlife, recreation, flood risk mitigation, cooling/shading, 
carbon storage or food production . 
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.6: BROWNFIELD AND DESPOILED LAND AND UNDER -UTILISED 
BUILDINGS  
 
Development proposals, where appropriate and in line with the provisions of the 
relevant Local Design Guide , will:  
 
• Prioritise the use of suitable brownfield land for homes and other uses, 
particularly within designated settlement boundaries, and support appropriate 
opportunities to remediate despoiled (degraded, derelict, contaminated and 
unstable) land; and,  
 
57 Paragraph  30-001-20190722  
Item No.  8.1686. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 139 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Make eff ective use of under -utilised land and buildings, particularly within 
designated settlement boundaries, through building renovations and 
conversions, the demolition and  rebuilding of vacant and redundant buildings, 
and building on or above existing building s, service yards, carparks or other 
infrastructure.    
 
 
 
Explanation  
6.350  Brownfield sites are those available for reuse which have previously been developed and 
are either abandoned or underused. The definition covers the curtilage of the 
development. The Brownfield Land Register includes all the brownfield sites that the local 
planning authority has assessed as appropriate for development. This includes sites with 
extant full planning permission, outline planning permission and permission in principle 
as well as sites without planning permission. Sites on the Brownfield Land Register have 
been sourced from the Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment 
(SHLAA 202 2) which includes all known potential residential development sites across 
the Dis trict.  
 
6.351  Where there  is the possibility  of contamination  from mineral  or coal workings,  waste  
disposal,  or previous  development  or use, development  proposals  will include  an 
appropriate  Contaminated  Land  Desktop  Study  and Remediation  Statement .  
 
6.352  A Cannock Chase Development Capacity Study has been prepared to set out evidence 
about the need for, and supply of, land for housing in the District over the period from 
2020 to 2038. The Study will be kept under continuous review. The Study will inform th e 
preparation of the Local Plan and meet the requirements set out in the NPPF (2021 
regarding the release of land from the Green Belt for development.  
 
6.353  Changes of use and conversions /adaption of buildings can assist in reducing waste by 
re-using the embod ied energy in the existing building  and can assist in reducing carbon 
emissions in the built environment.  
  
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Cannock Chase District Brownfield Land Register;  
• Cannock Chase District Development Capacity Study (2021);  
• Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) (Amendment) 
(No.3) Order 2020 (S.I. 2020.No. 756);  
• Town and Country Planning (Permitted Development and Miscellaneous Amendments) 
(England) (Coronavirus) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020.No. 632);  
• Town  and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) (Amendment) 
(No.2) Order 2020 (S.I. 2020.No. 755);  
 
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.7: SAFEGUARDING MINERAL  RESERVES  
 
Introduction  
Item No.  8.1696. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 140 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
6.354  National planning policies (NPPF 2021) require local planning policy to 
provide for the extraction of mineral resources of local and national importance (but not 
identify new sites or extensions to existing sites for peat extraction). Mineral resources 
should be safeguard ed by defining Mineral Safeguarding Areas and Mineral 
Consultation Areas . A Mineral Safeguarding Area is an area designated by the Minerals 
Planning Authority to safeguard known deposits of minerals from sterilisation by non -
mineral develop ment. A Mineral Consultation Area is a geographical area based on the 
Mineral Safeguarding Area, where the district council should consult the Mineral 
Planning Authority for any proposals for non -minerals development.  
 
National planning policies also require local plans to safeguard existing, planned and 
potential sites for: the bulk transport, handling and processing of minerals; the manufacture 
of concrete and concrete products; and the handling, processing and distrib ution of 
substitute, recycled and secondary aggregate material . 
 
 
POLICY SO8.7: SAFEGUARDING MINERAL RESERVES  
 
In support of the delivery of the objectives of the Minerals Local Plan for 
Staffordshire, all development will maximise the contribution that s ubstitute or 
secondary and recycled material can make as an alternative to primary minerals . 
 
The Local Planning Authority will consult the Minerals Planning Authority as 
required where development falls within the Mineral Safeguarding Areas defined in 
the Minerals Local Plan for Staffordshire.  
 
All major development proposals will:  
 
• Provide, where appropriate, for the extraction of mineral resources of local and 
national importance;  
• Ensure that the development does not sterilise known locations of miner al 
resources of local and national importance by safeguarding the Mineral 
Safeguarding Areas defined in the Mineral Local Plan for Staffordshire; and the 
associated Safeguarded Mineral Infrastructure sites used for mineral processing, 
handling, and transpo rtation.  
 
 
 
Explanation  
 
 
6.355  Minerals are a finite resource and best use need to be made of them. The NPPF requires 
relevant local authorities to ensure there is a sufficient supply of minerals to provide the 
infrastructure, buildings, energy and goods needed.  This involves the prote ction of areas 
for minerals workings.  
 
6.356  Planning applications for the extraction and working of minerals are determined by 
Staffordshire County Council. The County Council adopted the Minerals Local Plan for 
Staffordshire   (2015 -2030) in February 2017. The Minerals Local Plan Policy 4 
‘Minimising the Impact of Mineral Development’ sets out the environmental 
considerations that will be taken into account in assessing the impact of proposals for 
Item No.  8.1706. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 141 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
minerals development (including Green Belt, the Cannock Chase AONB, and the 
natural environment).  
 
6.357  An objective of the Minerals Local Plan is to achiev e an acceptable balance between the 
adequate supply  of minerals and the impact of mineral operations on local communities 
and the environment; taking account of the contribution that substitute or secondary and 
recycled material can make as an alternative to primary minerals; and ensuring that 
important ec onomic mineral resources are not needlessly sterilised.  
 
6.358  The Minerals Local Plan ( Policy 3 ‘Safeguarding Minerals of Local and National 
Importance and Important Infrastructure’ ) defines criteria for the assessment of planning 
applications for non -mineral related development within Mineral Safeguarding Areas and 
zones for Safeguarded Mineral infrastructure sites.  
 
6.359  The Minerals Local Plan identifies Mineral Safeguarding Areas, incl uding an area of 
surface coal and associated fireclays in the southern part of Cannock Chase District. This 
area will be safeguarded against needless sterilisation by non -mineral development. 
Prospective development will not be permitted unless it has been  demonstrated that 
either: that the development does not permanently sterilise the mineral; or, the benefits 
of the development outweigh the benefits of the mineral; or, it is not environmentally 
acceptable to extract the mineral.  
 
6.360  The Local Planning Auth ority will follow the relevant standing advice (October 2018 or 
subsequent revisions) provided by the County Council in processing planning 
applications in respect of the County’s mineral safeguarding policy.   
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• The Minerals Local Plan for Staffordshire   (2015 -2030) - February 2017  
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.8 MANAGING WASTE  
Introduction  
 
 
 
POLICY SO8.8 MANAGING WASTE  
 
All major development proposals will:  
 
• Be supported by a site waste management plan demonstrating that waste 
prevention is the first priority and how the demolition, construction and 
operational phases of the development will minimise the g eneration of waste.  
• Provide integrated facilities for the storage of recyclable and non -recyclable 
waste, and have regard to the operational needs of the relevant waste 
collection authorities in their design and access arrangements.  
 
Development proposals for waste management facilities will need to demonstrate 
that the proposals:  
 
• Are compatible with the objective of moving the management of waste up the 
Waste Hierarchy.  
Item No.  8.1716. Local Plan Policy Options  
Objective 8: Support ing a Greener Future  
 
Page. 142 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   
• Will not result in unacceptable direct or indirect impacts on the amenity of 
existing or proposed neighbouring uses.  
• Have good access to the principal road network, and where practicable, other 
modes of transport.  
 
Non-waste related development proposals on or in the vicinity of the permitted 
waste management facilities will not be support ed, unless there are overriding 
planning reasons why the non -waste related development should be permitted, 
including the relocation of waste facilities to alternative sites.  
 
 
Explanation  
6.361  The Staffordshire and Stoke -on-Trent Joint Waste Local Plan (2010 -26) was adopted in 
March 2013. Following a First Review during 2018, the County Council resolved in March 
2019 that the Waste Local Plan did not need to be revised, and that the Plan would 
continue to carry weight in  the determination of planning applications.  
 
6.362  The Waste Hierarchy, as adopted in the National Waste Strategy, is a method of 
sustainable waste management which ranks waste management options in a way that 
protects human health and  the environment. The hierarchy runs from the most to least 
effective solution: prevention; preparing for re -use; recycling; other recovery; and 
disposal.  
 
 
List of Relevant Evidence  
 
• Staffordshire and Stoke -on-Trent Joint Waste Local Plan (201 0) 
Item No.  8.1727. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 143 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
 
7.1 The delivery of the policies of the Cannock Chase Local Plan by the District Council and 
its partners will require proactive management and the co -ordinated inve stment of 
private and public resources. Delivery progress will be monitored closely through a 
variety of mechanisms, and will be summarised in the Authority Monitoring Report 
(AMR) prepared by the District Council.  
 
7.2 Once the Local Plan has been adopted, t he AMR will assess the extent to which the 
Strategic Objectives of the Local Plan are being achieved by monitoring the delivery of 
the Local Plan policies.   
 
7.3 The Monitoring Framework presented on the following pages includes the proposed 
Indicators that w ill be used in the AMR to assess the progress in delivering each Local 
Plan policy.  
 
Infrastructure  
 
7.4 An important part of Local Plan delivery is enabling infrastructure and investment in the 
right place, at the right time. This will be achieved by:  
 
• Assessing the needs for infrastructure and investment to enable delivery;  
• Co-ordinating the delivery of infrastructure and investment;  
• Identifying risks to delivery of infrastructure and i nvestment, and contingencies to 
deal with those risks . 
 
 
7.5 A review of  the Community Infrastructure Levy will follow the adoption of the Local Plan.  
The Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) is a supporting document to the Local Plan. It 
identifies the physical, green  and social and community infrastructure that will be 
required to support the delivery of the Local Plan. The IDP will be published alongside 
the Pre -Submission (Regulation 19) consultation draft of the Local Plan (in Winter 
2022), and subsequently reviewe d regularly. IDP  is a living document and progress will 
be reported in the AMR.  
 
 
7.6 The Infrastructure Funding Statement  (IFS) provides a summary of the financial and 
non-financial developer contributions (planning obligations) that will be sought by the 
District Council and its partners to deliver infrastructure. The developer contributions will 
be confirmed through the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and Section 106 
agreements (S106). The IFS will be prepared and subsequently reviewed in 
accordance with  the Regulations.  
 
Draft Monitoring Framework Note - requires review/updating  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1: DELIVERING HIGH QUALITY DEVELOPMENT THAT IS 
DISTINCTIVE, ATTRACTIVE & SAFE  
 
Policy  
 Indicator  Target  Contingency  Data Source  
SO1.1  
Protecting, 
Conserving and 
Enhancing the 
Distinctive Local Design and 
Access 
Statements and 
Heritage 
Statements 
(where Proportion of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements and 
Heritage 
Statements Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 In house 
monitoring of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements and 
Heritage 
Item No.  8.1737. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 144 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Historic 
Environment  appropriate) 
secured for 
major 
development 
and listed 
building 
applications.  
 
Heritage at Risk 
Register.  
Local List.   (where 
appropriate) 
protecting 
designated and 
non-designated 
assets.  
 
Positive impacts 
on historic 
environment.  Prepare/review 
Local Design 
Guides . 
 
Review policy if 
necessary.  Statements 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO1.2  
Enhancing the 
Quality of the 
Built 
Environment   Design and 
Access 
Statements 
secured.  
 
Major 
developments 
meeting 
National/Local 
Design Guide 
standards.  Proportion of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements 
addressing 
design quality.  
 
Proportion of 
applications 
meeting 
National/Local 
Design Guide 
standards.  
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 
Prepare/review 
Local Design 
Guide . 
 
Review policy if 
necessary.  In house 
monitoring of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements & 
conformity to 
Design Guides 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO1.3  
Creating Safe 
Places which 
Deter Crime and 
Reduce the 
Fear of Crime  Design and 
Access 
Statements 
secured.  
 
Developments 
meeting 
National/Local 
Design Guide 
standards.  
 
Levels of crime 
and anti -social 
behaviour, and 
fear of crime.  Proportion of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements 
addressing 
crime and 
community 
safety.  
 
Proportion of 
applications 
meeting 
National/Local 
Design Guide 
standards . Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 
Prepare/revise 
Local Design 
Guides . 
 
Review policy if 
necessary.  In house 
monitoring of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements & 
conformity to 
Design Guides 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
 
Crime and 
disorder 
statistics.  
 
 
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2: CREATING COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE AND HEALTHY 
LIVING OPPORTUNTIES ACROSS THE DISTRICT  
Policy  
 Indicator  Target  Contingency  Data Source  
Item No.  8.1747. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 145 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   SO2.1  
Safeguarding 
the Provision of 
New Community 
Infrastructure  Provision of 
Community 
Infrastructure:  
Education; 
Health  
 
 
Community 
Infrastructure 
accessible by 
walking and 
cycling.  Net increase in 
provision (by 
type of 
infrastructure).  
 
Proportion of 
residents who 
are able to 
access 
Community 
Infrastructure by 
walking and 
cycling (by type 
of infrastructure 
and location).  
 Prioritise use of 
Community 
Infrastructure 
Levy to address 
shortfa lls in 
provision.  
 
Review 
Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
 
Baseline study 
of accessibility 
to Community 
Infrastructure & 
programme of 
regular review.  
SO2.2  
Safeguarding 
Health and 
Amenity  Design and 
Access 
Statements 
secured.  
 
Major 
developments 
meeting the  
National  Design 
Code /Local 
Design Guide 
standards.  Proportion of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements 
addressing 
Health and 
Amenity.  
 
Proportion 
meeting 
National  Design 
Code /Local 
Design Guide 
standards.  
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 
Prepare/revise 
Local Design 
Guide . In house 
monitoring of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements & 
conformity to 
Design Guides 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
 
SO2.3  
Providing Active 
Leisure and 
Sport  Facilities  Provision of 
Active Leisure 
and Sports 
Facilities.  
  
Participation in 
sports and 
active leisure.  
 
Health 
inequalities.  
 Net increase in 
number of 
Active Leisure 
and Sports 
Facilities.  Prioritise use of 
Community 
Infrastructure 
Levy to address 
shortfalls in 
provision.  
 
Review 
Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan.  In house 
monitoring of  
Active Leisure & 
Sports Facilities 
(numbers & 
participation.  
 
Health statistics.  
SO2.4  
Providing 
Opportunities 
for Healthy 
Living and 
Activity  Provision of 
walking and 
cycling routes & 
open space.  
 
Major 
developments 
meeting the  Net increase in 
provision of 
cycling routes 
and open 
space.  
 
Proportion 
meeting 
National/Local Prioritise use of 
Community 
Infrastructure 
Levy to address 
shortfalls in 
provision.  
 
Review 
Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan.  In house 
monitoring of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements & 
conformity to 
Design Guides 
through 
development 
Item No.  8.1757. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 146 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   National/Local 
Design Guide 
standards.  
 
Usage of leisure 
facilities.  Design Guide 
standards.  management 
process.  
 
In house 
monitoring of 
Open Spaces 
Strategy.  
 
SO2.5  
Allotments and 
Community 
Food Growing  Provision of new 
allotments and 
community food 
growing sites.  
 
Allotments and 
community food 
growing sites 
protected 
through 
planning 
decisions, or 
replaced.  
 Net increase in 
provision of 
allotments and 
community food 
growing sites.  
 
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 In house 
monitoring of 
Open Spaces 
Strategy.  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3: PROVIDING FOR HOUSING CHOICE  
Policy  
 Indicator  Target  Contingency  Data Source  
SO3.1  
Provision for 
New Homes  The number of 
new homes 
completed 
against the 
targets set out 
in the Spatial 
Strategy and 
allocations set 
out in local Plan.  Achieve the 
required level of 
housing 
completions and 
maintain 5 year 
supply.  If delivery falls 
below the 
(MHCLG set) 
percentage of 
the housing 
requirement, an 
Action Plan will 
set out the ways 
that delivery will 
be boosted.  
 Housing 
Completions.  
Housing 
Delivery Test.  
SHLAA.  
SO3.2  
Housing Choice  The mix of 
housing size, 
type & tenure.  
 
Affordable 
housing units 
delivered.  Meet policy 
targets for 
housing mix.  
 
Increase the 
provision of 
affordable 
housing.  
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring of 
housing 
completions & 
permissions.  
SO3.3  
Delivering High 
Quality Housing  Homes meeting 
Nationally 
Described 
Space 
Standards.  Proportion of 
homes meeting 
space 
standards.  
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring of 
housing 
completions & 
permissions.  
Item No.  8.1767. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 147 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
Provision for 
people with 
health problems 
or disabilities  
 Proportion of 
homes providing 
for people with 
health problems 
or disabilities.  
SO3.4  
Gypsies, 
Travellers and 
Travelling Show 
People  Provision  of 
additional 
pitches and 
plots required 
by need set out 
in GTAA.  
 Number of 
additional 
pitches and 
plots provided.  Reassess site 
allocations and 
baseline data on 
the number of 
pitches and 
plots required  In house 
monitoring of 
provision.  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 4: CREATING A VIBRANT LOCAL ECOMONY AND WORKFORCE  
Policy  
 Indicator  Target  Contingency  Data Source  
SO4.1  
Safeguarding 
Existing 
Employment 
Areas for 
Employment 
Uses  Employment 
sites protected 
through 
planning 
decisions.  
 No unjustified 
loss of 
safeguarded 
employment 
sites.  
 
Sufficient supply 
and variety of  
employment 
areas (hectares, 
units and jobs).  
 Identify further 
allocations for 
employment use 
to compensate 
for losses of 
existing sites 
through a Local 
plan review.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
ELAA.  
SHLAA.  
SO4.2  
Provision for 
New 
Employment 
Uses  Employment 
sites completed 
against the 
targets set out 
in the Spatial 
Strategy and 
allocations set 
out in local Plan.  
 New provision 
employment 
(type,  
floorspace, 
hectares, units 
and jobs).  Site promotion.  
 
Identify 
alternative 
allocations to 
compensate for 
anticipated 
slippage.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
ELAA.  
SO4.3 
Sustainable 
Tourism and the 
Rural Economy  Deve lopment 
proposals that 
will contribute to 
the 
development of 
Tourism and the 
Rural Economy.  Number of 
planning 
applications 
approved for 
rural 
enterprises.  Economic 
development 
and promotion.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
 
SO4.4  
Live Work Units  Development 
proposals for 
new Live Work 
Units.  Increase in 
number of Live 
Work Units.  Economic 
development 
and promotion  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
Item No.  8.1777. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 148 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
SO4.5  
Provision for 
Local 
Employment 
and Skills  Employment 
and Skills Plans 
secured by 
major 
developments.  Proportion of 
major 
development 
proposals with 
Employment & 
Skills Plans.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
 
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTI VE 5: SUPPORTING THE PROVISION OF SUSTAINABLE TRASNPORT 
AND COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE  
Policy  
 Indicator  Target  Contingency  Data Source  
SO5.1  
Accessible 
Development  Numbers of 
Transport 
Assessments, 
Travel Plans, and 
Design and 
Access 
Statements 
secured with 
relevant 
provisions  such 
as those with 
LTN 1/20 or its 
subsequent 
revisions  
 
Mode of 
transport to work.  
 Secure Travel 
Plans for all 
developments 
of 50+ 
dwellings.  
 
Secure Design 
and Access 
Statements for 
all major 
developments 
of 10+ 
dwellings.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring of 
Travel Plans & 
Design and 
Access 
Statements 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO5.2  
Communication 
Technologies  Provision of 
communications 
infrastructure to 
facilitate digital 
connectivity to 
business and 
residential 
occupiers of 
major 
developments.  
 Provision of 
digital 
connectivity at 
the point of 
first 
occupation.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO5.3  
Low and Zero 
Carbon Transport  Design and 
Access 
Statements 
secured.  
 Proportion of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements 
addressing 
Low and Zero 
Carbon 
Transport.  
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 In house 
monitoring of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
Item No.  8.1787. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 149 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
SO5.4 Maintaining 
and Improving the 
Transport System  To be identified 
in the Cannock 
Chase Integrated 
Transport 
Strategy (to be 
produced by the 
County Council 
to support the 
Local Plan).  
 TBD TBD Staffordshire 
County 
Council.  
SO5.5  
Hatherton Canal 
Restoration 
Corridor  Route protected 
to safeguard the 
restoration of the 
Canal.  Route 
protected.  Consider 
alternative 
options.   In house 
monitoring of 
planning 
applications 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
 
SO5.6 
Safeguarding 
Proposed 
Recreational 
Footpath and 
Cycle Routes  Recreational 
Footpath and 
Cycle Routes 
safeguarded.  Routes 
protected.  Consider 
alternative 
options.  In house 
monitoring of 
planning 
applications 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO5.7  
Parking Provision  Numbers of 
Design and 
Access 
Statements 
secured with 
relevant 
provisions.  
 
Major 
developments 
meeting the 
parking 
standards set out 
in the 
National/Local 
Design Guide . 
 Secure Design 
and Access 
Statements for 
all major 
developments 
of 10+ 
dwellings.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
developme nt 
management 
process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 6: CREATING ATTRACTIVE TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES  
Item No.  8.1797. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 150 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
Policy  
 Indicator  Target  Contingency  Data Source  
SO6.1  
Hierarchy of Town 
and Local Centres  Outcome of 
applications for 
uses deemed 
inappropriate to 
the designated 
role of the 
Centre within the 
hierarchy.  
 Very low 
proportion of 
approvals of 
inappropriate 
uses.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO6.2  
Thresholds and 
Impact Tests for 
Town Centre 
Services  Impact 
Assessments 
secured to 
accompany 
proposals above 
the thresholds 
for Primary 
Shopping Areas 
and Local 
Centres.  
 Proportion of 
required 
Impact 
Assessments 
secured.  Review pre -
application 
guidance an d 
advice.  
 In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO6.3  
Safeguarding 
Existing Town 
Centre Services  Town centre 
service uses in 
the Primary 
Shopping Areas 
safeguarded 
from changes of 
use. Number of 
proposed 
changes of use 
from the 
specified town 
centre service 
uses in the 
Policy resisted.   
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process and 
health checks  
SO6.4  
Town Centre 
Design Guide  Major 
development 
proposals take 
account of 
design policy 
guidance.  Proportion of 
proposed town 
centre 
development 
proposals that 
provide 
evidence that 
the design 
policy 
guidance has 
been 
considered.  
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
Issue Local 
Design Guides.  In house 
monitor ing 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO6.5  
Cannock Town 
Centre 
Redevelopment 
Areas  Redevelopment 
proposals for 
identified areas.  Amount of new 
development 
achieved by 
use class.  
 Consider 
partnership 
schemes.  Town centre 
Health Check  
SO6.6  
Rugel ey Town 
Centre Redevelopment 
proposals for 
identified areas.  Amount of new 
development Consider 
partnership 
schemes.  Town centre 
Health Check  
Item No.  8.1807. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 151 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Redevelopment 
Areas  achieved by 
use class.  
 
SO6.7  
Hednesford Town 
Centre 
Redevelopment 
Areas  Redevelopment 
proposals for 
identified areas.  Amount of new 
development 
achieved by 
use class.  
 Consider 
partnership 
schemes.  Town centre 
Health Check  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 7: PROTECTING AND ENHANCING THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT  
Policy  
 Indicator  Target  Contingency  Data Source  
SO7.1  
Protecting, 
Conserving and 
Enhancing 
Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity  Development 
permitted 
which has a 
harmful impact 
on designated 
sites of 
importance for 
biodiversity & 
geodiversity.  
 No 
development 
permitted if it 
impacts on 
designated 
sites unless 
exceptional 
circumstances 
apply.  Ensure that 
necessary 
compensatory 
provisions are 
applied.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO7.2  
Biodiversity Net 
Gain  Biodiversity net 
gain provided 
by 
development.  Development 
proposals 
include plans 
for the 
restoration & 
recreation of 
priority 
habitats.  
 Off-site 
provision of 
habitats that will 
provide for 
compensatory 
biodiversity.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO7.3  
Special Areas of 
Conservation 
(SAC)  Development 
permitted 
which has an 
adverse impact 
on the SAC.  No planning 
permissions 
granted 
contrary to 
policy which 
would have an 
adverse impact 
on the SAC.  Refer to the 
Cannock Chase 
SAC 
Partnership and 
Natural England 
to advise on 
avoiding or 
mitigating 
impacts.  
 In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process and 
SAC condition 
survey.  
SO7.4  
Protecting, 
Conserving and 
Enhancing 
Landscape 
Character  Landscape and 
Visual Impact 
Assessment 
secured.  Landscape and  
Visual Impact 
Assessment 
secured for all 
major 
development 
proposals.  
 Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO7.5  Cannock 
Chase AONB No planning 
permissions Review pre -
application In house 
monitoring 
Item No.  8.1817. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 152 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Protecting, 
Conserving and 
Enhancing the 
Cannock Chase 
AONB  protected from 
damaging and 
inappropriate 
development 
through 
development 
management 
process.  granted that 
would have 
detrimental 
impact.  
 
All major 
proposals to 
meet the 
objectives of 
the AONB 
Management 
Plan.  
 guidance and 
advice.  through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO7.6  
Protecting, 
Conserving and 
Enhancing the 
Green Belt  Green Belt 
character and 
openness 
protected from 
development.  No planning 
permissions 
granted  that 
would have 
detrimental 
impact unless 
exceptional 
circumstances 
demonstrated.  
 Compensatory 
provision 
secured.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO7.7  
Amendments to 
the Green Belt  Compensation 
from 
development 
within the 
Green Belt  No planning 
permissions 
granted that 
would have 
detrimental 
impact.  
 Amendments to 
the Green Belt 
boundary only 
secured via 
formal review of 
Local Plan or 
Neighbourhood 
Plan.  
 In house 
monitoring 
through  
development 
management 
process.  
SO7.8  
Protecting, 
Conserving and 
Enhancing Green 
Infrastructure  Development 
within Green 
Space of High 
Value to 
Adjacent Urban 
Communities . Development 
that conflicts 
with the 
functions & 
characteristics 
of Green 
Space of High 
Value to 
Adjacent Urban 
Communities  
will be resisted.  
 Development 
permitted will 
provide 
compensatory 
provision of 
Green Space.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development  
management 
process.  
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 8: SUPPORTING A GREENER FUTURE  
Policy  
 Indicator  Target  Contingency  Data Source  
SO8.1  Proposals for 
LZC Energy 
and Heat Increased 
number of 
proposals for Review pre -
application In house 
monitoring 
through 
Item No.  8.1827. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 153 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Low and Zero 
Carbon Energy and 
Heat Production  Production, and 
LZC 
installations 
into built 
infrastructure.  
 LZC Energy 
and Heat 
Production 
submitted and 
approved.  guidance and 
advice.  development 
management 
process.  
SO8.2  
Achieving Net Zero 
Carbon 
Development  Delivering the 
highest 
performance 
that can be 
practically and 
viably 
achieved.  
 Increased 
proportion of 
development 
achieving the 
higher levels 
set out in the 
hierarchy.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO8.3  
Sustainable Design  Sustainability 
Statement 
secured for 
major 
development 
proposals (as 
part of the 
Design and 
Access 
Statement).  
 Proportion of 
major 
applications 
where a 
Sustainability 
State ment has 
been secured.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO8.4  
Managing Flood 
Risk Major 
development 
proposals avoid 
areas of 
highest flood 
risk, and 
incorporate 
sustainable 
water 
mana gement 
measures.  
 Reduced 
proportion of 
development 
within areas of 
highest flood 
risk. Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 
Complete 
exception test 
to demonstrate 
overriding 
sustainability 
benefits of 
development.  
 In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO8.5  
Avoiding Air, 
Water, Soil, Noise 
and Light Pollution  Major 
development 
proposals avoid 
air, water, soil, 
noise and light 
pollution.  Development 
proposals to 
set out how air, 
water, noise 
and light 
pollution wi ll be 
avoided.  
 Ensure that 
mitigation 
measures are 
suitable to 
compensate for 
potential 
impacts.  In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
SO8.6  
Brownfield and 
Despoiled Land 
and Under -Utilised 
Buildings  Major 
development 
proposals 
maxi mise use 
of brown field 
land and under -Proportion of 
available 
brown field 
land and 
under -utilised 
land and 
buildings used Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
Item No.  8.1837. Monitoring Framework  
 
Page. 154 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   utilised land 
and buildings.  in major 
development.  Brownfield 
Land Register.  
SHLAA & 
ELAA.  
 
SO8.7  
Safeguarding 
Mineral Reserves  Major 
development 
proposals 
minimise use of 
primary mineral 
resources, and 
safeguard 
mineral 
reserves.  
 Use of 
substitute or 
secondary and 
recycle d 
materials in 
construction.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
Minerals Local 
Plan 
monitoring 
process.  
SO8.8  
Managing Waste  Site Waste 
Management 
Plan secured 
with all major 
developme nt 
proposals.  Proportion of 
major 
development 
proposals that 
include a Site 
Waste 
Management 
Plan.  Review pre -
application 
guidance and 
advice.  
 In house 
monitoring 
through 
development 
management 
process.  
Item No.  8.184Appendices  
Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 155 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation    
Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
Active frontages   Includes active street frontages…  
Air Quality 
Management Area  AQMA  An area designated by the local authority which 
is not meeting the national air quality objectives.   
Local Air Quality Action 
Plan  A plan to tackle air pollution, particularly focused 
on AQMAs designated within a local authority.   
Area Action Plan  AAP An optional Development Plan Document. It is 
aimed at establishing a set of proposals and 
policies for the development of a specific area 
(such as a town centre or an area of new 
development).  
Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty  AONB  A statutory National Landscape designation to 
provide special protection to defined areas of 
natural beauty.  
Authority Monitoring 
Report  AMR  An annual rep ort produced by the local authority 
that monitors the effectiveness of Local Plan 
policies e.g. number of new houses built, 
amount of new open spaces.  
Birmingham City 
Council   The local Government body responsible for 
managing the City of Birmingham, incl uding the 
Planning services.  
Brownfield Land    Brownfield (also known as Previously 
Developed Land) is a previously developed site 
that is available for re -use, usually due to 
abandonment or under use.  
Brownfield 
Development    Site available for re-use which has been 
previously developed and is abandoned or 
underused.  
Brownfield Registers   A statutory list of previously developed sites that 
could be suitable for residential development.  
Building Better Building 
Beautiful Commission   An independ ent body that advised government 
on how to promote and increase the use of high -
quality design for new build homes and 
neighbourhoods  
Call for Sites   The process of collecting and collating 
information on potential development sites.  
Cannock Chase District 
Council  CCDC / CCC  The Local Planning Authority for Cannock, 
Rugeley, Hednesford, Norton Canes and 
neighbouring villages.  
Community 
Infrastructure   The facilities and services – including education, 
transport, health, emergency services, leisure 
and sports – that are needed to support new 
homes and businesses.  
Community 
Infrastructure Levy  CIL A charge on new developments that can be 
levied by local authorities (or other authorities 
with charging powers e.g. Mayor of London) to 
fund infrastructure projects.  The charging rates 
are set locally and vary from one area to 
another e.g. on the types of development 
Item No.  8.185Appendices  
     Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 156 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
charged and the value of those charges.  In  
Cannock Chase, the charges are currently £40 
per sqm for residential development and £60 
per sqm for out of town and all large foodstore 
retail development (subject to increases due to 
indexation).      
Comparison   Comparison goods relate to items not o btained 
on a frequent basis, these include clothing, 
footwear, household and recreational goods.   
Conservation Area    Protected areas of special architectural or 
historic interest.  
Conservation Area 
Management Plans   Plans that set out how Conservation Areas 
should be managed to protect their historic 
assets and integrity.  
Convenience   Convenience goods relate to everyday essential 
items including confectionary, food, drinks, 
newspapers and magazines.  
County Council  CC The upper tier of two -tier authorities covering a 
county wide area.  
Density   The amount of development that a site can 
accommodate (often measured in dwellings per 
hectare for residential development)  
Dwellings Per Hectare  DPH  Unit of land measurement relative to the amount 
of dwellings it could accommodate.  
Design Supplementary 
Planning Document  Design SPD  A document providing additional planning 
information and guidance on design issues for 
development in Cannock Chase Distri ct. 
Development Plan 
Document  DPD  Sets out the Local Planning Authority's policies 
and proposals for the development and status of 
land.   It can include a Local Plan, Site 
Allocations and Area Action Plan documents 
amongst others.  
Developer 
Contributions  and 
Housing Choices SPD   A document providing additional planning 
information and guidance on developer 
contributions and housing provision within 
Cannock Chase District.  
District Council  DC The lower tier of two -tier authorities, responsible 
for local services.  
Duty to Cooperate   This is a legal test that requires cooperation  
between local planning authorities and other 
public bodies to ensure Local Plan policies 
effectively address strategic issues e.g. 
infrastructure, housing. It is separate from but 
related to the Local Plan test of soundness.  
Economic 
Development Needs 
Assessment  EDNA  An assessment of the amount and type of 
employment land required in the District, taking 
into account a range of factors including the 
existing and potential future economic trends in 
the District and several forecast models for 
future need s. 
Item No.  8.186Appendices  
     Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 157 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
Employment Land 
Availability Assessment  ELAA  A database of sites put forward by stakeholders 
including the Council and land owners to be 
assessed for their suitability for future 
employment uses.  
The Government White 
Paper ‘Planning for the 
Future’  The White 
Paper  Planning consultation document which proposes 
reforms of the planning system to streamline 
and modernise the planning process.  
Greater Birmingham & 
Black Country Housing 
Market Area  GBBCHMA  A housing market area is a geographical area 
defined by household demand and preferences 
for all types of housing, reflecting the links 
between places where people live and work. 
This HMA is based on the wider Birmingham & 
Black Country (Dudley, Sandwell, Walsall, 
Wolverhampton) area.  
Greater Birmingham 
and Solihull Local 
Enterprise Partnership  GBSLEP  The Local Enterprise Partnership (see definition 
below) for this area, covering a number of local 
authorities including Cannock Chase District.   
Green Belt    A policy and land use designation used to retain 
areas of largely undeveloped, wild, or 
agricult ural land surrounding or neighbouring 
urban areas.  
Green Belt Review   A process that sets out the methodology and 
mechanism for potential possible alterations to 
the Green Belt boundaries.  
Green Space of High 
Value to Adjacent 
Urban Communities  
  A network of linked green infrastructure within 
Cannock Chase District that links urban areas to 
the countryside.  
Gross Value Added  GVA  The value generated by any unit engaged in the 
production of goods and services. GVA per 
head is a useful way of compar ing regions of 
different sizes.  
Gypsy, Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople  GTTS  National Planning Policy defines ‘Gypsies and 
Travellers’ as ‘persons of nomadic habit of life 
whatever their race or origin, including such 
persons who on grounds only of their own or 
family’s or dependents’ educational or health 
needs or old age have cea sed to travel 
temporarily, but excluding members of an 
organised group or travelling showpeople or 
circus people travelling together as such’. 
‘Travelling Showpeople’ are defined as 
‘members of a group organised for the purposes 
of holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or 
not travelling together as such). This includes 
such persons who on the grounds of their own 
or their family’s or dependents’ more localised 
pattern of trading, educational or health needs 
or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but 
Item No.  8.187Appendices  
     Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 158 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
excludes Gypsies and travellers as defined 
above’.  
Gypsy, Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation 
Assessment  GTAA  An assessment of the accommodation needs of 
gypsy, traveller and travelling showpeople for 
the plan period.  This is then used to identify 
how many new sites may be needed for such 
accommodation in the District.   
H1   A monitoring period for the first half of the year, 
January to June.  
Habitats Regulation 
Assessment  HRA  The Habitats Regulations Assessment is a tool 
to identify whether there are likely to be any 
harmful effects from minerals and waste policies 
and development proposals on internationally 
important nature sites.   The HRA considers how 
significant any impacts are likely to be, and 
identifies whether they can be red uced 
(mitigated) to protect these sites or whether it is 
not possible to offset any likely adverse effects. 
Internationally important nature sites include 
Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) which 
have important habitat features, Special 
Protection Areas ( SPAs) which relate to 
important bird populations and Ramsar sites 
which are internationally important wetlands. 
Collectively, these are often referred to as 
Natura 2000 sites.  
Hectare  HA A unit of land measurement.  
Housing and Planning 
Act 2016   An Act of Parliament that introduced changes to 
housing policy and the planning system.  
Housing Delivery Test   An annual test (by central Government) of the 
extent to which a local authority is meeting its 
local housing requirements.  Where the amount 
of new homes being built does not meet 
requirements there are different penalties 
dependent upon the level of under  delivery.    
Housing Needs 
Assessment   An assessment of the amount and type of 
housing accommodation required in the District, 
focused particularly upon affordable needs.   
Indoor and Outdoor 
Sports Facilities 
Assessment   An assessment of the current qu antity and 
quality of the local authority areas’ facilities and 
an assessment of the future needs for indoor 
and outdoor sports provision (in quantity and 
quality terms), taking account of future 
population changes.    
Industrial Strategy   A strategy document which aims to boost 
productivity by backing businesses to create 
good jobs and increase the earning power of 
people throughout the UK with investment in 
skills, industries  and infrastructure  
Item No.  8.188Appendices  
     Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 159 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan IDP A plan to identify and aid implementation of the 
necessary social, physical and green 
infrastructure required to create sustainable 
communities.  
Imperative reasons of 
overriding public 
interest   Imperative reasons of overriding public interest 
include:  
• the requirement to maintain the nation’s 
health, safety, education, environment 
(sustainable development, green energy, 
green transport);    
• complying with planning policies and 
guidance at a national, regional and local 
level;  
• requirements for economic or  social 
development (Nationally Significant 
Infrastructure Projects, employment, 
regeneration, mineral extraction, housing, 
pipelines, .etc.)  
Landscape Character 
Assessment   A detailed study that analyses and sets out 
different types of landscape within a n area and 
their historical context.  
 
Local Enterprise 
Partnership  LEP A body, designated by the Secretary of State for 
Communities and Local Government, 
established for the purpose of creating or 
improving the conditions for economic growth in 
an area.  
Local Design Guides   A set of design requirements that provide 
specific, detailed parameters for the physical 
development of a site or area.  
Local Green Space  LGS Local Green Space designation is a way to 
provide special protection for green areas of 
particular importance to local communities.  
Local List   A list of buildings or sites that make a positive 
contribution to an areas character. These may 
not be nationally designated.  
Local Nature Reserve  LNR Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) are plac es with 
wildlife or geological features that are of special 
interest locally.   There are over 1280 LNRs in 
England covering almost 40,000 ha  
Local Plan    The Development Plan for a Local Planning 
Authority area.   It can include Development Plan 
Documents such as Site Allocations and Area 
Action Plans.  
 
Local Planning 
Authority  LPA The authority responsible for planning functions 
within a District, County or any other type of 
administrative area.  
Item No.  8.189Appendices  
     Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 160 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
Local Plan (Part 1)  LPP1  The adopted 2014 Development Plan Document 
that sets out the strategic planning policies and 
context for Cannock Chase District.  
Mineral Safeguarding 
Areas   An area of land protected from development due 
to the presence of minerals within a site that 
could be required for  future extraction.  
Minerals Plan   A planning document that sets out future 
minerals needs within an area and protects 
mineral extraction sites to meet that demand.  
Mitigation and 
Implementation 
Strategy   A framework that aims to provide protection 
again st a potential threat and provide practical 
solutions or alternatives to solve the problem.  
The National Design 
Guide   This guide illustrates how well -designed places 
that are beautiful, enduring  and successful can 
be achieved in practice.  
National Planning 
Policy Framework  NPPF  This document sets out the Governments 
planning policies for England and how they 
should be applied.  
National Planning 
Practice Guidance  NPPG  The Government planning advice that 
accompanies the National Planning Policy 
Framework.  
Nationally Described 
Space Standards   This sets out requirements for the Gross Internal  
(floor) Area of new dwellings at a defined level 
of occupancy as well as floor  
areas and dim ensions for key parts of the home.  
Neighbourhood Plans    A plan prepared by a Parish Council or 
Neighbourhood Forum for a particular 
designated Neighbourhood Area.  
Open Space 
Assessment   An assessment of the current quantity and 
quality of the local authority areas’ open spaces 
and an assessment of the future needs for open 
space provision (in quantity and quality terms),  
Parking Standards, 
Travel Plans and 
Developer 
Contributions for 
Sustainable Transport 
SPD  A document providing additional planning 
information and guidance on transport related 
matters within Cannock Chase District.  
Playing Pitch Strategy 
& Action Plan   The document provides guidance and sup port to 
local authorities who are looking to understand 
and assess the need for playing pitches and 
improve provision.  
Proposals  Map  A map that shows the location of planning 
designations, which are usually also set out in 
written planning policies.  
Partner Authorities   The Government bodies working together as a 
team on a contract or project.  
Retail and Leisure 
Study   A study on retail and leisure uses within 
Cannock Chase District, including existing and 
future capacity.  
Item No.  8.190Appendices  
     Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 161 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
Safeguarded Land   Land that is protected for a specific future, often 
longer term, land use.  
SAC Zone of Influence   An area within which new residential 
development must provide mitigation measures 
to avoid harm to Cannock Chase S pecial Area 
of Conservati on. 
Self Build Register   A register of people who are interested in 
building their own dwelling within Cannock 
Chase District.  
Self Build and Custom 
Housebuilding Act 
2015   An Act of Parliament that sets out legislation on 
self build and custom house building.  
Site Assessment Matrix   A framework for assessing whether a site is 
suitable for a proposed use or designation.  
South Staffordshire 
District Council  SSDC  The Local Pl anning Authority for South -West 
Staffordshire.   It covers areas including Great 
Wyrley, Cheslyn Hay and Huntington.  
Special Area of 
Conservation  SAC Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) are 
protected sites under the European Community 
Habitats Directive.   They provide increased 
protection to a variety of wild animals, plants 
and habitats and are a vital part of global efforts 
to conserve the world’s biodiversity.  
Stafford Borough 
Council  SBC The Local Planning Authority for the Stafford 
area.   It includes the northern part of Cannock 
Chase AONB, Brocton and Great/Little 
Haywood.  
 
Staffordshire County 
Council  SCC  The upper - tier in a two tier  Local Authority 
system County wide Planning Authority for 
Highways, Minerals and Waste planning 
matters.  
Statement of 
Community 
Involvement  SCI A statement of how Cannock Chase Council will 
consult  the local community  when 
preparing  planning documents an d consulting 
on planning applications.  
Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment and Water 
Cycle Study  SFRA/WCS  SFRA – An assessment of flood risk across the 
District  taking into account the most up to date 
data on flooding from various sources e.g. rivers 
and surface water.  
 
WCS - An assessment of water resources 
across the District to identify if there is sufficient 
supply to support future developments and/or 
what up grades to infrastructure may be 
required.   
Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment  SHLAA  A database of sites put forward by stakeholders 
including the Council and land owners to be 
Item No.  8.191Appendices  
     Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 162 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
assessed for their suitability for future residential 
uses.  
Stoke -on-Trent & 
Staffordshire Local 
Enterprise Partnership  SSLEP  The economic body for the Staffordshire County 
Council and Stoke On Trent Government areas.  
See LEP definition.  
Supplementary 
Planning Document  SPD A local document that may cover a range of 
issues, thematic or site -specific, and provides 
further detail of policies and proposals in the 
local plan.  
Sustainability Appraisal  SA An appraisal of the economic, environmental, 
and social effects of a plan.  
 
Town and Country 
Planning Regulations 
2012   Regulatory framework  
Town Centre Services    Commercial, Business and Service’ (Class E), 
Learning and Non -Residentia l Institutions’ 
(Class F1), Local Community’ (Class F2) Uses, 
Hotels (Class C1); drinking establishments, hot 
food takeaways, cinemas, concert halls, dance 
halls and bingo halls.  
Transport Assessment   An assessment which sets out the transport 
issues relating to a proposed development. It 
identifies measures required to improve 
accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, 
particularly for alternatives to the car such as 
walking, cycling and public transport, and 
measures that will be needed to deal with the 
anticipated transport impacts of development  
Travel Plan   A long-term management strateg y for 
integrating proposals for sustainable travel 
based on evidence of the anticipated t ransport 
impacts of development. They set  measures to 
promote and encourage sustainable travel (such 
as promoting walking and cycling).  
Viability Assessment   An assessment of whether or not development 
is likely to be financially viable, taking into 
account a range of relevant factors including 
land values and costs, development costs, 
financing costs and developer profit.  These 
assessme nts can be undertaken at a Local Plan 
level (i.e. how will Local Plan policies affect the 
financial viability of developments in the District 
generally) and at a site -specific/development 
level.   
West Midlands 
Combined Authority  WMCA  A recently constituted authority formed of local 
authorities and Local Enterprise Partnerships 
(LEPs) chaired by the Mayor for the West 
Midlands.  It enables the transfer of powers on 
Item No.  8.192Appendices  
     Appendix I: Glossary  
 
Page. 163 
 Cannock Chase District Council - Local Plan Pre-submission Consultation   Phrase  Abbreviation  Definition  
decision making and funding from central 
Government to the West Midlands on specified 
areas (as set out within devolution agreements) 
e.g. transport, housing.     
 
Item No.  8.193For Internal Use Only - Not for Wider Distribution
© Crown copyright and database rights [2022] Ordnance Survey [100019754]
You are not permitted to copy, sub-license, distribute or sell any of this data
to third parties in any form.Date Created:
18-08-2022Local Plan Regulation 19
Safeguarded Land (SO7.6)
Residential Strategic Sites (SO3.1)
Residential Site Allocations (S03.1)
Existing Employment Areas (SO4.1)
Employment Site Allocations (SO4.2)
Mixed Site Allocations (SO3.1 & SO6.5 & SO6.6 & SO6.7)
GTTS Site Allocation
Safeguarded Community Park (SO7.6)
Primary Shopping Area Boundaries (CP11) (SO6.1)
Town Centre Boundaries (CP11) (SO6.1)
Local Centres (CP11) (SO6.1)
Hatherton Canal Restoration Corridor (SO5.5)
District boundary
Settlement Boundary (CP6) (SO3.1 and SO8.6)
Site of Biological Importance (CP12) (SO7.1)
Footpath/Cycle Route (CP10) (SO2.4 and SO5.6)
Strategic Green Space Network (CP5) (SO2.4 & SO7.8)
Greenbelt (CP1) (SO7.6)
Statutory Designations
Ancient Woodland (SO7.1)
Special Area of Conservation (SO7.1 and SO7.3) (CP12 and CP13)
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SO7.1) (CP12)
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (CP14) (SO7.5)
Local Nature Reserve (SO7.1) (CP12)
Ancient Monument (CP15) (SO1.1)
Conservation Area (CP15) (SO1.1)Legend
Statutory Designations
Ancient Woodland (SO7.1)
Special Area of Conservation (SO7.1 and SO7.3) (CP12 and CP13)
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SO7.1) (CP12)
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (CP14) (SO7.5)
Local Nature Reserve (SO7.1) (CP12)
Local Nature Reserves - Reg19
Ancient Monument (CP15) (SO1.1)
Conservation Area (CP15) (SO1.1)LegendDraft Local Plan Policies Map (Reg 19)
N
Item No.  8.194