2015-2030Carlisle District Local Plan
Foreword
Carlisle is a very special and diverse place for those who 
live, base their business, work in, or visit the District. It 
extends from the Solway Coast to the North Pennines, 
with the City of Carlisle, with its cathedral and castle, at 
its heart. There is also an abundance of lowland farmland 
supporting agricultural and other rural businesses, and 
many characteristic small towns, villages and hamlets. The 
World Heritage Site of Hadrian’s Wall strides across it all.  
The Local Plan provides the vision, strategy, policies and 
site allocations that will shape the future of Carlisle District. 
It provides clear direction on how to meet the challenges we 
face, such as: climate change; a growing population; and 
the need to deliver much needed regeneration in specific 
parts of the City. It also identifies where, when, how and 
the quantity of new development to be delivered. It will 
guide future planning documents such as Neighbourhood 
Development Plans and aims to create inclusive, safe and 
healthy communities.  The Plan has been shaped with the support and involvement 
of local communities, landowners, businesses, agencies and 
many others - all who share the desire to plan for a prosperous 
future for the District by meeting the need for new homes, a 
growing economy and the protection of our precious natural 
environment and outstanding heritage assets over the next  
15 years.  
Carlisle City Council is now well placed to deliver this Plan, 
by building on existing community support and working 
in partnership with business, developers, landowners and 
infrastructure providers.  
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all those who 
have been involved in the evolution of the Plan; from early 
consultation to the finished document. 
Cllr Colin Glover 
Leader of Carlisle City CouncilI am delighted to endorse the Local Plan. It provides a platform to embark upon the most ambitious levels of 
growth ever and directly echoes the priorities and vision of the Carlisle Plan 2015 - 2018 which aims to:  
‘…work in partnership to further establish our position as the regional centre and focus for investment, ensuring 
that residents can share in the benefits through increased opportunities and greater choice of jobs, range of 
housing and a quality environment’.
Contents
The Carlisle District Local Plan 2015-2030
1.  Introduction
2.  Vision and Objectives
Spatial Vision
Strategic Objectives
Spatial Portrait
Key Diagram
3.  Spatial Strategy and Strategic Policies
Policy SP 1:  Sustainable Development
Policy SP 2:  Strategic Growth and Distribution
Policy SP 3:  Broad Location for Growth: Carlisle South
Policy SP 4:  Carlisle City Centre and Caldew Riverside
Policy SP 5:  Strategic Connectivity
Policy SP 6:  Securing Good Design
Policy SP 7:  Valuing our Heritage and Cultural Identity
Policy SP 8:  Green and Blue Infrastructure
Policy SP 9:  Healthy and Thriving Communities
Policy SP 10:  Supporting Skilled Communities1
9
10
12
15
24
25
26
28
37
40
45
48
50
53
56
604.  Economy
Policy EC 1:  Employment Land Allocations
Policy EC 2:  Primary Employment Areas
Policy EC 3:  Primary Shopping Areas and Frontages
Policy EC 4:  Morton District Centre
Policy EC 5:  District and Local Centres
Policy EC 6:  Retail and Main Town Centre Uses Outside Defined Centres
Policy EC 7:  Shop Fronts
Policy EC 8:  Food and Drink
Policy EC 9:  Arts, Culture, Tourism and Leisure Development
Policy EC 10:  Caravan, Camping and Chalet Sites
Policy EC 11:  Rural Diversification
Policy EC 12:  Agricultural Buildings
Policy EC 13:  Equestrian Development63
64
67
70
72
73
75
77
79
81
83
84
86
885.  Housing
Policy HO 1:  Housing Strategy and Delivery
Policy HO 2:  Windfall Housing Development
Policy HO 3:  Housing in Residential Gardens
Policy HO 4:  Affordable Housing
Policy HO 5:  Rural Exception Sites
Policy HO 6:  Other Housing in the Open Countryside
Policy HO 7:  Housing as Enabling Development
Policy HO 8:  House Extensions
Policy HO 9:  Large Houses in Multiple Occupation and the Subdivision of Dwellings
Policy HO 10:  Housing to Meet Specific Needs
Policy HO 11:  Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Provision
Policy HO 12:  Other Uses in Primary Residential Areas
6.  Infrastructure
Policy IP 1:  Delivering Infrastructure
Policy IP 2:  Transport and Development
Policy IP 3:  Parking Provision
 Policy IP 4:  Broadband Access
 Policy IP 5:  Waste Minimisation and the Recycling of Waste
 Policy IP 6:  Foul Water Drainage on Development Sites
 Policy IP 7:  Carlisle Airport
 Policy IP 8:  Planning Obligations91
92
98
101
103
108
110
114 
116
118
120
122
125
127
128
130
133
135
137
139
141
1427.  Climate Change and Flood Risk
Policy CC 1:  Renewable Energy
Policy CC 2:  Energy from Wind
Policy CC 3:  Energy Conservation, Efficiency and Resilience
Policy CC 4:  Flood Risk and Development
Policy CC 5:  Surface Water Management and Sustainable Drainage Systems 
8.  Health, Education and Community
Policy CM 1:  Health Care Provision
Policy CM 2:  Educational Needs
Policy CM 3:  Sustaining Community Facilities and Services
Policy CM 4:  Planning Out Crime
Policy CM 5:  Environmental and Amenity Protection
Policy CM 6:  Cemetery and Burial Grounds Provision
9.  Historic Environment
Policy HE 1:  Hadrian’s Wall World Heritage Site
Policy HE 2:  Scheduled Ancient Monuments and Non-Designated Archaeological Assets
Policy HE 3:  Listed Buildings
Policy HE 4:  Historic Parks and Gardens
Policy HE 5:  Historic Battlefields
Policy HE 6:  Locally Important Heritage Assets
Policy HE 7:  Conservation Areas 145
146
150
155
157
161
165
166
168
170
172
174
178
179
180
182
184
185
185
187
18910. Green Infastructure
Policy GI 1:  Landscapes
Policy GI 2:  Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Policy GI 3:  Biodiversity and Geodiversity
Policy GI 4:  Open Space
Policy GI 5:  Public Rights of Way
Policy GI 6:  Trees and Hedgerows  
11. Monitoring and Implementation
12. Glossary
 Appendix 1: Sites Allocated within Policy HO 1
 Appendix 2: Local Plan Monitoring Framework191
192
194
196
200
203
204 
207
211
227
2531
1
Introduction2
Introduction
1.1	 The	Carlisle	District	Local	Plan	(2015	–	2030)	is	at	the	forefront	
of	shaping	how	the	District,	its	many	settlements	and	vast	rural	
area	will	develop	between	now	and	2030.	The	Plan	sets	out	
a	long-term	spatial	vision	and	strategic	objectives	to	support	
the	development	of	a	thriving	District	through	the	identification	
of	land	to	accommodate	new	development,	and	policies	to	
achieve	this	growth	in	a	positive,	managed	and	sympathetic	
way,	whilst	ensuring	the	timely	delivery	of	the	infrastructure	
necessary	to	support	growth.
1.2	 The	policies	and	proposals	within	the	Local	Plan,	and	any	
other	adopted	local	or	neighbourhood	development	plans	and	
supplementary	planning	documents	in	operation,	are	those	
against	which	all	planning	applications	within	the	District	will	
be	assessed.	 Ultimately	 the	aim	of	the	Local	 Plan	 is	to	facilitate	
sustainable	development.	It	is	therefore	important	to	read	the	
Plan	as	a	‘whole’	i.e.	with	reference	to	all	the	policies	that	may	
be	relevant,	as	it	is	these	policies	taken	collectively	which	
determine	what	will	be	regarded	as	constituting	sustainable	
development.	Policies	should	not	be	taken	out	of	context	and	
will	not	be	applied	in	isolation.	
1.3	 The	Local	Plan	operates	alongside	a	Policies	Map,	which	
illustrates	the	policies	in	the	Local	Plan(s)	which	have	an	area	
or	place	specific	application,	including	those	sites	that	are	
allocated	for	development	and,	where	appropriate,	committed	sites	that	have	planning	permission.	Designations	include	
existing	land	uses	such	as	areas	of	housing,	employment	and	
the	City	and	other	retail	centres,	and	areas	of	protected	land	
such	as	the	two	Areas	of	Outstanding	Natural	Beauty	and	
Hadrian’s	Wall	World	Heritage	Site	and	its	buffer	zone,	nature	
conservation	areas,	parks	and	playing	pitches,	amenity	open	
space	and	conservation	areas.
1.4	 Allocations	identified	on	the	Policies	Map	should	be	read	in	
conjunction	with	the	relevant	policy	in	the	Local	Plan	which	
will	set	out	criteria	that	any	planning	applications	will	need	
to	comply	with.	By	setting	out	specific	land	allocations	in	
this	way,	the	Plan	provides	local	communities,	land	owners,	
developers	and	infrastructure	providers	with	a	clear	indication	
of	the	future	pattern	of	development	across	the	District.	
Inclusion	as	an	allocated	site	within	the	Plan	indicates	that	the	
principle	of	development	on	such	sites	is	acceptable.	
1.5	 It	is	important	to	acknowledge	at	the	outset	that	the	Local	
Plan	will	operate	alongside	the	Cumbria	Minerals	and	Waste	
Local	Plan	(MWLP)	which	contains	mineral	and	waste	specific	
policies	for	use	in	determining	planning	applications	for	waste	
or	quarry	developments	across	Cumbria.	Once	the	MWLP	is	
adopted	it	may	be	necessary	to	update	the	Local	Plan	Policies	
Map	 to	illustrate	 Mineral	 Safeguarding	 Areas	 and	other	 relevant	
designations	and/or	allocations.3
1.6	 The	Local	Plan	will	also	operate	alongside	any	neighbourhood	
development	plans	brought	forward.	The	concept	of	
neighbourhood	development	planning	was	introduced	by	the	
Localism	Act	2011.	It	allows	communities	to	develop	a	vision	
of	what	their	area	should	be	like	and	make	decisions	on	where	
certain	types	of	development	should	go.	They	go	through	a	
formal	preparation	process	but	importantly	need	to	be	in	line	
with	the	strategic	policies	within	the	Carlisle	District	Local	
Plan.	One	such	plan	is	currently	being	progressed	in	Dalston.	
The	Council	will	continue	to	work	with	and	support	those	
pursuing	neighbourhood	development	plans.
1.7	 Section	206	of	the	Planning	Act	2008	(The	Act)	confers	the	
power	to	charge	Community	Infrastructure	Levy	(CIL)	on	
certain	bodies	known	as	charging	authorities.	This	came	into	
force	on	6	April	2010	through	the	CIL	Regulations	2010	(now	
amended	by	the	CIL	(Amendment)	Regulations	2011,	2012,	
2014	and	2015).	This	provides	the	enabling	powers	for	local	
planning	authorities	to	apply	CIL	to	development	proposals	
to	support	infrastructure	delivery	which	in	turn	will	support	
delivery	of	this	Local	Plan.1.8	 Monitoring	is	an	integral	part	of	the	plan	making	and	review	
process.	A	series	of	indicators	have	been	identified	to	assess	
the	relative	effectiveness	of	the	Local	Plan	with	regards	to	
achieving	its	desired	outcomes.	The	Authority	Monitoring	
Report	(AMR)	reports	on	an	annual	basis	the	performance	
of	the	Local	Plan,	and	in	doing	so,	plays	a	leading	role	in	
identifying	the	need	to	review	existing	policies	and	proposals.4
How the Local Plan has emerged
1.9	 The	Local	Plan	has	been	prepared	under	the	Planning	and	
Compulsory	Purchase	Act	2004	(as	amended)	and	the	Town	
and	Country	Planning	(Local	Planning)	(England)	Regulations	
2012.
1.10	 The	Plan	has	evolved	through	extensive	research	and	
consultation	which	identified	the	key	issues	it	needed	to	
address,	and	determined	the	best	approaches	to	various	
challenges	and	opportunities.	Active	community	involvement	
at	each	key	stage	of	plan	preparation	has	helped	to	mould	
the	Plan	and	has	been	undertaken	in	accordance	with	the	
Council’s	adopted	Statement	of	Community	Involvement	(SCI),	
which	sets	out	how	the	Council	will	undertake	consultation	
on	key	planning	documents	to	ensure	stakeholders	and	the	
community	are	engaged	in	the	process.	
1.11	 The	Plan	has	also	been	prepared	in	accordance	with	
national	planning	policy	and	has	had	regard	to	other	plans	
and	strategies	where	relevant,	including	the	Carlisle	District	
Sustainable	Community	Strategy	“A	Community	Plan	for	
Carlisle	and	District	2011-2016”	which	was	itself	informed	by	
extensive	public	consultation.
1.12	 The	Local	Plan	has	been	supported	by	a	comprehensive	and	
robust	evidence	base	proportionate	to	the	key	issues	it	is	
seeking	to	address.	The	majority	of	these	studies	focus	on	
Carlisle	District	specifically,	however	there	are	some	studies	that	 have	 been	 jointly	 prepared	 with	 other	 Cumbrian	 authorities	
or	produced	by	Cumbria	County	Council.	This	evidence	
includes	the	Infrastructure	Delivery	Plan	(IDP)	which	identifies	
the	strategic	and	local	infrastructure	required	to	deliver	the	
development	proposals	outlined	in	the	Local	Plan.	The	IDP	will	
be	reviewed	and	updated	throughout	the	lifetime	of	the	Plan	to	
continually	identify	and	ensure	the	timely	delivery	of	essential	
infrastructure.
1.13	 The	Localism	Act	introduced	a	Duty	to	Cooperate,	requiring	
the	City	Council	to	work	with	neighbouring	authorities	and	a	
wide	variety	of	public	and	private	bodies	on	cross	boundary	
planning	issues	and	matters	of	common	concern.	The	Duty	
to	Cooperate	ensures	that	there	has	been	in	the	past,	and	
will	be	in	the	future,	a	high	level	of	cooperation	in	the	plan	
making	process.	Regular	liaison	meetings	have	been	held	with	
the	prescribed	bodies	under	the	Act	to	ensure	that	strategic	
cross	boundary	issues	have	been	identified	and	addressed	as	
the	Plan	evolved.	Notably,	the	Council	has,	and	will,	continue	
to	work	with	all	neighbouring	authorities,	Cumbria	County	
Council	and	other	statutory	consultees	where	relevant	and	
necessary.	An	outcome	of	this	cooperation	is	that	the	Plan	
seeks	to	recognise	the	economic,	social	and	environmental	
linkages	with	neighbouring	areas,	and	opportunities	for	joint	
working	and	policy	development	have	been	identified.	5
1.14	 The	plan	preparation	process	has	also	been	informed	through	
a	variety	of	further	statutory	and	non-statutory	appraisals	and	
assessments.	These	include:
	 Equality Impact Assessment (EQIA) -	this	process	aimed	
to	ensure	that	the	Local	Plan	has	promoted	equality	and	that	
any	aspects	which	would	have	resulted	in	discrimination	are	
addressed.	The	Plan	has	been	subject	to	a	process	of	EQIA	
across	all	stages	of	its	evolution.	
	 Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA) -	this	is	the	statutory	
process	to	assess	the	potential	impacts	of	the	Local	Plan	
on	Natura	2000	sites.	Natura	2000	sites	are	of	exceptional	
importance	in	respect	of	rare,	endangered	or	vulnerable	natural	
habitats	and	species	within	Europe:	they	include	Special	
Protection	Areas	(SPAs)	designated	under	the	European	Union	
(EU)	‘Wild	Birds’	Directive;	Special	Areas	of	Conservation	
(SACs)	designated	under	the	EU	‘Habitats	Directive’;	European	
Marine	Sites	(EMS)	and	Ramsar	Sites.	As	the	Habitats	Directive	
applies	the	precautionary	principle,	plans	can	only	be	adopted	
if	there	is	likely	to	be	no	adverse	impact	on	the	integrity	of	the	
site(s)	in	question.	In	order	to	comply	with	the	requirements	of	
the	Habitats	Regulations,	a	Screening	Assessment	has	been	
undertaken	at	all	stages	of	the	evolution	of	the	Plan.	Each	roll	
forward	of	the	HRA	has	been	submitted	to	Natural	England	for	
comment,	and	the	conclusions	have	ultimately	been	signed	off.		 Health Impact Assessment (HIA) -	this	process	aimed	to	
measure	the	potential	health	impacts	of	a	policy,	programme	
or	project	on	the	wider	population.	The	HIA	has	therefore	
helped	to	ensure	that	the	proposals	outlined	in	the	Plan	have	
been	judged	against	the	effects	they	may	have	on	the	health	
of	the	population	through	recognition	that	planning	has	a	key	
role	to	play	in	the	delivery	of	healthy	sustainable	communities.	
Ultimately	the	HIA	has	aimed	to	reduce	health	inequalities,	
contribute	to	improved	health	and	contribute	to	better	decision	
making.
	 Rural Proofing - this	process	sought	to	assess	the	impact	of	
policies	and	site	allocations	on	the	rural	area.	The	Plan	has	
been	subject	to	Rural	Proofing	through	its	evolution	which	has	
helped	to	identify	those	policies	that	provide	urban	solutions	
that	may	not	necessarily	work	for	rural	areas	with	dispersed	
populations	and	economy.	This	allowed	the	adjustment	of	
policies	to	optimise	their	impact.
	 Sustainability Appraisal (SA) - SA	is	a	statutory	process	
integrated	into	the	preparation	of	all	aspects	of	the	Local	Plan.	
The	process	measures	the	potential	impacts	of	the	Plan	on	a	
range	of	economic,	social	and	environmental	considerations,	
and	includes	the	requirements	of	Strategic	Environmental	
Assessment	legislation.	The	separately	published	SA	
post-adoption	statement	makes	clear	how	environmental	6
considerations	have	been	integrated	into	the	Plan;	how	the	
report	and	consultation	responses	have	been	taken	into	
account;	the	reasons	for	choosing	the	selected	approach	
over	the	alternatives	considered;	and	the	arrangements	for	
monitoring	the	significant	environmental	effects	of	the	Plan.
Process leading to the adoption of the 
Local Plan
1.15	 The	Proposed	Submission	Draft	of	the	Carlisle	District	Local	
Plan	was	submitted	to	the	Government	for	independent	
examination	on	22nd	June	2015.		Prior	to	this,	representations	
on	the	‘soundness’	of	the	Plan,	and	policies	and	proposals	
within,	were	sought	by	the	City	Council	for	a	minimum	period	
of	six	weeks	in	accordance	with	Regulations	19	and	20	of	
the	Town	and	Country	Planning	(Local	Planning)	(England)	
Regulations	2012.
1.16	 The	hearing	sessions	of	the	examination	commenced	on	
Tuesday	1st	December	2015,	and,	following	a	recess	due	to	
the	devastating	effects	of	Storm	Desmond	in	Carlisle,	resumed	
on	Tuesday	19th	January	2016.		During	the	examination	
process	the	Inspector	assessed	whether	the	Plan	had	been	
prepared	in	accordance	with	the	‘Duty	to	Cooperate’;	legal	
and	procedural	requirements;	and	whether	it	was	‘sound’.	The	
tests	 of	‘soundness’	 are	defined	 in	the	National	 Planning	 Policy	
Framework	(NPPF)	(para.	182)	as	being:		 •	 Positively prepared	-	the	Plan	should	be	based	on	a	strategy	
which	seeks	to	meet	objectively	assessed	development	and	
infrastructure	 requirements,	 including	 unmet	 requirements	 from	
neighbouring	authorities	where	it	is	reasonable	to	do	so	and	
consistent	with	achieving	sustainable	development;
	 •		 Justified	-	the	Plan	should	be	the	most	appropriate	strategy,	
when	considered	against	the	reasonable	alternatives,	based	
on	proportionate	evidence;
	 •		 Effective	-	the	Plan	should	be	deliverable	over	its	period	
based	on	effective	joint	working	on	cross-boundary	strategic	
priorities;	and
	 •	 Consistent with national policy	-	the	Plan	should	enable	the	
delivery	of	sustainable	development	in	accordance	with	the	
policies	in	the	NPPF .
1.17	 The	Inspector’s	report	into	the	examination	of	the	Local	
Plan	was	received	on	25th	July	2016.		The	report	sets	out	
the	Inspector’s	findings,	based	on	a	consideration	of	all	the	
evidence,	on	legal	compliance	including	duty	to	cooperate,	
and	soundness.		The	overall	conclusion	and	recommendation	
in	this	report	sets	out	that	the	Local	Plan	meets	legal	
requirements,	is	sound	and	capable	of	adoption,	subject	to	the	
recommended	main	modifications.7
1.18	 Carlisle	City	Council	resolved	to	accept	the	Inspector’s	
findings,	including	recommended	main	modifications,	and	
formally	adopted	the	Carlisle	District	Local	Plan	(2015	–	2030)	
on	the	8th	November	2016.8
9
Vision and Objectives210delivery of new business premises 
and jobs. Continued innovation and 
development within agriculture has acted 
to ensure farming remains economically 
vibrant. Economic performance across 
the District has been underpinned by 
continued investment in higher and further 
education. This has resulted in a skilled 
and responsive workforce which exhibits 
high levels of entrepreneurship, with the 
University of Cumbria and Carlisle College 
having been at the forefront of these 
efforts.In 2030...  the District of Carlisle, 
with the City at its heart, is successfully 
asserting its position, as a centre for 
activity and prosperity, as the capital 
and economic engine for a region 
encompassing Cumbria, the western 
fringes of Northumberland and extending 
into South West Scotland. 
People are attracted to visit, live, work, 
invest and importantly remain in the 
District of Carlisle, a key driver of which 
is the setting of the historic City, as 
well as the District’s market towns and 
villages, within a stunningly beautiful rural 
backdrop much of which is characterised 
by a rich and unrivalled collection of 
natural and cultural assets. The more 
significant of these assets, including Hadrian’s Wall and its associated National 
Trail path and Solway Coast and North 
Pennines Areas of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty, continue to underpin a thriving 
visitor economy, as too does Carlisle’s 
proximity and ease of access to the Lake 
District National Park.
Key to Carlisle’s ongoing success has 
been an increased supply of new high 
quality market and affordable homes, the 
delivery of which has been instrumental in 
attracting and retaining an economically 
active workforce and in supporting 
thriving rural communities. Capitalising on 
excellent strategic transport connections, 
including the M6 corridor, rail connections 
and Carlisle Airport, land has similarly 
been made available to support the Spatial VisionPolicies and proposals have succeeded 
in strengthening and diversifying the City 
Centre offer, ensuring that its expanded 
retail and leisure focus is underpinned by a 
strong cultural offer which can be enjoyed 
by all. Opportunities have similarly been 
taken to support thriving rural communities 
through sustaining and enhancing a 
network of centres across the District’s 
rural towns and villages. 
Growth has been achieved through a 
framework which has sought to protect and 
enhance the very assets that make Carlisle 
unique, including its: important natural 
landscapes; wildlife species, habitats and 
geodiversity; and its cultural and heritage 
relics. Furthermore it has been enabled 
through a co-ordinated approach to the 
11timely delivery of supporting infrastructure, 
adding to the availability of essential local 
services, facilities and connections.
Careful consideration has been afforded to 
the design of all new development in order 
to ensure that proposals have enhanced 
their immediate setting, strengthened 
local distinctiveness and helped to 
create environments which are safe and 
resilient to the effects of climate change. 
New developments and the regeneration 
of brownfield sites within the City have 
proved a valuable catalyst for addressing 
social inequalities and deprivation, 
and as a recognised Healthy City, a 
firm commitment to continue positively 
improving health and wellbeing outcomes 
for all of the District’s residents has been at 
the forefront of decision making.Looking to the future a Masterplan is in 
place to guide the continued realisation 
of a sustainable major mixed use 
development at Carlisle South, in doing 
so ensuring that Carlisle is well placed to 
continue responding to the growth needs 
of its next generation. The District in its 
widest sense continues to be alive to 
its potential and capable of harnessing 
momentum to turn this into reality.  12
Strategic Objectives
Economy Spatial Strategy and Strategic Policies
•  Foster the right conditions to stimulate inward 
investment through increasing the working age 
population; strengthening and expanding the skills 
base available, diversifying the economy and 
improving enabling physical infrastructure. 
•  To create opportunities for economic growth by 
making land available to meet the current and future 
quantitative and qualitative needs of the business 
community and to maintain Carlisle’s role as an 
economic driver for a wider geographical area. 
•  To focus new retail and leisure floorspace within the 
City Centre, and take opportunities to strengthen 
and diversify its offer, in order to enhance its role 
as a sub-regional service centre and leisure and 
cultural destination.•  To promote a sustainable pattern of development, 
which will contribute to building a strong, 
responsive and competitive economy, to support 
the vision for managed growth.
•  To support strong, vibrant and healthy 
communities, by meeting the housing needs of 
present and future generations, in a high quality 
environment with accessible local services.
•  To contribute to protecting and enhancing our 
natural, built and historic environment (including 
improving biodiversity), using natural resources 
prudently, minimising waste and pollution, and 
mitigating and adapting to climate change including 
moving to a low carbon economy.Housing
InfrastructureClimate Change and Flood Risk
Health, Education and Community
13•	 	 To	enable	the	development	of	a	range	of	high	quality,	
energy	efficient	housing,	in	a	variety	of	appropriate	
locations,	to	meet	the	aspirations	of	the	existing	
residents,	including	those	with	a	need	for	affordable	
housing	and	those	wishing	to	move	to	the	area.
•	 	 To	make	land	available	to	boost	significantly	the	
supply	of	housing	to	support	economic	growth,	
whilst	ensuring	new	housing	supports	the	creation	of	
thriving	communities.•	 	 To	reduce	emissions	of	greenhouse	gases,	
including	through	securing	energy	from	renewable	
sources,	and	avoid	inappropriate	development	in	
areas	at	risk	of	flooding	in	order	to	ensure	that	the	
District	is	more	resilient	and	less	vulnerable	to	the	
effects	of	climate	change	and	can	successfully	
adapt	to	its	effects.
•	 	 To	ensure	the	provision	of	efficient	and	integrated	
infrastructure	networks,	and	their	timely	delivery,	
including	sustainable	transport,	where	needed	to	
support	new	and	existing	development,	facilitate	
economic	growth	and	deliver	the	Plan	strategy.•	 	 To	create	a	thriving,	successful	and	healthy	
community	for	all	by	promoting	cohesive	mixed	
communities	and	ensuring	that	everyone	can	have	
a	decent	home,	in	a	safe	environment,	with	good	
access	to	health	care,	educational	provision	and	
other	community	facilities	by	sustainable	modes,	
including	walking	and	cycling.14Historic Environment
•  To conserve, enhance and promote Carlisle’s 
heritage and important historic landscapes whilst 
ensuring that development proposals respect and 
enhance Carlisle’s historic assets.
Green Infrastructure
•  To protect, enhance and increase the provision 
of the green and blue infrastructure across the 
District to create and maintain multifunctional, 
interconnected and attractive recreational and 
ecological networks for the benefit of residents, 
businesses, visitors and the wider natural 
environment.15
Spatial Portrait
2.1	 This	spatial	portrait	describes	
the	District’s	current	geography,	
environment,	economy,	social	and	
cultural	characteristics	and	movement	
patterns.	In	doing	so	it	provides	a	
snapshot	of	the	District	as	it	is	now	
as	well	as	highlighting	future	issues	it	
faces.	
2.2	 Today	Carlisle’s	identity	is	largely	
shaped	by	its	extensive	rural	hinterland.	
It	has	an	important	agricultural	
economy,	and	is	set	in	an	area	of	high	
landscape	value,	including	a	coastal	
and	upland	landscape	recognised	
as	being	of	national	importance.	The	
historic	core	of	the	City	is	traversed	by	
rivers	that	are	internationally	important	
for	biodiversity,	and	a	World	Heritage	
Site	strides	across	the	District.
2.3	 The	District	of	Carlisle	covers	an	area	
of	approximately	1,042	sq	km	and	is	
situated	in	the	far	north	of	the	County	
of	Cumbria,	bounded	by	the	Scottish	
border	to	the	north,	Northumberland	to	the	east,	Allerdale	and	the	Solway	
Firth	to	the	west	and	Eden	to	the	
south.	The	City	of	Carlisle	forms	
the	principal	urban	area	and	lies	
within	the	south	western	part	of	the	
District.	The	remainder	of	the	District	
is	predominantly	rural	in	nature,	with	
the	exception	of	Longtown	to	the	
north	and	Brampton	to	the	east,	and	
a	number	of	smaller	villages	which	are	
scattered	predominantly	to	the	west	
and	east	of	the	City.	
Local Character and Distinctiveness
2.4	 Carlisle’s	local	character	and	
distinctiveness	has	been	significantly	
influenced	by	its	rich	and	turbulent	
history	resulting	from	its	location	on	
the	border	between	England	and	
Scotland.	Carlisle	established	itself	as	
an	important	and	well	fortified	Roman	
settlement	primarily	serving	the	forts	
along	Hadrian’s	Wall.	As	an	important	
frontier	town	it	was	frequently	disputed	
and	besieged	by	the	English	and	the	Scots	during	various	campaigns	and	
the	area	suffered	from	many	attacks	
by	the	Border	Reivers.	
2.5		 By	the	time	of	the	Norman	conquest	
in	1066	Carlisle	was	part	of	Scotland.	
This	changed	again	in	1092	when	the	
region	was	invaded	and	Cumberland,	
including	Carlisle,	was	subsequently	
incorporated	into	England.	Carlisle	
Castle	and	the	City	Walls	were	
constructed	shortly	after	and	whilst	
only	the	West	Walls	and	the	section	
around	the	Castle	remain	standing,	
the	titles	of	the	gates	still	remain	in	the	
names	of	key	roads	into	the		
City	Centre.	
2.6		 In	the	12th	Century	King	Henry	l	
allowed	the	founding	of	a	religious	
establishment,	later	making	the	town	
a	diocese	thus	turning	the	Priory	into	
a	Cathedral,	which	is	today	one	of	the	
smallest	in	England.16
2.7		 Carlisle	has	been	shaped	in	more	
recent	times	by	its	industrial	heritage,	
predominantly	in	textile	manufacture.	
This	was	followed	by	the	arrival	of	
the	railways	which	continue	to	be	of	
significant	strategic	benefit	to	the	City.
2.8		 As	a	result	of	Carlisle’s	extensive	
history	the	District	is	rich	in	heritage	
ranging	from	Hadrian’s	Wall	World	
Heritage	site	which	crosses	the	District	
from	Gilsland	in	the	east	to	Burgh	by	
Sands	in	the	west,	to	the	remaining	
City	walls,	Carlisle	Cathedral,	the	Old	
Town	Hall	and	Tullie	House.	There	are	
approximately	1139	listed	buildings	
within	the	District	and	19	conservation	
areas	including	areas	within	the	City,	
the	historic	market	towns	of	Brampton	
and	Longtown	as	well	as	some	of	the	
other	villages	such	as	Dalston	and	
Cumrew.	There	are	also	approximately	
166	Scheduled	Ancient	Monuments,	
two	designated	parks	and	gardens,	
(Corby	Castle	and	Dalston	Road	important	rivers,	becks	and	burns.	
The	North	Pennines	AONB	is	also	a	
European	Geopark.	The	River	Eden	
and	its	tributaries	are	of	international	
importance	for	their	biodiversity,	being	
designated	as	both	a	Site	of	Special	
Scientific	Interest	(SSSI)	and	a	Special	
Area	of	Conservation	(SAC).	Carlisle	
has	a	range	of	other	sites	of	European	
nature	conservation	importance	
including	the	Upper	Solway	Flats	and	
Marshes	Ramsar	site	and	Special	
Protection	Area	(SPA),	the	Solway	Firth	
(SAC),	the	Irthinghead	Mires	Ramsar	
site	and	the	North	Pennine	Moors	
(SPA).	These	form	part	of	a	network	of	
internationally	important	wildlife	sites	
within	the	European	Union	known	as	
Natura	2000.	
2.11	 In	addition,	the	District	is	home	to	
many	rare	and	endangered	species	
such	as	the	red	squirrel,	great	crested	
newt	and	otters,	as	well	as	habitats	
such	as	lowland	raised	bogs,	blanket	
bogs	and	upland	hay	meadows.	Cemetery);	as	well	as	one	historic	
battlefield	-	the	Battle	of	Solway	Moss,	
at	Longtown.
2.9		 Carlisle	District	also	has	a	number	of	
locally	listed	buildings	and	structures	of	
architectural	and	historic	significance	
which	 whilst	 not	of	national	 significance	
are	important	in	creating	the	locally	
distinctive	character	that	can	be	seen	
in	parts	of	the	District.	Future	additions	
to	this	list	will	ensure	Carlisle’s	local	
history	continues	to	be	protected	
alongside	both	the	nationally	and	
internationally	recognised	assets.	
The	District’s	heritage	is	an	extremely	
important	asset,	which	contributes	
significantly	to	the	character	and	
attractiveness	of	the	area	and	is	a	
major	draw	for	tourism.
2.10	 Carlisle	also	has	an	attractive	and	
varied	natural	landscape.	The	District	
includes	two	Areas	of	Outstanding	
Natural	Beauty	(AONB),	(Solway	
Coast	and	the	North	Pennines)	as	
well	as	a	network	of	ecologically	17
2.12	 The	landscape	and	wildlife	in	Carlisle	
and	surrounding	districts	underpins	
the	economy	of	the	area,	through	
people’s	work	and	leisure	activities,	
and	their	sense	of	local	identity.	
Delivery	of	targeted	biodiversity	and	
landscape	enhancements,	therefore,	
has	a	significant	contribution	to	
make	towards	social	inclusion	and	
sustainable	economic	development,	
and	logically	forms	an	integral	part	
of	all	aspects	of	the	Sustainable	
Community	Strategy	(The	Community	
Plan	for	Carlisle).
2.13	 The	District	has	approximately	455	ha	
of	public	open	space,	which	ranges	
from	amenity	open	space	(land	which	
is	recognised	as	making	a	contribution	
to	the	visual	amenity	and	enjoyment	
of	an	area),	to	natural/semi	natural	
greenspace,	parks/gardens,	allotments,	
play	areas	and	outdoor	sports	facilities.	
Within	the	centre	of	the	City,	and	
located	immediately	next	to	the	River	
Eden	are	two	linked	and	important	
urban	parks,	Rickerby	Park	and	Bitts	Park.	Rickerby	Park	is	a	natural	park	
with	mature	trees	and	grazed	by	sheep	
and	cattle.	Bitts	Park	has	a	more	formal	
layout	with	landscaped	beds	and	trees,	
together	with	playing	pitches,	children’s	
play	area	and	tennis	courts	etc.
Social Characteristics
2.14		 Population	data	collated	from	the	2011	
Census,	released	in	July	2012,	showed	
that	the	usual	resident	population	of	
the	District	had	increased	by	6,785	
from	100,739	in	2001	to	107,524,	a	rise	
of	6.7%.	Whilst	the	rate	was	slower	
than	the	average	for	England	and	
Wales	it	was	the	highest	recorded	in	
Cumbria.	
2.15	 Census	data	shows	that	over	the	ten	
year	period	2001	to	2011	there	has	
been	an	increase	of	15.8%	in	the	
over	60	age	group.	In	the	working	age	
groups	of	20	to	64	there	has	been	an	
increase	of	8.2%	overall,	but	in	the	
age	bracket	30	to	44	there	has	been	a	
decrease	of	7.2%.	The	under	18	age	
group	has	also	seen	a	decrease	of	3%,	but	the	most	marked	decrease	has	
been	in	the	5	to	14	age	bracket	which	
has	seen	a	reduction	of	10%	while	the	
0	to	4	age	group	has	experienced	an	
overall	increase	of	15.3%.
2.16	 Ethnic	minorities	within	the	District	
account	for	5.6%	of	the	population	
which	is	a	two	fold	increase	since	the	
2001	census.	In	the	same	time	period	
the	figures	for	Cumbria	have	also	
increased	from	2%	to	4.9%.		
2.17	 In	line	with	national	trends,	growth	in	
Carlisle	will	most	notably	be	seen	in	
the	number	of	older	people	living	in	
the	District	where	it	is	predicted	that	
there	will	be	a	57%	increase	by	2032.	
Approximately	68%	of	the	population	
currently	live	within	the	urban	area	of	
Carlisle.	In	the	rural	areas	a	key	feature	
is	the	sparse	distribution	of	residents;	
on	average	there	are	97	people	
per	hectare	in	Carlisle’s	rural	areas	
(compared	to	477	regionally	and	378	
nationally).	18
Movement Patterns
2.18	 The	M6	motorway	runs	through	the	
District	linking	the	City	of	Carlisle	
to	Southwest	Scotland,	Northwest	
England	and	beyond.	Carlisle	benefits	
from	four	motorway	junctions	at	
Carleton	(J42),	Rosehill	(J43)	and	
Kingstown	(J44),	whilst	junction	45	
connects	with	the	Scottish	border	
at	Gretna.	Additionally	the	Carlisle	
Northern	Development	Route	(CNDR)	
(the	A689)	provides	a	western	link	from	
the	A595	to	the	M6	at	junction	44.	It	
also	provides	a	combined	pedestrian	
and	cycle	route	along	its	8.25km	
length.
2.19	 From	Carlisle	City	there	is	a	network	of	
‘A’	roads	including	the	A69	which	links	
the	District	to	Newcastle	upon	Tyne	in	
the	North	East,	the	A7	to	the	Scottish	
Borders	and	on	to	Edinburgh,	the	A6	to	
Penrith	and	the	Lake	District,	and	the	
A595	to	Workington	and	Cockermouth	
in	West	Cumbria.2.20	 In	terms	of	rail	travel	and	freight		
movements,	the	West	Coast	Main	Line	
provides	a	north/south	high	speed	rail	
link	serving	the	City	providing	access	
to	Birmingham	and	London	and	
Glasgow	and	Edinburgh,	as	well	as	
links	via	Northern	Rail	to	Manchester	
Airport	and	Manchester	to	Glasgow	
and	Edinburgh.	There	are	rail	links	to	
Newcastle	and	the	Cumbrian	Coast	
providing	access	to	Barrow	and	
Lancaster.	The	historic	Carlisle/Settle	
line,	which	is	important	for	tourists,	
commuters	and	freight,	links	Carlisle	to	
Leeds.	
2.21	 Travel	to	work	is	heavily	dependent	on	
private	car	usage	with	40.8%	of	people	
working	in	Carlisle	District	choosing	
to	drive	to	work	(Source:	Office	of	
National	Statistics	(ONS)	Census	2011)	
despite	the	fact	that	nearly	50%	of	
people	travel	less	than	5km	to	their	
place	of	work.	This	level	of	car	usage	
is	partly	due	to	accessibility	to	public	transport	across	the	District	which	
varies	considerably	outside	the	urban	
area,	with	a	number	of	areas	having	
o n l y	l i m i t e d 	s e r v i c e s . 																																																																																																																										
Housing
2.22	 Housing	Stock	as	of	31	March	2012	
was	50,660	(source	ONS	Local	
Profiles).	85%	of	this	stock	is	privately	
owned	with	Registered	Providers	of	
housing	accounting	for	the	remaining	
15%.	
2.23	 At	the	2001	census	owner	occupation	
within	the	District	was	71%	which	
was	slightly	below	the	Cumbrian	
percentage	of	72%	but	higher	than	
that	of	the	North	West	which	was	
69%.		The	percentage	living	in	social	
rented	properties	were	18%,	16%	
and	20%	with	the	private	rented	
sector	accounting	for	8%,	12%	and	
8%	respectively.19
2.24	 A	house	condition	survey	undertaken	
in	2005	and	Registered	Social	Landlord	
data	from	2009	identified	that	27%	
of	the	private	sector	and	12%	of	the	
social	sector	dwellings	failed	the	
decency	standard	in	the	urban	area	
and	43%	and	10%	respectively	in	the	
rural	area.
2.25	 Housing	in	Carlisle	is	generally	more	
affordable	in	respect	of	house	price/
earning	ratio	at	4.7%	than	is	the	case	
for	England	which	is	6.6%	(source	
ONS	Local	Profiles	2012).	However,	
variations	in	average	house	prices	
across	the	District	identify	parts	of	the	
rural	area	where	average	house	prices	
are	in	excess	of	ten	times	the	annual	
income,	creating	problems	of	housing	
need	due	to	affordability.2.26		 Average	household	size	as	determined	
by	the	Department	of	Communities	and	
Local	Government	(DCLG)	has	reduced	
to	2.2	persons	and	is	expected	to	
further	reduce	to	2.17	by	2016	and	2.14	
by	2021.	This	compares	to	2.21,	2.18	
and	2.15	respectively	for	Cumbria	and	
2.36,	2.35,	2.33	for	England.		
2.27	 Over	the	last	10	years	72%	of	housing	
built	within	the	District	has	been	
within	the	urban	area	and	28%	in	the	
rural	area.	Housing	development	has	
significantly	slowed	over	the	last	5	
years	with	the	lowest	increase	in	new	
housing	being	recorded	in	2013/14	
with	only	190	net	new	dwellings.	
This	performance	relates	however	
to	national	as	opposed	to	local	
circumstances	and	predominately	the	
effects	of	the	most	recent	housing	
crash	and	subsequent	recession.Economy
2.28	 Carlisle	is	a	free	standing	City	which	
is	not	directly	influenced	by	a	major	
conurbation.	It	acts	as	a	significant	
employment	base	and	the	main	
professional	centre	for	Cumbria	as	well	
as	parts	of	Southwest	Scotland.	
2.29	 Historically,	the	economy	of	Carlisle	
was	based	around	easy	access	to	
a	railway	network	and	the	textile	
industry	which	has	over	time	declined	
and	been	replaced	by	other	forms	
of	manufacturing.	A	large	proportion	
of	Carlisle’s	working	population	are	
still	employed	in	the	manufacturing	
sector.	However,	the	wholesale/	retail	
trade	provides	employment	for	the	
largest	proportion	of	the	workforce.	
Employment	in	non-service	industries,	
such	as	agriculture,	manufacturing	and	
construction	are	all	higher	than	the	
national	average.	Carlisle	is	an	important	
centre	for	agricultural	services	and	lies	
at	the	centre	of	a	large	rural	livestock	
market.	Within	the	rural	area	Brampton	20
and	Longtown	act	as	employment	hubs	
along	with	Dalston	to	a	lesser	extent.	
All	three	settlements	have	industrial	
estates	which	provide	employment	
opportunities	for	people	within	their	
locality	as	well	as	the	wider	area.
2.30	 Whilst	Carlisle	benefits	from	good	
connections	to	the	M6	as	well	as	
being	situated	on	the	West	Coast	Main	
Line,	there	can	still	be	a	perception	by	
businesses	from	outside	the	area	of	
remoteness	and	isolation	which	may	
detract	from	Carlisle’s	attractiveness	
as	a	business	location.	This	is	further	
compounded	by	a	gap	in	skills	as	well	
as	poor	retention	levels	with	regards	
to	graduates.	However,	current	work	
under	the	‘Carlisle	Story’	banner	aims	
to	attract	people	to	visit	and	live	in	the	
area,	encourage	those	here	already	
to	stay,	persuade	investors	and	
developers	to	see	us	as	a	place	worth	
investing	in	and	create	and	attract	new	
jobs	whilst	keeping	the	ones	we	have.Tourism 
2.31	 Tourism	is	of	major	importance	to	
Carlisle	as	a	generator	of	economic	
prosperity	and	employment	with	
the	District	receiving	over	7	million	
visitors	in	2013	(STEAM	Report).	It	is	
essential	that	the	tourism	potential	of	
the	District	is	promoted	and	exploited	
to	maximise	the	benefits	it	can	bring	
to	the	area,	including	a	large	number	
of	jobs.	Carlisle’s	heritage	is	central	to	
its	attractiveness	as	a	tourist	location	
with	Hadrian’s	Wall	World	Heritage	
Site	and	National	Trail	crossing	the	
District,	Carlisle	Castle,	the	Cathedral,	
Tullie	House	museum	and	many	more	
attractions	attracting	visitors	in	their	
own	right.
2.32	 Carlisle	lies	at	the	heart	of	a	wealth	
of	historic	and	modern	attractions	
ranging	from	Roman	remains	to	
Norman	strongholds,	medieval	market	
towns	to	a	contemporary	City.	Carlisle	
has	museums,	art	galleries,	national	
sporting	events,	outdoor	and	indoor	recreation,	heritage	tours,	award-
winning	parks	and	nature	reserves.	
Carlisle	Racecourse	lies	on	the	edge	of	
the	City,	whilst	in	the	wider	rural	area	are	
a	wealth	of	historic	churches,	Talkin	Tarn	
Country	Park,	Lanercost	Priory	founded	
in	1197	as	an	Augustinian	Priory,	and	
stunning	countryside	including	the	two	
Areas	of	Outstanding	Natural	Beauty.
Culture and Heritage
2.33	 Protecting	heritage	whilst	supporting	
economic	growth	is	something	that	the	
City	Council	is	actively	engaged	in.	The	
historic	core	of	the	City	includes	Carlisle	
Castle,	Tullie	House	Museum,	Carlisle	
Cathedral	precinct,	the	Tithe	Barn,	the	
City	Walls,	the	Courts,	the	Market	Cross,	
the	Old	Town	Hall	and	the	Guildhall.	
These	and	other	heritage	and	cultural	
assets,	including	the	Sands	Centre	and	
Old	Fire	Station	Arts	Centre,	combine	
with	the	high	quality	environment	in	and	
around	the	District	to	contribute	towards	
Carlisle’s	appeal	as	a	visitor	destination.	
Providing	potential	for	economic	21
diversification,	particularly	within	the	
rural	area,	opportunities	of	this	nature	
are	already	being	supported	along	for	
example	the	route	of	Hadrian’s	Wall	
World	Heritage	Site	(officially	known	
as	‘Frontiers	of	the	Roman	Empire	
(Hadrian’s	Wall):	World	Heritage	Site’)	
National	Trail	with	the	development	
of	accommodation	and	refreshment	
facilities.	
Education	
2.34	 Educational	achievement	(measured	
as	5	or	more	GCSEs	at	A*	to	C	grade,	
including	English	and	maths)	at	15	
years	old	in	Carlisle	is	lower	(52.2%)	
than	both	national	(59.2%)	and	
regional	(59.9%)	averages.	The	District	
also	has	a	higher	percentage	of	its	
population	with	no	qualifications	at	
12.3%	compared	to	the	national	figure	
of	9.3%.	However	in	recent	years	there	
has	been	significant	investment	and	
restructuring	of	education	services	
and	institutions	across	the	District	and	
standards	are	continually	improving.		2.35	 All	post	11	education	in	the	District,	
which	was	managed	by	the	County	
Council,	now	has	Academy	status.	The	
Richard	Rose	Academy	(Central	and	
Morton	sites)	have	been	established	
through	an	investment	of	some	£30M.	
Trinity	School	has	obtained	Academy	
status	and	has	again	had	significant	
investment	to	improve	its	facilities.	In	
the	rural	area,	Caldew	School	Dalston	
and	William	Howard	School	Brampton	
have	also	had	significant	investment	to	
improve	facilities.
2.36	 Carlisle	College,	based	between	
Victoria	Place	and	Strand	Road,	is	the	
main	provider	of	further	education.	
The	college	also	provides	educational	
opportunities	for	students	aged	over	14	
alongside	vocational	and	skills	training	
for	a	growing	number	of	both	young	
and	mature	students	which	is	helping	
to	expand	the	skills	base	locally.	The	
facilities	at	the	college	have	greatly	
improved	in	recent	years	as	a	result	of	
significant	investment	being	made	to	redevelop	the	college	estate	through	
refurbishment	and	replacement	of	
outdated	buildings.
2.37	 The	University	of	Cumbria	was	
established	in	August	2007	and	
after	a	period	of	uncertainty,	has	in	
recent	years	experienced	significant	
levels	of	new	students	enrolling	
in	courses	based	at	its	Carlisle	
campuses.	Proposals	for	major	
campus	redevelopments	including	
a	new	administrative	headquarters	
for	the	University,	based	within	the	
City	of	Carlisle,	have	stalled	due	
to	the	initial	financial	challenges	
faced	by	the	university	following	its	
establishment.	With	recent	reports	
of	improved	performance,	increasing	
student	numbers,	and	in	an	improving	
economic	climate	it	is	hoped	that	these	
proposals	can	be	progressed	once	
more.	22
Social
2.38	 The	English	Indices	of	Deprivation	2010	 	
(which	updated	the	2007	indices)	show	
that	Carlisle	District	is	109th	out	of	326	
nationally		(with	1	being	the	highest)	
with	5	Lower	Super	Output	Areas		
in	the	10%	worst	nationally	which	
indicates	great	disparity	throughout	
the	District	and	a	slightly	worsening	
position	from	the	2007	indices	(ranked	
122nd	out	of	354	nationally).	
2.39	 The	Green	Infrastructure	Study	March	
2011	further	supports	the	inequality	
across	the	District	as	it	identified	that	
the	10	most	deprived	Super	Output	
Areas	of	the	District	have	on	average	
27%	less	green	infrastructure	cover	
than	the	10	least	deprived.Health
2.40	 Carlisle	became	a	World	Health	
Organisation	(WHO)	Healthy	City	in	
2009.	Since	then,	the	City	Council	has	
worked	closely	with	organisations	such	
as	the	National	Health	Service	(NHS),	
Riverside	and	Carlisle	Leisure	and	has	
gained	from	the	Healthy	City	approach	
and	network.	A	Healthy	City	is	one	that	
continually	creates	and	improves	its	
physical	and	social	environments	and	
expands	the	community	resources	that	
enable	people	to	mutually	support	each	
other	in	performing	all	the	functions	of	
life	and	developing	to	their	maximum	
potential.
2.41	 Life	expectancy	in	the	District	is	78.5	
years	for	men	and	82.0	years	for	
women.	Whilst	slightly	lower	than	the	
national	average	this	is	higher	than	
figures	for	the	North	West.		However,	
there	is	great	disparity	across	the	
District	with	men	in	the	least	deprived	
areas	living	seven	years	longer	than	those	in	the	most	deprived	areas.	
Mortality	rates	per	100,000	persons	
at	609.3	is	higher	than	the	national	
figure	of	553.3	and	early	death	rates	
from	cancer	remain	above	the	England	
average.		
Flooding and Climate Change
2.42	 The	position	of	Carlisle	at	the	meeting	
point	of	three	rivers	makes	it	vulnerable	
to	the	risk	of	flooding.	In	2005,	and	
then	again	in	2015,	the	District	
experienced	the	worst	floods	since	
1822	which	resulted	in	the	loss	of	
human	life	and	severely	affected	many	
homes	and	businesses.	Despite	flood	
defences	offering	a	level	of	defence	
against	future	flood	risk,	caution	
must	still	be	taken	when	considering	
proposals	for	development	in	high	risk	
areas	benefitting	from	defences.	23
2.43	 Specific	data	for	the	impacts	of	climate	
change	on	Carlisle	are	not	readily	
available,	but	information	is	available	on	a	
regional	basis	that	gives	a	good	indication	
of	the	potential	impacts.	Between	now	
and	2080,	if	we	continue	to	discharge	high	
amounts	of	greenhouse	gases,	the	District	
could	expect	an	impact	on	the	following:
•	 more	extreme	weather	conditions	causing	
disruption	to	front	line	services	like	refuse/	
recycling	collections;
•	 higher	energy	costs	for	buildings	and	
transport	as	climate	change	impacts	on	
markets	and	trade;
•	 health	related	problems	for	example	
waterborne	diseases	linked	to	warm	
weather	impacting	on	health	services;
•	 drier	summers	could	lead	to	droughts	
affecting	parks,	allotments	and	nature	
reserves	putting	pressure	on	water	
resources	and	local	biodiversity;	and
•	 wetter	weather	patterns	in	the	summer	
affecting	the	agricultural	economy	through	
impact	on	crop	and	grass	growth.©Crown copyright and database rights 20 14 Ordnance Survey LA100024459Legend
Hadrian ’s Wall W orld Heritage Site
RiversA Roads
Motorway
AONB
Carlisle Lake District Airport
Kingmoor Park Enterprise Zone (Policy EC 1)Train Line
South West Morton (Policy EC 1)Carlisle South (Policy SP 3)MOD - Longtown/Solway 45« Main Settlement
Potential route for
Borders RailwayCarlisle «
J45
J44
J43
J42èèèèè
«««è
Lake District National ParkM74
M6A595A596A689
A69Hawick/Galashiels
Edinburgh/Glasgow
Hexham/
Newcastle
Penrith/
ManchesterWigton
Workington/
CockermouthLongtown
Brampton
DalstonA7
A69
A7
A6A689M6SCOTLAND
A6071
EDENNORTHUMBERLAND
ALLERDALEGretna
Solway 
FirthA75
24Key Diagram
25
3
Spatial Strategy and Strategic PoliciesContext
This section of the Local Plan comprises a suite of policies 
which set out key overarching and recurring principles and 
therefore strategic direction for the more detailed policies and 
specific proposals that follow. Collectively these strategic 
policies constitute the spatial strategy at the heart of the 
Local Plan and in this regard they are central to the realisation 
of the vision of how Carlisle will look in 2030. A number of 
these policies go beyond traditional land use planning in 
order to lend impetus to wider initiatives pursuing common 
goals, as well as to ensure that synergies with the planning 
process are maximised.Objective
 • To promote a sustainable pattern of development, 
which will contribute to building a strong, responsive 
and competitive economy, to support the vision for 
managed growth.
 • To support strong, vibrant and healthy communities, 
by meeting the housing needs of present and future 
generations, in a high quality environment with 
accessible local services.
 •  To contribute to protecting and enhancing our natural, 
built and historic environment (including improving 
biodiversity), using natural resources prudently, 
minimising waste and pollution, and mitigating and 
adapting to climate change including moving to a low 
carbon economy.26
Policy SP 1 - Sustainable Development
When considering development proposals Carlisle City Council 
will take a positive approach that reflects the presumption in 
favour of sustainable development contained in the National 
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). It will always work 
proactively with applicants, and communities, jointly to find 
solutions which mean that proposals can be approved wherever 
possible, and to secure development that improves the 
economic, social and environmental conditions of the District.
Planning applications that accord with the policies in this 
Local Plan (and, where relevant, with polices in neighbourhood 
development plans) will be approved without delay, unless 
material considerations indicate otherwise.
Where there are no policies relevant to the application, or 
relevant policies are out of date at the time of making the 
decision, then the Council will grant permission unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise - taking into account whether:
1. any adverse impacts of granting permission would 
significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when 
assessed against the policies in the NPPF taken as a whole; 
or
2. specific policies in the NPPF indicate that  
development should be restricted.Justification
3.1	 The	current	United	Kingdom	Sustainable	Development	
Strategy	‘Securing	the	Future’	(HM	Government,	2005)	
defines	‘sustainable	development’	as:	“Development	which	
meets	the	needs	of	the	present	without	compromising	the	
ability	of	future	generations	to	meet	their	own	needs”.	
3.2	 The	NPPF	sets	out	a	presumption	in	favour	of	sustainable	
development.	This	presumption	is	considered	to	be	the	
golden	thread	running	through	both	plan	making	and	decision	
taking.	The	NPPF	emphasises	the	three	dimensions	to	
sustainable	development,	these	being:
	 •	an	economic	role	–	contributing	to	building	a	strong,			 	
	 responsive	and	competitive	economy;
	 •	a	social	role	–	supporting	strong,	vibrant	and	healthy			 	
	 communities;	and
	 •	an	environmental	role	–	contributing	to	protecting	and		 	
	 enhancing	our	natural,	built	and	historic	environment.
3.3	 These	roles	are	interdependent,	and	to	achieve	sustainable	
development,	economic,	environmental	and	social	gains	
should	be	achieved	through	all	aspects	of	planning.	27
3.4	 The	Carlisle	District	Local	Plan	is	the	
first	reference	point	for	those	involved	
in	the	determination	of	planning	
applications.	The	NPPF	makes	it	clear	
that	local	planning	documents	should	
reflect	the	presumption	in	favour	of	
sustainable	development	and	Policy		
SP	1	responds	to	this	requirement.	
3.5	 It	is	important	to	note	that	in	
accordance	with	other	policies	in	the	
NPPF	that	the	presumption	does	not	
apply	to	development	affecting	sites	
protected	under	the	Birds	and	Habitats	
Directives	and/or	land	designated,	
amongst	others,	as	a	Site	of	Special	
Scientific	Interest	(SSSI),	an	Area	of	
Outstanding	Natural	Beauty	(AONB),	
Local	Green	Space,	designated	
heritage	assets	or	locations	at	risk	of	
flooding	or	coastal	erosion.28
Policy SP 2 - Strategic Growth and Distribution
To ensure that objectively assessed development needs are 
met, and met in the most sustainable manner, strategic growth 
within the District of Carlisle will be governed by the following 
principles:  
1. Sufficient land will be identified to accommodate 9,606 net 
new homes between 2013 and 2030 including a minimum 
annualised average of:
• 478 net new homes between 2013 and 2020; and
• 626 net new homes between 2020 and 2030 (adjusted to 
have regard to delivery in the 2013-2020 period).
 a) approximately 70% of this growth will be focussed on the 
urban area of Carlisle, with approximately 30% in the rural 
area; and
 b) specific sites have been identified within the Plan, 
alongside an allowance for windfall developments, to 
accommodate the majority of growth required. Carlisle 
South has been identified as a broad location to 
accommodate additional housing growth in accordance 
with SP 3. 
2. Sufficient land will be identified to create the right 
conditions for economic growth: a) the focus for development will be within the urban area of 
Carlisle and locations which can maximise the benefits of Carlisle’s 
highly accessible position in relation to the M6 Corridor; and
 b) whilst efforts will be focussed across the Plan period on realising 
the residual capacity within existing employment areas, this 
approach will be complemented by the allocation of an additional 
45 Ha for employment related purposes.
3. Development of surplus land at Ministry of Defence (MOD) 
Longtown, which lies within the strategic M6 Corridor and benefits 
from excellent road and rail connections, will also be supported as 
a key element of the strategy to grow the economy, and to secure 
modal shifts in freight transport. 
4. The City Centre will maintain and enhance its status by being the 
primary focus for further comparison retail development across the 
Plan period:
 a) specifically, sufficient land will be identified within the City 
Centre to accommodate an additional 18,700m2 net comparison 
retail floor space until 2030.
5. Provision for leisure and other ‘main town centre uses’ will be 
based on the need to protect and enhance the vitality and viability 
of the City Centre, District Centres and Local Centres as defined on 
the Policies Map.29
6. Where possible and appropriate, 
the re-use and redevelopment of 
previously developed land will be 
encouraged across the District. Within 
the urban area of Carlisle the reuse 
and redevelopment of underused, 
vacant and derelict land will be 
supported in order to secure the 
continued regeneration of the City. 
7. Within the District’s rural settlements, 
development opportunities of an 
appropriate scale and nature, which 
are commensurate with their setting, 
will be harnessed to positively 
contribute to increasing the prosperity 
of the rural economy and to enable 
rural communities to thrive. 
8. Within the open countryside, 
development will be assessed 
against the need to be in the location 
specified.Justification
3.6	 Policy	SP	2	sets	out	the	level	of	
objectively	assessed	development	
needs	to	be	delivered	within	the	District	
until	2030,	and	importantly	a	number	
of	key	principles	to	guide	how,	where	
and	when	these	will	be	met	in	order	
to	ensure	that	sustainable	patterns	
of	development	prevail	across	the	
plan	period.	This	policy	therefore	
constitutes	a	key	strategic	policy	which	
will	be	used	to	shape	how	the	District	
develops	in	the	future.	
3.7	 The	delivery	of	housing	is	a	key	thrust	
of	the	spatial	strategy	necessary	
in	order	to	respond	to	changes	in	
local	demographics	and	equally	in	
accommodating	in-migration	necessary	
to	support	economic	growth	through	
helping	to	sustain	an	economically	
active	workforce.
3.8	 Policy	SP	2	makes	provision	for	a	
minimum	of	9,606	dwellings	between	
2013	and	2030.	The	District	of	Carlisle	
constitutes	a	self	contained	strategic	housing	market	area	and	this	level	
of	growth	therefore	reflects	what	the	
Council	considers	to	represent	the	
District’s	objectively	assessed		
housing	need.	
3.9	 The	housing	requirement	and	time	
period	to	which	it	relates	is	consistent	
with	the	base	date	and	findings	of	
the	Carlisle	Strategic	Housing	Market	
Assessment	(SHMA)	Update	2014,	and	
the	latest	2014	POPGROUP	modelling	
undertaken	by	the	Cumbria	Intelligence	
Observatory.	POPGROUP	is	a	software	
product	designed	to	project	populations,	
households	and	labour	forces	associated	
with	specified	future	scenarios	and	is	
widely	regarded	as	a	credible	tool	to	
derive	robust	projections.	To	do	this,	it	
builds	upon	Office	of	National	Statistics	
projections	using	further	assumptions,	
for	example:	the	continuation	of	longer/
shorter	term	trends	in	birth,	death	and	
migration	rates,	future	development	
proposals	and	the	anticipated	
performance	of	the	local	economy.30
3.10	 The	POPGROUP	“10	year	migration	
scenario”,	based	on	historic	migration	
trends,	and	the	“Experian	jobs	led	
scenario”,	based	on	the	latest	job	
projections	for	the	District	of	Carlisle,	
point	to	an	annual	housing	requirement	
of	between	383	and	592	new	homes.	
The	SHMA	Update	2014	also	produces	
projections	which	suggest	an	annual	
housing	requirement	of	between	485	
and	565	new	homes.	The	proposed	
requirement	pursued	by	the	Plan	can	
be	seen	to	align	with	this	evidence	
and	is	considered	reflective	of	the	
requirements	set	out	in	paragraph		
47	of	the	NPPF .
3.11 To	ensure	the	supply	of	new	homes	
does	not	constrain	economic	growth,	
a	minimum	number	equating	to	an	
annual	average	of	478	net	new	homes	
is	required	between	2013	and	2020.	
Beyond	this	and	for	the	remainder	of	
the	plan	period,	between	2020	and	
2030,	a	minimum	number	equating	
to	an	annual	average	of	626	net	new	
homes	is	required.	This	stepped	approach	reflects	that	job-growth	is	
generally	expected	to	be	stronger	post	
2020	(and	hence	a	greater	increase	
in	population	would	be	required	from	
this	point).	Aside	from	aligning	with	the	
evidence	in	the	form	of	the	jobs-led	
projection	within	the	SHMA	which	has	
influenced	the	housing	requirement,	
the	introduction	of	a	stepped	approach	
importantly	affords	an	opportunity	for	
the	development	industry	to	mobilise	
and	increase	 its	capacity	 within	 Carlisle,	
necessary	given	the	migration	from	a	
historically	lower	housing	requirement	
in	preceding	plan	periods	and	industry	
base	position.	
3.12 It	must	be	stressed	that	the	‘minimum’	
requirements	are	exactly	that	and	
should	the	conditions	be	in	place	
to	exceed	these	and/or	frontload	
supply	earlier	in	the	Plan	period	then	
such	opportunities	will	be	positively	
responded	to.	To	ensure	that	supply	
keeps	pace	with	demand	it	is	important	
that	any	shortfall	within	the	2013	
to	2020	period	is	addressed	within	this	same	period.	Beyond	2020	
the	annualised	average	employed	
for	assessment	purposes	should	
similarly	be	adjusted	to	have	regard	
to	any	under	or	over	provision	in	the	
preceding	seven	year	period.		
3.13	 Excluding	Carlisle	South	the	spatial	
strategy	seeks	to	focus	the	majority	
(approximately	70%)	of	new	housing	
growth	 within	 or	on	the	edge	 of	the	City	
of	Carlisle	which	aside	from	reflecting	
that	this	is	where	the	majority	of	
housing	needs	arise	within	the	District	
also	reflects	a	desire	to	enhance	the	
City’s	role	as	a	sub-regional	centre.	
Concentrating	development	on	the	
City	also	reflects	that	this	area	is	well	
served	by	existing	infrastructure	which	
entails	evident	sustainability	benefits.	
The	remainder	of	housing	growth	
(30%)	will	occur	within	the	District’s	
rural	settlements	including	in	Brampton	
and	Longtown.	31
3.14	 Specific	allocations	have	been	identified	within	the	Local	
Plan	to	contribute,	alongside	existing	commitments	and	an	
allowance	for	windfall,	to	meeting	the	majority	of	growth	
required	across	the	Plan	period.	Carlisle	South,	which	is	
subject	to	the	provisions	of	Policy	SP	3,	has	been	identified		
as	a	broad	location	to	accommodate	additional	housing		
growth	within	and	beyond	the	Plan	period.	
3.15	 The	supply	of	housing	land	is	summarised	in	Table	1	with		
the	anticipated	rate	of	delivery	illustrated	through	the		
trajectory	at	Figure	1.
Source No. Of Dwellings
Delivery	to	date	(2013	–	2015) 609
Outstanding	Planning	Permissions 3,884
Proposed	Local	Plan	Allocations* 4,017
Windfall	Provision	(@100	dwellings	per	annum	across	
the	plan	period)1,500
Strategic	Allocation	Carlisle	South 1,450
Total Supply 11,460Table 1 - Summary of Housing Land Supply (as at 1st April 2015)
* Excludes the capacity of those allocations which have an outstanding planning permission in place 
in order to avoid double counting.3.16	 Whilst	Table	1	indicates	a	total	supply	which	would	support	
a	higher	rate	of	delivery	than	that	proposed	within	the	Local	
Plan,	it	is	recognised	that	not	all	of	the	existing	permissions	
and	allocations	may	be	built	out	in	full	within	the	plan	period,	
which	the	trajectory	reflects.	Nevertheless,	if	economic	and	
market	conditions	are	favourable,	it	demonstrates	that	the	
Local	Plan	target	could	be	exceeded.32
33
3.17	 Despite	lower	completion	rates	
owing	predominately	to	unfavourable	
economic	conditions	and	the	recent	
global	recession,	there	are	encouraging	
market	signals	to	support	that	the	
desired	level	of	housing	growth	can	
be	achieved	particularly	across	the	
longer	term.	In	this	regard	the	Council	
is	fully	committed	to	directing	its	own	
resources	to	aid	delivery	efforts,	with	a	
housing	action	plan	in	place	to	guide	
interventions.	A	key	part	of	this	action	
plan	is	engagement	with	housing	
enablers	to	better	understand	future	
opportunities	as	well	as	risks	and	
constraints.
3.18	 The	delivery	of	housing	to	meet	the	
Local	Plan	target	will	be	monitored	
through	the	Annual	Monitoring	Report	
(AMR),	and	if	the	rate	of	delivery	is	
not	as	expected,	the	Council	will	seek	
to	work	directly	with	stakeholders	to	
identify	any	barriers	to	development,	
and	consider	further	interventions	
including	bringing	forward	additional	or	
substituting	allocations.	A	review	of	the	housing	element	of	the	strategy	would	
also	be	instigated	if	evidence	used	to	
determine	the	housing	requirement	
changes;	monitoring	shows	the	
strategy	is	not	meeting	its	objectives;	
or	sustained	market	signals	indicate	a	
clear	need	for	change.	
3.19	 From	an	employment	land	perspective	
Policy	SP	2	identifies	that	sufficient	
land	will	be	identified	to	create	the	
right	conditions	within	the	District	
for	economic	growth,	which	is	a	key	
priority	of	the	City	Council,	Carlisle	
Partnership	and	the	Cumbria	Local	
Enterprise	Partnership	(LEP).	Evidence,	
in	the	form	of	the	Carlisle	Employment	
Sites	Study	(2010)	and	the	Economic	
Review	of	Carlisle	(2013),	shows	that	
one	of	the	key	economic	issues	to	date	
within	the	District	has	been	the	lack	
of	quality	and	choice	of	employment	
locations	for	companies	to	invest.	The	
Local	Plan	seeks	to	address	these	
shortcomings	through	encouraging	and	
facilitating	investment	in	existing	sites,	
and	complementing	this	offer	through	the	provision	of	new	sites,	particularly	
within	the	strategically	important	M6	
Corridor	which	is	a	recognised	Cumbria	
LEP	priority.	
3.20	 Whilst	45	Ha	of	land	is	allocated	for	
employment	purposes	within	the	plan	
period,	there	is	also	approximately	46	
Ha	of	available	land	within	existing	
and	established	Primary	Employment	
Areas,	with	the	majority	of	this	(42	Ha)	
being	within	the	City	of	Carlisle	and		
(4	Ha)	within	rural	settlements.	There	
have	been	encouraging	signs	of	
investment	in	existing	employment	
sites,	including	the	award	of	LEP	
funding	to	enable	qualitative	
improvements,	and	the	City	Council	
is	committed	to	ongoing	engagement	
with	stakeholders	and	joint	working	
to	secure	further	inward	investment	
and	promote	opportunities	within	
the	District.	Whilst	the	allocation	and	
existing	Primary	Employment	Areas	
will	be	the	focus	for	new	employment	
related	development,	this	does	not	
preclude	additional	employment	34
developments	coming	forward	out	
with	these	sites	where	such	proposals	
would	act	to	diversify	and	strengthen	
the	employment	offer	in	the	District.	
In	these	circumstances	the	merits	of	
individual	 proposals	 would	 be	assessed	
on	a	case	by	case	basis	against	the	
suite	of	relevant	policies	within	the	
Local	Plan.
3.21	 The	identification	of	surplus	land	(some	
243	Ha)	at	the	Ministry	of	Defence	
owned	Longtown	munitions	base	and	
its	promotion	for	commercial	purposes	
represents,	owing	to	its	scale,	a	
significant	economic	opportunity	within	
the	District	within	the	life	of	the	Plan	
and	beyond.	The	opportunity	lends	
itself	to	manufacturing,	storage	and	
distribution	related	uses,	through	either	
making	use	of	existing	buildings	or	
through	the	development	of	new	ones.	
The	site’s	greatest	assets	are	its	ability	
to	operate	as	a	dry	port	owing	to	its	
excellent	rail	links,	its	proximity	to	the	
M6	and	M74,	 and	its	potential	 to	exploit	
linkages	with	the	Port	of	Workington.	3.22	 Identification	of	the	opportunity	at	the	
MOD	Longtown	site	within	the	Cumbria	
LEP’s	Strategic	Economic	Plan	2014-
2024,	and	recent	award	of	LEP	funding,	
is	testament	to	the	economic	potential	
of	the	site	with	initial	marketing	of	
the	opportunity,	branded	as	‘Solway	
45’,	revealing	strong	interest	in	it	as	
a	destination	for	inward	investment.	
The	City	Council	are	committed	to	
working	with	the	relevant	stakeholders,	
including	those	in	Scotland	given	the	
proximity	of	the	site	to	the	border,	to	
ensure	that	the	potential	benefits	of	
developing	the	site	are	maximised	and	
that	importantly	any	adverse	impacts	of	
doing	so	are	avoided.
3.23	 Whilst	it	is	not	considered	appropriate	
to	pursue	a	specific	employment	land	
uptake	target	through	the	Local	Plan,	
take	up	rates	will	be	monitored	and	this	
stance	will	be	kept	under	review.	
3.24	 Carlisle	City	Centre	is	recognised	as	
the	main	retail,	leisure,	service	and	
administrative	centre	for	a	sub	region	encompassing	the	majority	of	Cumbria	
and	which	extends	into	South	West	
Scotland	and	the	Scottish	Borders.	
In	catchment	terms	the	City	Centre	
caters	for	almost	500,000	people	and	
therefore	provides	a	higher	order	role	
for	both	residents	and	businesses	in	
the	region.	
3.25	 The	Carlisle	Retail	Study	(2012)	
identifies	that	whilst	the	City	Centre	
was	considered	to	be	vital	and	viable,	
it	was	not	achieving	its	full	potential	
due	to	existing	constraints	such	as	
its	historic	core	(attractive	asset	but	
restricts	change/expansion),	small	and	
historic	retail	accommodation	(size	and	
configuration	of	units)	and	department	
stores	occupying	multiple	(irregular)	
co-joined	units.	Consequently	the	
study	identifies	that	improving	the	
performance	and	overall	future	vitality	
and	viability	of	the	City	Centre	will	only	
be	achieved	if	new	comparison	retail	
provision	is	delivered	which	is		
of	sufficient	quality	to	add	to	the	
existing	offer.	35
3.26	 In	order	to	maintain	and	enhance	
its	status,	and	in	accordance	with	
national	policy,	the	City	Centre	will	
be	the	primary	focus	for	further	
comparison	retail	development	across	
the	plan	period.	Whilst	capacity	and	
opportunities	exist	within	the	Primary	
Shopping	Area	to	accommodate	
additional	retail	floor	space,	including	
within	The	Lanes	Shopping	Centre,	
land	has	been	identified	through	
Policy	SP	4	within	the	Local	Plan,	
through	a	potential	future	expansion	
of	the	Primary	Shopping	Area,	to	
accommodate	up	to	an	additional	
18,700m2	net	Class	A1	comparison	
(non-food)	retail	floor	space	over	the	
period	to	2030,	which	is	identified	as	
necessary	by	the	Carlisle	Retail	Study	
(2012).	As	with	other	key	elements	of	
the	spatial	strategy	the	delivery	and	
pipeline	of	additional	comparison	retail	
floor	space	will	be	kept	under	regular	
review.3.27	 Beyond	the	City	Centre	the	Carlisle	
Retail	Study	(2012)	highlights	the	
importance	of	a	network	of	local	
centres	which	perform	an	important	
top-up	function	from	a	convenience	
retail	perspective	as	well	as	in	providing	
access	to	other	important	local	
services	and	facilities.	The	network	of	
local	centres	considered	by	the	study	
has	been	reviewed	and	expanded	as	
part	of	the	Local	Plan	process,	and	a	
distinction	has	been	made	between	
district	and	local	centres.	Accordingly,	
the	provision	for	retailing,	leisure	and	
other	‘main	town	centre	uses’	will	be	
based,	in	accordance	with	national	
policy,	on	the	need	to	protect	and	
enhance	the	vitality	and	viability	of	this	
hierarchy	of	centres.
3.28	 Evidence	in	the	form	of	the	Strategic	
Housing	Land	Availability	Assessment	
(SHLAA)	and	Employment	Land	
Availability	Position	Statement	
support	that	there	are	relatively	limited	
opportunities	to	meet	development	needs	on	previously	developed	land.	
This	largely	reflects	that	previous	efforts	
and	planning	regimes	have	succeeded	
in	bringing	previously	developed	land	
across	the	District	back	into	beneficial	
use.	Opportunities	will	however	
be	taken	to	re-use	and	redevelop	
previously	developed,	underused	and	
vacant	land	where	it	exists,	particularly	
within	the	urban	area	of	Carlisle	where	
such	opportunities	can	also	act	as	a	
catalyst	for	wider	urban	regeneration	
and	renewal.
3.29	 In	order	to	support	the	rural	economy	
and	thriving	rural	communities,	
development	proposals	of	an	
appropriate	scale	and	nature,	which	
are	commensurate	with	their	setting,	
will	be	supported	within	the	District’s	
rural	settlements.	This	approach	will	
consider	proposals	on	a	case	by	case	
basis	on	their	individual	merits,	and	
against	other	policies	of	relevance	36
within	the	Local	Plan,	and	is	considered	
preferable	to	a	prescriptive	approach	
particularly	given	the	diversity	of	the	
many	rural	settlements	within	the	
District.	
3.30	 Within	the	open	countryside	
development	proposals	will	be	
assessed	against	the	need	to	be	in		
the	location	specified.	This	approach	
is	necessary	to	ensure	that	sustainable	
patterns	of	development	prevail	
and	that	importantly	unnecessary	
and	unjustified	encroachment	into	
and	urbanisation	of	the	District’s	
countryside	and	fine	landscapes	is	
avoided,	in	keeping	with	the	objectives	
of	national	policy.37
Policy SP 3 - Broad Location for Growth: Carlisle South 
A broad location for growth for a major mixed use development, 
focusing on housing, is identified on the Key Diagram at 
Carlisle South. The release and phasing of Carlisle South will 
be informed by a Development Plan Document inclusive of an 
Infrastructure Delivery Strategy.  
To support the housing development, there will be a requirement 
for primary and secondary schools, employment and retail sites, 
community facilities, open space, green and other infrastructure 
including highways and transport.
The development of this area will be in accordance with a 
masterplan which will be approved as a Development Plan 
Document. The study area for the masterplan will include the 
whole of the undeveloped extent beyond the city’s existing 
southern edge and any existing allocations.
The purpose of the masterplan will be as follows:
1. to provide more detail on how and when the strategic 
requirements set out in this policy will be delivered;
2. to set a framework to guide the preparation of future 
planning applications;
3. to provide a framework against which future planning 
applications will be assessed;4. to enable and support the co-ordination and timely delivery 
of infrastructure provision; and
5. to facilitate the delivery of land release to help address the 
imbalance of employment land between the north and south 
of the City.
The potential for the future development of a southern relief 
road linking Junction 42 of the M6 with the southern end of the 
A689 will be an integral part of the masterplan.
To enable a comprehensive and coordinated development 
approach, piecemeal or unplanned development proposals 
within the area which are likely to prejudice its delivery 
including the infrastructure required for the area will not be 
permitted.
To ensure that Carlisle South is deliverable when required, work 
on masterplanning the area will commence in the early years of 
the plan period.38
Justification
3.31	 The	NPPF	(para	47)	states	that	in	order	
to	deliver	a	wide	choice	of	high	quality	
homes,	and	to	boost	significantly	
the	supply	of	housing,	local	planning	
authorities	should:	“Identify	a	supply	
of	specific,	developable	sites	or	broad	
locations	for	growth,	for	years	6-10	
and,	where	possible,	for	years	11-15”.
3.32	 The	NPPF	also	states	that	the	supply	
of	new	homes	can	sometimes	be	
best	achieved	through	planning	
for	larger	scale	development,	such	
as	new	settlements	or	extensions	
to	existing	villages	and	towns	that	
follow	the	principles	of	Garden	Cities.	
Paragraph	52	states:	“Working	with	
the	support	of	their	communities,	local	
planning	authorities	should	consider	
whether	such	opportunities	provide	
the	best	way	of	achieving	sustainable	
development.	In	doing	so,	they	should	
consider	whether	it	is	appropriate	
to	establish	Green	Belt	around	or	
adjoining	any	such	new	development”.	3.33	 Policy	SP	2	sets	out	the	overall	housing	
target	and	identifies	that	specific	sites	
have	been	identified	within	the	Plan,	
through	Policy	HO	1,	alongside	an	
allowance	for	windfall	developments,	to	
accommodate	the	majority	of	growth.	
Policy	SP	3	makes	provision	for	the	
development	of	additional	housing	(and	
associated	infrastructure),	by	setting	
out	a	broad	location	for	growth	at	
Carlisle	South.	
3.34	 The	broad	location	is	of	such	a	size	
that	it	would	deliver	a	strategic	number	
of	houses	and	necessary	supporting	
development	such	as	schools,	
employment,	retail	and	community	
facilities,	open	space	and	green	and	
other	infrastructure	for	the	District,	in	a	
location	bordering	the	southern	edge	
of	Carlisle,	where	the	Plan	indicates	
future	development	for	housing	and	a	
range	of	complementary	uses	would	be	
appropriate	in	principle.	Future	growth	
in	this	direction	is	considered	the	most	appropriate	option	for	meeting	longer	
term	development	needs	within	the	
District	including	beyond	the	plan	
period.
3.35	 The	delivery	of	Carlisle	South	as	a	
strategic	growth	option	may	also	help	
to	deliver	in	the	long	term	a	southern	
link	road	from	the	A689	(western	
bypass)	to	Junction	42	of	the	M6,	
and	afford	opportunities	to	secure	
investment	in	employment	premises		
in	the	strategic	M6	corridor.
3.36	 Policy	SP	3	makes	clear	that	the	
development	of	Carlisle	South	as	a	
broad	location	would	be	governed	
by	future	masterplanning	work,	and	it	
would	be	through	this	process	where	
consideration	would	be	afforded	to	the	
detail	of	the	scale	and	nature	of	the	
development	and	its	boundaries	and	to	
the	infrastructure	necessary	to	support	
growth.	This	process	would	also	
inform	the	release	date	and	phasing	of	
development	in	this	area.	Maintaining	39
adequate	distances	between	the	major	
mixed	use	development	and	existing	
settlements	in	the	wider	locality,	in	
order	to	avoid	any	coalescence	and	
preserve	their	distinctiveness,	would	
be	a	valid	and	undoubtedly	essential	
approach	of	any	such	work.	
3.37	 Future	masterplanning	work	would	
be	undertaken	in	partnership	with	
stakeholders	and	be	subject	to	its	own	
public	consultation.	Such	work	would	
take	forward	the	outcomes	through	to	
the	production	of	a	Development	Plan	
Document.	It	would	then	set	the	policy	
framework	for	any	future	planning	
applications	and	make	clear	the	
requirement	for	individual	applications	
to	demonstrate	how	they	align	with	
the	masterplan	including	how	they	will	
contribute	to	the	delivery	of	strategic	
infrastructure.3.38	 The	identification	of	Carlisle	South	in	
the	Plan	does	not	imply	that	the	whole	
area	should	be	developed.	Within	
this	wider	area,	specific	and	linked	
development	sites	will	be	identified	
and	allocated	for	specific	uses,	taking	
account	of	infrastructure	needs	and	
land	constraints	through	the	processes	
outlined.
3.39	 It	would	prejudice	the	strategy	of	the	
Plan	 if	individual	 sites	 within	 the	Carlisle	
South	area	came	forward	until	such	
time	as	the	intended	Development	Plan	
Document,	inclusive	of	an	infrastructure	
delivery	strategy,	is	adopted.	It	
would	also	prejudice	the	delivery	of	
infrastructure.40
Policy SP 4 - Carlisle City Centre and Caldew Riverside
In order to maintain and enhance its status, Carlisle City Centre, 
as defined on the Policies Map, will be the principal focus for 
comparison retail within the District, in addition to leisure, office 
and other main town centre uses.  
Development proposals within the City Centre should support its 
vitality and viability and respond to opportunities to:
1. create a diverse mix of uses, including City Centre living, which 
support vitality through generating daytime and evening activity;
2. preserve or enhance the character, appearance and wider 
setting of the City Centre, Botchergate and Portland Square/
Chatsworth Square Conservation Areas and contribute towards 
the delivery of objectives within their respective Management 
Plans;
3. create new and enhance the existing public realm through 
imaginative hard and soft landscaping; 
4. improve connectivity within the City Centre specifically with 
regards to increasing pedestrian and cycle permeability and 
accessibility; and
5. bring back into beneficial use vacant and redundant buildings 
and upper floors particularly where to do so would increase  
City Centre living or generate job growth. Land to the north of Lowther Street including Rickergate has 
been identified for a potential future expansion of the Primary 
Shopping Area. Retail led development proposals within this 
area will be supported where they are in response to identified 
needs, are guided by a comprehensive strategy and where 
it can be demonstrated that the proposal would integrate 
effectively with the existing Primary Shopping Area. Proposals 
within this area which would prejudice the ability to respond to 
an identified need to deliver additional comparison retail floor 
space will be unlikely to be supported, unless the benefits of 
doing so outweigh the benefits of safeguarding the potential 
expansion.
To the south of the City Centre a notable and significant 
opportunity exists in the locality of the Citadel, as defined on 
the Policies Map, to reuse and redevelop buildings and land 
for a mix of uses which could act as a catalyst to enhance the 
vitality and viability of the southern extent of the City Centre, 
including Botchergate, and further improve the sense of arrival 
for visitors using this important historic and iconic gateway. 
Consideration will be afforded to progressing a development 
brief for this locality to ensure that the opportunity to deliver a 
comprehensive and strategic development across this area is 
safeguarded. This approach will also ensure that the potential 41
benefits are maximised and that any opportunities to accelerate 
delivery are identified. Proposals will be supported providing 
that they do not prejudice any longer term opportunities 
and respect the significance of the heritage assets which 
characterise this area. 
Caldew Riverside, as defined on the Policies Map, constitutes 
a significant regeneration opportunity outwith but in close 
proximity to the City Centre, to bring back into beneficial use 
land for a mix of uses which would complement those found 
in the City Centre and in doing so aid its overall attractiveness. 
Development proposals for main town centres uses on this site 
will be considered on their merits, and should be accompanied 
by a sequential and impact test in accordance with Policy EC 
6, to ensure that any proposed scheme does not threaten the 
delivery of sequentially preferable sites and the health of the 
City Centre Primary Shopping Area. Development proposals 
should demonstrate how they would contribute to the delivery 
of the comprehensive redevelopment of the wider site and 
positively interact with the River Caldew, including enhancing 
the riverside walk/cycle way, as well as improving linkages with 
the City’s West Walls and the City Centre beyond.
All proposals will need to consider their impacts on the 
transportation network.	Justification
3.40	 Carlisle	City	Centre	is	the	main	retail,	leisure,	service	and	
administrative	centre	for	a	sub	region	encompassing	the	
majority	of	Cumbria	and	which	extends	into	South	West	
Scotland	and	the	Scottish	Borders.	Due	to	its	historic	
status	and	heritage	assets	it	is	also	an	important	visitor	
destination,	and	a	key	economic	driver	which	is	reflective	
of	the	roles	it	performs	and	jobs	these	roles	give	rise	to.	In	
order	to	maintain	this	status	and	ensure	that	its	offer	keeps	
pace	with	a	growing	population	and	expectations,	there	is	
a	need	to	plan	positively	for	the	future	of	the	City	Centre.
3.41	 The	extent	of	the	City	Centre	is	defined	on	the	Policies	
Map.	This	area	will,	in	accordance	with	national	policy		
and	Policy	SP	2	of	the	Local	Plan,	be	the	principal	focus	
for	main	town	centre	uses,	with	comparison	(non-food)	
retail	further	focussed	within	the	Primary	Shopping	Area	
within	the	City	Centre	in	accordance	with	Policy	EC	3	of	
the	Local	Plan.
3.42	 The	Council	commissioned	consultants	to	prepare	the	
City	Centre	Development	Framework	(CCDF)	to	guide	the	
consideration	of	future	development	proposals	in	the	City	
to	2030.	Policy	SP	4	seeks	to	embed	the	key	principles	to	
emerge	from	this	work	within	the	Local	Plan	and	to	take	
forward	the	key	development	opportunities	identified.	42
3.43	 The	overriding	objective	for	
development	within	the	City	Centre	
will	be	to	contribute	to	maintaining	
and	where	possible	enhancing,	in	
accordance	with	national	policy,	its	
vitality	and	viability.	The	need	for	
proposals	to	contribute	towards	a	
diverse	mix	of	uses	reflects	a	desire		
to	act	to	ensure	vitality	throughout		
both	the	daytime	and	evening	
economies,	and	in	doing	so	expand		
the	City	Centre	offer.
3.44	 The	City	Centre	is	covered	in	its		
entirety	by	conservation	area	
designations	which	serve	to	reinforce	
its	historic	status.	Botchergate	is	
currently	identified	as	a	Conservation	
Area	at	Risk	and	it	is	therefore	
imperative	that	opportunities	are	taken	
to	contribute	towards	the	achievement	
of	actions	within	its	adopted	
management	plan	in	order	to	help	
reverse	its	decline.	Whilst	management	
plans	are	not	yet	in	place	for	the	
City	Centre	and	Portland	Square/
Chatsworth	Square	Conservation	Areas,	proposals	will	be	expected	
to	contribute	towards	the	delivery	of	
objectives	within	these	once	in	place.	
3.45	 The	public	realm	within	the	City	
Centre	exerts	a	significant	influence	
on	the	perceived	quality	of	the	City	
Centre	and	its	overall	attractiveness	
as	a	destination.	Whilst	there	has	
been	significant	investment	in	public	
realm	within	key	areas	of	the	City	
Centre,	there	remains	a	need	to	
improve	its	quality	in	other	parts.	The	
City	Council	have	commissioned	a	
public	realm	framework	as	a	means	of	
helping	to	identify	and	prioritise	further	
enhancements,	and	development	
proposals	should	consider	how	
they	can	assist	such	efforts.	Major	
development	proposals	within	or	on	
the	edge	of	the	City	Centre	should	also	
consider	how	they	can	help	to	expand	
the	public	realm	network	through	
opening	up	access	to	high	quality	
public	space.3.46	 Connectivity	between	parts	of	the	City	
Centre,	and	between	the	City	Centre	
and	adjoining	areas	and/or	attractions,	
is	not	as	good	as	it	could	be.	Whilst	
in	some	regards	connectivity	could	
be	improved	through	more	simplistic	
measures	such	as	enhanced	signage,	
at	the	other	end	of	the	spectrum	more	
creative	solutions	are	required	to	
overcome	the	severance	effect	of	key	
vehicular	routes	which	pass	through	
the	City	Centre.	Again	development	
proposals	should	consider	how	they	
can	assist	to	improve	connectivity,	
not	least	through	a	high	quality	and	
inclusive	design	approach.	
3.47	 There	remains	potential	across	the	City	
Centre	to	bring	back	into	beneficial	use	
upper	floors	with	the	introduction	of	
City	Centre	living	and/or	proposals	for	
offices	and	other	uses	which	generate	
job	growth	proven	to	positively	
enhance	vitality.	Such	proposals	will,	
subject	to	conforming	to	other	policies	
of	relevance	within	the	Local	Plan,	be	
supported.	43
3.48	 A	key	objective	of	the	CCDF	was	to	
explore	whether	and	where	within	the	
City	Centre	additional	A1	comparison	
(non-food)	retail	floor	space	could	be	
accommodated.	The	need	to	do	so	
reflects	the	findings	of	the	Carlisle	
Retail	Study	(2012)	and	both	the	
quantitative	and	qualitative	need	for	
this	form	of	additional	floor	space	
within	the	City	Centre	within	the		
plan	period.	
3.49	 The	CCDF	concludes	that	the	most	
appropriate	and	logical	expansion	of	
the	Primary	Shopping	Area	within	the	
City	Centre	would	be	to	its	north,	on	
land	to	the	north	and	east	of	Lowther	
Street.	Accordingly	this	area,	which	
is	also	that	where	land	availability	is	
currently	greatest	and	market	interest	
strongest,	has	been	identified	on	the	
Policies	Map	as	a	future	extension	of	
the	Primary	Shopping	Area.	The	extent	
of	land	identified	reflects	that	a	number	
of	development	options	exist	within	this	
area,	as	evidenced	through	the	CCDF	
and	other	private	sector	indicative	proposals,	through	which	the	required	
development	needs	could	be	met.	
The	identification	of	this	land	in	this	
manner	is	considered	to	afford	a	strong	
degree	of	flexibility	whilst	at	the	same	
time	providing	a	sufficient	degree	of	
certainty	to	aid	investment	decisions.	
3.50	 In	order	to	be	supported	a	fundamental	
aspect	of	any	proposal	within	this	
area	will	be	demonstrating	how	the	
development	scheme	integrates	
effectively	with	the	existing	Primary	
Shopping	Area,	particularly	from	a	
pedestrian	accessibility	perspective.	
Furthermore,	such	proposals	should		
be	guided	by	a	comprehensive	strategy	
to	ensure	a	strategic	approach	to	
the	actual	expansion	of	the	Primary	
Shopping	Area	prevails.	Proposals	
which	would	prejudice	the	ability	of	the	
land	to	the	north	and	east	of	Lowther	
Street	to	respond	to	the	identified	need	
to	deliver	additional	comparison	retail	
floor	space	will	not	be	supported.	3.51	 The	CCDF	also	identifies	that	a	
notable	and	significant	redevelopment	
opportunity	exists	to	the	south	of	the	
City	Centre	centred	on	the	Citadel	and	
former	Courts	buildings.	This	reflects	
that	these	 buildings	 are	shortly	 (in	2016)	
to	be	vacated	by	Cumbria	County	
Council,	and	equally	that	the	adjacent	
properties	fronting	English	Street	and	
Victoria	Viaduct	are	also	in	public	
ownership.	
3.52	 While	this	location	does	present	a	real	
opportunity	to	deliver	a	transformative	
mixed	use	development	(for	a	variety	
of	main	town	centre	uses,	alongside	
residential,	educational	or	institutional	
uses),	realising	this	will	not	be	without	
challenges.	Development	will	need	
to	respect	the	historic	character	and	
fabric	of	the	site,	and	comprehensive	
development	will	be	dependent	on	
assembling	a	number	of	leases.	
Reflecting	these	characteristics,	it		
may	be	that	the	redevelopment	of		
this	site	will	need	to	take	place	on	a	
phased	basis.44
3.53	 In	order	to	ensure	that	the	opportunity	
to	deliver	a	comprehensive	and	
strategic	development	across	the		
wider	Citadel	area	in	the	future	is	
not	lost,	the	Council	will	consider	
progressing	a	development	brief	for	
the	site	in	conjunction	with	Cumbria	
County	Council.	Importantly	this	
process	may	also	help	to	identify	
opportunities	to	accelerate	the	
delivery	of	a	more	comprehensive	
redevelopment	and	ensure	that	the	
benefits	associated	with	redeveloping	
this	site	in	acting	as	a	catalyst	to	
improve	the	vitality	and	viability	of	the	
southern	extent	of	the	City	Centre,	
including	Botchergate,	are	maximised.	
3.54	 Caldew	Riverside	constitutes	a	
significant	regeneration	opportunity	to	
bring	back	into	beneficial	use	land	for	
a	mix	of	uses	outwith,	and	although	
in	close	proximity	physically	distinct	
from,	the	City	Centre.	The	site	is	not	however	without	its	constraints	and	
is	contaminated	in	parts	and	subject	
to	the	risk	of	flooding.	Planning	
permission	is	in	place	for	a	food	
superstore	on	part	of	the	site	with	
the	consent	for	this	having	been	
lawfully	implemented	but	not	currently	
progressed.	Based	on	the	level	of	need	
identified	in	the	Carlisle	Retail	Study	the	
site	is	not	relied	upon	to	accommodate	
any	main	town	centre	uses.
3.55	 The	CCDF	identifies	that	a	mix	of	uses	
could	potentially	be	accommodated	
on	this	site	subject	to	addressing	
the	relevant	policy	tests	elsewhere	
within	the	Local	Plan	and	providing	
these	uses	do	not	undermine	the	
delivery	of	sequentially	preferable	site	
opportunities	within	the	City	Centre	
including	the	proposed	extension	of	
the	Primary	Shopping	Area	and	the	
redevelopment	of	the	Citadel	complex.	
The	delivery	of	main	town	centre	uses	
on	these	sequentially	preferable	sites	will	be	given	clear	priority	over	Caldew	
Riverside.		In	these	circumstances	
development	proposals	for	the	site	will	
be	considered	on	their	merits	and	be	
expected	to	deliver	enhanced	walking	
and	cycling	links	and	to	aid	the	overall	
attractiveness	 of	the	City	 Centre	 through	
the	delivery	of	uses	which	would	
complement	those	found	within	it.	
3.56	 Finally	all	proposals	will	need	to	
consider	their	impacts	on	the	
transportation	network,	in	accordance	
with	Policies	SP	5	and	IP	2	of	the		
Local	Plan,	to	ensure	that	access	to	key	
sites	and	key	routes	are	not	adversely	
affected.45
Policy SP 5 - Strategic Connectivity
The City Council will support improvements to the transport 
network, in partnership with delivery partners and operators, 
including the Highway Authority, in order to support the 
District’s growth aspirations and Carlisle’s role as a strategic 
transport hub. 
Proposals in line with the objectives of the 3rd Cumbria Local 
Transport Plan will be supported. Interventions to facilitate 
growth as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan will be 
prioritised. Opportunities will also be taken to:
1.  increase the provision for walking and cycling, including 
improved connectivity across the District;
2.  retain and enhance existing public transport services and to 
improve and modernise key public transport infrastructure 
including Carlisle Railway Station and interchange; 
3.  promote economic growth and seek to attract new and 
growing investment along the M6 corridor; 
4.  improve transport networks for all modes to ensure access 
and movement are maintained; 
5.  develop a southern relief road linking Junction 42 of the M6 
with the southern end of the A689 as part of developing the 
broad location of Carlisle South;6.  enhance the appearance of key gateways;
7.  secure a modal shift in the transport of freight from 
road to rail and improve connections with the Port of 
Workington; and
8.  support Carlisle Airport as a gateway for business, 
tourism and in helping to improve access to global 
markets and destinations.
The lines of disused railways which have the potential for 
future use as green corridors for walking and cycling, or to 
facilitate the reinstatement of public transport services, will  
be protected. Specifically, the alignment of the former  
Carlisle - Longtown - Borders railway will, as far as possible, 
be protected through recognition of the longer term aspiration 
to reinstate the Carlisle-Borders-Edinburgh rail connection.
Land will be safeguarded and/or allocated through the 
planning process to support the realisation of new or 
improved transport infrastructure. 46
Justification
3.57	 Carlisle	fulfils	an	important	role	as	a	
strategic	transport	hub	for	the	wider	
Cumbrian	sub-region.	The	strategically	
important	M6	passes	through	the	
District	from	south	to	north	and	
links	to	Scotland	beyond	as	well	as	
important	east	and	west	connections	
to	Newcastle	and	the	Northeast	and	
West	Cumbria	including	the	Port	of	
Workington	and	Britain’s	Energy	Coast.	
Carlisle	also	hosts	Cumbria’s	principal	
railway	station	with	Carlisle	Station	
fulfilling	an	important	gateway	and	
rail	interchange	on	the	strategically	
important	West	Coast	Mainline.	A	
number	of	strategic	green	corridors		
and	cycle	ways	traverse	through	the	
District	and	link	to	the	Lake	District,	
Yorkshire	Dales	and	Northumberland	
National	Parks.	Carlisle	Airport	is	also		
a	strategically	important	transport	
asset	for	both	Carlisle	and	the	wider	
sub-region,	with	aspirations	to	increase	
its	role	and	function	over	the	next	few	
years.3.58	 Carlisle’s	strategic	connectivity	makes		
it	an	accessible	and	attractive	
location	for	investment	and	supports	
and	services	the	wider	County.	The	
need	to	protect	and	further	enhance	
this	connectivity	has	however	been	
identified	as	critical	in	supporting	not	
only	the	District’s	growth	aspirations	
but	also	those	of	the	wider	County.	The	
need	for	this	is	echoed	by	the	Cumbria	
LEP	which,	through	its	Strategic	
Economic	Plan,	identifies	connectivity	
as	one	of	four	key	priorities	stating	
that	investment	is	required	in	the	full	
range	of	Cumbria’s	strategic	networks,	
including	rail,	road,	cycleways	and	
public	transport	to	improve	connectivity	
within	and	to	the	sub-region.
3.59	 The	3rd	Cumbria	Local	Transport	Plan	
(LTP)	sets	out	objectives	and	plans	for	
developing	transport	across	Cumbria	
including	within	Carlisle.	The	overriding	
objective	of	the	Cumbria	LTP	is	to	
ensure	a	high	quality	and	resilient	highway	and	transport	network	that	
everyone	can	access,	which	supports	
the	development	of	a	sustainable	
and	prosperous	low	carbon	economy	
and	ensures	Cumbria’s	outstanding	
environment	can	be	enjoyed.	The	
policies	and	allocations	within	this	
Local	Plan	help	to	contribute	to	this	
ambition	through	acting	to	reduce	
the	need	to	travel,	reduce	the	need	
to	use	private	vehicles,	promoting	
accessibility	to	jobs,	shopping,	leisure	
and	community	facilities	by	public	
transport,	walking	and	cycling	and	
promoting	more	sustainable	transport	
choices	for	both	people	and	freight.	
Specific	proposals	which	further	aid	
the	delivery	of	the	LTP	objectives	will	
be	supported.
3.60	 In	order	to	facilitate	the	levels	of	
growth	set	out	in	the	Local	Plan,	
interventions	identified	through	the	
Infrastructure	Delivery	Plan	(IDP)	will	be	
prioritised.	The	IDP	acts	to	document	47
and	continually	review	infrastructure	
requirements,	including	transport	
infrastructure,	and	subsequently	
to	monitor	whether	the	delivery	of	
infrastructure	is	keeping	pace	with	
development.	The	IDP	has	been	
developed	with	the	co-operation	of	a	
wide	range	of	infrastructure	providers	
including	transport	partners	and	
operators.
3.61	 Opportunities	will	also	be	taken	where	
they	arise	to	assist	in	the	realisation	
of	a	number	of	strategic	interventions	
listed	in	Policy	SP	5.	These	include	
improving	opportunities	for	walking	
and	cycling;	modernising	public	
transport	infrastructure;	acting	to	
capitalise	on	the	economic	potential	of	
the	M6	corridor;	improving	transport	
networks;	enhancing	the	appearance	
of	key	gateways;	securing	a	modal	
shift	in	the	transport	of	freight	
from	road	to	rail	particularly	within	
the	context	presented	by	the	part	commercialisation	of	surplus	land	
at	MOD	Longtown	and	potential	
connectivity	to	the	Port	of	Workington;	
and	supporting	Carlisle	Airport	as	a	
gateway	for	business,	tourism	and	in	
helping	to	improve	access	to	global	
markets	and	destinations.	
3.62	 The	lines	of	disused	railways	offer	
unique	opportunities	to	improve	
connectivity	through	their	reinstatement	
as	transport	corridors.	Every	effort	
will	therefore	be	made	to	protect	
the	potential	of	disused	alignments	
within	the	District	as	far	as	is	possible.	
Of	particular	relevance	within	the	
District	is	the	alignment	of	the	former	
Carlisle-Longtown-Borders	railway	
in	light	of	the	Campaign	for	Borders	
Rail	and	cross	boundary	longer	term	
aspirations	to	reinstate	the	Carlisle-
Borders-Edinburgh	rail	connection.	Of	
relevance	to	these	aspirations	is	the	
Scottish	Government’s	decision	to	re-
open	the	section	of	this	route	between	Edinburgh	and	Tweedbank	which	is	
currently	under	construction,	albeit	that	
no	firm	proposals	are	yet	in	place	to	
further	extend	this	route.
3.63	 Where	land	is	identified	as	being	
essential	to	the	delivery	of	transport	
interventions	which	have	a	reasonable	
prospect	of	delivery,	it	will	be	
safeguarded	where	necessary	through	
the	planning	process.	No	such	
safeguarding	is	considered	necessary	
at	the	current	time,	but	if	needed	
throughout	the	life	of	the	Local	Plan	will	
be	achieved	through	the	partial	review	
of	the	Local	Plan	or	acting	to	bring	
forward	an	additional	Development	
Plan	Document.48
Policy SP 6 - Securing Good Design
Development proposals will be assessed against the following 
design principles. Proposals should:
1.  respond to the local context and the form of surrounding 
buildings in relation to density, height, scale, massing 
and established street patterns and by making use of 
appropriate materials and detailing; 
2.  take into consideration any important landscape or 
topographical features and respect local landscape 
character; 
3.  reinforce local architectural features to promote and 
respect local character and distinctiveness; 
4.  take into consideration the historic environment including 
both designated and undesignated heritage assets and 
their settings;
5.  ensure all components of the proposal, such as buildings, 
car parking, and new connections, open space and 
landscaping are accessible and inclusive to everyone, safe 
and well related to one another to ensure a scheme which 
is attractive and well integrated with its surroundings;
6.  seek to ensure that streets are designed, where 
appropriate, to encourage low vehicle speeds which allow 
streets to function as social spaces; 7.  ensure there is no adverse effect on the residential amenity of 
existing areas, or adjacent land uses, or result in unacceptable 
conditions for future users and occupiers of the development; 
8.  aim to ensure the retention and enhancement of existing trees, 
shrubs, hedges and other wildlife habitats through avoidance, 
including alternative design. If the loss of environmental features 
cannot be avoided, appropriate mitigation measures should be put 
in place and on-site replacement of those features will be sought; 
9.  include landscaping schemes (both hard and soft) to assist the 
integration of new development into existing areas and ensure  
that development on the edge of settlements is fully integrated  
into its surroundings; 
10.  ensure that the necessary services and infrastructure can be 
incorporated without causing unacceptable harm to retained 
features, or cause visual cluttering; 
11.  ensure that the layout and design incorporates adequate space  
for waste and recycling bin storage and collection; and
12.  when agreed by the Highway Authority, the reinstatement of 
existing traditional materials will also be sought, following repairs 
to roads, pavements, kerbs and underground services.
All proposals should be designed to maximise opportunities to  
employ sustainable design and construction techniques.49
Justification
3.64	 High	quality	design	is	an	integral	
part	of	sustainable	development	and	
accordingly	is	a	key	thrust	of	the	
Local	Plan’s	strategic	overarching	
strategy.	The	Plan	recognises	that	
good	design	is	essential	to	creating	
accessible,	inclusive,	attractive,	vibrant	
and	sustainable	places	with	a	strong	
sense	of	place,	in	which	people	want	
to	live,	work	and	have	fun.	This	policy	
applies	across	the	whole	spectrum	of	
development,	regardless	of	use	type	or	
scale;	all	new	development	is	expected	
to	be	well	designed	and	appropriate	to	
its	surroundings.
3.65	 Good	design	should	enhance	the	
quality	of	buildings	and	spaces	
by	considering	form	and	function,	
efficiency	and	effectiveness,	and	the	
potential	impact	of	a	development	
on	the	well	being	of	the	people	
who	will	use	and	view	it.	It	should	
be	sympathetic	to	the	needs	and	
requirements	of	different	use	classes	
and	localities.	3.66	 Good	design	should	be	the	aim	of	
everyone	involved	in	the	development	
process.	The	principles	in	this	
policy	will	help	to	ensure	that	the	
development	itself	is	not	only	well	
designed,	but	also	complements	and	
enhances	its	local	setting	whilst	being	
accessible	and	inclusive	to	everyone.	
Developments	should	also	seek	to	
encourage	a	healthy	lifestyle	through	
the	provision	of	opportunities	for	
walking	and	cycling,	and	safe	places	to	
play,	where	these	are	appropriate.
3.67	 In	areas	where	there	are	no	significant	
local	building	traditions	or	where	
positive	character	elements	are	lacking,	
proposals	should	seek	to	create	a	
strong	and	attractive	local	identity	
through	intelligent,	innovative	and	
imaginative	design.
3.68	 Landscaping	schemes	are	an	essential	
consideration	of	the	design	process.	
Landscaping	schemes	can	take	
two	forms:	soft	landscaping	which	includes	tree	and	shrub	planting;	
and	hard	landscaping	concerning	
paving,	walls	etc.	Where	appropriate,	
the	Council	may	require	the	partial	
implementation	of	a	landscaping	
scheme	prior	to	the	completion	of	the	
development	in	order	to	reduce	the	
impact	of	the	construction	works	on	
site	in	the	interim	period.	The	proposed	
development	should	be	situated	to	
reflect	the	mature	growth	of	species	
above	ground	and	landscaping	
schemes	should	take	account	of	the	
position	of	underground	services	and	
utilities,	ensuring	any	planting	does	not	
compromise	their	function.
3.69	 In	addition	to	this	policy	consideration	
must	also	be	given	to	any	additional	
design	guidance/policies	or	site	
specific	supplementary	planning	
documents	including	those	set	out	in	
neighbourhood	development	plans.50
Policy SP 7 - Valuing our Heritage and Cultural Identity
The Council will, through planning decisions and in fulfilling its 
wider functions, proactively manage and work with partners to 
protect and enhance the character, appearance, archaeological 
and historic value and significance of the District’s designated and 
undesignated heritage assets and their settings. 
Opportunities will also be pursued, to aid the promotion, 
enjoyment, understanding and interpretation of both heritage and 
cultural assets, as a means of maximising wider public benefits 
and in reinforcing Carlisle’s distinct identity. 
Key elements which contribute to the distinct identity of Carlisle 
District, and which will therefore be a priority for safeguarding and 
enhancing into the future, include;
1. the outstanding universal value of the World Heritage Site 
associated with the Roman frontier including Hadrian’s Wall and 
associated Roman sites such as Bew Castle;
2. medieval castles and other fortifications including Carlisle 
Castle and the City Walls, the Citadel, Brampton Mote, Bew 
Castle, Naworth Castle, Rose Castle, Scaleby Castle and other 
bastles and fortified houses;
3. Battle of the Solway Moss battlefield;4. the historic quarter of Carlisle City including the Cathedral 
and its precinct, Carlisle Castle and the City Walls, Tullie 
House Museum, the Market Cross, Old Town Hall and the 
Guildhall, as well as the important streets and spaces which 
interconnect and provide a setting for these assets;
5. important industrial heritage including Tindale, Forest Head 
Quarries and prominent and historically significant mill / 
factory buildings in West Carlisle including Dixon’s Chimney;
6. key religious sites and their settings including the Cathedral 
precinct, Brampton, Burgh by Sands, Lanercost, Wreay and 
Bewcastle Cross;
7. conservation areas across the District and particularly 
Botchergate and the City Centre which fulfil important  
social and economic functions for the District and wider 
sub-region; and
8. key cultural assets encompassing parklands, landscapes, 
museums, art galleries, public art, local food and drink and 
local customs and traditions.
As well as fulfilling its statutory obligations, the Council will:
 a)  seek to identify, protect and enhance locally identified 
heritage assets;51
 b)  promote heritage-led regeneration 
including in relation to development 
opportunities in the City Centre; 
 c)  produce conservation area 
appraisals and management plans; 
 d)  develop a positive strategy to 
safeguard the future of any heritage 
assets that are considered to be ‘at 
risk’; and
 e)  adopt a proactive approach to 
utilising development opportunities 
to increase the promotion and 
interpretation of the District’s rich 
archaeological wealth.
A more detailed suite of policies as a 
key mechanism through which to help 
safeguard the above assets and wider 
archaeological interest is set out in the 
historic environment chapter of the Plan.Justification
3.70	 The	historic	environment	plays	a	vitally	
important	role,	both	in	terms	of	keeping	
the	story	of	Carlisle’s	history	alive	for	
the	people	who	live	here	but	also	for	
the	economy	in	telling	visitors	that	
story.	It	is	a	source	of	local	pride	and	
identity,	as	well	as	being	a	valuable	
educational	and	economic	resource.	
It	is	central	to	the	character,	quality	
and	cultural	identity	of	the	District	and	
contributes	significantly,	from	a	social	
perspective,	to	quality	of	life.	The	
historic	environment	acts	as	a	stimulus	
and	inspiration	to	place	making	and	
plays	a	part	in	increasing	the	appeal	of	
the	area	as	a	place	to	live,	work,	visit	
and	invest	in.	
3.71	 The	District	contains	a	wealth	of	
heritage	and	cultural	assets	and	
evidence	which	have,	and	will	continue	
to,	inform	our	understanding	and	
interpretation	of	the	development	of	
the	District’s	historic	landscapes	and	
townscapes,	all	of	which	contribute	to	
its	identity	and	local	distinctiveness.	In	these	regards	it	is	pertinent	to	note	that	
whilst	much	is	known	about	the	past,	
much	 equally	 remains	 to	be	discovered.	
3.72	 Policy	SP	7	serves	to	ensure	that	this	
evidence	is	given	due	consideration	
in	planning	decisions	and,	aside	from	
planning	and	development	proposals,	
reaffirms	the	Council’s	commitment	
to	work	proactively	with	partners	
where	opportunities	arise	to	preserve,	
protect	and	enhance	the	character,	
appearance,	archaeological	and	
historic	value	of	heritage	and	cultural	
assets,	as	well	as	to	better	understand	
their	significance.	In	these	regards	
the	policy	sets	a	clear	and	important	
statement	of	intent	with	regards	to	both	
heritage	and	cultural	considerations	
playing	an	integral	part	in	local	decision	
making.
3.73	 The	Local	Plan	in	its	widest	sense	
seeks	to	achieve	this	aim	through	
ensuring	that	both	heritage	and	cultural	
assets	are	safeguarded	or	enhanced	52
for	the	future,	both	for	their	own	
heritage	and	cultural	merits	and	for	
the	wider	benefits	they	bring,	in	line	
with	the	NPPF .	Benefits	should	include	
improvements	in	the	quality	of	the	
historic	built	environment,	stimulation	
of	high	architectural	quality	in	new	
buildings,	creation	of	a	stronger	local	
identity	and	sense	of	place,	increased	
sustainability,	encouragement	of	
local	building	craft	skills,	greater	
opportunities	for	interpretation	and	use	
of	the	historic	environment	in	education	
and	increased	levels	of	investment	
and	tourism.	To	ensure	that	historic	
assets	make	a	positive	contribution	
towards	the	wider	economic,	social	
and	environmental	regeneration	of	
Carlisle	District,	it	is	important	that	they	
are	not	considered	in	isolation	but	are	
conserved	and	enhanced	within	their	
wider	context.	A	holistic	approach	
to	the	built	and	natural	environment	
maximises	opportunities	to	improve	
the	overall	image	and	quality	of	life	in	the	District	by	ensuring	that	the	historic	
context	informs	planning	decisions	and	
provides	opportunities	to	link	with	other	
environmental	infrastructure	initiatives,	
working	with	partners.	
3.74	 Like	most	places,	Carlisle	District	has	
a	number	of	heritage	assets	that	are	
considered	to	be	‘at	risk’.	The	Council	
will	work	with	partners	to	help	secure	
the	long	term	sustainable	future	of	such	
assets	and	aims	to	reduce	the	number	
of	buildings	and	areas	at	risk.	As	
part	of	this,	should	a	historic	building	
(designated	or	undesignated)	become	
vacant,	under-used,	or	derelict,	
the	council	will,	where	appropriate,	
encourage	its	owner	to	promote	its	
re-use,	or	its	more	efficient	existing	use	
where	this	preserves	or	enhances	its	
heritage	significance.	As	a	last	resort,	
the	Council	may	employ	more	robust	
measures	such	as	Amenity	Notices,	
Urgent	Works	Notices	and	Repairs	
Notices,	to	safeguard	finite	historic	
assets	from	unwarranted	loss.53
The Council will, through planning decisions and in fulfilling 
its wider functions, work with partners to develop a holistic 
approach to the protection and stewardship of the District’s 
green and blue infrastructure through a comprehensive and 
connected policy approach. 
Existing assets will be protected and, where possible, enhanced 
in order to establish a multifunctional, integrated and accessible 
green and blue infrastructure network which maximises wider 
public and ecological benefits.
New development will be required to work towards delivering, 
where appropriate and achievable, outcomes of the Carlisle 
Green Infrastructure Strategy. At a strategic level these include:
1. affording the highest level of protection to key blue and green 
assets and taking opportunities to enhance relationships 
with, views and the setting of aquatic assets such as the 
Rivers Eden, Caldew, and Petteril within the City; 
2. recognising and enhancing the function of and connectivity 
to Bitts and Rickerby Parks as strategic green infrastructure 
hubs for the City and wider District;
3. supporting and enhancing strategic green links including 
Hadrian’s Wall National Trail, the Cumbria Way, English 
Coastal Path and The Reivers Route;4. supporting and enhancing those assets which fulfil a key 
visitor and leisure, or other productive economic function 
including Bitts and Rickerby Parks, Talkin Tarn and 
Kershope Forest; and
5. protecting the lines of disused railways and encouraging, 
where appropriate and possible, proposals for their reuse  
for green transport links such as cycleways and footpaths, 
or as important wildlife corridors. 
Conditions, legal agreements and developer contributions 
will be sought to secure new or enhanced green and 
blue infrastructure provision on, or associated with, new 
development. Developers will be expected to provide some 
aspects of green and blue infrastructure within developments, 
ensuring that, where possible, they integrate with wider blue 
and green infrastructure networks. 
Where unavoidable harm is caused to a green infrastructure 
asset through development, the developer will be expected 
to replace or mitigate for this damage. Any replacement or 
mitigation measure will be expected to be of similar or better 
quality to that lost, including fulfilling the same functions 
effectively, and should be deployed as closely as possible to 
the affected green infrastructure asset.Policy SP 8 - Green and Blue Infrastructure54
Justification	
3.75	 ‘Green	infrastructure’	(GI)	is	a	term	
used	to	refer	to	the	living	network	
of	green	spaces,	water	and	other	
environmental	features	in	both	urban	
and	rural	areas.	It	is	often	used	in	
an	urban	context	to	cover	benefits	
provided	by	trees,	parks,	gardens,	
road	verges,	allotments,	cemeteries,	
woodlands,	rivers	and	wetlands,	but	is	
also	relevant	in	a	rural	context,	where	
it	might	refer	to	the	use	of	farmland,	
woodland,	wetlands	or	other	natural	
features.	In	some	instances,	GI	can	
also	provide	important	off-road	walking	
and	cycling	links,	contributing	in	part	to	
the	wider,	integrated	transport	network.	
‘Blue	infrastructure’	(BI)	refers	to	the	
aquatic	and	hydrological	networks	such	
as	rivers	and	canals	which	often	entail	
wider	corridors	and	therefore	go	hand	
in	hand	with	GI.	
3.76	 National	policy	expects	planning	
authorities	to	plan	positively	for	the	
creation,	protection,	enhancement	and	management	of	green	and	
blue	infrastructure	networks.	This	
reflects	that	beyond	the	key	role	
these	infrastructure	networks	play	
in	providing	a	pleasant	and	green	
environment,	they	also	constitute	an	
important	mechanism	for	building	
resilience	against	and	countering	
the	impacts	and	causes	of	climate	
change.	They	also	have	a	proven	and	
demonstrable	positive	impact	upon	
peoples’	quality	of	life	and	health	and	
well	being,	providing	both	pleasant	and	
safe	places	for	exercise	but	also	the	
sense	of	comfort	and	connection	to	the	
natural	environment,	providing	rich	and	
varied	habitats	that	allow	the	District’s	
flora	and	fauna	thrive.	Fundamentally	
they	also	play	a	key	role	in	supporting	
and	driving	economic	growth	and	
regeneration.	
3.77	 At	the	heart	of	Policy	SP	8	is	a	
presumption	against	the	loss	of	any	
components	of	GI	which	fulfil	or	have	the	potential	to	fulfil	valuable	functions	
unless	the	loss	of	such	assets	can	be	
mitigated.	Productive	landscapes	also	
fall	under	the	definition	of	GI	and	these	
landscapes,	which	help	drive	the	rural	
economy	through	forestry,	agriculture	
and	tourism,	will	be	protected	from	
inappropriate	development	through		
this	policy.	
3.78	 The	Carlisle	Green	Infrastructure	
Strategy	(2011)	sets	out	a	vision	
which	places	adopting	a	progressive	
approach	to	GI	at	the	heart	of	creating	
an	excellent	place	for	business,	
community	and	wildlife,	which	is	
confident	in	its	own	distinctiveness,	
strength	and	resilience,	ultimately	to	
assist	in	making	Carlisle	one	of	the	
best	places	in	the	UK	to	live,	work,	
invest	and	enjoy	life.	In	addition	to	a	
number	of	specific	actions	the	strategy	
highlights	four	key	benefits	of	using	GI	
as	follows:	55
•	 enhancing	the	image	and	perception	
of	the	District	through	improving	the	
aesthetics	and	environmental	quality		
of	key	areas	over	time;
•	 supporting	spatial	and	economic	
growth	by	creating	the	setting	and	
stimulus	for	this	as	well	as	making		
it	sustainable;
•	 to	improve	quality	of	life	through	
tackling	health	and	wellbeing	
inequalities	and	deprivation;	and	
•	 enhancing	sustainability	and	resilience	
through	presenting	an	opportunity	to	
future-proof	the	District.
3.79	 The	City	Council	will	work	with	partners	
to	help	realise	the	ambitions	of	the	GI	
Strategy	and	will	aim	to	ensure	that	
all	opportunities	are	taken	through	the	
planning	system	to	add	to,	enhance	
the	quality	of,	improve	the	functionality	
and	increase	the	connectivity	of	the	
District’s	green	and	blue	infrastructure	
networks.	3.80	 Applicants	for	all	development	
proposals	will	be	expected	to	consider	
and	be	designed	to	maximise	the	
full	range	of	benefits	of	green	and	
blue	infrastructure	affording	careful	
consideration	to	how	they	can	add	to	
and	integrate	with	existing	spaces	and	
the	wider	network.	Where	appropriate,	
provision	should	be	made	on	site	
for	green	infrastructure	through,	for	
example,	landscaping	and	open	space	
provision.	In	such	circumstances	
consideration	should	be	afforded	to	
the	functionality	of	such	components,	
for	example,	including	how	they	can	
equally	assist	with	climate	change	
adaptation	through	providing	natural	
shading	and	urban	cooling	or	in	
creating	valuable	habitat	to	support	
and	enable	biodiversity	to	flourish	or	to	
improve	ecological	connectivity.3.81	 The	Carlisle	Green	Infrastructure	
Strategy	(2011)	highlights	a	particular	
lack	of	accessible	green	space	within	
the	City	Centre,	emphasising	the	value	
this	places	on	those	green	spaces	that	
are	present.	In	these	circumstances	
and	in	other	areas	where	a	deficit	is	
identified,	developers	may	be	required	
to	contribute	towards	new	provision.	
This	approach	reflects	the	need	to	
ensure	that	this	form	of	infrastructure	
keeps	pace	with	development	and	
ultimately	that	those	proposals	which	
place	an	increased	demand	on	assets	
contribute	to	upgrading	capacity.	Such	
contributions	may	also	be	justified	on	
the	basis	of	the	necessity	to	improve	
the	quality	of	existing	assets	and/or	
to	improve	their	accessibility.	In	some	
circumstances	contributions	towards	
the	maintenance	of	these	assets	will	
also	be	justified.	The	imposition	of	
conditions	or	planning	obligations	will	
be	used	where	necessary	to	secure	
such	contributions.56
The Council will, through planning decisions and in fulfilling 
its wider functions, work with partners to proactively improve 
the health and sense of wellbeing of the District’s population, 
and reduce health inequalities. The Council will support 
development of new/enhanced healthcare infrastructure 
and will aim to ensure that all development contributes 
to enhanced health and wellbeing outcomes through the 
following measures:
1. creating high-quality and inclusive environments that 
support people in making healthy choices, and that 
make these choices easier by encouraging development 
proposals to maximise the opportunity for walking and 
cycling, social interaction, sport and physical activity, 
whilst providing accessible local services, facilities and 
jobs, a diverse and useable integrated network of green 
infrastructure assets and convenient public transport 
facilities;
2. providing high quality design which ensures that 
developments consider their lifetime quality, create safe and 
accessible environments and minimise and mitigate against 
potential harm from risks such as pollution and other 
environmental hazards;3. encouraging the development of decent homes that are 
adaptable for the life course of the occupiers; 
4. carrying out Health Impact Assessments for significant 
strategic proposals and for proposals that are likely to have 
a significant impact on the health and wellbeing of the local 
population, or particular groups within it, in order to identify 
measures to maximise the health benefits of development  
and avoid any potential adverse impacts; 
5. preparing for extreme weather events by creating 
environments and communities that are resilient to the 
impacts of extreme weather, ultimately caused by climate 
change; 
6. protecting and promoting the role of community food  
growing spaces including allotments, community orchards 
and community gardens in providing social and mental health 
benefits and access to healthy, affordable locally produced 
food as part of Carlisle’s role as a Food City; and 
7. maximising opportunities for renewable and decentralised 
energy.Policy SP 9 - Healthy and Thriving Communities57
Justification
3.82	 The	impact	of	our	environment	on	the	
health	and	wellbeing	of	the	population	
is	being	increasingly	recognised	in	
health	plans,	strategies	and	policy	
statements	and	in	national	planning	
policies.	Almost	every	decision	has	the	
potential	to	impact	upon	human	health	
and	wellbeing	and	Carlisle’s	status	as	
a	Healthy	City	adds	additional	focus	
to	the	health	and	wellbeing	benefits	
that	are	attainable	from	sustainable	
development,	in	creating	environments	
that	allow	people	to	reach	their	
full	health	potential	at	all	stages	of	
their	lives.	The	potential	impacts	of	
development	are	wide	ranging	and	so	
due	consideration	must	be	given	to	
how	spatial	planning,	urban	design,	
housing	and	regeneration	can	enhance	
the	quality	of	the	environment	and	
contribute	to	addressing	the	causes	
of	ill-health,	improving	health	and	
reducing	health	inequalities.	3.83	 The	District	currently	has	some	
significant	pockets	of	deprivation		
with	over	18,000	people	living	in	areas	
considered	to	be	the	most	deprived	in	
England	(Carlisle	Health	and	Wellbeing	
Profile	2013).	It	is	recognised	that	
behavioural	factors	are	not	the	only	
influences	on	health.	Social	and	
economic	circumstances	affect	how	
people	behave	and	their	health.
3.84	 The	link	between	planning	and	
health	has	been	long	established.	
Development	can	affect	health	and	
health	inequalities	in	a	variety	of	
ways,	including	through;	the	quality	
of	housing	and	developments,	
design	of	neighbourhoods,	density	
of	development,	mix	of	land	uses,	
quality	and	efficient	transport	systems,	
opportunities	to	undertake	recreation	
and	experience	leisure	and	cultural	
activities,	opportunities	to	grow	or	
have	access	to	healthy	food,	access	
to	green	and	open	space	facilities,	
air	quality,	noise	and	exposure	to	hazardous	substances.	It	is	therefore	
recognised	that	the	Local	Plan	has	
a	key	part	to	play	in	addressing	the	
health	inequalities	of	our	District	in	
order	to	create	better	environments	for	
people	to	live,	work	and	play,	as	well	
as	protecting	and	improving	access	to	
health	services	at	a	local	level	such	as	
GPs	and	at	a	larger	scale,	such	as	the	
Cumberland	Infirmary.
3.85	 Health	starts	where	people	live,	learn,	
work	and	play	and	so	the	Local	Plan	
is	important	in	guiding	development	
of	different	uses,	scale	and	location	
and	striving	to	ensure	that	health	and	
wellbeing	will	not	be	compromised	as	
a	result	of	new	development.	Efforts	
to	improve	health	outcomes	through	
the	Local	Plan	will	be	maximised	by	
the	application	of	those	policies	which	
seek	to	ensure	that	new	development	
takes	account	of	access	to	services	
and	facilities;	enables	walking	and	
cycling;	provides	access	to	formal	and	58
informal	community	meeting	spaces,	
sports	facilities;	reduces	the	fear	of	
crime	and	supports	the	development	of	
education	and	health	facilities;	as	well	
as	seeking	to	protect	health	through	
policies	that	ensure	only	appropriate	
developments	are	granted	within	close	
proximity	to	populated	areas	such	as	
policies	considering	levels	of	pollution	
and	hazardous	substances	etc.	Health	
and	wellbeing	is	therefore	an	underlying	
theme	for	consideration	when	assessing	
any	application	for	development.	It	is	
also	recognised	that	proposals	that	
provide	improved	social,	economic	
and	environmental	opportunities	can	
address	some	of	the	existing	design	
disadvantage	in	the	District.
3.86	 Green	infrastructure	can	play	a	key	role	
in	contributing	towards	the	health	of	
the	District.	This	can	include	a	range	
of	usable,	high	quality	green	assets	
which	can	be	wide	ranging	in	their	role	
and	function	for	the	local	community.	
This	can	include,	for	example,	green	
spaces	for	play,	areas	for	food	growing,	networks	of	semi-natural	habitats	
which	provide	opportunities	to	interact	
with	nature	as	well	as	peaceful	and	
tranquil	green	spaces	in	which	people	
can	relax.	
3.87	 Health	and	wellbeing	can	be	improved	
by	ensuring	that	homes	are	accessible,	
inclusive	and	incorporate	design	
features	which	add	to	the	comfort	and	
convenience	of	the	home	and	support	
the	changing	needs	of	individuals	and	
families	at	different	stages	of	life,	their	
life-course.	This	type	of	development	
would	allow	older	people	to	stay	in	
their	own	homes	for	longer,	reduce	the	
need	for	home	adaptations	and	give	
greater	choice	to	disabled	people	who	
cannot	achieve	independent	living	due	
to	lack	of	suitable	housing.	The	Local	
Plan	encourages	the	development	of	
decent	homes	that	are	adaptable	for	
the	life	course	of	the	occupiers,	given	
the	numbers	of	residents	in	the	three	
oldest	age	bands	(60-74,	75-84	and	
85+)	are	projected	to	increase	(Cumbria	
Observatory,	Spring	2014)	across	the	plan	period.	The	Council	will	seek	to	
ensure	that	consideration	will	be	given	
to	the	needs	of	the	community	on	a	
site	by	site	basis	and	an	appropriate	
mix	of	dwellings	agreed	through	the	
Development	Management	process.
3.88	 The	links	between	health,	education,	
community	and	planning	are	also	
highlighted	by	national	planning	policy	
which	acknowledges	the	role	that	the	
planning	system	can	play	in	facilitating	
social	interaction	and	creating	healthy,	
inclusive	communities.	It	emphasises	
the	importance	of	working	with	
health	partners	to	understand	and	
take	account	of	the	health	status	
and	needs	of	the	local	population,	
including	expected	future	changes,	
and	barriers	to	improving	health	and	
wellbeing.	This	policy	seeks	to	ensure	
that	development	enhances	health	
and	wellbeing	and	does	not	have	a	
negative	effect	on	it	by	ensuring	that	
public	health	partners	are	consulted	on	
development	proposals.	59
3.89	 Where	proposals	for	development	
are	likely	to	have	a	significant	impact	
on	health	and	wellbeing	of	the	local	
population	or	particular	groups	within	
it,	a	Health	Impact	Assessment	(HIA)	
will	be	required.	The	HIA	should	
measure	the	potential	health	impacts	
of	a	development	proposal	on	the	
wider	population.	It	is	a	tool	to	appraise	
both	positive	e.g.	physical,	social	and	
mental	wellbeing	benefits	from	the	
creation	of	accessible	open	space	and	
negative	e.g.	generation	of	pollution	
impacts	on	different	subgroups	of	the	
population	that	might	result	from	the	
proposal	being	implemented.	HIAs	will	
add	value	and	assist	decision	making	
in	the	planning	process	by	maximising	
the	benefits	and	opportunities	from	
a	development	to	contribute	towards	
creating	healthy	communities.	It	allows	
any	necessary	mitigation	measures	to	
be	identified	and	can	help	to	identify	
the	potentially	cumulatively	significant	
effect	a	proposal	could	have	on	health	
infrastructure	and/or	the	demand	for	healthcare	services.	The	Local	Plan		
has	itself	been	the	subject	of	a	HIA.		
The	potential	need	for	an	HIA	in	relation	
to	a	planning	application	will	be	raised	
with	applicants	through	the	pre-
application	process.
3.90	 Good	public	transport,	in	combination	
with	cycling	and	walking,	can	reduce	
air	pollution,	noise	and	greenhouse	
gas	emissions,	energy	consumption	
and	congestion,	improve	road	safety	
and	better	protect	landscapes	and	
urban	cohesion,	while	providing	more	
opportunities	to	be	physically	active	
and	socially	connected	with	improved	
access	to	educational,	recreational	
and	job	opportunities.	Where	there	
are	public	green	spaces	and	forests,	
people	can	use	these	to	walk,	play,	
and	cycle,	turning	physical	activity	
into	an	integral	part	of	their	daily	lives,	
improving	health	by	reducing	stress	
levels	and	noise	pollution.	3.91	 Demonstrating	 the	relationship	 between	
sustainable	development	and	health	is	
a	powerful	argument	to	support	climate	
change	mitigation	and	adaptation	in	
particular	and	sustainable	development	
in	general.	A	healthier	environment	can	
contribute	to	better	outcomes	for	all.	
This	involves	valuing	and	enhancing	
our	natural	resources,	whilst	reducing	
harmful	pollution	and	significantly	
reducing	carbon	emissions.	By	valuing	
our	physical	and	social	environment,	
we	can	restore	our	natural	environment	
and	strengthen	our	social	assets,	
whilst	enhancing	our	independence	
and	wellbeing	at	both	a	personal	and	
community	level.	By	doing	so,	we	
improve	the	quality	of	care,	build	strong	
communities	and	generate	conditions	
where	life	is	valued.	One	example	of	
developments	reducing	the	impacts	of	
climate	change	is	through	tree	planting	
as	trees	absorb	atmospheric	pollutants	
and	produce	oxygen	whilst	absorbing	
carbon	dioxide	and	sequestrating	
carbon,	and	can	also	provide	urban	
cooling	through	natural	shading.60
3.92	 Carlisle	District	is	a	founding	member	
of	the	Sustainable	Food	Cities	Network	
which	strives	to	create	a	City	where	
good	food	flourishes	and	where	we	
work	 in	partnership	 to	empower	 change	
towards	a	vibrant	and	inclusive	food	
culture.	As	part	of	the	commitment	to	
sustainable	development,	sustainable	
food	production	will	be	promoted	in	
consideration	of	its	contribution	to	
health	and	wellbeing,	environmental	
sustainability,	local	commercial	
enterprise	prosperity	and	strengthening	
communities.	Acknowledging	
and	acting	to	protect	the	roles	of	
community	growing	spaces	such	
as	allotments,	community	orchards,	
community	gardens	and	farmers’	
markets	in	providing	access	to	healthy,	
affordable	locally	produced	food	will	
assist	this	aim.The City Council will work with partners to develop skilled communities in 
order to underpin future economic growth.
In contributing to this objective the City Council will support developments 
which relate to the operational needs of and/or expansion of all of the 
District’s higher, further and specialist education establishments including 
the University of Cumbria and Carlisle College. 
Ancillary and related uses such as student housing will also be supported 
providing it can be demonstrated that such uses are:
1. genuinely linked to the education establishment and its operations;
2. in locations where they are compatible with the surrounding land uses; 
and
3. in accessible locations which minimise the need to travel.
Where appropriate any new or proposed extensions to existing campuses 
should be guided by a comprehensive and clear strategy. Policy SP 10 - Supporting Skilled Communities61
Justification
3.93	 The	Economic	Review	of	Carlisle	
(January	2013)	identifies	as	a	priority	
a	need	to	ensure	the	availability	of	
“Motivated	and	skilled	people,	able	
and	willing	to	be	effective	employees	
and	entrepreneurs”	in	order	to	underpin	
Carlisle’s	growth.	
3.94	 Carlisle	College	is	the	main	provider	
of	higher	education	in	the	District.	It	
provides	education	opportunities	for	
students	over	14	years	of	age	and	
vocational	and	skills	training	for	a	
growing	number	of	young	and	mature	
students	and	is	helping	to	expand	
the	skills	base	locally.	Significant	
investment,	including	physical	
expansion,	has	been	and	continues		
to	be	made	to	the	College	facilities.	
3.95	 The	University	of	Cumbria	has	now	
become	well	established	in	Carlisle	
having	brought	together	many	of	the	
previous	further	education	offers	in	the	
District.	Alongside	Carlisle	College,	the	
University	is	at	the	forefront	of	looking	to	strengthen	the	further	education	
offer	across	Cumbria	resulting	in	
higher	student	numbers	and	improved	
facilities	within	Carlisle.	The	University	
also	plays	a	leading	role	in	terms	
of	fostering	business	growth	and	
interaction	within	the	wider	region,		
and	as	a	research	establishment.
3.96	 Policy	SP	10	provides	a	clear	
commitment	to	work	with	partners	
to	develop	a	skilled	population	and	
workforce	within	Carlisle.	From	a	
land	use	planning	perspective	it	
provides	a	clear	framework	to	guide	
investment	decisions,	making	clear	
that	developments	which	relate	to	
the	operational	needs	or	expansion	
of	higher	and	further	education	
establishments	will,	in	principle,	be	
supported.	This	support	extends	to	
cover	ancillary	and	related	uses	which	
are	recognised	as	essential	to	the	wider	
attractiveness	and	ultimately	success	
of	these	establishments.	3.97	 Given	the	nature	of	such	facilities	it	is	
important	to	ensure	that	these	continue	
to	be	sustainable	from	an	accessibility	
perspective	and	therefore	in	locations	
which	minimise	the	need	to	travel.	
There	is	also	a	need	to	ensure	that	
they	are	compatible	with	surrounding	
uses	which	reflects	that	most	existing	
facilities	currently	operate	successfully	
in	mixed	use	environments.	
3.98	 The	University	of	Cumbria	continues	
to	largely	operate	from	separate	
premises	around	the	City	rather	than	
a	single	campus.	In	order	to	develop	
a	future	strategy	for	higher	education	
the	University	of	Cumbria	has	been	
reviewing	their	existing	operations	
and	the	use	of	premises	as	part	of	a	
new	Masterplan	for	their	presence	in	
Carlisle.	The	Council	are	continuing	
to	work	with	the	University	to	discuss	
how	their	future	aspirations	can	be	
supported,	where	appropriate,	through	62
the	planning	process	and	will	continue	
to	advocate	in	these	and	similar	
circumstances	that	such	intentions	are	
guided	by	a	comprehensive	and	clear	
strategy.Economy
63
4
Objective
•	 	 Foster	the	right	conditions	to	stimulate	
inward	investment	through	increasing	the	
working	age	population,	strengthening	
and	expanding	the	skills	base	available,	
diversifying	the	economy	and	improving	
enabling	physical	infrastructure.
•	 	 To	create	opportunities	for	economic	growth	
by	making	land	available	to	meet	the	current	
and	future	quantitative	and	qualitative	needs	
of	the	business	community	and	to	maintain	
Carlisle’s	role	as	an	economic	driver	for	a	
wider	geographical	area.
•	 	 To	focus	new	retail	and	leisure	floorspace	
within	the	City	Centre,	and	take	opportunities	
to	strengthen	and	diversify	its	offer,	in	order	
to	enhance	its	role	as	a	sub-regional	service	
centre	and	leisure	and	cultural	destination.Context
The	City	Council	is	committed	to	
delivering	sustainable	economic	
growth	for	its	residents,	businesses	
and	visitors.	The	Local	Plan	will	
be	one	of	the	mechanisms	to	help	
deliver	economic	growth	by	setting	
out	a	clear	and	positive	framework	
which	supports	and	enables	the	
expansion	of	existing	businesses	and	
creates	the	right	environment	and	
conditions	to	attract	new	businesses	
and	investment.	
Evidence	shows	that	one	of	the	key	
economic	issues	to	date	has	been	
the	lack	of	quality	and	choice	of	
employment	locations	for	companies	
to	invest.	The	Local	Plan	seeks	to	address	these	shortcomings	through	
improving	the	attractiveness	of	
existing	sites,	and	complementing	
this	offer	through	the	provision	of	
new	sites,	particularly	within	the	
strategically	important	M6	Corridor	
which	is	a	recognised	Cumbria		
Local	Enterprise	Partnership	priority.	
The	Local	Plan	looks	to	support	
and	enable	the	growth	of	all	sectors	
of	the	District’s	economy.	The	vital	
and	complementary	roles	played	
by	retail,	leisure,	tourism	and	
agriculture,	as	well	as	by	industry,	
are	recognised	within	the	Plan	with	
policies	designed	to	allow	each	
sector	to	prosper.	64Justification
4.1		 The	Carlisle	Employment	Sites	Study	(2010)	identified	
that	whilst	there	was	sufficient	land	for	employment	
in	Carlisle	there	were	qualitative	issues	with	the	sites	
which	were	available	to	fulfil	this	need.	A	key	element	of	
the	Plan’s	economic	strategy	is	to	support	investment	
in	existing	sites	to	facilitate	their	modernisation	and	
reconfiguration,	as	well	as	ensuring	the	potential	of	
residual	capacity	within	these	sites	is	realised.	This	
approach	is	being	complemented	by	the	allocation	of	
an	additional	45	Ha	of	land	for	employment	related	
purposes.
4.2		 Brunthill	comprises	of	37	Ha	of	undeveloped	land	
within	the	wider	established	Kingmoor	Park	strategic	
employment	location.	The	site	has	good	access	to	
Junction	44	of	the	M6.	Kingmoor	Park	is	one	of	a	number	
of	strategic	locations	recognised	by	the	Cumbria	Local	
Enterprise	Partnership	(LEP)	as	central	with	regards	to	
capitalising	on	the	potential	associated	with	the	strategic	
connectivity	of	the	M6	Corridor.	The	site	benefits	from	a	
series	of	permissions	which	are	either	outline	in	nature	
or	full	consents	which	are	yet	to	be	implemented.	
Accordingly	the	allocation	of	the	site	is	considered	
both	appropriate	and	necessary	to	safeguard	it	for	
employment	purposes	across	a	longer	horizon.		In	order	to	support	economic	growth	and	increase	the	level	
of	high	value	jobs	within	the	local	economy,	45	Ha	of	land	has	
been	allocated,	as	identified	on	the	Policies	Map,	at:
•	 	 Kingmoor	Park/Brunthill	(37	Ha)	for	the	development		
of	B1	(Business),	B2	(General	Industrial)	and	B8		
(Storage	and	Distribution);	and
•	 	 Land	to	the	South	West	of	Morton	(8	Ha)	for	the	
development	of	a	business	park	(B1	use).
Sui	Generis	uses	may	also	be	appropriate	within	the	
above	allocations	providing	it	can	be	demonstrated	that	
employment	opportunities	are	nevertheless	being	maximised	
and	that	there	would	be	no	significant	adverse	impacts	on	
existing	or	proposed	adjoining	uses.
Consideration	will	be	afforded	to	the	need	for	and	nature	
and	quantum	of	land	release	at	Carlisle	South,	in	order	to	
support	longer	term	economic	objectives,	through	acting	
to	masterplan	the	planned	major	mixed	use	development	in	
accordance	with	Policy	SP	3.Policy EC 1 - Employment Land Allocations65Owing	to	its	location	within	the	heart	
of	Kingmoor	Park,	future	proposals	
will	be	required	to	demonstrate	that	
the	development	of	the	site	integrates	
effectively	with	the	remainder	of	the	
location.
4.3		 Land	to	the	South	West	of	Morton	
comprises	of	8	Ha	which	is	well	placed	
to	meet	economic	objectives.	Being	
ideally	located	directly	adjacent	to	the	
Carlisle	Northern	Development	Route	
(CNDR)	the	site,	once	developed,	will	
present	further	job	opportunities	for	
residents	of	the	west	of	the	District	
and	importantly	ensure	a	mixed	use	
approach	prevails	with	regards	to	
the	development	of	the	wider	Morton	
locality,	which	includes	significant	
residential	development,	a	new	district	
centre	and	ancillary	community	
infrastructure	including	a	new	primary	
school.	Future	proposals	will	therefore	
be	required	to	demonstrate	that	the	
development	of	the	site	integrates	effectively	with	the	wider	development	
and	adjoining	phases.	Whilst	the	
full	extent	of	the	allocation	currently	
benefits	from	outline	planning	
permission	for	B1	purposes,	the	
allocation	of	the	site	is	considered	
both	appropriate	and	necessary	to	
safeguard	it	for	employment	purposes	
across	a	longer	horizon.
4.4 	 Whilst	the	primary	focus	of	the	
allocated	employment	sites	will	be	
for	B1,	B2	and	B8	land	use	purposes,	
the	Policy	recognises	that	in	some	
circumstances	Sui	Generis	uses	may	
also	be	appropriate.	In	order	to	be	
considered	favourably	such	uses	will	
have	to	demonstrate	that	employment	
opportunities	are	nevertheless	being	
maximised,	through	for	example	the	
number	and	nature	of	jobs	inherent	in	
the	proposal,	as	well	as	demonstrating	
that	the	proposed	use	can	co-exist	
without	in	any	way	jeopardising	
adjacent	uses	or	the	effectiveness	of	the	allocation	in	its	widest	sense	as	a	
focus	for	employment	related	activity.	
The	approach	taken	by	the	Plan	in	
these	regards	responds	to	the	evidence	
and	the	need	for	a	flexible	approach	
towards	developing	land	to	support	
economic	objectives.	
4.5		 The	Carlisle	Employment	Sites	Study	
(2010)	identifies	that	in	employment	
land	terms	there	is	a	perceived	spatial	
imbalance	with	the	majority	of	land	and	
premises	to	the	north	of	the	City	away	
from	concentrations	of	population	to	
the	southern	areas	of	the	City.	Also	of	
relevance	is	that	the	Carlisle	Economic	
Partnership	Economic	Review	of	
Carlisle	(January	2013)	identifies	
enhancing	and	developing	key	
employment	sites	at	Carlisle	motorway	
junctions	as	a	key	action,	which	
aligns	with	wider	and	well	established	
aspirations	to	realise	the	economic	
potential	of	the	M6	corridor.	Policy	
SP	3	within	the	Plan	identifies	Carlisle	66
South	as	a	broad	location	for	growth	
for	a	major	mixed	use	development	to	
meet	development	needs	towards	the	
end	of	and	beyond	the	plan	period.	
Carlisle	South	therefore	presents	an	
opportunity	to	act	to	deliver	additional	
employment	land	within	the	south	of	
the	City,	within	the	M6	corridor	in	close	
proximity	to	Junction	42,	and	in	doing	
so	to	respond	to	an	evidenced	need	to	
do	so.
4.6		 Owing	to	the	need	to	develop	Carlisle	
South	in	a	comprehensive	manner	
which	is	supported	by	the	timely	
delivery	of	the	appropriate	strategic	
and	local	infrastructure,	Policy	SP	3	
commits	to	developing	the	location	
through	a	masterplan	which	will	be	
approved	as	a	Development	Plan	
Document	(DPD).	It	is	through	this	
process	whereby	the	need	for	and	
nature	and	quantum	of	employment	
land	release	within	the	South	will	
be	considered,	subsequent	to	
which	additional	employment	land	allocations	within	the	plan	period	may	
be	forthcoming.	In	this	latter	regard	
care	would	need	to	be	afforded	to	
ensuring	that	the	premature	release	
of	any	land	for	employment	purposes	
within	the	South	did	not	compromise	
current	priorities	to	modernise	existing	
established	employment	sites,	as	well	
as	the	delivery	of	the	Kingmoor	Park	
and	Morton	allocations.67Within	Primary	Employment	Areas,	as	identified	on	the	Policies	
Map,	proposals	for	B1,	B2	and	B8	Uses	will	be	acceptable.	
Proposals	for	B1(a),	unless	clearly	ancillary	in	their	nature,	will	
in	accordance	with	national	policy	be	subject	to	a	sequential	
and	impact	test.	Sui	Generis	uses	may	also	be	appropriate	in	
Primary	Employment	Areas	providing	it	can	be	demonstrated	
that	employment	opportunities	are	nevertheless	being	
maximised	and	that	there	would	be	no	significant	adverse	
impacts	on	existing	or	proposed	adjoining	uses.
The	introduction	of	non-employment	related	uses	within	Primary	
Employment	Areas	may	be	appropriate	where	such	uses	are	
ancillary	in	nature;	of	a	proportionate	scale;	and	where	their	
introduction	would	aid	the	overall	attractiveness	or	sustainability	
of	the	employment	area.
Trade	counters	and	retailing	from	employment	premises	will	be	
restricted	in	their	scale	and	nature	to	be	ancillary	to	the	main	
operation	of	the	B1/B2/B8	business.	Planning	conditions	may	
be	imposed	to	ensure	that	the	use	remains	ancillary.
Where	there	is	no	reasonable	prospect	of	an	entire	employment	
site	remaining	in	continued	employment	use;	interventions	to	
improve	the	attractiveness	of	the	site	are	not	feasible;	and	its	
release	would	not	impact	on	the	wider	strategy	for	employment	
land	or	the	availability	of	local	employment	opportunities,	Policy EC 2 - Primary Employment Areas
applications	for	alternative	uses	of	land	or	buildings	will	be	
treated	on	their	merits	having	regard	to	market	signals	and	the	
relative	need	for	different	land	uses	to	support	sustainable	local	
communities.
Where	an	existing	employment	site	adversely	affects	
neighbouring	residential	properties	or	local	amenity,	proposals	
for	its	redevelopment	or	change	of	use	will	be	supported	where	
they	would	result	in	the	removal	of	the	adverse	effect.
In	the	Sandysike/Whitesyke	areas	proposals	for	the	
redevelopment	and	extension	to	existing	industrial	and	
warehousing	premises	will	be	acceptable	subject	to	careful	
consideration	on	any	impacts	on	the	landscape	owing	to	their	
open	countryside	setting.68
4.7		 Primary	Employment	Areas	are	located	
across	the	District	and	are	identified	
on	the	Policies	Map.	They	are	typically	
existing	industrial	and	business	estates	
already	well	established	and	are	home	
to	a	variety	of	large	scale	strategic	
employers	as	well	as	local	employment	
and	small	scale	business	start	up	units.	
The	wide	variety	and	nature	of	these	
areas	means	that	it	is	difficult	to	treat	
them	all	with	equal	policy	direction.	
However,	they	all	have	varying	degrees	
of	similar	issues	particularly	when	
there	is	interest	from	non-traditional	
employment	uses	and	alternative	sites	
are	limited.
4.8		 Policy	EC	2	provides	a	framework	
which	seeks	to	safeguard	the	primary	
purpose	of	these	areas	for	employment	
generating	uses	(traditionally	B1,	B2	
and	B8),	in	order	to	provide	the	wide	
variety	and	certainty	of	sites	required	to	
meet	the	needs	of	existing	businesses	
or	those	looking	to	locate	within	Justification
Carlisle	District.	The	Policy	also	seeks	
to	encourage	investment	by	making	
clear	that	new	development	such	as	
extensions	or	the	reconfiguration	of	
existing	premises	for	employment	
related	uses	within	these	areas	will	
be	appropriate.	Proposals	for	B1(a)	
(offices),	unless	clearly	ancillary	in	their	
nature,		will	however	as		a	‘main	Town	
Centre’	use	be	subject	to	a	sequential	
and	impact	test	in	accordance	with	the	
provisions	of	Local	Plan	Policy	EC	6.
4.9		 In	response	to	a	need	for	flexibility,	
the	policy	recognises	that	in	some	
circumstances	Sui	Generis	uses	within	
these	areas	may	also	be	appropriate.	
In	order	to	be	considered	favourably	
such	uses	will	have	to	demonstrate	
that	employment	opportunities	are	
nevertheless	being	maximised,	through	
for	example	the	number	and	nature	of	
jobs	inherent	in	the	proposal,	as	well	
as	demonstrating	that	the	proposed	
use	can	co-exist	without	in	any	way	jeopardising	adjacent	uses	or	the	
effectiveness	of	the	designated	area	
in	its	widest	sense	as	a	focus	for	
employment	related	activity.
4.10	 Non	employment	related	uses	will	
only	be	supported	within	Primary	
Employment	Areas	where	proposals	
are	of	an	appropriate	scale	and	nature	
which	can	evidently	be	seen	to	be	
ancillary	in	nature,	and	particularly	
where	the	introduction	of	the	proposed	
ancillary	use	helps	to	improve	
the	overall	attractiveness	and/or	
sustainability	of	an	area.	Such	flexibility	
is	recognised	as	paramount	within	the	
District	given	the	need	to	improve	the	
attractiveness	of	existing	employment	
sites	to	meet	economic	growth	
aspirations	in	the	short	to	medium	
term.694.11	 The	need	to	effectively	control	factory	
and	trade	sales	from	premises	within	
primary	employment	areas	reflects	
the	need	to	safeguard	the	City	Centre	
and	other	recognised	retail	centres	
from	peripheral	and	out	of	centre	retail	
developments.	Any	proposals	which	
exceed	what	can	genuinely	in	the	
circumstances	be	considered	to	be	
ancillary	to	an	existing	employment	
related	use	will	therefore	be	resisted.
4.12	 Where	there	is	no	reasonable	
prospect	of	a	Primary	Employment	
Area	or	site	within	being	retained	
for	ongoing	or	future	employment	
use,	and	interventions	to	improve	
the	attractiveness	of	the	site	are	not	
feasible,	development	proposals	for	
alternative	uses	will	be	considered	
on	their	merits.	Similarly	where	the	
ongoing	operation	of	an	existing	
employment	site	adversely	affects	
neighbouring	residential	properties	
or	local	amenity,	proposals	for	its	redevelopment	or	change	of	use	which	
would	act	to	remove	such	conflicts	
will	be	considered	favourably.	Such	
issues	are	more	prevalent	in	the	older	
and	traditional	industrial	areas	of	
Carlisle	City	such	as	Denton	Holme,	
where	there	is	a	tight	knit	pattern	of	
development	often	with	housing	and	
industry	in	close	proximity.	Whilst	these	
areas	have	historically	contributed	
positively	towards	the	supply	of	
employment	land	within	the	District,	
their	ability	to	do	so	in	the	future	can	
in	some	circumstances	be	genuinely	
limited	or	no	longer	appropriate.	70
The	District’s	Primary	Shopping	Areas,	as	defined	on	the	
Policies	Map,	will	be	the	focus	for	new	retail	development	
across	the	plan	period,	in	accordance	with	the	hierarchy	set	
out	in	Policy	SP	2.	
Proposals	for	the	change	of	use	of	ground	floor	shops	to	non-
retail	uses	within	Primary	Shopping	Areas	will	be	supported	
providing	the	proposal:
1.	 	 would	not	lead	to	an	unacceptable	concentration	of	such	
uses	and/or	undermine	the	vitality	and	viability	of	the	area;	
and
2.	 	 includes	provision	for	views	into	the	building	or	for	a	
window	display	in	keeping	with	the	character	of	the	
frontage,	in	order	to	retain	active	frontages.
In	order	to	retain	a	strong	retail	core	within	the	City	Centre	
Primary	Shopping	Area,	a	number	of	Primary	Shopping	
Frontages	have	been	defined	and	are	identified	on	the	Policies	
Map.	The	impacts	of	proposals	for	non-	retail	uses	within	a	
designated	frontage	will	be	assessed	in	the	context	of	the	
defined	frontage	as	well	as	the	wider	area.Policy EC 3 - Primary Shopping Areas & Frontages Justification
4.13	 The	main	policy	objective	within	Primary	Shopping	Areas	
is	to	maintain	the	vitality	and	viability	of	the	wider	Centres	
within	which	they	are	located,	through	the	retention	
of	high	levels	of	retailing	at	ground	floor	levels.	This	
objective	is	in	keeping	with	national	policy	which	requires	
competitive	town	centre	environments.	Changes	of	use	
which	would	result	in	concentrations	of	non-retail	uses	
and	the	creation	of	lengths	of	“dead”	frontage,	or	which	
would	result	in	a	loss	of	retail	provision	to	the	detriment	
of	the	overall	vitality	and	viability	and	attractiveness	of	the	
Centre,	will	be	resisted.
4.14		 Notwithstanding	the	above	it	is	recognised	that	the	
vitality	and	viability	of	defined	centres	is	also	increasingly	
dependent	on	a	flexible	approach	particularly	as	centres	
increase	their	role	as	destinations	for	leisure	related	uses,	
i.e.	eating,	drinking	and	socialising.	Accordingly	Policy	
EC	3	sets	out	the	circumstances	in	which	non-retail	uses	
would	be	acceptable	within	Primary	Shopping	Areas.
4.15	 In	order	to	retain	the	vitality	and	viability	of	the	City	Centre	
Primary	Shopping	Area,	it	is	important	that	A1	uses	
continue	to	dominate	the	ground	floor.	The	Local	Plan	
seeks	to	achieve	this	through	the	identification	of	Primary	
Shopping	Frontages.	Proposals	for	non-retail	uses	within	71Primary	Shopping	Frontages	will	be	
subject	to	an	assessment	against	the	
criteria	specified	within	Policy	EC	3.	
Importantly	such	assessments	will	need	
to	consider	any	impacts	both	within	
the	context	of	the	specific	frontage	
designation	as	well	as	the	wider	area.	
4.16	 Any	retail	development	outside	of	
the	Primary	Shopping	Area	should	
be	subject	to	relevant	sequential	and	
impact	assessments	as	consistent	with	
Policy	EC	6.72
Land	is	allocated	at	Morton	for	a	District	
Centre	to	accommodate	a	foodstore	
anchor.	Proposals	for	additional	retail,	
leisure,	local	services	and	community	
facilities	will	be	supported	within	the	
District	Centre	site	providing	they	are	
of	a	scale	and	nature	commensurate	
with	its	intended	catchment	and	would	
aid	its	vitality	and	viability.	Proposals	
for	comparison	(Class	A1)	retail	which	
exceed	500sqm	(gross)	will	need	to	
be	accompanied	by	a	retail	impact	
assessment	to	demonstrate	that	there	
would	be	no	significant	impact	on	the	
City	Centre	Primary	Shopping	Area.Policy EC 4 - Morton District Centre Justification
4.17	 The	provision	of	a	District	Centre	
at	Morton	is	important	in	ensuring	
that	a	mixed	use	and	sustainable	
development	approach	prevails	with	
regards	to	the	development	of	the	
wider	Morton	locality,	which	includes	
a	new	business	park,	significant	
residential	development	and	ancillary	
community	infrastructure	including	
a	new	primary	school.	Future	
proposals	will	therefore	be	required	
to	demonstrate	that	the	development	
of	the	site	integrates	effectively	with	
the	wider	Morton	development	and	
adjoining	phases.
4.18	 The	Carlisle	Retail	Study	(August	
2012)	recommends	that	the	District	
Centre	allocation	for	Morton	should	be	
retained	in	order	to	provide	sufficient	
policy	protection	to	ensure	that	the	
foodstore	anchor	is	delivered.	The	
need	for	a	foodstore	reflects	the	need	
to	address	a	spatial	deficiency	in	
convenience	retail	provision	in	the	west	and	south	of	the	City,	and	the	need	for	
an	anchor	alongside	which	a	range	of	
complementary	retail	and	leisure	uses	
and	community	services	and	facilities	
can	be	delivered	to	meet	the	needs	
of	existing	and	future	residents.	Any	
complementary	uses	should	be	of	a	
scale	and	nature	which	is	commensurate	
with	the	catchment	of	the	District	Centre	
and	which	do	not	therefore	threaten	
the	vitality	and	viability	of	the	City	
Centre	and	its	Primary	Shopping	Area.	
Proposals	for	Class	A1	comparison	retail	
will	be	required	to	undertake	an	impact	
assessment	which	reflects	the	need	to	
exercise	caution	particularly	in	respect	
of	fashion	retailing	and	the	potential	
negative	effect	that	proposals	of	this	
nature	may	have	upon	the	City	Centre	
Primary	Shopping	Area.
4.19	 Any	development	which	would	
compromise	the	deliverability	of	the	
Morton	District	allocation	will,	within	the	
context	of	Policy	EC	6,	be	resisted.73Policy EC 5 - District and Local Centres
Within	District	and	Local	Centres,	
as	identified	on	the	Policies	Map,	
proposals	for	retail	development	and	
other	main	town	centre	uses	will	be	
acceptable	providing	that:
1.		 it	is	of	a	scale	and	nature	appropriate	
to	the	area	served	by	the	centre;
2.		 it	does	not	adversely	affect	the	
amenity	of	any	adjacent	residential	
areas;
3.		appropriate	access,	parking	and	
security	arrangements	can	be	
achieved;	and
4.		 the	design	of	any	new	development	
is	attractive	and	in	keeping	with	the	
character	of	the	locality.
Non-retail	proposals	within	Local	
Centres	will	be	supported	only	where	
they	act	to	enhance	the	vitality	and	
viability	and	overall	attractiveness	of	
the	centre.	Justification
4.20	 The	centres	of	Brampton,	Dalston	
and	Longtown	are	defined	as	
District	Centres	which	reflects	that	
they	comprise	of	groups	of	shops	
containing	at	least	one	supermarket	or	
superstore,	alongside	a	range	of	non-
retail	services,	such	as	banks,	building	
societies	and	restaurants	and	other	
local	public	facilities	such	as	a	library	or	
secondary	school.	Beyond	these	there	
are	also	a	number	of	Local	Centres	
throughout	the	District	which	comprise	
of	clusters	of	small	shops,	and	often	
other	services	and	facilities,	of	a	local	
nature	which	serve	a	small	catchment.	
Such	centres	serve	the	immediate	
day	to	day	shopping	needs	of	local	
residents.4.21	 The	following	Local	Centres	have	been	
identified	within	the	District,	and	are	
shown	on	the	Policies	Map:
 Urban Areas
	 •	 Blackwell	Road,	Currock;
	 •	 Botchergate	South;
	 •	 Central	Avenue/Pennine	Way,	Harraby;
	 •	 Denton	Street;
	 •	 Holmrook	Road,	Whernside;
	 •	 Kingstown	Road;
	 •	 Newlaithes	Avenue,	Morton;
	 •	 Petteril	Bank	Road,	Upperby	Bridge;
	 •	 Scotland	Road,	Stanwix;
	 •	 Stonegarth,	Morton;	and
	 •	 Wigton	Road,	Caldewgate.
	Rural Areas
	 •	 Hallbankgate;	and
	 •	 Warwick	Bridge.74
4.22	 District	and	Local	Centres	often	also	
fulfil	 a	social	 function	 bringing	 members	
of	local	communities	together.	As	such	
it	is	necessary	to	protect	the	vitality	and	
viability	of	these	centres	as	important	
attributes	of	sustainable	communities.
4.23	 The	Policy	seeks	to	enable	further	retail	
development	or	proposals	for	main	
town	centre	uses	within	defined	centres	
providing	the	scale	and	nature	of	
proposals	is	appropriate	and	therefore	
proportionate	to	the	catchment	of	the	
area	served	by	the	centre.	Non	retail	
uses	 within	 District	 or	Local	 Centres	 will	
be	considered	favourably	where	they	
act	to	enhance	the	vitality	and	viability	
and	therefore	overall	attractiveness	
of	the	centre,	through	for	example	
bringing	back	into	beneficial	use	vacant	
premises	or	through	appropriately	
diversifying	the	mix	of	uses.	Proposals	
which	would	result	in	an	unacceptable	
reduction	in	shopping	facilities	and	
which	therefore	act	to	undermine	the	
primary	purpose	of	a	District	or	Local	
Centre	will	be	resisted.4.24	 Through	recognition	that	District	and	
Local	Centres	are	often	within	or	
close	to	established	residential	areas,	
careful	consideration	will	need	to	be	
afforded	to	ensuring	that	proposals	
do	not	prejudice	residential	amenity.	
District	and	Local	Centres	also	play	
an	important	role	in	place	shaping	and	
their	appearance	has	an	important	
impact	on	the	perception	of	the	local	
area	itself.	Careful	consideration	should	
therefore	be	afforded	to	the	design	of	
any	new	development	to	ensure	that	
it	is	attractive	and	in	keeping	with	the	
character	of	the	locality.	75Development	proposals	for	new	retail	and	main	town	centre	
uses	should	in	the	first	instance	be	directed	towards	defined	
centres,	and	for	comparison	retailing	proposals	the	defined	
Primary	Shopping	Areas	(where	designated)	within	these	
centres,	in	accordance	with	the	hierarchy	set	out	in	Policy		
SP	2.	
In	line	with	national	policy	proposals	outside	of	defined	
centres	will	be	required	to	undertake	a	sequential	test.	In	
addition,	locally	set	impact	thresholds	for	retail	floorspace	
have	been	set	for	the	urban	area	and	will	be	required	for	
proposals	which	exceed	1000sqm	(gross)	for	convenience	
retail	and	500sqm	(gross)	for	comparison	retail.	A	separate	
impact	threshold	of	300sqm	(gross)	for	convenience	and	
comparison	retail	proposals	has	been	set	for	Brampton,	
Dalston	and	Longtown.
This	approach	also	applies	to	proposals	for	the	extension	of	
floorspace	(including	the	use	of	a	mezzanine	floor)	at	existing	
stores	or	retail	warehouses	where	these	are	outside	defined	
centres.
Any	proposals	for	a	foodstore	will	be	required,	as	part	of	
the	impact	test,	to	demonstrate	that	that	they	would	not	
undermine	the	planned	delivery	of	the	Morton	District	Centre	
foodstore	anchor,	or	impact	on	its	trading	viability.Policy EC 6 - Retail and Main Town Centre Uses 
Outside Defined CentresJustification
4.25	 Policy	EC	6	seeks	to	ensure	that	the	vitality	and	viability	of	
defined	retail	centres	is	not	undermined	by	proposals	for	retail	
and	other	main	town	centre	uses	outside	of	these	centres	
or	where	comparison	(non-food)	retail	is	concerned	out	with	
designated	Primary	Shopping	Areas	within	these	centres.		
Main	town	centre	uses	are	defined	within	the	glossary	and	
mirror	those	currently	employed	by	national	policy	for	retail	
planning	purposes.
4.26	 The	Carlisle	Retail	Study	(2012)	found	that	there	was	limited	
spare	capacity	in	the	initial	years	of	the	plan	period	and	
therefore	that	any	development	should	aim	to	reinforce	the	City	
Centre	as	the	prime	retail	location.	To	achieve	this,	proposals	
for	new	retail	and	main	town	centre	uses	will,	in	line	with	
national	policy,	have	to	undertake	a	sequential	test.	A	locally	
set	threshold	has	also	been	established	for	undertaking	retail	
impact	assessments	which	addresses	the	requirements	of	
National	Planning	Policy	Guidance	(NPPG)	and	updates	the	
threshold	set	in	the	2012	study.
4.27	 The	Retail	Impact	Threshold	update	(September	2015)	
recommends	that	in	respect	of	the	urban	area	of	Carlisle	
separate	retail	thresholds	for	convenience	and	comparison	
retailing	should	be	applied	to	enable	sufficient	opportunity	to	
robustly	assess	the	impact	of	any	future	edge/out	of	centre	
proposal	on	existing	urban	centres.76
4.28	 In	respect	of	the	District	Centres	of	
Brampton,	Dalston	and	Longtown	
a	threshold	has	been	set	in	order	to	
reflect	the	nature	of	these	centres	
which	are	occupied	by	small	scale	
operators	orientated	towards	top	up	
provision.
4.29	 The	sequential	and	impact	tests	
should	be	carried	out	in	accordance	
with	national	policy	(and	in	respect	of	
impact	test	in	line	with	the	thresholds	
set	out)	with	the	approach	being	
proportionate	to	the	scale	and	nature	of	
the	proposal	being	progressed.
4.30	 The	evidence	supports	that	there	is	
no	requirement	for	new	convenience	
provision	in	the	City,	beyond	existing	
commitments	including	the	Morton	
allocation,	over	the	Local	Plan	period	
through	to	2030.	Accordingly,	any	
proposals	elsewhere	in	the	City	which	
would	undermine	the	delivery	of	the	
Morton	allocation,	or	impact	upon	its	
trading	viability,	will	be	resisted.		This	position	will	however	be	monitored	
when	committed	foodstore	schemes	
are	trading,	and	regular	main	food	
shopping	patterns	established.77Well	designed	and	appropriate	shop	fronts,	whether	original	
or	reproduction,	should	be	retained	wherever	practicable	and	
if	necessary	restored	when	the	opportunity	arises.	Shop	fronts	
should	contribute	to	the	creation	of	a	strong	sense	of	place	
within	the	local	context	and	relate	in	scale,	proportion,	materials	
and	decorative	treatment	to	the	relevant	façade	of	the	building	
and,	where	appropriate,	to	adjacent	buildings	and/or	shop	
fronts.
Within	conservation	areas	new	and	alterations	to	shop	fronts	
will	only	be	acceptable	where	their	design	contributes	to	
the	preservation	and	enhancement	of	the	area’s	character,	
appearance	and	setting,	and	provided	the	following	criteria	are	
met:
1.	any	original	or	period	features	are	retained	or	where	possible	
restored;
2.	the	proposal	relates	well	in	scale,	height,	proportions,	
materials	and	detailing	to	other	parts	of	the	building,	
adjoining	shop	fronts	and	the	street	scene	generally;
3.	the	proposal	does	not	involve	a	single	shop	front	spanning	
two	or	more	frontages;
4.	the	proposal	does	not	involve	the	use	of	inappropriate	
modern	shop	front	features;	and5. the	proposal	contributes	to	the	realisation	of	specific	
relevant	objectives	in	any	up	to	date	Conservation	Area	
Management	Plan.
The	use	of	roller	shutters	that	would	obscure	displays	and	
architectural	features	on	shop	fronts	will	not	be	permitted	in	
any	location.	Applicants	wishing	to	install	security	measures	
on	shop	fronts	are	encouraged	to	consider	alternative	
measures	and	must	seek	to	ensure	that,	if	shutters	are	to	
be	used,	they	are	well	designed	and	integrated	with	the	
frontage,	maintaining	an	active	shop	front	even	when	the	
unit	is	closed.Policy EC 7 - Shop Fronts78
Justification
4.31	 Policy	EC	7	applies	to	new	or	
alterations	to	existing	shopping	
frontages	across	the	District	including	
within	defined	centres	and	Primary	
Shopping	Areas.
4.32	 Shop	fronts	owing	to	their	nature	and	
prominence	have	an	important	role	
to	play	in	place	shaping,	and	as	such	
should	be	designed	to	a	high	quality	
to	help	establish	a	strong	sense	of	
place.	Accordingly,	design	solutions	
should	respond	to	local	character	and	
history,	and	reflect	the	identity	of	local	
surroundings	and	materials,	although	
this	will	not	necessarily	preclude	
appropriate	innovation.
4.33	 There	are	a	number	of	well	designed	
and	traditional	shop	fronts	in	the	
District,	particularly	in	the	City	Centre,	
Botchergate,	Brampton,	Dalston	and	
Longtown.	Special	care	is	needed	
when	dealing	with	proposals	which	
might	detract	from	the	character	of	a	building	and,	where	it	is	considered	
appropriate	and	pertinent,	the	
traditional	features	of	well	designed	
and	high	quality	shop	fronts	should	be	
retained	whenever	alterations	are	being	
carried	out.
4.34	 The	Council	has	produced	
Supplementary	Planning	Guidance	
(SPG)	on	the	design	of	shop	fronts	
which	supports	the	implementation	of	
this	Policy.	The	guidance	offers	useful	
information	on	how	people	wishing	
to	install	new	shop	fronts	or	alter	
existing	ones	can	do	so	in	keeping	
with	the	traditional	styles	of	frontages	
across	the	City	and	wider	District.	
Applicants	will	be	encouraged	to	have	
regard	to	the	document,	and	any	
future	successor	documents,	when	
progressing	development	proposals	of	
this	type.4.35	 Highly	visible	crime	prevention	
measures	such	as	security	shutters	
can	work	against	the	creation	of	a	
vital,	vibrant	and	attractive	shopping	
environment,	have	a	detrimental	effect	
on	townscape	and	impact	negatively	
on	the	overall	perception	of	an	area.	
When	closed,	solid	security	shutters	
present	a	blank	frontage	and	have	
a	deadening	effect	on	the	character	
of	the	street.	Areas	no	longer	benefit	
from	passive	surveillance	by	shoppers	
and	passers-by,	thereby	making	
shops	more	vulnerable	to	attack.	In	
order	to	minimise	their	impact	on	the	
building	and	the	general	character	of	
the	area,	the	Council	encourages	the	
use	of	security	measures	other	than	
solid	external	shutters.	Security	is	
best	considered	at	the	early	stages	
of	designing	a	new	shop	front	so	that	
measures	can	be	integrated	into	the	
overall	scheme,	rather	than	added	on	
as	an	afterthought.79Proposals	which	help	to	sustain	and	enhance	a	vibrant	and	
viable	food	and	drink	offer	will	be	supported.	Development	
proposals	for	uses	within	Use	Class	A3	(restaurants	and	
cafes),	A4	(drinking	establishments)	and	A5	(hot	food	
takeaways)	will	be	approved	provided	that:
1.	they	are	in	defined	centres	or,	if	not,	accord	with	the	
sequential	and	impact	tests;
2.	the	amenity	of	adjacent	uses	would	not	be	adversely	
affected;
3.	the	proposal	would	not	cause	unacceptable	levels	of	
traffic	generation	or	highway	obstruction,	particularly	
where	customers	are	collecting	food	from	takeaways,	or	
jeapordise	highway	or	pedestrian	safety;	and
4. 	the	proposal	would	not	lead	to	an	unacceptable	
concentration	of	a	particular	use	or	business	type	within	
any	given	locality.
Opening	hours	will	be	imposed	having	regard	to	the	
surrounding	uses,	the	character	of	the	area,	possibility	of	
nuisance	to	residential	areas	and	public	safety.Policy EC 8 - Food and Drink Justification
4.36	 This	Policy	seeks	to	facilitate	the	creation	of	a	vibrant	and	
viable	food	and	drink	offer	across	the	District.	The	need	to	
do	so	reflects	national	policy	and	the	need	to	support	the	
vitality	and	viability	of	City,	District	and	Local	Centres	through	
diversifying	their	offer	and	encouraging	competition	and	a	
greater	provision	of	customer	choice.	The	Policy	responds	
to	this	requirement	through	enabling	the	appropriate	growth	
of	food	and	drink	related	leisure	services	which	in	many	
instances	will	complement	a	centre’s	retail	offer,	the	District’s	
visitor	offer	and	support	the	evening	economy	through	
improving	evening	activity.
4.37	 The	primary	evidence	base	for	this	Policy	is	the	Carlisle	Retail	
Study	(2012).	This	highlights	that	whilst	there	is	an	existing	
restaurant	sector	that	is	informally	emerging	within	the	
City	Centre,	there	exists	capacity	to	expand	this	restaurant	
offer,	with	an	eye	to	attracting	larger,	nationally	recognised	
restaurant	chains.	It	also	recommends	that	the	Council	should	
aim	to	maintain	and	effectively	manage	the	existing	provision	
of	pubs	and	other	late	night	establishments	within	the	City	
through	the	planning	process.
4.38	 Outside	of	the	City	Centre	the	food	and	drink	offer	is	largely	
made	up	of	cafes	and	pubs	during	the	day,	whilst	the	evening	
economy	largely	revolves	solely	around	small	town	public	
houses.80
4.39	 Whilst	the	principal	of	such	uses	is	
supported,	it	must	be	recognised	that	
their	nature	is	such	that	they	can,	
in	certain	circumstances,	adversely	
impact	upon	the	character	and	
residential	amenity	of	areas.	Careful	
consideration	will	therefore	need	to	
be	afforded	to	ensure	that	proposals	
would	not,	by	way	of	noise	or	odour,	
constitute	a	nuisance.	Proposals	also	
need	to	ensure	that	they	would	not	in	
any	way	jeopardise	highway	safety.
4.40	 The	scope	for	such	uses	to	constitute	
a	nuisance	can	be	amplified	where	
there	is	a	concentration	of	them.	
Concentrations	can	also	adversely	
impact	on	the	vitality	and	viability	of	
retail	centres	through	eroding	their	
wider	value	and	through	resulting	in	
dead	frontages	particularly	during	the	
day.	Accordingly,	proposals	which	
would	result	in	an	unacceptable	
concentration	of	such	uses	will	be	
resisted.4.41	 In	some	areas	of	the	District,	public	
houses	represent	important	community	
facilities	which	fulfil	a	broader	purpose	
and	social	role.	Proposals	which	would	
result	in	the	loss	of	a	public	house	
should	therefore	have	regard	to	Policy	
CM	3	which	seeks	to	prevent	the	
unacceptable	loss	of	valued	community	
facilities.81Proposals	will	be	supported	where	they	contribute	towards	the	development	
and/or	protection	of	the	arts,	cultural,	tourism	and	leisure	offer	of	the	District	
and	support	the	economy	of	the	area.
Proposals	for	main	town	centre	uses	which	are	ancillary	to	established	tourist,	
leisure	or	cultural	attractions	will	be	exempt	from	the	need	to	undertake	a	
sequential	and	impact	test.	New	proposals	where	no	attraction	currently	exists,	
or	those	which	go	beyond	what	can	be	regarded	as	ancillary,	will	have	to	have	
regard	to	Policy	EC	6.
All	proposals	for	arts,	cultural,	tourism	and	leisure	development	must	also	
accord	with	the	following	criteria:
1.	the	scale	and	design	of	the	development	is	compatible	with	the	character	of	
the	surrounding	area;
2.	adequate	access	by	a	choice	of	means	of	transport,	including	sustainable	
modes	of	travel	such	as	cycling	or	long	distance	walking,	and	appropriate	
car	parking	is	provided;	and
3.	where	relevant,	the	value	and	significance	of	the	attraction	is	not	
compromised.	
Hadrian’s	Wall	World	Heritage	Site	(WHS)	is	a	major	attraction	for	tourism	
and	proposals	for	new	tourism	development	which	are	sustainable	and	aim	
to	promote	the	enjoyment	and	understanding	of	the	WHS	whilst	meeting	the	
above	criteria	will	be	permitted.Policy EC 9 - Arts, Culture, Tourism and Leisure Development Justification
4.42	 The	tourism,	arts,	cultural	and	leisure	
sectors	are	vitally	important	to	Carlisle	
as	generators	of	economic	prosperity,	
employment	and	enjoyment.	It	is	
essential	that	the	potential	of	these	
sectors	is	promoted	and	supported	
to	ensure	the	continued	growth	of	
the	economy	and	cultural	horizons	
of	the	District.	This	could	include	the	
development	of	new	community	centres	
and	sports	halls,	as	well	as	projects	
such	as	an	arts	centre	within	the	City	
for	residents	and	visitors	alike.	Carlisle’s	
heritage	and	environment	is	central	to	
its	attractiveness	as	a	tourist	location	
with	key	attractions	including	Hadrian’s	
Wall	Path	National	Trail	crossing	the	
District,	the	English	Costal	Path	and	
the	historic	City	Centre	comprising	of	
Carlisle	Castle,	Tullie	House	Museum,	
Carlisle	Cathedral	Precinct,	the	City	
Walls,	the	Courts,	the	Market	Cross,	
the	Old	Town	Hall	and	Guildhall.	The	
importance	of	access	to	the	natural	
environment	and	the	benefits	and	82
opportunities	that	the	green	and	blue	
infrastructure	of	the	District	entails	
for	arts,	culture,	tourism	and	leisure	
development	is	also	recognised.
4.43	 Arts,	culture,	tourism	and	leisure	
development	(including	theatres,	
museums,	galleries	and	concert	halls,	
hotels	and	conference	facilities)	are	
main	town	centre	uses	and,	as	such,	
the	Council	will	encourage	this	type	
of	development	within	a	recognised	
centre	(i.e.	the	City	Centre,	District	
Centres	or	Local	Centres).	A	sequential	
test	and	impact	assessment	would,	
in	accordance	with	Policy	EC	6,	
normally	be	required	for	this	kind	of	
development	outside	of	a	recognised	
centre;	however	where	development	
is	clearly	ancillary	to	an	established	
leisure	or	cultural	attraction,	
this	requirement	will	be	waived.	
Development	outside	of	a	recognised	
centre	that	is	either	too	large	to	be	
described	as	ancillary	or	unrelated	
to	an	existing	attraction	will	still	be	subject	to	a	sequential	test	and	impact	
assessment	as	per	standard	planning	
policy.		
4.44	 Sustainable	rural	tourism	and	
leisure	developments	that	aid	rural	
diversification	will	be	supported,	
particularly	where	they	involve	the	
provision	and	expansion	of	tourist	and	
visitor	facilities	in	appropriate	locations	
where	identified	needs	cannot	be	met	
by	existing	facilities	in	nearby	local	
centres.	Such	development	must	be	
of	a	suitable	scale,	and	design	and	be	
sited	with	great	care	and	sensitivity	to	
its	rural	location.	
4.45	 New	development	should	normally	
be	accessible	by	public	transport,	
walking	and	cycling.	However,	for	some	
developments	in	the	rural	area	this	may	
not	be	possible,	 especially	 if	associated	
with	a	diversification	scheme	in	an	
area	with	poor	public	transport	links.	In	
these	cases	new	development	should	
be	able	to	demonstrate	that	it	has	integrated	as	much	as	possible	with,	or	
is	easily	accessible	from	existing	green	
infrastructure	routes,	including	long	
distance	walking	routes	such	as	the	
Hadrian’s	Wall	or	English	Costal	paths.
4.46	 Proposals	that	would	result	in	the	
loss	of	an	art,	cultural,	tourist	or	
leisure	facility	would	be	required	to	
demonstrate	that	the	current	use	is	no	
longer	viable;	that	there	is	currently	
no	requirement	for	an	alternative	
community	use;	and	that	there	is	
adequate	alternative	provision	in	the	
locality.83Proposals	for	the	development	of	and	extension	to	
caravan,	camping	and	chalet	sites	will	be	supported	
where:
1.	clear	and	reasoned	justification	has	been	provided	
as	to	why	the	development	needs	to	be	in	the	
location	specified;
2.	the	siting,	scale	or	appearance	of	the	proposal	does	
not	have	an	unacceptable	adverse	effect	on	the	
character	of	the	local	landscape,	or	upon	heritage	
assets	or	their	settings;
3.	the	site	is	contained	within	existing	landscape	
features	and	if	necessary,	and	appropriate,	is	
supplemented	with	additional	landscaping;	
4. adequate	access	and	appropriate	parking	
arrangements	are	provided;	and
5. the	potential	implications	of	flood	risk	have	been	
taken	into	account	where	necessary.
In	addition,	the	Council	will	consider	the	need	to	
impose	planning	conditions	to	avoid	continual	
residential	use	of	such	sites	or	seasonal	restrictions	
where	necessary	to	safeguard	the	landscape.Policy EC 10 - Caravan, Camping and Chalet Sites Justification
4.47	 This	Policy	reiterates	support	for	the	sustainable	rural	tourism	
and	leisure	developments	that	benefit	businesses	in	rural	areas,	
communities	and	visitors	and	which	respect	the	character	of	the	
countryside	in	line	with	the	National	Planning	Policy	Framework	
(NPPF).	This	includes	supporting	the	provision	and	expansion	of	visitor	
accommodation	in	appropriate	locations	where	identified	needs	are	not	
met	by	existing	provision	in	established	settlements.
4.48	 Proposals	for	both	static	and	touring	caravan	sites	as	well	as	those	
for	chalets	and	camping	will	be	judged	against	the	criterion	specified	
in	the	Policy,	which	are	considered	self	explanatory	in	their	purpose.	
In	certain	circumstances	restrictions	will	be	applied	through	the	
imposition	of	planning	conditions	to	avoid	the	continual	residential	
use	of	a	site.	This	reflects	that	there	is	a	need	to	preserve	the	supply	
of	visitor	accommodation	in	order	to	respond	to	demand,	and	equally	
that	such	sites	may	not	be	in	a	location	considered	sustainable	for	
occupation	as	primary	residences.	Similarly,	conditions	may	also	be	
imposed	to	restrict	seasonal	occupancy	of	sites	where	considered	
necessary	to	safeguard	landscape	character	through,	for	example,	the	
winter	months.
4.49	 In	addition	to	the	need	to	obtain	planning	permission,	caravan,	
camping	and	chalet	site	operators	must	obtain	a	site	licence.	The	site	
licence	covers	such	matters	as	the	number	and	standard	of	spacing	
of	the	caravans	and	hygiene.	The	City	Council’s	Environmental	Health	
Section	issues	site	licences.84
Development	proposals	to	diversify	and	expand	upon	the	
range	of	sustainable	economic	activities	undertaken	in	
rural	areas	will	be	supported	and	encouraged	both	through	
the	conversion	of	existing	buildings	and	well	designed	
new	buildings.	Any	new	building	must	be	well	related	to	an	
existing	group	of	buildings	to	minimise	its	impact	and	blend	
satisfactorily	into	the	landscape	through	the	use	of	suitable	
materials,	design	and	siting.
Proposals	must:
1.	be	compatible	with	their	existing	rural	setting;
2. be	in	keeping,	in	terms	of	scale	and	character,	with	the	
surrounding	landscape	and	buildings;
3.	include	adequate	access	and	car	parking	arrangements;	
and
4.	not	lead	to	an	increase	in	traffic	levels	beyond	the	capacity	
of	the	surrounding	local	highway	network.Policy EC 11 - Rural Diversification Justification
4.50	 Whilst	the	preferred	location	for	new	development	will	be	
in	existing	settlements,	changes	in	agriculture	over	recent	
decades	have	resulted	in	a	decline	in	farm-related	jobs.	As	a	
result	there	is	now	a	need	to	strengthen	the	economy	in	rural	
areas	by	supporting	the	sustainable	growth	and	expansion	
of	all	types	of	business	and	enterprise	in	rural	areas.	There	
are	often	opportunities	for	reusing	or	adapting	surplus	
existing	rural	land	and	buildings	for	commercial,	industrial,	
recreational	or	environmental	uses	such	as	guesthouses,	farm	
shops,	rural	workshops	or	other	business	premises,	helping	
the	countryside	to	diversify,	flourish	and	sustain	itself.	The	
City	Council	recognises	the	important	and	changing	role	of	
agriculture	and	the	need	for	new	employment	in	the	rural	area.	
New	employment	opportunities	may	also	be	created	within	the	
rural	area	as	the	provision	and	availability	of	rural	broadband	
spreads/expands.	
4.51	 The	use	of	surplus	rural	buildings	for	the	provision	of	tourist	
holiday	accommodation	can	help	to	retain	buildings	in	the	
countryside	whilst	helping	to	boost	the	rural	economy.	
Conversion	of	rural	buildings	to	holiday	accommodation	can,	
when	skilfully	undertaken,	involve	minimal	alteration	and	
therefore	have	little	impact	on	the	character	of	the	countryside.	
Nevertheless	schemes	must	be	sensitive	to	their	environments	
and	measures	must	be	taken	to	mitigate	any	potential	
environmental	impacts.	The	NPPF	supports	sustainable	rural	85tourism	and	leisure	developments	
where	they	respect	the	character	of	the	
countryside.	This	type	of	development	
is	important	in	areas	where	identified	
needs	are	not	met	by	existing	facilities	
in	rural	service	centres.
4.52	 Traditional,	redundant	and	underused	
buildings	may	provide	habitats	for	
wildlife	such	as	bats	or	barn	owls.	For	
those	species	protected	by	the	Wildlife	
and	Countryside	Act	1981,	the	City	
Council	will	seek	to	ensure	a	survey	is	
carried	out	and	suitable	precautions	
taken	for	the	protection	of	the	species	
and	their	habitat	before	permission	
will	be	granted.	Other	environmental	
diversification	schemes	may	help	to	
improve	the	ecological	value	of	the	
rural	area	whilst	helping	to	provide	local	
employment.86
Proposals	for	new	agricultural	buildings	
and	structures,	or	extensions	to	
existing	ones,	which	fall	outside	of	
Permitted	Development	rights	will	be	
permitted	provided	that:
1.	the	building	or	structure	is	sited	
where	practical	to	integrate	with	
existing	agricultural	buildings	and/
or	take	advantage	of	the	contours	
of	the	land	and	any	existing	natural	
screening;	
2. the	scale	and	form	of	the	proposed	
building	or	structure	relates	to	an	
existing	group	of	buildings,	unless	
otherwise	justified;
3. the	design	and	materials	used	reflect	
the	overall	character	of	the	area;	and
4.	the	proposal	would	not	have	
an	unacceptable	impact	on	any	
adjacent	land	uses.Justification
4.53	 The	development	of	agricultural	
buildings	and	other	structures	of	
a	certain	scale	not	requiring	full	
planning	permission	instead	require	
an	‘Agricultural	Determination’	from	
the	City	Council.	The	purpose	of	this	
arrangement	is	to	enable	the	Council	
to	comment	on	the	siting	and	design	
of	particular	proposals,	whilst	not	
obliging	the	applicant	to	submit	formal	
applications	for	planning	permission.
4.54	 The	siting	of	a	new	agricultural	building	
can	have	a	considerable	impact	on	the	
surrounding	landscape.	New	buildings	
should	therefore,	where	possible,	
integrate	with	both	the	surrounding	
landscape	and	farmstead	as	a	whole.	
It	may	be	possible	to	do	this	by	using	
natural	contours	in	the	land	or	existing	
natural	screening	such	as	woodland,	
trees	or	mature	hedgerows.	The	aim	is	
not	to	hide	a	new	building	from	sight,	
but	to	soften	its	outline	and	integrate	
it	with	the	surrounding	landscape.	Any	new	planting	should	therefore	reflect	
the	vegetation	type	already	existing	in	
the	locality.
4.55		 New	buildings	should	normally	form	
part	of	a	group	rather	than	stand	on	
their	own	and	should	relate	to	existing	
buildings	in	scale	and	colour.	However,	
there	may	be	occasions	when	a	large	
building	of	modern	design	is	required	
on	a	farm	largely	comprising	traditional	
buildings.	To	avoid	visual	conflict,	
such	buildings	should	be	designed	
to	minimise	their	impact	by	such	
measures	as	breaks	in	roof	slope	or	
differing	roof	heights	and	by	linking	the	
building	into	the	landscape	by	planting	
groups	of	trees	to	soften	its	outline.	
In	exceptional	circumstances	such	
buildings	may	be	better	sited	away	
from	the	group.
4.56	 In	sensitive	areas	such	as	within	
the	setting	of	a	listed	building,	
in	a	conservation	area	or	Area	of	
Outstanding	Natural	Beauty	(AONB),	Policy EC 12 - Agricultural Buildings87it	will	normally	be	necessary	to	use	
traditional	or	sympathetic	materials	
and	the	colours	chosen	should	
be	compatible	with	the	setting	or	
surrounding	countryside.	Many	
traditional	buildings	are	also	important	
for	protected	species	including	bats	
and	barn	owls.	Where	such	species	are	
thought	to	be	present	in	or	adjacent	
to	the	existing	buildings,	a	survey	
should	be	undertaken	to	confirm	their	
presence.	The	adopted	North	Pennines	
AONB	Supplementary	Planning	
Documents	on	Building	Design	Guide	
(2011)	and	Planning	Guidelines	(2011)	
provide	further	information	on	the	
development	of	agricultural	buildings	
within	the	AONB.
4.57	 Finally,	agricultural	activities	can	impact	
on	the	amenity	of	adjoining	land	uses	
and	care	must	therefore	be	exercised	
to	avoid	proposals	giving	rise	to	
any	unnecessary	levels	of	nuisance	
including	by	way	of	noise	or	odour.88
Proposals	relating	to	the	development	of	
stables,	horse	riding	arenas	and/or	riding	
centres	will	be	permitted	provided	that:
1. there	will	be	no	unacceptable	impact	
upon	the	landscape	and	character	of	
the	area;
2. the	building	or	structure	is	sited	where	
practical	to	integrate	with	existing	
buildings	and/or	take	advantage	of	the	
contours	of	the	land	and	any	existing	
natural	screening;
3.	the	proposal	will	not	have	a	
detrimental	effect	upon	surrounding	
land	uses;
4. the	surrounding	roads	and	bridleways	
are	adequate	and	safe	for	the	
increased	use	by	horse	riders,	with	the	
roads	being	suitable	for	all	users;	and
5.	the	scale	and	intensity	of	use	is	
proportionate	to	the	equestrian	needs	
and	appropriate	for	the	site	and	
character	of	the	area.Justification
4.58	 Horse	riding	and	keeping	are	popular	
leisure	activities	attracting	a	wide	range	
of	people,	as	well	as	being	an	intrinsic	
part	of	rural	life.	Carlisle	District	has	
seen	an	increase	in	the	number	of	
proposals	for	equestrian	development;	
this	trend	is	likely	to	continue	due	
to	changes	in	the	rural	economy	
providing	scope	for	diversification	in	
rural	businesses.	The	NPPF	supports	
sustainable	rural	tourism	and	leisure	
developments	where	they	respect	
the	character	of	the	countryside.	
Supporting	information	and	good	
practice	guidance	for	this	type	of	
development	is	available	from	the	
British	Equestrian	Federation	which	is	
the	national	governing	body	for	horse	
sports	in	the	UK.
4.59	 Horse	keeping	can	be	an	appropriate	
use	in	the	countryside	provided	that	
care	is	taken	over	the	siting	and	
location	of	facilities	and	that	access	
to	roads	and	bridleways	is	adequate.	As	with	all	developments	care	must	
be	taken	to	ensure	the	design	of	
the	development	is	appropriate,	
proportionate	to	genuine	needs	and	
that	any	proposal	would	not	adversely	
affect	adjoining	land	uses	including	
through	nuisance	in	the	form	of	noise,	
odours	or	light	pollution.	Associated	
buildings	should	be	situated	in	one	
block	or	a	tight	grouping	to	reduce	
visual	impact	on	the	landscape	and	
means	of	enclosure	should	reflect	
local	characteristics.	Proposals	likely	
to	damage	sensitive	areas,	such	as	
important	habitats	or	landscapes,	will	
not	be	acceptable.
4.60	 Conditions	may	be	imposed	upon	
applicants	to	ensure	that	jumps	and	
other	equipment	are	removed	and	
stored	out	of	site	to	help	reduce	
the	visual	impact,	of	the	operation,	
on	the	landscape.	High	standards	
of	maintenance	and	management	
are	required	to	ensure	that	the	Policy EC 13 - Equestrian Development89activities	do	not	adversely	affect	the	
countryside	and	that	the	horses	are	
well	accommodated	and	cared	for.	
Additionally,	in	some	cases	conditions	
may	be	placed	on	this	type	of	
development	to	restrict	their	use	to	that	
of	the	applicant.
4.61	 There	is	a	highways	safety	issue	
associated	with	increasing	levels	of	
horse	riders	on	the	roads,	therefore	
schemes	which	would	give	rise	to	
excessive	numbers	of	horses	on	
the	surrounding	roads	will	not	be	
favourably	considered	unless	it	can	
be	demonstrated	that	the	safety	of	all	
users	would	not	be	prejudiced.90
91
5
HousingContext
The housing chapter sets out a group of policies which aim 
to enable development and growth to meet the housing 
needs of the District for open market, affordable and special 
needs housing, including provision for Gypsies, Travellers 
and Travelling Showpeople. To deliver the objective, the Plan 
focuses new housing development on the City of Carlisle, 
whilst also making provision for a commensurate proportion 
of housing to come forward in the rural areas. This chapter 
sets out specific allocations for housing across the District, 
and sets out a criteria based approach to enable housing 
to be delivered in a range of other circumstances such as 
for rural workers, or through the conversion of redundant 
rural buildings. Policies also recognise the range of housing 
circumstances at the domestic scale, and make provision for 
extensions to, or subdivision of, existing homes, and group 
housing such as HMOs, student housing, extra-care schemes 
and to protect the amenity of residential areas.Objective
• To enable the development of a range of high quality, 
energy efficient housing, in a variety of appropriate 
locations, to meet the aspirations of the existing 
residents, including those with a need for affordable 
housing and those wishing to move to the area.
• To boost significantly the supply of housing by making 
land available, to support economic growth, whilst 
ensuring new housing supports the creation of thriving 
communities.92
Policy HO 1 - Housing Strategy and Delivery
Planning permission will be granted for housing proposals that will: 
1. deliver the allocations set out in this Policy and contribute to achieving the Plan’s housing target.  
Any unallocated sites which come forward for development and which would prejudice the delivery 
of this strategy will be resisted; and
2. in bringing forward allocations, developers will need to demonstrate that their proposals contribute 
to the overall mix of dwelling types, sizes and tenures which help meet identified local housing need 
and the development of mixed and sustainable communities.
The following table sets out allocated housing sites in the urban and rural areas. These sites are 
identified on the Local Plan Policies Map. Proposals should be brought forward having regard to and 
addressing any issues set out in Appendix 1.  
Housing delivery will be monitored closely and if the number of houses built is not as expected, 
interventions will be sought, including bringing forward additional allocations.Allocated sites Urban Carlisle: Total Capacity (dwellings) 2,779 Area (Ha): Indicative Yield: Indicative Plan Period:
U 1 - Land to the south east of junction 44 8.03 217 0 - 5
U 2 - Land north of California Road, east of U 1 6.54 200   6 - 10
U 3 - Site of Pennine Way Primary School 3.57 112   6 - 10
U 4 - Land north of Moorside Drive/Valley Drive 4.96 140 0 - 5 
U 5 - Land between Carleton Road and Cumwhinton Road 7.25 204 0 - 5
U 6 - Land at Garden Village, west of Wigton Road 6.08 169   6 - 10
U 7 - Land at Newhouse Farm, south-east of Orton Road 30.19 509   6 - 10
U 8 - Land north of Burgh Road 2.83 66 0 - 5
U 9 - Site of former Morton Park Primary School, Burnrigg 1.67 54   6 - 10
U 10 - Land off Windsor Way 10.60 300 0 - 5
U 11 - Land east of Lansdowne Close/Lansdowne Court 2.50 75   6 - 10
U 12 - Site to the rear of Border Terrier, Ashness Drive/Ellesmere Way 0.40 18 0 - 5
U 13 - Land east of Beverley Rise 1.20 30   6 - 10
U 14 - Land north of Carleton Clinic, east of Cumwhinton Drive 9.3 189 0 - 5
U 15 - Former Dairy site, Holywell Crescent, Botcherby 1.51 66 0 - 5
U 16 - Land at Deer Park, Belah 3.83 100   6 - 10
U 17 - Land to the south west of Cummersdale Grange Farm 2.43 60   6 - 10
U 18 - Land Opposite Rosehill Industrial Estate* 10.50 150 0 - 5
U 20 – Durranhill Road 3.32 70   6 - 10
U 21 – Laing’s site, Dalston Road 1.20 50   6 - 10 Housing Allocations for Carlisle District
9394
Allocated sites Rural Area: Total Capacity (dwellings) 1,409 Area (Ha): Indicative Yield: Indicative Plan Period
Brampton 
R 1 - Land south of Carlisle Road 
R 2 - Land west of Kingwater Close 
R 3 - Land north of Greenfield Lane 
9.7 
2.31 
5.66 
250 
60 
140 
0 - 5 
6 - 10 
6 - 10
Longtown 
R 4 - Site of former Lochinvar School 
R 5 - Land south of Old Road 
3.56 
2.9 
106 
60 
6 - 10 
0 - 5
Burgh by Sands 
R 6 - Land west of Amberfield 
1.0 
25 
6 - 10
Cummersdale 
R 7 - Land east of Cummersdale Road 
0.38 
14 
0 - 5
Cumwhinton 
R 8 - Land adjacent to Beech Cottage 
R 9 - Land west of How Croft 
0.6 
0.76 
15 
20 
0 - 5 
6 - 10
Houghton 
R 10 - Land at Hadrian’s Camp 
5.1 
96 
0 - 5
Harker 
R 11 - Kingmoor Park Harker Estate 
10.7 
300 
6 - 10
Moorhouse 
R 12 - Land east of Monkhill Road*  
0.8 
10 
6 - 1095
Allocated sites Rural Area: Total Capacity (dwellings) 1,409 Area (Ha): Indicative Yield: Indicative Plan Period
Rickerby 
R 14 - Land at Tower Farm 
0.8 
10 
0 - 5
Scotby 
R 15 - Land north of Hill Head, east of Scotby Road  
R 16 - Land at Broomfallen Road 
3.7 
1.5 
90 
28 
0 - 5  
0 - 5 
Warwick Bridge 
R 17 - Warwick Bridge/Little Corby North 
R 18 - Land to the south of Corby Hill/Heads Nook Road 
1.55 
1.00 
45 
30 
0 - 5  
6 - 10
Wetheral 
R 19 - Wetheral South 
R 20 - Land west of Steele’s Bank 
2.2 
1.6 
60 
40 
6 - 10 
0 - 5
Wreay  
R 21 - Land west of Wreay School 
0.7 
10 
0 - 5
*There is no site U 19 or R 13.96
Justification
5.1 The sites allocated in this policy are 
detailed in Appendix 1, which sets 
out site profiles to aid identification, 
together with some of the main issues 
associated with the sites. 
5.2 The delivery of housing across the 
District is linked to three important 
issues of both national and local 
significance: how to accommodate 
an ageing population whilst retaining 
mixed communities; how to promote 
sustainable growth; and how to provide 
the physical and social infrastructure 
that is required to support housing 
growth. One of the key issues facing 
the District is the provision of a range 
of new housing to help meet the needs 
of the whole community. Planning for 
a range of housing types (including for 
the elderly) will enable more balanced 
communities with a mix of people 
creating opportunities for better 
neighbourhoods.5.3 This Policy has taken into account the 
following factors:
• the Council has maximised its 
opportunities for developing brownfield 
land, and the number of brownfield 
sites remaining is diminishing;
• a peripheral scattered approach to new 
housing around the edge of Carlisle 
may not be the most sustainable option 
as some sites may be a considerable 
distance from the centre;
• providing housing development within 
or on the edge of the city enables good 
access to existing services and public 
transport; and
• whilst a small number of housing sites 
within the Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (SHLAA) are 
located within the City, the majority are 
on the periphery, with one or two very 
large sites.5.4 Policy SP 2 identifies the annual 
average housing target across 
the District. In responding to this 
requirement the focus must be on 
delivering attractive and sustainable 
communities and neighbourhoods 
where people want to live. To achieve 
this, account must be taken of the 
implications for infrastructure and 
services across the whole District.
5.5 A number of significant sites are 
expected to contribute to the delivery 
of the housing strategy across the 
Plan period. Where an existing 
planning permission is in place and 
has been implemented, it has not been 
considered necessary to identify the 
site as a housing allocation. Significant 
sites of this nature are shown for 
information on the Policies Map to 
aid the identification of future housing 
growth. To assess the housing capacity 
of the District, and in accordance with 
Government requirements, the City 
Council has prepared a SHLAA. 97
5.6  With reference to the proposed 
housing allocations, the assessment of 
deliverability has been informed by the 
SHLAA. To be considered deliverable, 
sites should be available and offer 
a suitable location for development 
now, and be achievable with a realistic 
prospect that housing can be delivered 
on the site within five years. In 
particular, development of the site must 
be viable.  
5.7 The September 2014 Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment (SHMA) update 
identifies that the latest population 
forecasts generally show (after 
factoring in local assumptions about 
new housing development, growth 
of the local economy and trends in 
births, deaths and migration rates) 
that the population will continue to 
grow to the end of the Plan period and 
beyond, although at a much lower level 
of growth than was seen in previous 
sub national population projections. 
The overall conclusions are that an objective level of need sits somewhere 
in the range of 480 to 565 homes per 
annum. The lower figure is based on a 
reasonable demographic basis for need 
with the upper figure being based on a 
need to meet the Experian economic 
forecast.
5.8 Therefore given the need to plan for 
employment growth, and to provide 
housing to meet a broad range of 
needs, the Local Plan has set an 
appropriate housing target. Delivery 
of housing to meet this target will 
be monitored through the Authority 
Monitoring Report (AMR), and if the 
numbers of houses being built is not as 
expected, the Council will seek to work 
directly with stakeholders to identify 
any barriers to development, and 
consider further interventions including 
bringing forward further allocations.98
New housing development on sites other than those allocated 
will be acceptable within or on the edge of Carlisle, Brampton, 
Longtown, and villages within the rural area provided that 
the development will not prejudice the delivery of the spatial 
strategy of the Local Plan and:
1. the scale and design of the proposed development is 
appropriate to the scale, form, function and character of the 
existing settlement;
2. the scale and nature of the development will enhance 
or maintain the vitality of the rural community within the 
settlement where the housing is proposed;
3. on the edge of settlements the site is well contained within 
existing landscape features, is physically connected, and 
integrates with, the settlement, and does not lead to an 
unacceptable intrusion into open countryside;
4. in the rural area there are either services in the village where 
the housing is being proposed, or there is good access to 
one or more other villages with services, or to the larger 
settlements of Carlisle, Brampton and Longtown; and5. the proposal is compatible with adjacent land users.
Within rural settlements applicants will be expected to 
demonstrate how the proposed development will enhance or 
maintain the vitality of rural communities. 
Applicants will be expected to work closely with those directly 
affected by their proposals to evolve designs that take account 
of the views of the community.Policy HO 2 - Windfall Housing Development99
Justification
5.9   Windfall housing is recognised as 
contributing in a positive way to 
the supply of housing over the plan 
period. Within the built up areas of 
Carlisle, Brampton and Longtown, 
particularly but not exclusively within 
the Primary Residential Areas, there 
are likely to be opportunities for new 
residential development, either through 
the development of vacant sites, the 
conversion of vacant buildings, or as 
part of a larger mixed use scheme. 
Residential development in these areas 
will be acceptable, subject to the stated 
criteria in the above policy.  
5.10 The scale of the rural area and the 
number of villages within it gives a 
wide choice about where to locate 
new housing. If housing is located in 
sustainable locations it can bring many 
benefits including wider choice for 
households. 5.11 The majority of Carlisle District is rural. 
The Local Plan only makes housing 
allocations on sites that can support 
10 or more houses. In smaller villages, 
no allocations have been made as 10 
additional houses on one site may be 
inappropriate in terms of scale. This 
policy aims to provide a flexible basis 
with which to make provision for rural 
housing in smaller villages, which will 
inherently be smaller in scale, reflective 
of the fact that sustainability may be an 
issue.
5.12 Most new residential development 
in the rural area will be focussed in 
sustainable locations. This means 
villages which have, or have good 
access to, for example, a primary 
school, post office, shop and frequent 
public transport within 400m walking 
distance. Other facilities such as a 
village hall, church, pub, and other local 
businesses can all add to the overall 
sustainability of a location.5.13 It is recognised that within many parts 
of the rural area it will be difficult 
to achieve all of the above. The 
National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF) states that in rural areas local 
planning authorities (LPAs) should be 
responsive to local circumstances and 
plan housing development to reflect 
local needs. It goes on to say that to 
promote sustainable development in 
rural areas, housing should be located 
where it will enhance or maintain the 
vitality of rural communities.  
5.14 The local circumstances for Carlisle 
District are very specific in that there 
is a large rural area with many villages 
scattered throughout. The villages vary 
in size and the level of services that 
they support. There are some very 
small villages which support a primary 
school, for example Raughton Head 
and Wreay, and some much larger 
villages with few or no services, such 
as Brisco and Low Row. There are also 100
a number of primary schools, churches, 
village halls and pubs which lie entirely 
outside any recognised village, for 
example Stoneraise Primary School, 
and Blackford Primary School, but 
which serve a surrounding cluster of 
villages. 
5.15  Accessibility to services will therefore 
be one consideration in assessing 
applications for housing under this 
policy. Housing will also be acceptable 
where it will enhance or maintain the 
vitality of rural communities. This 
will need to be demonstrated by 
the applicant, and could include, for 
example, a young family moving to the 
village, someone wishing to work from 
home, people moving into a village 
to support other family already living 
there.5.16 Development is more likely to be 
acceptable on sites that are physically 
contained by existing landscape 
features such as hedges, trees, 
woodland or topography, physically 
and visibly connected to the village, 
and do not adversely impact on wider 
views into or out of a village. 
5.17  Applicants will be expected to work 
closely with those directly affected 
by their proposals to evolve designs 
that take account of the views of 
the community. Proposals that can 
demonstrate this in developing the 
design of the new development should 
be looked on more favourably. As 
such, applicants will be expected to 
demonstrate that they have complied 
with this Policy requirement.101
Justification
5.18  Gardens contribute significantly to the character and quality of 
housing areas within the City, and also within the market towns 
and many villages within the rural area. Mature gardens can 
also help to mitigate factors contributing to climate change, 
for example trees which absorb carbon dioxide. Proposals for 
housing development in existing gardens, especially backland 
development, can often be contentious.
5.19 National planning policy makes provision for local plan policy 
to resist inappropriate development of residential gardens, for 
example where development would cause harm to the local 
area. The Natural Environment White Paper (Securing the 
Value of Nature, 2011) states that natural networks include 
private gardens and that these can help to conserve wildlife 
in environments that have become fragmented by human 
activities.  
5.20 There will be instances where development of part of a 
residential garden for housing will be acceptable. However, 
such proposals also have the potential to cause significant 
amenity problems to existing properties including loss of 
privacy, loss of daylight, overlooking, visual intrusion by a 
building or structure, noise disturbance, reduced space around 
buildings, loss of car parking, and loss of mature vegetation 
including screening. There can also be increased surface water 
run off due to an increase in hard surfaces.Proposals for housing development in existing residential 
gardens will be permitted providing that the following 
criteria are met:
1. the scale, design and siting of the proposal would 
not result in a cramped form of development out of 
character with the surrounding environment;
2. a safe and attractive garden area, which reflects that 
predominant in the area, can be created for both the 
proposed new house and the existing house;
3. the proposal, by way of design, siting and materials 
integrates into the surrounding built, natural, and where 
necessary historic environment;
4. there is no unacceptable loss of living conditions to 
surrounding properties by overlooking, loss of light, 
overbearing nature of the proposal or increase in on 
street parking; and
5. the proposal does not prejudice the development 
potential of an adjacent site.Policy HO 3 - Housing in Residential Gardens102
5.21 Critical factors which will be taken into 
account in determining applications 
will be the size of the site, capacity of 
the access and impact on adjacent 
properties.
5.22 For sites to be acceptable there 
needs to be an appropriate plot depth 
and configuration, in order to allow 
new housing to be developed which 
results in a quality environment for 
both new and adjacent residents. 
Garden development, especially on 
rear gardens, on restricted plot depths 
is unlikely to be acceptable, especially 
where overlooking issues cannot be 
overcome.
5.23 The form and scale of any new 
development should respect the 
local character of the immediately 
surrounding area. In particular, the 
scale, number of storeys and massing 
of new housing development should 
not exceed that of existing dwellings 
adjacent to the site.5.24 Backland sites can result in piecemeal 
proposals being submitted for land 
which are physically connected to 
much larger areas with greater potential 
for a more comprehensive form of 
development. Proposals which block 
the development potential of adjacent 
land, for example through land locking, 
are unlikely to be acceptable.
5.25 This Policy also relates to tandem 
development. This is a form of 
backland development where a new 
dwelling is placed immediately behind 
an existing dwelling and uses the same 
access. This type of development is 
nearly always unacceptable because of 
the impact on the amenity of the house 
at the front of the site.103
Policy HO 4 - Affordable Housing
In order to achieve mixed and inclusive 
neighbourhoods, affordable housing 
provision will be sought in the following 
circumstances:
1.  within Zone A, all sites of six units and 
over will be required to provide 30% 
of the units as affordable housing;
2. within Zone B, all sites of 11 units or 
over will be required to provide 20% 
of the units as affordable housing; and
3. within Zone C, all sites of 11 units or 
over will be required to provide 30% 
of the units as affordable housing.
It will not be acceptable to sub-divide 
sites and purposely design a scheme 
to avoid making affordable housing 
contributions. 
The tenure split of affordable housing to 
be provided should be 50% for social or 
affordable rent and 50% for intermediate 
housing. A lower proportion and/or 
different tenure split may be permitted where it can be clearly demonstrated 
by way of a financial appraisal that the 
development would not otherwise be 
financially viable or where the proposed 
mix better aligns with priority needs. 
Early dialogue with the Council on these 
matters is essential. 
For sites of between six and ten units, 
the affordable housing contribution 
will be sought in the form of cash 
payments which will be commuted 
until after completion of units within 
the development. For sites of 11 units 
or over, the affordable housing should 
be provided on the application site 
unless off site provision, or a financial 
contribution of broadly equivalent value 
in lieu of on-site provision, can be 
robustly justified by local or site specific 
circumstances.
The opportunity to secure affordable 
extra care housing schemes as part of 
the wider affordable housing mix on development sites will be sought where it 
is considered to meet needs and the site 
is in an appropriate location. 
Policy HO 4 will operate within the 
context of national policy and will be 
implemented with regard to any relevant 
future changes including to the national 
definition of affordable housing.104
Justification
5.26 The NPPF states that in order to deliver 
a wide choice of high quality homes, 
local planning authorities should use 
an evidence base to ensure that their 
Local Plan meets the full, objectively 
assessed needs for market and 
affordable housing. In addition, in order 
to ensure viability and deliverability, 
the scale of affordable housing 
required by this Policy has been 
calculated following the undertaking 
of an Affordable Housing Economic 
Viability Assessment, (AHEVA), which 
assesses the viability of a range of 
housing developments across the 
District using a residual valuation 
appraisal method. Zones A, B and C 
(which depict differences in viability 
within the District) have therefore 
been defined having regard to the 
evidence as set out in the Carlisle 
AHEVA and government policy set 
out in the Planning Practice Guidance 
(PPG) regarding the thresholds for 
seeking planning obligations including affordable housing. The introduction 
of PPG, which introduces national 
thresholds, has necessitated the 
identification of the built up area of 
Brampton as Zone C. This reflects 
that the town of Brampton is not a 
‘designated rural area’ as described 
under section 157(1)(c) of the Housing 
Act 1985. However, the viability 
evidence supports that development 
sites in Brampton can support 30% of 
the units as affordable. 
5.27 The Policy contains a viability 
cushion in line with advice in the 
Harman guidance, ‘Viability Testing 
Local Plans’. Therefore when the 
requirements of this policy make a 
site unviable, the Council will expect 
the developer to submit an appraisal 
such as the Homes and Communities 
Agency Development Appraisal Tool 
or similar, before a departure from the 
policy will be allowed.5.28 The SHMA update (Sept 2014) identified 
that overall in the period from 2013 
to 2030 an average of 295 affordable 
homes per annum are required. Although 
this demand will be partially met by 
the private rented sector supported by 
housing benefit, this policy aims to strike 
a balance on an appropriate affordable 
housing requirement.
5.29 Cumbria County Council’s Extra Care 
Strategy estimates the need for 340 extra 
care units by 2019, across the District, 
with 234 of those places needed within 
the City of Carlisle. The opportunity to 
deliver an element of this housing on 
appropriate development sites, as part of 
the overall affordable housing provision, 
will be sought.
5.30 The maximum proportion of affordable 
housing on larger housing schemes 
is an important factor to consider in 
trying to achieve balanced and mixed 
communities. Large developments 
of entirely affordable housing could 105
potentially lead to community cohesion 
issues with the surrounding area 
and also fail to contribute to mixed 
communities. The siting of affordable 
housing within a development also 
needs careful thought to ensure that it 
is not concentrated within one area of 
the site, but is integrated throughout 
the development. This approach 
will provide greater opportunities for 
community cohesion. 
5.31 In relation to the tenure split of 
affordable housing 50% should be 
social or affordable rented with the 
remaining 50% for affordable home 
ownership (often referred to as 
intermediate housing). However, it 
is important to allow for flexibility to 
ensure that marginal schemes remain 
viable. Demand for intermediate 
housing (such as shared ownership) 
can vary with market conditions and as 
a result there may be occasions where 
an increased proportion of social rented 
housing will be acceptable.5.32 Sub-dividing a site to avoid making 
affordable housing contributions will 
not be acceptable. The yield generated 
by the site as a whole will be assessed 
and used as a basis on which to seek 
the affordable housing contribution. 
Therefore affordable housing will be 
sought on developments below these 
thresholds if the Council considers that 
the site is part of a larger development 
site, particularly where the site is being 
sub-divided as a way to avoid the 
affordable housing threshold.
5.33 This will also apply where one site is 
divided between different developers, 
or is proposed to be developed in a 
phased manner. The affordable housing 
generated by the site as a whole will 
be assessed and used as the basis on 
which to seek the affordable housing 
contribution.5.34 In determining the type of affordable 
housing to be provided, the Council’s 
Housing Service will advise developers 
of the appropriate type and mix of 
units for each site to ensure local need 
is being met. This will help deliver 
the priorities in the Carlisle Housing 
Strategy 2012-2016, especially 
the need to work closely with local 
communities to address their housing 
needs and preferences, and support 
community based development 
initiatives.
5.35 For sites of eleven units or over the 
Council’s expectation will be that 
affordable housing will be provided 
on the application site, in line with the 
Council’s commitment to mixed and 
sustainable communities, supported 
by the NPPF .  Off-site provision (or 
financial contributions towards the 
provision of affordable housing) 
will only be agreed where such an 
approach can be robustly justified,  106for example to improve or make more 
effective use of the existing housing stock, 
where housing need priorities could be 
better met in an alternative location, or where 
there is an oversupply of a particular type of 
affordable housing provision in the immediate 
area and the agreed approach contributes to 
the objective of creating mixed and balanced 
communities.
5.36 Evidence will be required to show that the 
affordable housing cannot be managed 
effectively on the site and that providing the 
affordable housing elsewhere will significantly 
widen housing choice and encourage a 
better social mix. Where off-site provision 
or contributions are agreed, it will be on the 
basis of the developer providing the same 
ratio of affordable housing to market housing 
as would have been provided on-site. Off-
site provision should, where possible, be in 
the same Housing Market Area (HMA) as the 
application site (Carlisle City, Rural Carlisle 
East or Rural Carlisle West).107
Figure 2 
108
In the rural area dwellings will be permitted on small sites where open 
market housing would not be acceptable, subject to the following 
criteria:
1. the development is for affordable housing to meet an identified 
local need;
2. the affordable housing will be retained for affordable need in 
perpetuity;
3. the proposal can demonstrate that the development can be 
delivered; and
4. the site is very close to, adjoining or within a settlement which 
provides a range of local services and facilities, or has good public 
transport links to a larger settlement with a wider range of services 
and facilities.
In the following exceptional circumstances an element of open market 
housing will be allowed on rural exception sites:
1.  excessive development costs due to site constraints;
2.  the Registered Provider can demonstrate that the additional 
revenue created by the development of open market housing is 
essential to enable the delivery of affordable housing on the site; or
3. the amount of open market housing is the minimum required to 
achieve site viability.Justification
5.37 The purpose of a rural exception site is to address 
local housing need in order to sustain rural 
communities. Proposals must include evidence 
setting out the level of local need and a justification 
of the particular location to ensure that the scheme 
is appropriate in terms of scale, tenure and other 
characteristics. This Policy enables planning 
permission to be granted for affordable housing on 
land that would not normally be used for housing 
because, for example, it is subject to policies of 
restraint. Hence, an exception is made to normal 
planning policy to address proven local housing 
need. However, other planning issues such as site 
suitability, scale, design etc must still be addressed.
5.38 The rural area can be the least affordable place to 
live in the District. In 2008, the Government’s ‘Living 
Working Countryside’ Matthew Taylor review of the 
rural economy and affordable housing found that 
while people working in rural areas tend to earn 
significantly less than those working in urban areas, 
rural homes are more expensive than urban homes. 
5.39 The popularity of rural areas and migration from 
urban areas add to the pressures on rural housing 
affordability.Policy HO 5 - Rural Exception Sites109
5.40 In the rural area, opportunities for 
delivering affordable housing can 
be limited. The AHEVA notes that 
rural exception sites land values are 
generally lower, thereby creating 
an opportunity to deliver affordable 
housing. Rural exception sites can 
contribute towards the supply of 
affordable housing, and help to meet 
specific identified local needs. Such 
sites can only be used for affordable 
housing in perpetuity. The type, tenure 
and size of the homes must meet an 
identified local need. Local is defined 
as within the parish.
5.41 Examples of the type of land that would 
qualify as an exception site include:
• land within or adjacent to a small 
village where open market housing 
would normally be constrained;
• land close to a larger village with a 
range of services and facilities; or• the exception site is adjacent to the 
edge of a village, or is well related to 
existing residential development and 
amenities located in, or adjacent to, a 
clearly identifiable village or settlement.
5.42 The policy aims to ensure that rural 
communities remain sustainable by 
making provision for households in local 
affordable housing need, for example:
• existing residents needing separate 
accommodation in the area, e.g. grown 
up children, or growing families;
• workers who provide important services 
and need to live closer to the local 
community; or
• people who require family support, e.g. 
the elderly.
5.43 Villages throughout the District vary 
enormously in size. It is therefore 
important that the development of a 
rural exception site is in scale with its 
surroundings, and normally only small 
sites will be considered acceptable.  It is important that the number and type 
of houses to be developed enables 
the creation of sustainable, inclusive 
and mixed communities. Schemes are 
more likely to be successful with the 
involvement, support and knowledge 
of the parish council and the local 
community.
5.44 The occupancy of the houses will be 
controlled by a Section 106 agreement 
to ensure that the affordable housing 
is available in perpetuity to meet local 
needs. This prevents the houses being 
sold or rented at open market rates.
5.45 The S106 must include the name of the 
parish or parishes within the appropriate 
area (usually the relevant Housing Market 
Area) where the local affordable housing 
need has been identified. It may also 
include a list of neighbouring parishes, 
wards or wider geography to be referred 
to if, at some point in the future, one or 
more of the houses becomes vacant and 
there are no applicants from the original 
parish or parishes.  110
New housing will be allowed in the open countryside in the 
following special circumstances:
1. where there is an essential need for a rural worker to live 
at or near their place of work, and evidence is provided to 
demonstrate need for a full time worker to be available at all 
times for the enterprise to function properly, provided that:
a) the business is established, has been profitable for at 
least one year, is currently financially sound, and has a clear 
prospect of remaining so;
b) the housing need cannot be met by other housing nearby; 
and
c) the house would be appropriate in terms of size, scale and 
design for its location.
2. replacement dwellings:
a) the dwelling has an existing lawful residential use;
b) the development is of a scale appropriate to the size of the 
plot; and
c) the development would reflect the identity of local 
surroundings and materials in terms of both the new dwelling 
and any curtilage development such as garages, outbuildings 
and boundaries.Policy HO 6 - Other Housing in the Open Countryside
3. conversion of structurally sound redundant or disused 
buildings, provided that the development would:
a) lead to an enhancement of the immediate setting of the 
building; and
b) be able to access the road network without the need to 
construct access tracks which would have an unacceptable 
impact on the landscape. 
Justification111
5.46 There are a number of opportunities 
within the rural parts of the District 
to create new dwellings either where 
there is an essential need for a rural 
worker to live at or near their place 
of work, through the demolition and 
replacement of substandard dwellings, 
or though the conversion of redundant 
or disused buildings.  
5.47 Rural workers dwellings - most rural 
workers will live in a variety of locations 
within and outside the District (and 
commute to their work) or in existing 
properties connected to their place of 
work. However, there will be specific 
circumstances where the nature and 
demand of the rural enterprise require a 
worker to live at the place of business 
in the countryside.
5.48 The definition of a rural worker is not 
simply limited to someone employed 
in agriculture or forestry, but can 
include, for example, those employed 
in equestrian or other land based 
enterprises, water based businesses, rural arts and crafts, etc. The definition 
does not apply to someone whose 
business or occupation is carried out in a 
wide locality in the rural area, for example 
a tradesperson who has no requirement 
for fixed premises.
5.49 Applicants for such dwellings will need 
to demonstrate that there is a clearly 
established existing functional need, 
that the need relates to a full time 
worker, that the enterprise concerned 
is an established business, and has 
been profitable for at least one year. The 
business should also provide evidence 
that there is a clear prospect of it 
remaining financially sound.
5.50 The applicant will also be expected to 
demonstrate that the need for a dwelling 
could not be met by existing housing 
for sale in the area. This would require 
a basic search for houses for sale in the 
immediate locality and a brief indication 
as to why they are not suitable to meet 
the need for the rural worker, for example, 
on the grounds of location or price.5.51 Houses permitted under this policy will 
be subject to a condition limiting initial 
and successive occupation to a rural 
worker solely or mainly employed at 
their place of work nearby.
5.52 An application for the removal of 
such an occupancy condition will 
only be permitted where it can be 
demonstrated that:
• there is no longer a need for the 
dwelling in relation to the enterprise/
business; and
• the dwelling has been marketed for 
sale or rent for six months at a price 
that reflects the occupancy condition.
5.53 Replacement dwellings - proposals 
for replacement dwellings will need to 
demonstrate that the dwelling to be 
replaced has not been abandoned. 
Development proposals under this 
policy will generally arise where an 
existing dwelling is in a poor condition 
and therefore unsuitable for current 
living standards.112
5.54 Careful consideration will need to 
be given to the location of the new 
dwelling within the plot, and sufficient 
curtilage will need to be retained 
for adequate garden, parking and 
circulation space. Any new dwelling 
should not have a greater adverse 
impact on character and appearance of 
the surrounding area than the dwelling 
to be replaced. The existing house 
on the site must be demolished on 
completion of the new dwelling.
5.55 Conversion of redundant and 
disused buildings - buildings such as 
barns, mills and old stables make a 
significant contribution to the character 
and quality of the countryside around 
Carlisle. To avoid their loss and to 
prevent them from becoming derelict 
eyesores this policy makes provision 
for their conversion and re-use. 
Conversions must aim to retain and 
enhance any architectural quality and 
character of the building and its rural 
setting.5.56 Any building to be converted should 
be visually worth retaining due to its 
contribution to the rural landscape. 
This will exclude modern agricultural 
or industrial buildings. Buildings to be 
converted should be structurally sound. 
Proposals which require the substantial 
reconstruction of the external walls or 
roof will not be acceptable. Structural 
surveys may be required in order 
to demonstrate that a building is 
structurally sound.
5.57 Carlisle is the second largest District in 
England and covers 400 square miles. 
As such, there are likely to be some 
very remote rural buildings in areas 
with poor accessibility, remote from 
services, facilities and employment, 
and where the only option for travel is 
by car. The conversion of redundant 
or disused buildings in such locations 
may raise sustainability issues, and 
any proposals will require additional 
information to be submitted by the 
applicant to show the following:• how the site will access utilities such as 
energy and water supply;
• how the site will access the road 
network; and
• how the building will contribute to 
energy efficiency.
5.58 All proposals under this Policy should 
seek to optimise the potential to 
improve the character and quality of 
the site. A high standard of design will 
be required resulting in a development 
which is visually attractive as a result 
of good architecture and appropriate 
landscaping. The design of new houses 
in the open countryside should promote 
or reinforce local distinctiveness but be 
open to appropriate innovation.  
5.59 In all cases the creation of new 
dwellings should avoid introducing 
suburban character or features, 
such as extensive areas of tarmac or 
paviours, close boarded timber fencing 
or leylandii hedges.113
5.60 Where a courtyard development of 
several dwellings is proposed, the 
gardens and courtyard should normally 
be left as a single communal space.
5.61 Many rural buildings can be habitats 
for a variety of wildlife including bats 
and barn owls. These species are 
sensitive to disturbance and therefore 
at risk from building works. They are 
also protected under the 1981 Wildlife 
and Countryside Act. An ecological 
survey will also be required where such 
species are present. The survey should 
identify the species present, identify 
any impacts and consider avoidance, 
mitigation, and new benefits.114
Justification
5.62 Within the District there are a number of buildings which 
can be considered as heritage assets. Heritage assets for 
the purpose of this policy are most likely to include historic 
buildings that are either on the statutory list or the local list.  
5.63 In many cases the setting of a heritage asset will be significant 
and must not be compromised as a result of proposals arising 
under this policy. In particular walled or historic gardens, open 
parkland or other landscapes can be an integral part of the 
setting of a heritage asset.
5.64 Enabling development in the form of new housing, which 
would not be supported by any other policies in the Local 
Plan, should be proportionate to the scale and complexity of 
the project. Early pre-application discussions will be essential, 
so that applicants do not waste resources on schemes that are 
unlikely to be justified.
5.65 The impact of the development must be accurately detailed 
when the planning application is submitted. Outline planning 
applications will not be acceptable. The design and layout 
of the enabling development will be critical in determining its 
acceptability. The proposals must adequately set out how the 
objective of securing the future of the heritage asset will be 
achieved, including setting out any timescales, which ideally 
should secure the restoration of the heritage asset as early as 
possible in the course of the enabling development, preferably Policy HO 7 - Housing as Enabling Development
Enabling development in the form of new housing, where it 
would otherwise be contrary to planning policy, that would 
secure the future conservation of a heritage asset, will be 
acceptable providing that the following criteria are met:
1. it is necessary as a last resort to resolve problems arising 
from the inherent needs of the place;
2. any harm caused to the significance of the heritage asset 
and its setting is outweighed by the public benefits of the 
proposal;
3. sufficient grant or subsidy to secure the future of the 
heritage asset is not available from any other source;
4. the proportion of enabling development proposed is the 
minimum required to secure the long term future of the 
heritage asset;
5. the development secures the long term future of the 
heritage asset, and this outweighs the disbenefits of 
departing from any other planning policies; and
6. the new development makes a positive contribution to 
local character and distinctiveness.115
at the outset, and certainly before the 
completion and occupation of the 
dwellings.  
5.66 The end use of the heritage asset 
must not only be compatible with the 
historic form, character and fabric of 
the place, but be financially viable. This 
means either that the place must have 
a positive market value on completion 
of repair and return to beneficial use, 
or there must be clarity about who 
will take responsibility for it in the long 
term.116
Policy HO 8 - House Extensions
House extensions and alterations should be designed to:
1. relate to and complement the existing building in scale, 
design, form and materials;
2. be visually subservient to the main building;
3. ensure there is no loss of amenity to surrounding properties 
by overlooking, overbearing nature of the proposal, or 
increase in on street car parking caused by the loss of an 
existing garage or off street parking space;
4. ensure adequate natural light within the building, garden or 
other outdoor amenity space;
5. maintain the established character and pattern of the street 
scene and be a positive addition; and
6.   retain gaps between buildings where they are characteristic 
of the area and contribute to the street scene.Justification
5.67 Many people choose to adapt their existing homes to cater for 
changes in lifestyle rather than move house. House extensions 
are usually defined as any extension of the living space, 
including basements, roof conversions and conservatories. 
Planning permission will be refused for development of 
poor design that fails to take the opportunities available for 
improving the character and quality of an area and the way it 
functions.
5.68 The design of an extension should respond to the 
characteristics of the specific site, as well as the 
distinctiveness of the wider setting. The aim should be 
to reflect the style of the existing building, especially in 
conservation areas and for listed buildings. However, 
extensions of a more contemporary design may be 
appropriate, provided they are of the highest standard of 
design, and innovative in nature, together with significantly 
enhancing the immediate setting. Consequently, any proposal 
will need to demonstrate that through its scale, density, layout, 
siting, character and appearance, it has been designed to 
respect the property and its surroundings. 
5.69 Most proposals should be visually subservient to the existing 
property. The scale of the extension that is likely to be 
acceptable will depend on the size of the plot, the size of 
the original dwelling and the impact on neighbours and the 117
street scene. Further detailed policy 
is contained in the adopted 2011 
Supplementary Planning Document 
(SPD) Achieving Well Designed 
Housing.
5.70 Not all house extensions require 
planning permission. Permitted 
development rights allow householders 
to improve and extend their homes 
without the need to seek planning 
permission. The Government has 
produced technical guidance 
on permitted development for 
householders which can be found on 
the Planning Portal website.
5.71 This policy will therefore apply to all 
applications for development which are 
not covered by permitted development 
rights, although it also provides useful 
guidance, together with the SPD 
Achieving Well Designed Housing, for 
extensions being constructed under 
permitted development rights.118
Justification
5.72 A Large House in Multiple Occupation 
(HMO) is a house with more than six 
people sharing. These are unclassified by 
the Use Classes Order and in planning 
terms are described as being sui generis. 
This Policy applies to large HMOs. The 
General Permitted Development Order 
gives Permitted Development rights for 
change of use from dwelling houses to 
small scale houses in multiple occupation. 
Small scale is defined in Circular 08/2010 
as small shared houses or flats occupied 
by between three and six unrelated 
individuals who share basic amenities.
5.73 The Housing Act 2004 definition of an 
HMO is as follows:
• three or more unrelated people are sharing 
facilities;
• buildings comprising non-self-contained 
flats;
• houses converted to self-contained flats 
before 1991 and not in accordance with 
the 1991 Building Regulations; andPolicy HO 9 - Large Houses in Multiple Occupation and the Subdivision of Dwellings
Proposals for the subdivision of 
dwellings and the creation of houses in 
multiple occupation will be acceptable 
providing that:
1. such proposals do not lead to the 
unacceptable loss of good quality 
family housing;
2. effective measures are proposed to 
minimise the effects of noise and 
other disturbance to neighbouring 
residential properties;
3. adequate space is provided for the 
storage of refuse and recycling bins;
4. the proposal would not adversely 
affect the character of the building 
or the surrounding area, for example 
through increased on-street parking; 
and
5. the proposal does not lead to the 
creation of substandard units of 
accommodation. Within the rural area, proposals for 
the subdivision of larger houses into 
two or more units of accommodation 
must demonstrate either that there are 
services in the village where the house is 
located, or that there is good access to 
one or more other villages with services, 
or to the larger settlements of Carlisle, 
Brampton and Longtown.119
Whilst the nature of the buildings in 
these locations (three storey Victorian 
houses) can be successfully converted, 
there are often problems with lack of 
parking or sufficient outdoor space for 
storage of bins and recycling bags. 
This can have an unacceptable impact 
on the amenity of neighbours, and on 
the character of the street scene. 
5.80 This policy also applies to proposals 
to subdivide larger houses into two 
or more dwellings. This can provide 
additional smaller units of housing, 
often at less cost than new build, and 
can often preserve the life of an older 
building. Such proposals must ensure 
adequate internal living space, as well 
as complying with other policy criteria. 
Where such houses are located in the 
open countryside, proposals must 
demonstrate that there is good access 
to local services and facilities, or to the 
larger settlements of Carlisle, Brampton 
or Longtown.• a self-contained flat converted to 1991 
Building Regulations standards (or 
later), if occupied by more than three 
unrelated persons.
5.74 The Act also makes provision for 
mandatory licensing of certain HMOs 
and for such licensing schemes to be 
operated by the City Council.
5.75 Under the Act, HMOs which need to be 
licensed are those where:
• the HMO or any part of it comprises 
three storeys or more; 
• the HMO is occupied by five or more 
persons; and
• these persons are living in two or more 
single households.
5.76 Where an HMO is situated in a part of 
a building above business premises, 
each storey of the business premises is 
included when calculating the number 
of storeys for the HMO.5.77 Because of the shared occupancy of 
the properties, HMOs, such as bedsits 
and shared houses, require a higher 
standard of management than other 
private rented property and are subject 
to additional regulation. Some of these 
regulations relate to the management 
of the HMOs and this helps safeguard 
the health and safety of people who 
live in them who can be amongst the 
most vulnerable and disadvantaged 
members of the community. This type 
of housing is a valuable housing option 
for many people. 
5.78 HMO licensing has been operated 
in Carlisle since 2006. For more 
information on HMO licensing, please 
contact the Private Sector Housing 
Team at the City Council. 
5.79 Certain areas in Carlisle have a 
concentration of HMOs, in particular 
Warwick Square/Aglionby Street/
Warwick Road, Stanwix, and 
Chatsworth and Portland Squares.  120
Policy HO 10 - Housing to Meet Specific Needs
The Council and its partners will work together to enable 
the delivery of specialist housing for vulnerable people 
including for the ageing population and those with physical 
and learning disabilities, such as extra-care accommodation, 
and which take account of the need to provide for a variety 
of care needs and flexibility to accommodate differing 
requirements of care.  
Proposals for new development to meet a particular housing 
need, e.g. older people, supported or other specialist 
accommodation will be acceptable where they are in 
appropriate sustainable locations, for example, close to a 
range of services and facilities.  Justification
5.81 The age profile for Carlisle District is slightly older than found 
regionally or nationally, with a greater proportion of people in all 
age groups from 45 onwards. Within the rural area there is a much 
larger proportion of people aged 45 and over than in the urban 
area. Nearly 30% of the population of each rural HMA is aged 60 
or over. Cumbria County Council has produced an ‘Extra Care 
Housing Strategy 2011-2029’, which identifies that 340 extra 
care units are required in the District up to 2019. There will be 
continuing dialogue with the County Council on how this can be 
delivered.  
5.82 These figures have implications for the delivery of housing over 
the plan period and therefore it is essential to ensure that the 
needs of older people are met over the plan period. New specialist 
housing for vulnerable people should aim to give all people who 
require provision of care more choice and control over where and 
how they live and how they receive care.
5.83 This Policy encourages the provision of housing to maximise the 
independence and choice of older people and those members of 
the community with specific needs. When assessing proposals 
for the development of residential care homes, extra care housing 
and other similar schemes the Council will have regard to the local 
need for the accommodation proposed, and the ability of future 
residents and staff to access a range of local services such as 
shops, community facilities and public transport.121
the changing needs of individuals and 
families. Adaptable homes are intended 
to add to the comfort and convenience 
of the home, and support the changing 
needs of those who live there at 
different stages of their lives. They are 
designed to create and encourage 
better living environments for everyone, 
from small children to coping with 
temporary or permanent disability, or 
reduced mobility in later life. 
5.87 Housing for people with a range of 
special needs will also be necessary. 
The Cumbria County Council ‘Adult 
Social Care in Carlisle District Plan 
2012-14’ identifies extra care housing 
as a key form of support. Carlisle has 
a number of such schemes where 
people are offered support in extra 
care schemes, rather than residential 
care, enabling them to stay at home 
for longer. Burnside Court in Stanwix 
provides 44 flats for people with care 
needs, and is provided by Anchor Housing, and Heysham Gardens, Belle 
Vue, provides 60 units (Eden Housing).5.84 Older people or others with specialist 
housing needs often want to stay 
within the community in which they 
have been living, or move to be close 
to family or others who are able to help 
support them. Whilst such locations 
may not benefit from local services 
and facilities, they are still considered 
sustainable in terms of the community/
family support for the particular 
housing need.
5.85 The Council will also support evidence 
based proposals for annexes or 
extensions to existing houses to 
accommodate an elderly, disabled or 
otherwise dependant person.  
5.86 Proposals for the development of 
homes that are adaptable for the life 
course of the occupiers in line with 
Building Regulations M4 (2) (Accessible 
and adaptable dwellings), and M 4 (3) 
(Wheelchair user dwellings), will help 
to ensure a supply of adaptable and 
accessible homes that can respond to 122
Policy HO 11 - Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Provision 
The Council and its partners will work together to meet the 
accommodation needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople.
Land has been allocated adjacent to Low Harker Dene for nine 
permanent residential pitches and up to 15 transit pitches to 
meet identified needs over the Plan period for Gypsies and 
Travellers provision.
Proposals which contribute to achieving additional provision 
of transit and permanent residential  pitches, and sites for 
Travelling Showpeople, in addition to the sites allocated will be 
considered favourably where they meet the following criteria:
1. the location, scale and design would allow for integration 
with, whilst not dominating or unacceptably harming, 
the closest settled community to enable the prospect of 
a peaceful co-existence between the site and the local 
community;
2. the site has reasonable access to key services and facilities 
including schools, shops, doctors’ surgeries and health care 
and other community facilities;
3. there are opportunities to access these facilities by public 
transport, walking or cycling;4. adequate utilities can be provided or are already available;
5. the site is well planned to be contained within existing 
landscape features, or can be appropriately landscaped to 
minimise any impact on the surrounding area;
6. satisfactory living conditions can be achieved on the site and 
there would be no unacceptable impact on the amenity of 
adjacent land uses including residential uses;
7. any ancillary business uses that are intended to be carried 
out on the site will not  have an unacceptable impact on 
the residential use of the site, any adjacent land uses or the 
visual amenity of the area; and
8. the site should have, or be able to provide, adequate access 
and turning space for large vehicles and caravans.
The redevelopment or change of use of existing sites for 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople to alternative 
uses will not be supported whilst there remains a proven need 
for provision within the District.123
Justification
5.88 The Housing Act 2004 places a duty 
on local authorities to carry out an 
assessment of the accommodation 
needs of Gypsies and Travellers 
in the District. Government policy 
on travellers is contained in the 
Communities and Local Government 
(CLG) document ‘Planning Policy 
for Traveller Sites’ which also states 
that local planning authorities should 
make their own assessment of need 
for the purposes of planning. This 
will help in identifying land for sites 
and will also ensure that both plan 
making and decision taking help to 
reduce the number of unauthorised 
developments and encampments and 
make enforcement more effective.
5.89 The Cumbria Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) 
(November 2013) sets out an up to 
date picture of accommodation needs 
across Cumbria on a district by district 
basis up to 2030. This will ensure that any under provision can be addressed 
to ensure that an appropriate level of 
supply is maintained in places where 
Travellers can access education, 
health, welfare and employment.  
5.90 The total pitch requirement across the 
District, based on the current supply 
of pitches, and views expressed by 
Gypsy and Traveller households, is 17 
pitches up to 2030. It is acknowledged 
that the need for pitches should be 
regularly reviewed to determine the 
extent to which this requirement is 
changing over time.   
5.91 There are currently a number of 
licensed Gypsy sites in the District 
including: Low Harker Dene; Hadrian’s 
Park and Atchin Tan. In addition, there 
are also a number of pitches provided 
through personal consents to cater for 
the needs of single family units. There 
is also a permanent site for people of 
the Showman’s Guild at Willowholme 
in Carlisle.5.92 In addition to the need for permanent 
provision, the GTAA also makes an 
assessment of the need for pitches for 
short term use while in transit. Such 
sites are intended to be authorised, 
and usually permanent, but there is a 
limit on the length of time residents can 
stay.
5.93 Within the District, based on Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
surveys, and the broad scale of 
unauthorised encampment activity, 
the GTAA identifies that up to eight 
additional transit pitches would help 
offset the incidences of unauthorised 
encampment activity in Carlisle. 
This is not an annual requirement, 
but rather an overall requirement 
which helps to address on-going 
unauthorised encampment activity.  
The transit allocation adjacent to Low 
Harker Dene provides sufficient land 
to accommodate up to 15 pitches.  124
Any additional proposals for transit 
provision will be assessed against the 
criteria in the policy.
5.94 With regards to provision for Travelling 
Showpeople, the GTAA does not 
identify any need for new permanent 
sites over the Plan period. Any 
proposals coming forward for provision 
for Travelling Showpeople will be 
assessed against the criteria in the 
policy. 125
Primary Residential Areas are identified on the Local 
Plan Policies Map. The amenity of residential areas 
will be protected from inappropriate development. 
Planning applications for non-residential uses will 
only be permitted providing that: 
1. such uses maintain or enhance the overall quality 
and character of the immediate area;
2. there is no detrimental effect on residential 
amenity either through noise, nuisance, damage 
to visual amenity or increase in traffic; and 
3. the proposed use will provide a beneficial service 
to the local community.
Support will be given for schemes which include the 
redevelopment or refurbishment of previous non-
conforming uses in the area.
The character and residential amenity of the area 
should not be compromised by the cumulative 
impact of such proposals, either through increase 
in traffic or the intensity or intrusive nature of such 
proposals.Policy HO 12 - Other Uses in Primary Residential Areas Justification
5.95 This Policy aims to ensure a good standard of amenity for all existing and 
future occupants of land and buildings. The City Council therefore aims 
to protect and maintain the residential character of the areas identified 
as being primarily in residential use, as shown on the Local Plan Policies 
Map. The Policy coverage will extend to include all consented residential 
schemes once implemented.
5.96 Within residential areas it is necessary to prevent development that 
would be detrimental to the amenity of those who live there. In order 
to protect residential amenity, the City Council will resist any planning 
application which seeks to introduce a use which is clearly non-
conforming and threatens the residential character of an area. 
5.97 Certain proposals for non-residential uses within established residential 
areas including small local shops, public houses, health care facilities, 
and small businesses including B&Bs may be acceptable provided the 
applicant can demonstrate that the benefits of the scheme will be in the 
community’s interest. 
5.98 There are uses, however, either through the type of use, its scale, or 
because it would generate an unacceptable level of traffic, noise or 
other adverse effects such as impact on the safety or health of residents 
that would result in an overall loss of amenity. Such development is not 
acceptable in residential areas and will not be permitted. 126
127
6
InfrastructureContext
Infrastructure can take many forms 
and is essential to support the delivery 
of the objectives within the Local 
Plan of increased housing provision, 
economic growth and creating thriving 
and sustainable communities. The 
policies in this chapter aim to ensure key 
infrastructure provision is in place, or can 
be put in place, to allow new development 
to be brought forward and function in a 
sustainable way.
The implementation of the policies within 
this chapter will be supported through 
evidence in the form of the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP) which identifies what 
infrastructure currently exists across the Objective
To ensure the provision of efficient 
and integrated infrastructure 
networks and their timely delivery, 
including sustainable transport, 
where needed to support new and 
existing development, facilitate 
economic growth and deliver the 
Plan’s strategy. District, highlighting any deficits and likely 
funding arrangements that will be needed 
to address them, ultimately to help ensure 
that infrastructure provision keeps pace 
with growth. Where deficits exist, this 
chapter establishes a framework through 
which developments can help to address 
them using planning obligations where 
appropriate and viable to do so.128
New development must ensure that sufficient infrastructure 
is in place in order to support it. Where this is not the case, 
or where proposals would place an unacceptable strain on 
existing infrastructure networks, development will not be 
permitted unless arrangements can be made to ensure the 
timely delivery of required infrastructure improvements.
Where a development requires the creation of new 
infrastructure the Council will require it to be secured through 
planning obligations. If adopted, the Community Infrastructure 
Levy (CIL) may also be used to help address infrastructure 
deficits identified in the Carlisle Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
(IDP).
Early engagement at pre-application stage by all parties 
with infrastructure providers will be encouraged for all 
development proposals. Applicants proposing major 
development must be able to demonstrate they have engaged 
in pre-application discussions with relevant infrastructure 
providers.
Where land is earmarked for infrastructure development, it will 
be protected from development proposals with the potential 
to compromise its delivery. Where necessary, the Council will 
act to safeguard land for new and emerging infrastructure 
proposals that may arise over the lifetime of the Plan.Justification 
6.1	 The	timely	delivery	of	infrastructure	is	fundamental	to	the	
delivery	of	the	Plan.	Co-ordinating	development	with	the	
delivery	of	infrastructure	will	be	necessary	in	some	instances.
6.2	 Key	infrastructure	likely	to	be	necessary	to	co-ordinate	with	
the	delivery	of	development	within	Carlisle	includes:
•	 primary	and	secondary	school	placements;
•	 adequate	highway	capacity	and	achievable	access;
•	 health	and	social	facilities	or	improvements;
•	 flood	risk	and	surface	water	management	infrastructure		
and	improvements;
•	 transport	facilities	and	improvements;
•	 foul	water	drainage	and	network	capacity;
•	 energy	supply;	and
•	 clean	water	supply.
6.3	 Other	infrastructure	requirements	may	also	need	to	be	
addressed	before	development	can	commence.	These	
requirements	will	vary	from	location	to	location,	and	may	
cover	a	wide	range	of	social	and	environmental	needs,	based	
on	local	circumstances.Policy IP 1 - Delivering Infrastructure129
6.4	 The	Infrastructure	Delivery	Plan	(IDP)	
will	continue	to	be	used	to	identify	
any	infrastructure	deficits	that	may	
impact	upon	proposals	for	new	
development.	In	this	regard	the	IDP	
will	support	the	implementation	of	
this	Policy	through	providing	evidence	
for	seeking	developer	contributions	
from	applicants	where	a	specific	
infrastructure	issue	would	directly	
affect	and/or	result	from	a	development	
proposal.	Issues	may	also	be	raised	
during	consultation	on	a	planning	
application	by	relevant	infrastructure	
bodies.	New	development	which	would	
place	unacceptable	strain	on	existing	
infrastructure,	or	which	is	proposed	in	
an	area	where	essential	infrastructure	
does	not	exist,	will	only	be	approved	
once	the	applicant	has	demonstrated	
how	and	when	infrastructure	
requirements	will	be	met.6.5	 The	IDP	will	also	provide	information	
and	evidence	to	support	the	
introduction	of	a	Community	
Infrastructure	Levy	(CIL),	which	would	
seek	contributions	from	applicants	
towards	known	strategic	infrastructure	
deficits	that	have	been	identified	across	
the	District.	If	CIL	is	subsequently	
introduced	by	the	City	Council,	the	use	
of	planning	obligations	would	be	scaled	
back	 in	accordance	 with	 the	regulations	
governing	the	use	of	CIL.
6.6	 In	order	to	reduce	disruption	caused	
by	connecting	development	sites	
to	infrastructure	networks	such	as	
gas,	water,	sewage,	electricity	and	
broadband	 fibre	 i.e.	where	 development	
may	need	to	close	highways	to	carry	
out	work,	developers	will	need	to	co-
ordinate	with	infrastructure	providers	to	
ensure	that	works	on	multiple	utilities	
are	carried	out,	wherever	it	is	possible	
to	do	so,	at	the	same	time.	This	will	
help	to	avoid	situations	where	lengthy	road	closures	are	incurred	on	multiple,	
separate	occasions	over	the	course	
of	construction	as	different	utilities	
are	installed,	to	the	inconvenience	of	
existing	communities.
6.7	 The	Council	will	seek	to	ensure	that	
land	required	to	accommodate	new	
infrastructure	provision	is,	where	
necessary,	protected	from	unrelated	
and	potentially	compromising	
development.	In	some	cases	it	may	
be	necessary	to	formally	allocate	or	
safeguard	land	for	the	development	
and	delivery	of	new	infrastructure.	If	
the	need	to	do	so	arises	throughout	
the	life	of	the	Plan	the	Council	will	
consider	the	need	for	a	partial	review	of	
the	appropriate	element	of	the	Plan	or	
consider	the	need	to	bring	forward	an	
additional	Development	Plan	Document	
(DPD).130
All new development will be assessed 
against its impact upon the transport 
network. Development that will cause 
severe issues that cannot be mitigated 
against will be resisted. Development 
likely to generate significant levels of 
transport within isolated and poorly 
accessible areas will be resisted 
unless a clear environmental, social or 
economic need can be demonstrated.
New development that will be accessible 
to the public will be required to 
prioritise safe and convenient access 
for cyclists and pedestrians, and to 
take opportunities to contribute to 
the creation and enhancement of an 
integrated and continuous sustainable 
transport network. All new development 
must demonstrate/provide convenient 
access to public transport, although a 
more flexible approach may be justified 
in rural areas where public transport 
options are more limited.Proposals that would facilitate a modal 
shift in freight transport from road to rail 
and/or air will be supported where the 
impact on the surrounding road network 
and land uses can be accommodated 
without significant adverse effect.
Travel Plans and Transport 
Assessments: 
Development which through reference 
to national guidance requires the 
submission of a Transport Assessment 
and/or Travel Plan, should, in addition 
to responding to national guidance, 
demonstrate how:
1. the needs of cyclists and pedestrians 
will be met and prioritised on site;
2. the development will help to reduce 
the need to travel, particularly by 
private motor car;
3. the movement of freight and goods by 
rail will be maximised where possible 
and appropriate;Policy IP 2 - Transport and Development
4. the site will safely and conveniently 
connect to public and green transport 
routes, and contribute to creating a 
multifunctional and integrated green 
infrastructure network;
5. the accessibility needs of more 
vulnerable people have been taken into 
account;
6. the impact of heavy goods vehicles 
accessing the site, where this is a 
required aspect of operations, will be 
minimised, including restrictions on 
operating hours and how route plans 
involving the movement of HGVs will 
avoid residential areas where possible; 
and
7. all other sustainable transport 
concerns will be addressed.
Sustainable Vehicle Technology: 
Developers will be encouraged to include 
sustainable vehicle technology such as 
electric vehicle charging points within 
proposals.131
Justification
6.8	 Through	recognition	that	all	new	
developments	can	potentially	impact	
upon	the	transport	network,	it	is	
important	that	the	extent	of	these	
impacts	are	fully	understood	and	
considered	when	determining	planning	
applications.	Policy	IP	2	seeks	to	
achieve	this	via	providing	a	framework	
through	which	likely	impacts	can	be	
assessed.	The	overriding	objective	
of	the	Policy,	which	builds	upon	the	
Strategic	Transport	Policy	at	the	
outset	of	the	Plan,	is	to	ensure	that	
development	proposals	that	will	
compromise	the	safe	or	effective	
operation	of	any	element	of	the	
District’s	transport	network	will	be	
resisted.
6.9	 New	development	should	be	planned	
in	such	a	way	that	reduces	the	need	to	
travel	and	prioritises	the	movements	
of	pedestrians	and	cyclists	and	other	
sustainable	transport	uses	in	order	to	
achieve	safe	and	secure	access	for	all.	Residential	developments	should	
in	this	context	pay	particular	regard	
to	the	importance	of	safe	walking	
routes	to	school.	New	development	
should	capitalise	upon	and	enhance	
links	to	existing	green	infrastructure	
and	rights	of	way	networks	wherever	
possible	or	should	seek	to	create	
new	networks	if	none	are	present.	
Similarly	opportunities	should	be	taken	
to	maximise	connectivity	with	public	
transport.
6.10	 Travel	Plans	and	Transport	
Assessments	will	be	used	to	make	sure	
that	new	development	conforms	to	the	
principles	of	sustainable	transport.	The	
circumstances	when	such	assessments	
will	be	formally	required	are	set	out	
in	the	Planning	Practice	Guidance	
as	too	is	the	intended	scope	of	such	
assessments.	In	summary	however	
such	assessments	will	generally	be	
required	to	demonstrate	that:•	 the	wider	impact	of	development	
on	the	transport	network	has	been	
considered;
•	 pedestrians	and	cyclists	have	been	
given	the	highest	consideration	in	
terms	of	accessing	the	site	and	there	
is	good	access	to	the	public	transport	
network;
•	 road	and	street	layouts	are	designed	
to	be	safe	and	secure	and	minimise	
the	conflicts	between	traffic	and	
pedestrians	and	cyclists;
•	 the	needs	of	vulnerable	people,	such	
as	children,	people	with	disabilities,	the	
elderly,	and	parents	with	prams/young	
children	have	been	addressed;
•	 convenient	and	safe	walking	routes	
to	schools	and	other	services	and	
facilities	can	be	achieved;132
•	 the	delivery	and	movement	of	goods	
and	supplies	is	as	efficient	as	possible	
(i.e.	by	rail)	and	that	all	reasonable	
efforts	have	been	taken	to	reduce	the	
potential	nuisance	caused	by	HGV	
movements;	and
•	 opportunities	to	incorporate	facilities	
for	electric	vehicle	charging	points	have	
been	considered.
6.11	 The	Manual	for	Streets	was	produced	
by	the	Department	for	Transport	
in	2007	and	continues	to	provide	
valuable	guidance	on	how	to	achieve	
accessible	and	well	designed	streets	
and	neighbourhoods.	In	order	to	ensure	
a	high	quality	living	environment	for	
residents,	the	Council	will	encourage	
its	use	within	development	proposals.	
In	keeping	with	the	Manual	for	
Streets,	the	Council	will	expect	new	
development	to	integrate	well	with	
existing	development	particularly	
regarding	cycle	and	pedestrian	access	
and	connections.	Foot	and	cycle	paths	will	need	to	be	both	convenient	and	
safe,	not	only	from	a	traffic	point	of	
view,	but	also	through	ensuring	that	
neither	a	sense	of	fear	is	created	nor	
crime	encouraged	through	the	isolating	
of	the	route	from	other	activities	and	
street	users,	especially	at	night.
6.12	 The	Council	will	continue	to	work	with	
the	Local	Highway	Authority	to	ensure	
that	new	estate	roads	and	streets,	
particularly	those	designed	using	the	
Manual	for	Streets,	are	of	a	standard	
that	can	be	adopted.
6.13	 Whilst	electric	vehicle	technology	is	
still	in	its	infancy,	there	is	a	strong	push	
from	 national	 Government	 to	encourage	
the	development	of	infrastructure	to	
support	its	growth.	The	provision	of	
electronic	car	chargers	within	car	parks	
is	slowly	growing	within	the	City	and	
wider	District.	As	such	consideration	
should	be	afforded	to	increasing	
electric	charging	provision	wherever	
appropriate	and	possible.	133
Where appropriate, proposals for new development will be 
expected to provide a minimum number of parking spaces 
per new dwelling/m 2 of floor space depending on the 
type and location, in consultation with the Local Highway 
Authority and in accordance with any local standards in 
operation.
In areas suffering from significant on-street parking problems, 
greater provision will be sought where possible, or alternative 
measures to address the issues will be required. In all areas 
the need to encourage the use of alternative means of travel, 
other than the private car, shall be an important consideration 
when applying parking standards.
Provision for convenient and secure bicycle parking will 
also be expected to be provided in line with standards. A 
minimum standard for disabled parking spaces within new 
development will also be applied.   
Off and on street parking provision will be required to be 
well designed, safe and appropriate for the street scene. 
Proposed car parking provision that would have a significant 
adverse impact upon the character of an area will be resisted. 
The Council will expect developers to have regard to the 
Manual for Streets when considering parking design.Justification
6.14	 National	policy	now	makes	clear	that	parking	standards	
should	be	determined	at	the	local	level	in	response	to	
local	circumstances.	The	Council,	working	with	the	Local	
Highway	Authority,	will	produce	a	Supplementary	Planning	
Document	(SPD)	to	set	minimum	parking	standards	for	the	
District.	A	minimum	requirement	for	parking	as	opposed	to	
a	maximum	allowance	is	considered	a	logical	response	to	
local	circumstances	and	specifically	an	increase	in	on	street	
parking.	Experience	supports	that	more	spaces	are	needed	
in	new	development,	and	new	standards,	depending	on	the	
type,	location	and	scale	of	development	will	reflect	this.	New	
development	will	be	expected	to	be	in	line	with	the	standards	
presented	within	the	SPD	once	formally	adopted.
6.15	 In	the	interim,	standards	will	be	decided	on	a	case	by	case	
basis,	in	consultation	with	the	Local	Highway	Authority,	
ensuring	that	all	new	development	provides	adequate	parking	
provision.	In	doing	so	standards	and	therefore	requirements	
will	be	informed	by:
•	 the	type,	mix	and	use	of	the	development;
•	 the	accessibility	of	the	development;
•	 the	availability	of	and	the	opportunities	for	public	transport;
•	 local	car	ownership	levels;
•	 the	availability	and	number	of	parking	permits	within	the	
locality;	andPolicy IP 3 - Parking Provision134
•	 an	overall	need	to	reduce	the	use	of	
high-emission	vehicles.
6.16	 For	commercial	and	leisure	areas,	it	
may	be	acceptable	for	different	uses	to	
share	parking	space	which	can	count	
towards	meeting	the	required	spaces	
for	both	businesses,	assuming	it	can	
be	adequately	demonstrated	that	
anticipated	peak	usage	will	occur	at	
different	times	of	the	day	as	to	avoid	
conflict.	
6.17	 There	is	an	issue	with	increasing	levels	
of	on	street	parking	in	some	residential	
areas	within	the	District	and	there	
is	therefore	a	need	to	look	at	more	
appropriate	off	street	parking	solutions.	
When	considering	proposals,	it	must	
be	noted	that	garages	that	are	less	
than	6m	in	length	and	3m	in	width	
are	not	considered	large	enough	to	
comfortably	accommodate	the	average	
modern	family	car	and	will	not	be	
counted	as	car	parking	spaces.6.18	 Conversely	it	is	acknowledged	that	there	
is	virtually	no	off-street	parking	provision	
in	some	parts	of	the	City,	such	as	on	and	
around	Warwick	Road,	and	this	can	result	
in	significant	issues	with	inappropriate	
on	street	parking.	There	are	also	parking	
problems	on	the	Kingstown	Industrial	
Estate	in	the	north	of	the	City,	where	
piecemeal	take	up	of	units	has	meant	
that	insufficient	parking	spaces	have	
been	provided	leading	to	congestion	
issues	on	the	estate	roads	as	people	
struggle	to	find	a	place	to	park.	Beyond	
the	City,	issues	also	arise	due	to	a	lack	
of	parking	in	the	other	larger	settlement	
centres,	particularly	in	Brampton	where	
town	centre	spaces	are	used	largely	by	
workers	rather	than	visitors	or	shoppers,	
with	issues	owing	to	commuter	parking	
also	known	in	Dalston	and	Longtown.	
A	more	flexible	approach	to	parking	
standards	in	such	areas	may	be	required.135
New development must be able to demonstrate how it will 
contribute to and be compatible with local fibre or internet 
connectivity. Applicants will be expected to demonstrate the 
anticipated connectivity requirements of the development, 
known nearby data networks and their anticipated speed, and 
realistic assessments of connection potential (fixed copper, 
3G, 4G, fibre, satellite, microwave, etc) or contribution to any 
such networks.
All new development should aim to enable a connection to 
the internet with a minimum symmetrical speed of 10Mbps, 
aspiring towards 25Mbps where possible and viable. Where 
this cannot be achieved, proposals should still include, where 
possible, suitable measures to enable a superfast broadband 
connection at a future date. 
Applicants proposing major development schemes are 
encouraged to engage with local broadband groups and 
Parish Councils, where present, to explore how superfast 
broadband can be provided to benefit the local community; 
establish whether any community broadband projects are 
active within the local area; and understand how development 
may contribute to and integrate with them.
Within the City Centre, Brampton and Longtown proposals to 
expand the free public Wi-Fi network will be supported.Justification
6.19	 The	expansion	of	high	speed	broadband	across	the	District	
will	be	supported,	particularly	in	rural	areas	where	there	has	
been	a	market	failure	regarding	the	viability	of	providing	high	
speed	and	holistic	connectivity.
6.20	 The	Fibre	to	the	Home	Council	Europe	(FTTH)	reported	that	
in	2012/13	the	UK	had	not	yet	achieved	1%	household	
coverage	of	superfast,	fibre	optic	broadband	(100Mbps),	
falling	dramatically	behind	other	European	countries.	
The	Government	has	expressed	its	intention	to	invest	in	
broadband	networks	across	the	country,	aiming	to	ensure	
every	household	has	access	to	at	least	2Mbps	and	that	90%	
of	homes	have	access	to	at	least	25Mbps	by	2015.	It	is	widely	
recognised	however	that	speeds	of	at	least	100Mbps	will	be	
required	to	ensure	the	functionality	of	emerging	workplace	
practices	such	as	cloud	computing.
6.21	 Across	the	District	current	levels	of	broadband	access	vary	
significantly.	Parts	of	the	City,	in	have	access	to	fibre	optic	
cable	broadband	technically	capable	of	speeds	of	up	to	and	
above	75Mbps.	Rural	parts	of	the	District	can	have	generally	
much	lower	connection	speeds,	though	this	is	improving	as	
access	to	fibre	broadband	is	rolled	out	across	the	County.Policy IP 4 - Broadband Access136
6.22	 This	Policy	seeks	to	balance	the	
viability	of	new	development	with	that	
of	ensuring	the	wider,	long	term	viability	
of	the	District	from	a	socio-economic	
perspective	in	terms	of	access	to	
superfast	broadband.	It	also	seeks	
to	support	community	broadband	
initiatives.	Provision	needs	to	be	made	
to	ensure	new	development	contributes	
towards	the	Government’s	target	of	
24Mbps	to	95%	of	UK	households	
by	2017.	However,	it	would	be	remiss	
not	to	consider	the	likely	requirements	
of	homes	and	businesses	over	the	
15	years	of	this	Plan	and	encourage	
applicants	to	consider	ways	of	allowing	
for	future	upgrades	to	networks	within	
their	plans.	Applicants	will	be	required	
to	actively	demonstrate	that	they	have	
considered	broadband	connectivity	
within	their	proposals	and,	where	
necessary,	justify	why	a	10Mbps	
connection	at	the	site	could	not	be	
achieved.	Where	a	10Mbps	connection	
is	not	currently	possible,	applicants	should	demonstrate	the	efforts	taken	to	
ensure	that	their	development	is	ready	
to	embrace	superfast	broadband	once	
it	is	available	by	ensuring	measures	
such	as	ducting,	capable	of	carrying	
fibre	cables,	is	provided	up	to	the	
public	highway	or	any	community	led	
broadband	networks	in	the	area.	
6.23	 A	free	public	Wi-Fi	network	is	currently	
being	rolled	out	by	the	City	Council	
across	the	City	Centre	and	within	
parts	of	Brampton	and	Longtown,	
for	the	benefit	of	residents,	visitors	
and	businesses.	Proposals	to	expand	
these	networks	or	to	create	similar	new	
ones	will	be	supported	providing	the	
necessary	infrastructure	is	incorporated	
into	the	street	scene	as	subtly	as	
possible.137
All new development should follow the principles of 
sustainable waste management and must include details of 
facilities for the storage, collection and recycling of waste 
produced on-site for both during and after construction. On 
new housing estates of 20 or more new dwellings developers 
will be encouraged to make provision for collective, 
accessible and secure waste and recycling areas that create 
a single, sheltered point for waste storage and collection to 
serve a number of dwellings.
Developers will be expected to provide waste storage units 
for every new dwelling or unit within a new development, 
either as large euro-bins for collective waste areas or smaller 
wheelie bins for individual dwellings. These bins must meet 
Council standards for quality, size, colour and design, and 
must be in place before any dwelling is occupied. Where 
necessary this requirement will be secured through the 
imposition of planning conditions and/or planning obligations.Justification
6.24	 The	principles	for	sustainable	waste	management	are	clearly	
established	 at	the	national	 level.	 Similar	 principles	 are	set	out	in	
the	Cumbria	Minerals	and	Waste	Local	Plan,	which	forms	part	
of	the	Development	Plan	for	the	District	of	Carlisle.	Planning	
authorities	should	seek	to	reduce	the	amount	of	waste	going	to	
landfill.	This	means	ensuring	that	every	possible	step	has	been	
taken	by	new	development	to	ensure	sustainable	methods	of	
waste	disposal	are	encouraged	and,	on	larger	sites,	required	
through	planning	policy.
6.25	 Carlisle	City	Council	currently	aims	to	have	at	least	50%	of	
all	household	waste	disposed	of	sustainably	either	through	
recycling	or	composting	by	2020.	The	Council	is	well	on	track	
to	meeting	this	target	with	around	43.5%	of	all	household	
waste	in	2013/14	being	recycled	or	composted.	This	figure	has	
seen	a	significant	increase	in	recent	years	with	only	25.73%	of	
waste	being	recycled	or	composted	in	2004/5.	To	ensure	that	
this	trend	is	maintained	all	new	development	must	be	required	
to	follow	the	principles	of	sustainable	waste	management.
6.26	 Developers	will	be	encouraged	to	set	aside	areas	on	new	
housing	estates	for	collective	waste	storage	in	order	to	
provide	a	single	point	for	collection.	This	should	make	it	easier	
for	refuse	collection	services	to	work	on	an	estate	and	also	
alleviate	levels	of	disturbance	to	residents	that	may	arise	
from	refuse	trucks	travelling	door	to	door.	Collective	waste	Policy IP 5 - Waste Minimisation and the Recycling of Waste138
sites	must	be	accessible	to	refuse	
trucks	and	must	also	be	secure	to	
prevent	fly	tipping;	sheltered	from	the	
elements	to	prevent	pollution;	and	free	
from	animal	interference.	Recycling	
provision	should	also,	where	possible,	
be	provided	alongside	these	collective	
waste	areas.
6.27	 Collective	waste	areas	should	be	
accessible	and	larger	estates	may	
require	multiple	sites.	One	euro-
bin	should	be	provided	for	every	12	
households	using	the	storage	area,	
or	every	eight	if	recycling	facilities	are	
not	available.	Collective	waste	sites	
should	be	within	easy	walking	distance	
from	any	given	front	door	on	an	estate	
and	special	arrangements	will	need	to	
be	put	in	place	to	assist	people	with	
mobility	issues.
6.28	 When	considering	how	waste	should	
be	stored	on	a	property	where	
collective	waste	points	will	not	be	
available,	developers	must	be	able	to	demonstrate	that	this	has	been	
considered	within	a	design	and	access	
statement.	Where	possible,	waste	
storage	areas	should	be	discreetly	
located	outside	and	afforded	some	
protection	from	the	elements.	When	
considering	how	waste	should	be	
located	for	collection,	developers	must	
ensure	that	kerbside	placement	is	
achievable.
6.29	 Developers	will	be	expected	to	provide	
bins	for	each	new	dwelling	or	unit	
within	a	new	development.	These	bins,	
either	euro-bins	or	smaller	wheelie	bins	
for	individual	dwellings,	must	meet	
Council	standards	for	design,	quality,	
colour	and	size.	They	must	also	bear	
the	Council’s	logo	to	ensure	they	can	
be	immediately	recognised	by	the	
refuse	teams.	It	is	recommended	that	
developers	order	their	bins	through	the	
Council’s	waste	services	team.	Bins	
must	be	provided	before	dwellings/
units	are	occupied	on	site.139
Where there are concerns that inadequate foul water 
treatment and drainage infrastructure exists to serve a 
proposed development, or where such provision cannot be 
made within the time constraints of planning permission, 
it is the responsibility of the developer to demonstrate 
how foul drainage from the site will be managed. In some 
circumstances, it may be necessary to co-ordinate the 
delivery of development with the delivery of infrastructure. In 
certain circumstances, a new development will be required 
to discharge foul water to the public sewerage system at an 
attenuated rate.
The first presumption will be for new development to drain 
to the public sewerage system. Where alternative on-site 
treatment systems are proposed, it is for the developer to 
demonstrate that connection to the public sewerage system 
is not possible in terms of cost and/or practicality and provide 
details of the responsibility and means of operation and 
management of the system for its lifetime to ensure the risk to 
the environment is low.  Justification 
6.30	 Foul	and	surface	water	drainage	are	managed	through	two	
different	systems	and	must	be	considered	separately.	Policy	
IP	6	sets	out	the	expected	approach	with	regard	to	foul	water	
drainage	but	should,	where	necessary,	be	read	alongside	
Policy	CC	5	which	relates	to	surface	water	management.	
Policy	IP	6	requires	applicants	to	ensure	that	the	impact	of	
development	on	infrastructure	has	been	considered	in	liaison	
with	the	statutory	sewerage	undertaker.
6.31	 United	Utilities	manage	and	monitor	capacity	within	the	waste	
water	treatment	network.	The	Council	relies	on	feedback	from	
them	in	order	to	ascertain	whether	sufficient	capacity	exists	
within	the	network	to	accommodate	new	development	or	
where	it	may	be	necessary	to	co-ordinate	development	in	line	
with	any	upgrading	work.	This	will	be	dependent	on	detailed	
proposals	and	developers	are	encouraged	to	speak	to	United	
Utilities	at	the	earliest	opportunity.
6.32	 Specific	issues	that	may	arise	within	the	waste	water	
infrastructure	network	will	also	be	picked	up	through	the	
Infrastructure	Delivery	Plan.	The	Council	will	continue	to	work	
with	United	Utilities	to	ensure	the	impact	of	development	on	
infrastructure	is	appropriately	managed.	Policy IP 6 - Foul Water Drainage on Development Sites140
6.33	 The	quality	of	groundwater	and	
surface	waters	and	associated	water-
based	recreation,	fisheries	and	nature	
conservation	must	be	protected	
against	the	risk	of	pollution	from	the	
inadequate	provision	of	foul	water	
sewerage	and	sewage	treatment	
facilities.	Development	proposals	which	
necessitate	the	use	of	septic	tanks	and	
sewage	treatment	package	plants	may,	
if	not	designed	correctly	or	located	
appropriately,	result	in	an	increased	
risk	of	pollution	to	groundwater	and	
surface	waters.	Such	systems	will	only	
be	permitted	if	it	can	be	demonstrated	
that	connection	to	the	public	foul	water	
sewerage	system	is	not	feasible,	taking	
into	account	cost	and/or	practicability,	
and	where	it	can	be	demonstrated	
that	they	accord	with	environmental	
standards.	The	discharge	from	such	
systems	will	also	need	to	comply	
with	the	Environmental	Permitting	
Regulations.	141
Within the boundary of Carlisle Airport, 
development that is related to airport 
activities will be acceptable.
In addition, enabling development that 
would facilitate the ongoing or further 
operational development of the Airport, 
and which would not compromise other 
elements of the Local Plan’s overarching 
spatial strategy, will be acceptable. 
Applicants will be required to provide 
clear evidence as to how any such 
enabling development will ensure the 
ongoing viable operations of the Airport 
for aviation.Justification
6.34	 There	is	a	continuing	requirement	to	support	the	
development	of	the	Airport	for	aviation	uses	through	
recognition	of	its	role	as	a	unique	component	of	the	
District’s	strategic	transport	infrastructure.	National	policy	
makes	clear	that	when	planning	for	airports,	plans	should	
take	account	of	their	growth	and	role	in	serving	business,	
leisure,	training	and	emergency	service	needs.	
6.35	 The	extent	of	the	boundary	of	the	airport	is	defined	on	the	
Policies	Map.	Development	proposals	within	the	boundary	
which	relate	to	Airport	activities	will	be	supported,	subject	
to	conformity	with	other	polices	within	the	Local	Plan	where	
relevant.
6.36	 Enabling	development	that	would	facilitate	the	ongoing	or	
further	development	that	is	essential	or	conducive	to	the	
operation	of	the	Airport,	will	be	acceptable,	subject	to	the	
clear	provision	of	evidence	to	demonstrate	how	any	such	
development	is	proportionate	to	and	relates	to	the	ongoing	
viable	operations	of	the	Airport.	Proposals	for	enabling	
development	must	also	demonstrate	through	reference	
to	their	scale	and	nature	that	the	Local	Plan’s	overarching	
spatial	strategy	would	not	be	compromised.Policy IP 7 - Carlisle Airport142
Carlisle City Council will work with partners to identify and 
deliver infrastructure, services and community facilities to 
improve the sustainability of its communities.
In the first instance new development will be expected to 
provide infrastructure improvements which are directly 
related to and necessary to make the development 
acceptable. These will be identified through the development 
management process and secured through planning 
conditions and obligations.
The Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) will, through 
consultation with relevant partners and infrastructure 
providers, assist in the identification of the infrastructure, 
services and facilities that new development may be 
required to contribute to within the life of the Plan. Such 
infrastructure could cover a wide range of economic, social 
and environmental provision.
If a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) is introduced by 
the Council, planning obligations will not be sought for 
infrastructure funded by CIL.
Certain forms of development, where prescribed by national 
policy and guidance, will be exempt from any tariff-style 
planning obligations. Policy IP 8 - Planning Obligations
Where a developer seeks to depart from any planning 
obligations sought, it will be necessary for them to 
demonstrate that such contributions are nevertheless being 
maximised as far as it is viable to do so, and that ultimately 
the wider economic, social and environmental benefits to be 
realised from approving the proposal in the absence of such 
contributions outweigh the harm of doing so.143
Justification
6.37	 There	are	a	number	of	policies	in	the	
Plan	which	aim	to	improve	the	local	
environment	for	existing	residents	
of	the	District	and	new	occupants.	
In	order	to	ensure	that	any	new	
development	 proposals	 are	integrated	 a	
number	 of	measures	 will	be	considered.	
Planning	obligations	are	one	way	of	
integrating	new	development	into	the	
surrounding	environment	especially	
where	development	proposals	may	
have	a	direct	impact	on	others.	Given	
the	wide	range	of	local	issues	which	
may	 arise,	 the	City	 Council	 will	consider	
setting	out	its	priorities	for	planning	
obligations	in	a	separate	document.	
Notwithstanding	this,	it	is	recognised	
that	ultimately	the	scope	of	obligations	
will	need	to	be	considered	on	a	site	
by	site	basis,	informed	through	local	
circumstances	and	the	nature	of	
development	proposed.6.38	 The	Carlisle	IDP	identifies	known	
deficiencies	in	infrastructure	provision	
within	the	District,	having	regard	to	
planned	and	therefore	cumulative	
levels	of	development,	and	also	
highlights	what	funding	arrangements	
are	required	to	address	these.	Where	
there	are	gaps	in	funding,	it	is	likely	
that	developer	contributions	will	be	
needed	to	ensure	infrastructure	is	
provided	where	and	when	it	is	needed.	
Planning	obligations	may	be	used,	
where	appropriate,	to	secure	such	
contributions.
6.39	 In	the	future	the	Council	may	seek	
to	adopt	a	CIL.	The	need	for	CIL	will	
be	informed	through	the	IDP	process	
and	subject	to	a	separate	process	
of	preparation	which	would	entail	
consultation	opportunities	and	a	
separate	examination.	In	accordance	
with	the	regulations	which	govern	the	
use	of	CIL,	if	introduced,	the	approach	
to	the	use	of	planning	obligations	
alongside	CIL	will	be	clearly	set	out.6.40	 In	accordance	with	national	policy	
and	to	ensure	that	the	Plan	remains	
deliverable,	it	is	recognised	that	the	
use	of	planning	obligations	must	not	
over	burden	developers	or	compromise	
the	viability	of	development	proposals.	
The	Plan	and	the	policy	requirements	
within	have	therefore	been	informed	
through	the	Local	Plan	Viability	Study	
and	development	proposals	will	be	
assessed	in	accordance	with	the	tests	
set	out	in	paragraph	204	of	the	National	
Planning	Policy	Framework.	144
145
7
Climate Change and Flood RiskContext
Carlisle City Council recognises that the planning system 
has a central role to play in ensuring the resilience of 
our communities into the future. It is therefore clear that 
the policies contained within this chapter emphasise the 
importance of protecting our natural environment whilst 
making the most effective use of our natural resources 
through renewable energy generation, energy efficient design 
and effective water management. Central to this is ensuring 
that the District is resilient to the effects of climate change.Objective
To reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, including 
through securing energy from renewable sources, 
and avoid inappropriate development in areas at risk 
of flooding in order to ensure that the District is more 
resilient and less vulnerable to the effects of climate 
change and can successfully adapt to its effects.146
Proposals for renewable energy development will be supported 
where they can demonstrate, through identifying and 
thoroughly appraising any potential individual and cumulative 
effects, that any associated impacts are or can be made 
acceptable. This presumption will apply where proposals:
1.   do not have an unacceptable impact on the location, 
in relation to visual impact caused by the scale of 
development, on the character and sensitivity of the 
immediate and wider landscape, townscape or heritage 
assets and their settings;
2.   do not have an unacceptable impact on local amenity and 
can successfully mitigate against any noise, smell or other 
nuisance or pollutants likely to affect nearby occupiers and 
neighbouring land uses;
3.  ensure that any waste arising as a result of the development 
is minimised and dealt with using a suitable means of 
disposal;
4. do not have an unacceptable effect on existing services 
such as highways infrastructure and telecommunications; 
and5.   do not have an unacceptable effect on civil or military 
aviation and/or other defense related installations, 
including RAF Spadeadam and Eskdalemuir Seismic 
Recording Station.
In addition to the criteria set out above, applications for 
wind energy development should accord with Policy CC 2.
In all cases proposals will be required to demonstrate that 
appropriate operational requirements have or are capable 
of being satisfied (including accessibility and suitability 
of the road network, ability to connect to the grid and 
the proximity of any feedstock where relevant) and that 
appropriate measures are put in place for the removal of 
structures and the restoration of sites should they become 
non-operational.
Where mitigation is required to make any identified impacts 
acceptable these will, where necessary, be secured through 
condition or planning obligations. Policy CC 1 - Renewable Energy147
Justification
7.1	 The	City	Council	recognises	the	
importance	of	protecting	our	natural	
environment	whilst	making	the	most	
effective	use	of	our	natural	resources	
through	renewable	energy	generation.	
Renewable	energy	is	the	collective	
term	used	for	repeatedly	occurring	
natural	energy	sources.	These	include	
energy	from	wind,	biomass,	waste,	
hydropower,	solar,	heat	pumps,	
woodfuel	and	others	as	technologies	
develop.	This	criteria	based	Policy	
will	be	used	to	ensure	that	renewable	
energy	development	is	sited	in	the	
most	appropriate	locations,	be	that	
large	scale	or	micro-renewable	
schemes	(where	planning	permission	
is	required).	Policy	CC	2	‘Energy	
from	Wind’	must	also	be	satisfied	
when	considering	applications	for	the	
development	of	wind	energy.	Certain	
combustible	industrial,	agricultural	
or	domestic	waste	materials	and	
anaerobic	digestion	plants	are	also	
regarded	as	renewable	sources	of	energy	however	applications	for	this	
type	of	renewable	energy	development	
which	import	off-site	waste	materials	
would	 come	 under	 the	remit	 of	Cumbria	
County	Council	as	the	Waste	Planning	
Authority.
7.2	 The	Government	is	committed	to	
sourcing	15%	of	its	total	energy	(across	
the	sectors	of	transport,	electricity	
and	heat)	from	renewable	sources	by	
2020	alongside	a	UK	carbon	budget	to	
reduce	emissions	by	80%	from	1990	
levels	by	2050.	Renewable	energy	
sources	can	help	to	diversify	energy	
supply	and	reduce	harmful	emissions	
to	the	environment,	however	most	
forms	of	renewable	energy	require	
specific	environmental	conditions	and	
therefore	can	only	be	developed	where	
the	resource	exists.	The	Overarching	
National	Policy	Statement	for	Energy	
(EN-1)	advises	that	a	diverse	mix	of	all	
types	of	power	generation	is	beneficial	
so	that	we	are	not	dependent	on	any	one	type	of	power	generation,	
therefore	ensuring	security	of	supply.	
Additionally,	the	value	of	renewable	
energy	generation	is	recognised	as	
a	means	of	achieving	a	low-carbon	
economy.	The	Planning	Policy	
Guidance	(PPG)	includes	a	strong	
message	that	local	authorities	should	
promote	and	encourage,	rather	than	
restrict,	the	development	of	renewable	
energy	sources.
7.3	 The	Cumbria	Renewable	Energy	
Capacity	and	Deployment	Study	
(September	2011)	considers	a	range	of	
renewable	energy	sources,	translating	
potential	into	realistic	deployable	
capacity	up	to	2030	in	order	for	
Cumbria	to	meet	Government	energy	
targets.	It	states	that	Cumbria	needs	to	
significantly	increase	its	current	level	of	
deployment	(of	all	types	of	renewable	
energy)	if	it	is	to	meet	the	target	figure	
considered	deployable	by	2030.148
	 The	study	looks	at	the	overall	potential	
technical	capacity	from	wind,	biomass,	
energy	from	waste,	hydropower,	
solar	and	heat	pumps.	Applicants	
should	have	regard	to	this	and	any	
future	studies	in	the	formulation	of	
development	proposals.
7.4	 It	should	be	noted	that	within	Carlisle	
District	there	are	a	number	of	additional	
landscape	and	functional	constraints	
that	may	limit	renewable	energy	
development	in	certain	locations,	
including	within	the	North	Pennines	and	
Solway	Coast	Areas	of	Outstanding	
Natural	Beauty	(AONB),	Hadrian’s	
Wall	World	Heritage	Site	and	buffer	
zone,	Carlisle	Airport	Safeguarding	
area,	Eskdalemuir	Seismic	Recording	
safeguarding	area	and	the	Ministry	
of	Defence	(MOD)	safeguarding	
zone.	Within	sensitive	landscapes	
reference	must	be	made	to	the	relevant	
Management	Plan(s)	when	considering	
proposals	which	could	have	an	impact	
upon	these	designations.	The	Cumbria	
Landscape	Character	Guidance	and	Toolkit	2011,	or	any	successor	
documents,	should	be	used	to	assist	
in	identifying	areas	that	are	capable	
of	successfully	integrating	renewable	
energy	developments.	
7.5	 The	Council	will	seek	to	foster	
community	involvement	in	larger	
scale	renewable	energy	projects,	
and	recommends	that	developers	of	
renewable	energy	projects	engage	in	
active	consultation	and	discussion	
with	local	communities	at	an	early	
stage	in	the	planning	process.	The	
Council	will	also	seek	to	consider,	
where	appropriate,	the	opportunity	for	
developing	renewable	energy	projects	
in	association	with	new	large-scale	
developments,	for	example	district	
heating	networks.	It	will	also	positively	
support	community-led	initiatives	for	
renewable	and	low	carbon	energy	
where	they	are	in	line	with	this	Policy,	
for	example	community-led	anaerobic	
digestion	schemes.	7.6	 It	is	recognised	that	micro-renewables	
can	make	an	important	contribution	
to	renewable	energy	and	carbon	
reduction,	especially	in	reducing	
carbon	emissions	from	both	domestic	
and	commercial	buildings.	Micro-
renewables	refers	to	installations	
of	less	than	50Kw	and	includes	
technologies	such	as	solar	panels	and	
wood-fuelled	heating.	In	some	cases	
due	to	scale	and	site	constraints,	
planning	permission	will	be	required	for	
micro-renewable	energy	schemes,	as	
such	the	criteria	of	this	Policy	will	be	
used	to	assess	such	applications.
7.7	 Proposals	for	renewable	energy	
developments	may	inevitably	have	
some	local	environmental	implications.	
Any	significant	adverse	impact	will	
be	weighed	against	the	wider	social,	
economic	and	environmental	benefits	
including	those	of	reducing	emissions.	
Some	renewable	energy	projects	may	
be	subject	to	an	Environmental	Impact	
Assessment	(EIA).	This	will	be	the	
case	where	a	scheme	is	likely	to	have	149
significant	environmental	implications	
for	the	surrounding	area	during	its	
development	and/or	operation.	Further	
information	on	EIA	can	be	found	online	
in	the	PPG.
7.8	 Proposals	will	be	required	to	
demonstrate	that	they	have	
considered	the	environmental	
effects	of	the	distribution	lines	
between	the	development	and	the	
point	of	connection	to	the	National	
Grid.	Consideration	should	also	be	
given	to	the	environmental	impact	
of	access	tracks	where	these	are	
required	to	construct	and	maintain	the	
proposed	development,	as	well	as	the	
appropriateness	of	the	local	highway	
network	to	gain	access	to	the	site	in	
these	terms	and	for	the	purposes	of	
restoration.150
2.   an unacceptable impact on local 
amenity in relation to noise, amplitude 
modulation, shadow flicker, low 
frequency sound or vibration. In the 
interests of residential amenity and 
safety, turbines over 25m to blade 
tip will be required to be located a 
minimum of 800m away from residential 
properties. It is recognised that in some 
cases due to site-specific factors such 
as orientation of views, landcover, other 
structures and topography that it may 
be appropriate to vary this threshold, 
where it can be demonstrated through 
evidence that there would nevertheless 
be no unacceptable impacts on 
residential amenity or safety; 
3.   an adverse effect on any nature 
conservation features, biodiversity 
and geodiversity, including designated 
sites, or priority habitats and species; 4. a significant adverse impact on 
the significance of heritage assets 
including Hadrian’s Wall World 
Heritage Site and conservation of its 
Outstanding Universal Value, Scheduled 
Ancient Monuments, listed buildings, 
historic parks and gardens, battlefields, 
conservation areas or undesignated 
heritage assets included in a local list 
including their settings; 
5.   an unacceptable effect on existing 
services such as highways 
infrastructure and telecommunications; 
and
6.   an unacceptable effect on civil or 
military aviation and/or other defence 
related installations, including RAF 
Spadeadam and Eskdalemuir Seismic 
Recording Station.Proposals for the development of wind 
turbines will be supported where they 
accord with national policy and guidance, 
and where it can be demonstrated, 
through identifying and thoroughly 
appraising any potential individual and 
cumulative effects, that any associated 
impacts are or can be made acceptable. 
This presumption will apply where 
proposals do not have;
1.   an unacceptable impact on the 
location, in relation to visual impact 
caused by the scale of development, 
on the character and sensitivity of 
the immediate and wider surrounding 
landscape and townscape; Policy CC 2 - Energy from Wind151
The criteria listed above will also be 
used as a basis for future identification 
of suitable area(s) for wind energy 
development.
In all cases proposals will be required 
to demonstrate that appropriate 
operational requirements have or are 
capable of being satisfied (including 
accessibility and suitability of the 
road network, ability to connect to 
the grid and the proximity of any 
feedstock where relevant) and that 
appropriate measures are put in place 
for the removal of structures and the 
restoration of sites should they become 
non-operational.
Where mitigation is required to make 
any identified impacts acceptable 
these will, where necessary, be 
secured through condition or planning 
obligations.Justification	
7.9	 The	Local	Plan	has	a	duty	to	encourage	
the	use	of	renewable	energy	sources	
as	a	means	of	reducing	greenhouse	
gas	emissions	and	providing	positive	
resilience	to	the	impacts	of	climate	
change.	 The	Climate	 Change	 Act	(2008)	
set	legally	binding	carbon	budgets	for	
the	UK	which	aim	to	reduce	UK	carbon	
dioxide	emissions	by	34%	by	2020	
and,	in	line	with	European	guidelines,	at	
least	80%	by	2050.	The	UK	Renewable	
Energy	Strategy	2009	includes	a	
national	target	to	provide	15%	of	
electricity	and	heat	from	renewable	
and	low	carbon	sources	by	2020.	
Accordingly	the	National	Planning	
Policy	Framework	(NPPF)	requires	
local	planning	authorities	to	promote	
and	support	the	delivery	of	renewable	
and	low	carbon	energy	and	associated	
infrastructure	in	moving	towards	a	low	
carbon	economy.7.10	 The	Cumbria	Renewable	Energy	
Capacity	and	Deployment	Study	
(September	2011)	considers	a	range	of	
renewable	energy	sources,	translating	
potential	into	realistic	deployable	
capacity	up	to	2030	in	order	for	
Cumbria	to	meet	Government	energy	
targets.	It	states	that	Cumbria	needs	to	
significantly	increase	its	current	level	of	
deployment	(of	all	types	of	renewable	
energy)	if	it	is	to	meet	the	target	figure	
considered	deployable	by	2030	and	
encourages	the	continued	deployment	
of	commercial	wind	as	it	provides	the	
cheapest	option	for	energy	generation	
and	gives	the	highest	carbon	savings.	
Wind	energy	proved	to	be	the	largest	
single	resource	in	Cumbria	with	Carlisle	
having	a	significantly	lower	capacity	
than	other	Districts.	In	relation	to	
landscape	capacity,	the	study	identifies	
that	Carlisle	has	9%	of	the	wind	
energy	capacity	for	Cumbria.	Despite	
this,	Carlisle	is	identified	as	having	152
the	highest	potential	capacity	for	
accessible	small	scale	resource	‘micro-
renewables’,	due	to	the	urban	nature	of	
the	District.
7.11	 In	order	to	ensure	that	only	appropriate	
development	takes	place,	the	Policy	
sets	a	positive	criteria	based	approach	
to	encourage	acceptable	proposals	
to	come	forward	to	help	meet	
national	renewable	energy	targets.	
This	approach	sees	each	proposal	
determined	on	its	merits,	and	will	work	
in	conjunction	with	other	local	plan	
policies	to	ensure	the	maximum	level	
of	resource	is	harnessed	while	ensuring	
that	any	impacts	are,	or	can	be	made	
acceptable,	reflecting	both	national	
planning	policy	and	local	evidence.	
7.12	 In	addition	to	the	criteria	set	out	in	
Policy	CC	2	wind	energy	development	
will	be	required	to	follow	national	
policy	and	therefore,	as	appropriate,	
it	will	be	necessary	to	define	suitable	
areas	for	wind	energy	development.	
Furthermore,	applications	should	demonstrate	that	they	have	addressed	
the	planning	concerns	of	the	local	
community	and	therefore	have	their	
backing.	Using	this	evidence	the	
Council	will	consider	the	extent	to	
which	the	applicant	has	addressed	
community	concerns	and	make	a	
judgment	of	the	community	backing.	
7.13	 Until	such	time	as	the	suitable	areas	are	
identified	in	a	subsequent	development	
plan	document		(on	a	district	basis	
or	through	collaboration	with	
adjoining	districts)	or	neighbourhood	
development	plan,	proposals	for	wind	
energy	development	will	be	considered	
against	other	local	plan	policies,	
together	with	national	policy	and	
guidance.
7.14	 In	identifying	and	considering	the	
impacts	of	any	proposal,	such	
assessments	will	be	required	to	also	
take	into	account	the	impact	of	any	
singular	or	cumulative	development	
on	the	landscape	and	other	matters	from	known	proposals	in	the	planning	
system,	extant	planning	approvals	
or	other	existing	renewable	energy	
developments	within	and	adjacent	
to	Carlisle	District,	including	across	
the	border	in	Scotland.	Such	an	
approach	is	imperative	in	ensuring	that	
the	cumulative	effects	of	proposed	
developments	are	understood.
7.15	 Proposals	for	wind	energy	
developments	will	almost	always	have	
some	local	environmental	implications.	
Any	significant	adverse	impacts	
will	be	weighed	against	the	wider	
social,	economic	and	environmental	
benefits	including	those	of	reducing	
emissions	and	greenhouse	gasses.	
Some	renewable	energy	projects	may	
be	subject	to	an	EIA.	This	will	be	the	
case	where	the	scheme	is	likely	to	have	
significant	environmental	implications	
for	the	surrounding	area	during	its	
development	and/or	operation.	Further	
information	on	EIA	can	be	found	online	
in	the	PPG.	153
7.16	 Proposals	for	the	development	of	wind	
turbines	will	be	expected	to	provide	
supporting	evidence	proportionate	
to	their	scale	and	nature	and	the	key	
issues	they	give	rise	to,	including	
Landscape,	Visual	and	Environmental	
Assessments.	In	developing	proposals	
regard	should	be	had	to	the	Cumbria	
Wind	Energy	-	Supplementary	Planning	
Document	(SPD);	Cumbria	Renewable	
Energy	Capacity	and	Deployment	
Study	(2011);	the	Cumbria	Landscape	
Character	Guidance	and	Toolkit	
(2011)	and/or	any	related	documents.	
Additionally,	the	City	Council	have	
worked	with	Cumbria	County	Council	
and	other	Cumbrian	authorities	to	
develop	a	Cumulative	Impact	of	
Vertical	Infrastructure	Study.	This	
study	is	valuable	in	that	It	assesses	
the	cumulative	effect	of	a	number	
of	tall	structures	in	the	landscape	
(turbines,	pylons,	telecoms,	masts	
etc)	and	assesses	instances	where	it	
is	considered	that	the	landscape	has	
reached	the	point	of	saturation.	This	study	will	therefore	be	used	when	
determining	applications	of	this	type.
7.17	 From	a	landscape	perspective	the	
Cumbria	Wind	Energy	SPD	was	
adopted	by	the	City	Council	in	2007	
to	help	guide	the	siting	and	design	of	
turbines	and	to	indicate	the	capacity	of	
each	landscape	character	type	within	
Cumbria	for	wind	energy.	It	reiterates	
that	wind	energy	development	can	
have	 wider	 landscape	 and	visual	 effects	
than	other	forms	of	renewable	energy	
development.	This	SPD	is	therefore	
used	to	guide	development	of	this	kind	
and	will	support	the	implementation	of	
this	Policy.
7.18	 It	should	be	noted	that	within	
Carlisle	District	there	are	a	number	of	
additional	landscape	and	functional	
constraints	that	may	limit	wind	related	
developments	in	certain	locations,	
including	within	the	North	Pennines	
and	Solway	Coast	AONBs,	Hadrian’s	
Wall	World	Heritage	Site	and	buffer	
zone,	Carlisle	Airport	Safeguarding	area,	Eskdalemuir	Seismic	Recording	
safeguarding	area	and	the	MOD	
safeguarding	zone.	Within	sensitive	
landscapes	reference	must	be	made	
to	the	relevant	Management	Plan(s)	
when	considering	proposals	which	
could	have	an	impact	upon	these	
designations.
7.19	 Within	aviation	or	military	installation	
safeguarding	areas,	where	proposals	
may	have	an	effect	on	and	compromise	
their	safe	and	effective	operation,	
an	assessment	of	potential	effects	
should	be	set	out	in	an	Environmental	
Statement	(as	outlined	in	EN1-	
Overarching	National	Policy	Statement	
for	Energy).	Similarly	it	must	be	
demonstrated	that	proposals	would	
not	inhibit	the	safe	operation	of	
existing	services	including	highways	
and	public	rights	of	way	nor	impede	
telecommunications	networks.
7.20	 A	key	objective	of	the	Policy	is	to	
protect	amenity	and	particularly	
residential	amenity	and	safety.	154
Whilst	the	PPG	is	clear	that	Local	
Planning	Authorities	should	not	rule	out	
otherwise	acceptable	renewable	energy	
developments	through	inflexible	rules	
on	buffer	zones	or	separation	distances,	
the	inclusion	of	an	800m	separation	
distant	is	considered	entirely	justified	
within	the	District	in	response	to	the	most	
up	to	date	evidence	on	these	matters	
and	importantly	to	ensure	a	consistent	
approach	 on	this	strategic	 cross	 boundary	
issue	particularly	with	the	adjoining	
Borough	of	Allerdale	and	Scotland.	
Through	recognition	that	the	local	context	
including	factors	such	as	topography,	the	
local	environment	and	near-by	land	uses	
can	influence	the	extent	to	which	distance	
itself	is	likely	to	determine	whether	the	
impact	of	a	proposal	is	acceptable,	
flexibility	has	been	built	in	to	permit	
a	departure	from	the	800m	threshold	
where	it	can	be	clearly	demonstrated	
that	residential	amenity	and	safety	would	
not	be	compromised.	Such	an	approach	
accords	entirely	with	that	advocated	by	
the	PPG.7.21	 Any	impacts	on	the	District’s	
biodiversity,	geodiversity	and	
heritage	assets	will	be	considered	
in	the	context	of	the	relevant	policy	
coverage	set	out	elsewhere	within	
the	Plan.	The	RSPB	will	be	consulted	
where	development	has	the	potential	
to	impact	significant	populations	
of	sensitive	bird	species	or	their	
habitats.
7.22	 Proposals	will	be	required	to	
demonstrate	that	they	have	
considered	the	environmental	
effects	of	the	distribution	lines	
between	the	development	and	the	
point	of	connection	to	the	National	
Grid.	Consideration	should	also	be	
given	to	the	environmental	impact	
of	access	tracks	where	these	are	
required	to	construct	and	maintain	the	
proposed	development,	as	well	as	the	
appropriateness	of	the	local	highway	
network	to	gain	access	to	the	site	in	
these	terms	and	for	the	purposes	of	
restoration.7.23	 Where	it	is	identified	that	a	proposal	
would	give	rise	to	any	significant	
adverse	impacts,	measures	will	
be	required	to	be	put	forward	to	
demonstrate	that	such	impacts	can	
be	satisfactorily	mitigated	and	that	
such	measures	can	be	appropriately	
secured	through	the	imposition	of	
planning	conditions	or	use	of	planning	
obligations.
7.24	 The	Council	will	seek	to	foster	
community	involvement	in	wind	
energy	projects,	and	recommends	
that	developers	of	renewable	energy	
projects	engage	in	active	consultation	
and	discussion	with	local	communities	
at	an	early	stage	in	the	planning	
process.	The	Council	will	also	seek	
to	consider,	where	appropriate,	the	
opportunity	for	developing	community-
led	initiatives	for	wind	energy	schemes	
where	they	are	in	line	with	this	Policy.155
New development should make the fullest contribution to 
creating environments which enable carbon reduction and are 
resilient to the effects of climate change.
Development proposals must take into account the need for 
energy conservation and efficiency in their design, layout and 
choice of materials. The principles should be introduced in 
the early stages of the design process in order to consider the 
orientation of buildings to maximise solar gain and introduce 
options for alternative methods of heating. The efficient and 
effective use of land, including the reuse of existing buildings 
and the use of environmentally sustainable and recycled 
materials is also expected within the design.
Proposals which incorporate other micro-renewable sources 
of renewable energy like photovoltaic cells will be supported in 
accordance with other policies in the Plan.
The Council will encourage all major developments to explore 
the potential for a District Heating Network or Decentralised 
Energy Network. Proposals for renewable, low carbon or 
decentralised energy schemes will be supported provided 
they do not result in unacceptable harm which cannot be 
successfully mitigated. This includes support for community-
led renewable energy schemes.Policy CC 3 - Energy Conservation, Efficiency and Resilience Justification	
7.25	 It	is	important	to	be	clear	that	as	well	as	planning	to	mitigate	
and	reduce	the	impacts	of	climate	change,	we	must	also	
recognise	that	some	level	of	climate	change	is	now	unavoidable.	
There	is	therefore	a	need	to	start	adapting	to	the	predicted	
impacts	we	are	likely	to	see	in	the	future.	The	Council	therefore	
seeks	to	ensure	the	high	quality	of	development	proposals	
and	to	promote	energy	efficiency	and	sustainable	sources	of	
energy	supply.	This	Policy	sets	out	a	supportive	framework	
for	delivering	low	and	zero	carbon	energy	infrastructure	to	
demonstrate	the	Council’s	commitment	to	supporting	the	
delivery	of	energy	security	and	climate	change	initiatives.	The	
Council	is	committed	to	ensuring	that	all	new	development	
maximises	energy	efficiency	in	its	design	and	materials	used,	in	
line	with	the	NPPF .	
	7.26	 It	is	acknowledged	that	buildings,	which	are	energy	efficient	
and	hence	cheaper	to	run,	have	enhanced	market	appeal.	
The	layout,	location	and	design	of	a	development	can	have	
a	fundamental	impact	on	energy	efficiency.	Higher	density	
developments	and	south	facing	aspects	can	both	help	to	
produce	milder	urban	microclimates	as	well	as	maximising	
natural	light.	Design	should	aim	to	maximise	solar	gain		
(where	appropriate)	as	well	as	natural	ventilation,	utilising	
appropriate	materials,	micro-renewables	and	increasing	
opportunities	to	recycle	heat	(through	air/ground	source	heat	156
pumps)	and	rainwater.	Energy	efficient	
housing	also	has	health	benefits	
through	providing	warmer	housing	
in	winter	months.	Development	
should	also	consider	the	use	of	
micro-renewables	in	reducing	carbon	
emissions	from	both	domestic	and	
commercial	buildings.	
7.27	 Applicants	should	be	able	to	
demonstrate	how	they	have	attempted	
to	minimise	energy	use	and	heat	loss	
through	careful	and	imaginative	design,	
location	and	construction	techniques.	
The	Council	has	produced	a	SPD	on	
Energy	Efficiency	(March	2011)	which	
provides	further	detailed	guidance	on	
energy	conservation	for	developers	
in	the	consideration	of	development	
proposals.
7.28	 The	NPPF	recognises	the	important	
role	of	planning	in	supporting	a	move	
to	a	low	carbon	future.	Building	
Regulations	set	the	minimum	standards	
for	the	design	and	construction	of	new	
buildings	(and	extensions)	with	energy	efficiency	standards	dealt	with	under	
Part	L.	Progress	towards	‘zero	carbon’	
will	be	made	through	progressive	
tightening	of	Building	Regulations.	
Changes	to	Building	Regulations	and	
the	move	to	zero-carbon	buildings	
will	increase	energy	efficiency	and	
encourage	greater	use	of	decentralised	
and	renewable	energy.	Development	
proposals	will	be	assessed	against	the	
relevant	Building	Regulations	prevailing	
at	the	time.	The	Council	will	support	
proposals	which	seek	to	build	to	a	
higher	energy	level	than	is	currently	
required	by	Building	Regulations	
through	the	aforementioned	methods	
in	order	to	further	reduce	carbon	
emissions.157
The Council will seek to ensure that 
new development does not result in 
unacceptable flood risk or drainage 
problems.
Most new development should be located 
in Flood Zone 1 and development within 
Flood Zones 2, 3a and 3b (with the 
exception of water compatible uses and 
key infrastructure (as defined in the PPG)) 
will only be acceptable when they are 
compliant with the NPPF and when the 
sequential test and exception test where 
applicable have been satisfied.
Development should:
1. be supported by a Flood Risk 
Assessment for all proposals of 1 
hectare or greater in Flood Zone 1 or 
in an area within Flood Zone 1 which 
has surface water concerns or is listed 
as an area of concern in the Lead 
Local Flood Authority local flood risk 
management strategy; all proposals 
for new development (including minor 
development and changes of use) in Flood Zones 2 and 3; and where 
proposed development or a change of 
use to a more vulnerable class may be 
subject to other sources of flooding; to 
establish:
 a) whether a proposed development is 
likely to be affected by current or future 
flooding from any source, taking into 
account the increased risk associated 
with climate change;
b) whether it will increase flood risk 
elsewhere or interfere with flood flows;
c) that no other lower risk alternative  
site exists;
d) whether appropriate mitigation 
measures are proposed to deal with 
potential risks and effects;
e) how access and egress can 
reasonably be maintained at times of 
flood risk;
f) that adequate floodplain storage  
capacity can be provided and that the capacity of the water supply, 
drainage and sewerage networks have 
been considered in liaison with the 
relevant statutory bodies for water and 
wastewater, to establish the impact of 
development on infrastructure; and
g) that where flood defences exist the 
residual risk of flooding that remains 
behind defences has been considered. 
This should include reference to 
overtopping of defences in extreme 
events and possible breach analysis 
evidence.
 2.  take account of the Council’s Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (or the most up 
to date flood risk information available) 
along with any evidence from the Lead 
Local Flood Authority (Cumbria County 
Council) and the Environment Agency.
  Where mitigation is required to make any 
identified impacts acceptable these will, 
where necessary, be secured through 
condition or planning obligations.Policy CC 4 - Flood Risk and Development158
7.30	 The	primary	source	of	flood	risk	in	
Carlisle	District	is	fluvial	flooding	(where	
flooding	occurs	in	the	floodplains	
of	rivers	when	the	capacity	of	rivers	
is	exceeded	as	a	result	of	rainfall	or	
snow	and	ice	melts	within	catchment	
areas	further	upstream).	Carlisle	City	
is	vulnerable	from	the	River	Eden,	
River	Petteril	and	the	River	Caldew,	
both	independently	and,	in	wider	flood	
events	concurrently.	Carlisle	is	also	
at	risk	of	flooding	from	a	number	of	
main	watercourses,	namely	Dow	Beck,	
Gosling	Sike,	Parham	Beck	and	Wire	
Mire	Beck.	The	main	urban	areas	at	
risk	of	flooding	are:	Denton	Holme,	
Willowholme,	Carlisle	City	Centre,	
Etterby	Terrace,	Rickerby,	Warwick	
Road	and	Harraby	Green.	There	are	also	
parts	of	the	rural	area	that	are	at	risk,	for	
example	River	Roe	at	Stockdalewath.7.31	 Within	the	District	the	floodplain	areas	
of	the	Rivers	Eden,	Caldew,	Esk,	Lyne,	
Irthing	and	Petteril,	and	their	tributaries,	
have	remained	largely	undeveloped.	
Therefore	future	development	will	
continue	to	be	directed	away	from	
floodplains	and	wider	flood	risk	
areas.	Further	information	on	the	
risk	of	flooding	is	available	on	the	
Environment	Agency’s	website	and	is	
regularly	updated.	Flood	risk	at	any	
specific	location	may	be	influenced	by	
local	factors	such	as	existing	formal	
or	informal	flood	defences	and	the	
capacity	of	existing	drainage	systems	
or	road/rail	culverts.	Flood	defence	
works	have	been	completed	within	the	
City	along	the	Rivers	Eden,	Caldew	
and	Petteril	and	in	the	rural	area	
along	the	River	Eden	at	Crosby-on-
Eden.	Elsewhere	there	are	maintained	
flood	embankments	at	Low	Crosby	
and	some	privately	owned	flood	
embankments	at	Warwick	Bridge.Justification
7.29	 The	Council	recognises	the	risk	that	
flooding	poses	for	parts	of	the	District,	
including	the	potential	for	flood	events	
to	occur	more	frequently	as	a	result	of	
climate	change.	The	most	significant	
flood	event	in	recent	years	occurred	in	
January	2005,	when	flooding	affected	
approximately	2,700	residential	
properties	across	the	catchment	of	the	
River	Eden,	with	Carlisle	City	being	
badly	affected.	As	well	as	high	flood	risk	
in	the	urban	 area,	 there	 is	also	 significant	
risk	of	flooding	in	the	rural	area.	It	
is	therefore	important	that	planning	
policies	provide	a	framework	to	ensure	
that	flood	risk	to	people,	including	their	
health	and	property	is	not	increased	
as	a	result	of	development.	This	Policy	
aims	to	steer	new	development	away	
from	flood	risk	areas	where	possible,	in	
line	with	the	NPPF	and	associated	PPG.	
Where	development	is	considered	to	be	
acceptable	in	these	areas,	opportunities	
to	reduce	the	causes	and	impacts	of	
flooding	will	be	taken.159
7.32	 Extensive	areas	of	the	District	(both	
urban	and	rural)	are	within	Flood	Zone	
3	(High	Probability	of	Risk	or	Functional	
Floodplain).	The	safeguarding	of	the	
floodplains	is	all	the	more	important	
because	of	concerns	about	climate	
change	which	may,	in	all	probability,	
result	in	an	increased	frequency	of	
severe	weather	events,	increased	
winter	rainfall	and	sea	level	rise	which	
could	affect	the	coastline	and	Solway	
Firth	estuary	and	main	rivers.
7.33	 New	developments	usually	result	in	
an	increase	in	impermeable	surfaces,	
including	roofs	and	paving	where	they	
replace	existing	permeable	surfaces.	
These	changes	can	reduce	percolation	
and	increase	volumes	and	rates	of	
surface	water	run-off	while	decreasing	
the	response	time	with	the	potential	
to	either	create	or	exacerbate	flooding	
problems	elsewhere.	Developments	
should	be	sustainable	and	use	building	
methods	that	promote	the	use	of	
permeable	surfacing.	However,	in	order	to	provide	solutions	to	the	potential	
negative	effects	of	new	development,	
a	site-specific	flood	risk	assessment	
(FRA)	will	be	required.	The	FRA	should	
follow	the	guidance	in	the	PPG	and	
the	Environment	Agency	and	Lead	
Local	Flood	Authority	Standing	
Advice.	Proposals	for	development	
in	all	areas	should	always	seek	to	
include	permeable	surfaces	in	order	to	
reduce	the	potential	impact	of	surface	
water	run-off.	Additionally,	the	natural	
environment	and	trees	in	particular	can	
play	a	huge	part	in	helping	to	absorb	
surface	water	run-off.	The	creation	of	
hedges,	tree	belts,	landscaped	and	
wooded	areas	helps	soak	up	rainfall	
and	slow	down	water	run-off.
7.34	 The	outcome	of	a	FRA	may	identify	
that	mitigation	will	be	required.	The	
City	Council	will	encourage	the	use	of	
Sustainable	Drainage	Systems	(SUDS)	
as	a	means	of	reducing	the	overall	
flood	risk,	controlling	pollution	from	
urban	run-off	and,	where	possible,	creating	new	wildlife	habitats	and	
amenity	space.
7.35	 In	certain	circumstances	it	is	necessary	
for	a	Sequential	Test	to	be	undertaken	
in	order	to	steer	new	development	to	
areas	with	the	lowest	probability	of	
flooding.	Here,	development	should	
not	be	allocated	or	permitted	where	
there	are	reasonably	available	sites	
that	are	appropriate	for	the	proposed	
development	in	areas	with	a	lower	
probability	of	flooding.	Where	the	
Sequential	Test	has	been	undertaken	
but	no	suitable	 sites	 have	 been	 found	 in	
zones	of	lower	probability	of	flooding,	
and	there	is	an	exceptional	need	for	
the	development,	the	Exception	Test	
should	be	applied	as	outlined	within	the	
NPPF .	Allocated	sites	within	the	Local	
Plan	have	been	sequentially	tested	and	
therefore	a	separate	Sequential	Test	will	
not	be	required.160
embankment,	within	eight	metres	of	the	
top	of	the	bank	or	wall	which	confines	
the	river.	Additionally,	when	development	
takes	place	on	land	adjoining	a	main	river	
or	ordinary	watercourse	it	has	become	
common	practice	for	planning	authorities	
to	require	the	developer	to	leave	a	strip	
of	land,	at	least	5-8m	wide,	free	from	
development	along	one	or	both	sides	of	
a	watercourse,	in	order	to	provide	access	
for	future	maintenance	and	space	for	the	
watercourse	in	flood.	The	Environment	
Agency	is	responsible	for	providing	Flood	
Defence	Consent	for	works	in	or	near	
main	rivers.	Similarly,	Cumbria	County	
Council	as	Lead	Local	Flood	Authority	
(LLFA)	is	responsible	for	providing	
Ordinary	Watercourse	Flood	Defence	
Consent	for	works	in	or	near	ordinary	
designated	watercourses.
7.37	With	regards	to	coastal	areas,	the	
Marine	Management	Organisation	is	
responsible	for	issuing	marine	licenses	
under	the	Marine	and	Costal	Access	Act	7.36	 A	Strategic	Flood	Risk	Assessment	
(SFRA)	has	been	produced	for	the	
whole	District	with	a	Stage	2	SFRA	
carried	out	for	those	parts	of	the	City	
Centre	that	benefit	from	flood	defences	
in	order	to	provide	some	indicative	
breach	modelling	of	the	flood	defences.	
The	City	Council	will	discourage	more	
vulnerable	development	proposals	
in	areas	of	close	proximity	to	flood	
defences,	where	the	risks	would	be	
highest	during	a	breach	or	overtopping	
flood	event.	The	SFRA	should	be	used	
during	the	preparation	of	FRAs	in	order	
to	assess	the	risk	of	flooding	to	a	site	
from	all	sources.	There	are	restrictions	
on	development	in	close	proximity	
to	existing	flood	defences	under	the	
Environment	Agency’s	Flood	Defence	
Byelaws.	There	is	a	requirement	to	
obtain	consent	from	the	Environment	
Agency	for	development	within	eight	
metres	of	the	foot	of	any	artificial	
river	embankment	serving	as	a	flood	
protection	barrier	or,	if	there	is	no	2009.	A	marine	licence	may	be	
required	for	activities	involving	a	
deposit	or	removal	of	a	substance	
or	object	below	the	mean	high	
water	springs	mark	or	in	any	tidal	
river	to	the	extent	of	the	tidal	
influence.	Any	works	may	also	
require	consideration	under	The	
Marine	Works	(Environmental	
Impact	Assessment)	Regulations	
2007	(as	amended),	therefore	
early	consultation	with	the	Marine	
Management	Organisation	is	
advised.
7.38	 When	considering	potential	flood	
risk	associated	with	development,	
the	Environment	Agency’s	flood	
maps	should	be	consulted	to	ensure	
that	the	most	current	information	
has	been	taken	into	account.161
The approach to surface water 
drainage should be based on evidence 
of an assessment of site conditions 
and any surface water discharge 
solution should reflect the non-
statutory technical standards for 
sustainable drainage (March 2015) or 
any subsequent replacement national 
standards. Measures intended to 
assist with surface water management 
should be made clear as part of any 
submission. 
Where there is no alternative option 
but to discharge surface water to 
a combined sewer, applicants will 
need to demonstrate why there is no 
alternative and submit clear evidence 
that the discharge of surface water 
will be limited to an attenuated rate, 
including an allowance for climate 
change, agreed with the appropriate 
bodies. Where SUDS are incorporated, a 
drainage strategy should be submitted 
detailing:
a) the type of SUDS and/or measures 
proposed;
b) hydraulic design details/calculations;
c) pollution prevention and water quality 
treatment measures together with 
details of pollutant removal capacity 
as set out in the CIRIA SUDS Manual 
C697 or equivalent and updated local or 
national design guidance; and
d) the proposed maintenance and 
management regime.
Drainage requirements including 
detailed maintenance and management 
arrangements for the lifetime of the 
development will be secured by way 
of planning conditions and/or planning 
obligations.Policy CC 5 - Surface Water Management and Sustainable Drainage Systems
Development proposals should 
prioritise the use of sustainable 
drainage systems. Surface water 
should be managed at the source, 
not transferred; and discharged in the 
following order of priority:
1.   into the ground (infiltration at 
source);
2.   attenuated discharge to a surface 
water body; 
3.   attenuated discharge to surface 
water sewer, highway drain or 
another drainage system; and as 
last resort
4.  attenuated discharge to a 
combined sewer.162
Justification	
7.39	 Surface	water	management	is	a	key	
principle	of	sustainable	development.	
SUDS	aim	to	reduce	flooding	by	using	
devices	or	a	series	of	complementary	
devices	to	control	surface	water	run-
off	as	near	to	its	source	as	possible.	
The	Flood	and	Water	Management	Act	
2010	defines	a	SUDS	as:	‘a	structure	
for	dealing	with	rainwater	that	is	not	a	
sewer	or	watercourse’.	Development	
increases	impermeable	surfaces	
which	increase	the	risk	of	downstream	
flooding.	Underground	piped	systems	
have	focussed	on	the	rapid	removal	
of	surface	water	from	sites	to	the	
receiving	watercourse	or	sewer	with	
little	consideration	to	the	downstream	
environment.	SUDS	seek	to	replicate	
natural	drainage	flow	patterns	with	
retention	of	peak	runoff	and	additional	
flow	volumes	on	site.	This	ensures	that	
the	risk	of	flooding	is	not	increased.	
The	natural	processes	which	happen	
in	many	SUDS	techniques	trap	and	passively	treat	many	pollutants	and	
help	to	prevent	the	settlement	of	
contaminants	such	as	dust,	oil,	litter	
and	organic	matter	which	otherwise	
tend	to	flow	rapidly	into	the	sewer	
system,	by	mimicking	natural	features	
that	slow	down	the	rate	that	water	
drains	away	thereby	reducing	the	
amount	of	surface	run-off	entering	into	
sewers.				
7.40 SUDS	can	also	help	to	reduce	the	need	
for	investment	in	flood	management	
and	protection	measures	by	mitigating	
any	additional	flood	risk	that	new	
development	might	generate.	The	
Council’s	SFRA	advocates	that	SUDS	
should	be	considered	and	given	priority	
for	every	new	development	site,	in	
line	with	the	NPPF	and	associated	
PPG.	It	provides	advice	relating	to	the	
use	of	SUDS	and	has	identified	the	
permeability	of	the	soil	within	Carlisle	
is	mainly	low	with	some	small	areas	of	medium	and	high	permeability	
soils.	This	will	have	an	effect	on	the	
appropriateness	of	SUDS	techniques	
employed.
7.41	 The	use	of	SUDS	should	be	considered	
at	the	earliest	possible	stage	in	the	
preparation	of	a	design	solution,	
in	conjunction	with	a	landscaping	
scheme.	Key	considerations	at	this	
stage	should	be:
	 •	layout;
	 •	density;
	 •	site	access;
	 •	topography;	
	 •	ground	conditions;	and
	 •	discharge	destinations.163
7.42	 Examples	of	SUDS	techniques	
include	porous	surfaces,	filter	drains	
and	strips,	trenches,	ponds,	wetland	
basins,	soakaways,	green	roofs	and	
swales	or	wide,	shallow	depressions.	
SUDS	solutions	will	be	appropriate	
on	most	types	of	development	where	
the	area	or	impermeable	surface	is	to	
be	increased,	particularly	in	areas	of	
the	District	where	culvert	capacity	and	
floodplain	constraint	problems	exist.	
The	City	Council	will	also	support	
retrofitting	of	SUDS	within	existing	
developments	to	achieve	integrated	
water	management.	SUDS	can	help	
to	create	enjoyable	and	high	quality	
environments	which	encourage	
biodiversity	and	amenity,	benefit	water	
resources,	reduce	pressure	on	the	
sewer	network	and	help	to	mitigate	the	
negative	impacts	of	climate	change.	
They	work	effectively	in	both	rural	and	
urban	areas	and	help	support	new	development	without	adding	to	the	risk	
of	flooding	or	pollution.	They	will	also	
contribute	to	achieving	improvements	
to	comply	with	the	Water	Framework	
Directive.
7.43 It	is	recommended	that	pre-application	
discussions	take	place	before	
submitting	an	application	to	the	local	
planning	authority.	In	the	context	of	
the	Policy,	the	appropriate	bodies	are	
Cumbria	County	Council	as	LLFA,	
Environment	Agency	and	United	
Utilities.
7.44	 United	Utilities	will	continue	to	work	
with	landowners	and	developers	to	limit	
the	extent	of	surface	water	entering	the	
sewerage	system	as	a	result	of	new	
development	to	most	appropriately	
manage	the	impact	of	growth	on	
infrastructure.	Proposals	should	clearly	
demonstrate	with	evidence,	how	
they	have	applied	the	surface	water	
drainage	hierarchy	outlined	in	this	Policy.	Applicants	will	be	required	
to	demonstrate	that	surface	water	
disposal	will	be	controlled	so	that	pre	
and	post	development	run-off	rates	
are	at	least	equivalent.
7.45	 A	discharge	to	groundwater	or	
watercourse	may	require	the	consent	
of	the	Environment	Agency	or	
Cumbria	County	Council	as	LLFA.	
In	accordance	with	national	policy,	
the	Council	will	work	with	the	LLFA	
seeking	their	advice	on	all	major	
scheme	designations	consisting	of	
9	houses	of	more	on	sites	greater	
than	0.5ha,	or	locations	where	local	
flooding	affects	land	to	be	developed.	
Early	 pre	planning	 discussions	 with	 the	
LLFA	is	strongly	advised	with	regard	to	
the	risk	of	flooding	from	any	proposed	
development	and	the	suitability	of	a	
more	sustainable	drainage	approach	
to	the	disposal	of	surface	water.164
7.46	 Standards	for	dealing	with	Sustainable	
Drainage	are	outlined	within	the	non-
statutory	technical	standards	for	
sustainable	drainage	(March	2015)	(or	
any	subsequent	replacement	national	
standards).	Reference	should	also	be	
made	to	Cumbria	County	Council’s	
SUDS	Requirements	document	when	
published.165
8
Health, Education and CommunityObjective
To create a thriving, successful 
and healthy community for all 
by promoting cohesive mixed 
communities and ensuring that 
everyone can have a decent home, 
in a safe environment, with good 
access to health care, educational 
provision and other community 
facilities by sustainable modes, 
including walking and cycling.Context
The policies contained within the plan aim to facilitate social interaction and create 
healthy, inclusive and sustainable communities by ensuring that they would not be 
compromised as a result of new development. For example, through the Local Plan, 
new development will provide opportunities to: enable walking and cycling; create 
formal and informal community meeting spaces; sports facilities and green spaces; 
provide local shops; reduce the fear of crime and support the development of 
education and health facilities. Health and wellbeing is therefore an underlying theme 
which will be considered when applications for any type of development are assessed. 
The Council recognises the importance of protecting and enhancing the health and 
wellbeing of the District’s population and the benefits that are attainable from good 
design and development. This is further enhanced by Carlisle’s status as a World 
Health Organisation (WHO) Healthy City. A Healthy City is one that continually creates 
and improves its physical and social environments and expands the community 
resources that enable people to mutually support each other in performing all the 
functions of life and developing to their maximum potential. Since becoming a Healthy 
City in 2009, the Council has worked closely with partner organisations. It has gained 
from the Healthy City approach and network to improve the health and wellbeing of 
the District’s residents.166
Proposals for the development of 
health care facilities will be supported 
where the scale and location of 
the proposal is appropriate for the 
catchment it is intended to serve 
and is or can be made accessible by 
walking, cycling and public transport.
Development at the Cumberland 
Infirmary for hospital, health care 
and related ancillary uses will also be 
supported. Non-health care related 
development at this location will be 
supported on surplus land subject to 
the compliance with other relevant 
policies within the Plan.Policy CM 1 - Health Care Provision Justification 
8.1 In order to contribute towards the 
objective of enhancing health and 
wellbeing, new development will be 
supported in line with this policy which 
provides a framework against which 
proposals will be assessed.
8.2 In recent years, planning approval has 
been granted for the development of 
the North Carlisle Medical Centre in 
the Stanwix area of the City. The new 
medical centre is also home to Carlisle 
Partnership NHS Foundation Trust and 
includes provision for a pharmacy. This 
model may be replicated across the 
plan period as public health services 
continue to be reconfigured and the 
existing estate rationalised. In addition 
to this there has been an indication 
that a site for a replacement medical 
centre will be required in Brampton 
over the course of the plan period. 
The opportunity has therefore been 
taken to promote the delivery of such 
a facility in tandem with the delivery of new housing on a site allocated for 
residential purposes off Carlisle Road in 
Brampton.
8.3 It is important that sites for the 
provision of health care facilities are 
accessible by public transport. Where 
there is not currently bus service 
provision existing routes may need to 
be amended, where it is possible to do 
so, to serve new developments in order 
to improve their accessibility. In such 
cases those promoting new health 
facilitates should engage with public 
transport providers.
8.4 It is acknowledged that over the 
plan period there is likely to be a 
requirement for some redevelopment 
and reconfiguration at the Cumberland 
Infirmary. This may result in some 
land and/or buildings being identified 
as surplus to current and future 
health care requirements. This policy 
is supportive of development and 167
reconfiguration at the Cumberland 
Infirmary, particularly where this will 
enable the hospital to meet future 
health needs of the City and deliver 
improved facilities. Redevelopment 
of surplus land and/or buildings, 
identified through the process of 
an asset review, will be supported 
for alternative non-health care uses 
subject to compliance with other 
relevant policies within the Plan. 168
Proposals for the development of new 
educational facilities as well as for the 
expansion, alteration and improvement 
of existing educational facilities will be 
supported where they are well related to 
the catchment they will serve.
Where there is a need for new educational 
facilities outside of an existing site, the 
location should be close to the intended 
catchment in order to minimise travel in line 
with sustainable development principles.
Specifically in relation to primary and 
secondary school provision, Carlisle 
City Council will continue to work with 
the Education Authority to identify what 
new demand will be generated from 
development as well as helping to identify 
suitable new education sites should this  
be required.
To assist in the delivery of additional  
school places, where required, to meet the 
needs of development, contributions will  
be sought.Policy CM 2 - Educational Needs Justification
8.5 This Policy aims to respond to the 
need to ensure that there is sufficient 
choice of school places available to 
meet the needs of existing and new 
communities. There are currently 48 
Primary schools within the District, 
18 are located within the urban area 
with 30 located in the wider rural 
area. There are two additional schools 
currently planned within the urban area 
in response to large scale housing 
developments at Crindledyke and 
Morton. Most rural primary schools 
are located within villages, however 
there are a number located in the open 
countryside which serve wide, yet 
sparsely populated rural communities.
8.6 In relation to secondary school 
provision, there are currently six 
secondary schools within the District. 
Four are located within the City itself 
with one school located in Brampton 
and one in Dalston, both serving the 
wider rural area. In addition to this there are also two privately run secondary 
schools in the District. Over the 
last few years, significant changes, 
investment and reorganisation have 
been made to the District’s secondary 
schools in pursuit of greater efficiency 
and higher educational attainment.
8.7 Cumbria County Council, as the 
responsible Education Authority, 
has highlighted the potential need 
for more primary and secondary 
school places in different parts of the 
District in order to keep pace with the 
demand generated by new housing 
developments. The process of the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) will 
continue to ensure that the need for 
additional school places is identified 
in response to housing developments 
and that the necessary measures are 
put in place to ensure their timely 
delivery.169
8.8 There are two options to overcome 
the issue of school capacity, either 
supporting the expansion of existing 
schools or securing the construction 
of an entirely new school to meet any 
need arising from significant levels 
of new development. Where housing 
developments or the cumulative impact 
of a number of housing developments 
in an area gives rise to the need 
for extensions, refurbishment and/
or remodelling to provide additional 
capacity (including nursery capacity, 
as appropriate) at existing schools, 
or the construction of a new school, 
the County Council will look to the 
landowner/developer or a consortium 
of landowners/developers to fund 
the cost of providing the additional 
capacity or additional school at the 
appropriate time, including the cost of 
acquiring additional land if necessary.
8.9 This Policy also applies to higher and 
further education provision in the 
District. 170
Proposals which involve the loss of valued community 
facilities such as shops, public houses and other facilities 
of value to the local community will only be permitted 
where it can be demonstrated that:
1. its current use is no longer viable or there is adequate 
alternative provision in the locality to serve the local 
community;
2. all options for their continuance have been fully 
explored, including any scope for alternative community 
uses; and
3. any asset listed on a Community Asset Register has 
satisfied the requirements under this obligation. 
JustificationPolicy CM 3 - Sustaining Community Facilities and Services
8.10 Planning has a social role to play in supporting strong, vibrant 
and healthy communities, by ensuring there are accessible local 
services that reflect the community’s needs and support its 
health, social and cultural wellbeing, by for example promoting 
the retention and development of local services and community 
facilities such as local shops, meeting places, sports venues, 
cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship and 
guarding against their unnecessary loss, particularly where this 
would reduce the community’s ability to meet its day-to-day needs.
8.11 One of the major challenges facing communities, and which is 
often exacerbated in rural settlements, is their ability to retain local 
services and facilities which are essential for maintaining thriving 
and sustainable communities. This policy seeks to retain facilities 
and services of value to the local community through ensuring 
that their loss constitutes a valid material consideration in the 
determination of any development proposals affecting them.
8.12 Community facilities are important for delivering a valuable service 
and social focus for the local community both in rural villages and 
urban environments, particularly for those without access to private 
transport. Whilst it is often difficult to define ‘locality’ as this varies 
across the District, it is generally accepted as being where there 
is an identifiable local population that a service or facility serves. It 
is however recognised that in more sparsely populated rural areas 
this may be more difficult to define.171
8.13 It will not always be possible to prevent 
the closure of community facilities 
and services when it is uneconomic 
or unsustainable for their use to 
continue. Proposals involving their 
loss will only however be permitted 
where the Council is satisfied that the 
existing use is no longer viable and, 
where appropriate, there is no market 
for the business as a going concern, 
or for any alternative community uses. 
Proof of advertising in these terms for 
a reasonable period of time, usually not 
less than six months, will be required to 
substantiate that this is the case. Such 
evidence should include for example, 
a record of numbers of enquiries to 
take over the facility/service, evidence 
of viability and proof that the property 
has been adequately marketed at an 
appropriate value.
8.14 It is recognised that some local facilities 
such as community centres, village 
halls and schools provide a valuable social role for the local community 
in providing multi-functional meeting 
and recreation spaces. Where the 
redevelopment of such sites, either in 
existing use or where their last use was 
for such, is proposed, consideration 
should be given, where possible, to 
the incorporation or retention of valued 
provisions such as community meeting 
space within the new development.
8.15 Operating alongside this policy is the 
Community Right to Bid. This right 
was introduced through the Localism 
Act and gives community groups 
the right to prepare and bid to buy 
community buildings and facilities that 
are important to them including, for 
example, shops, pubs and community 
centres if made available for sale. The 
City Council maintains a Community 
Asset Register to hold all of these 
‘assets of community value’. If an 
owner of a listed asset wants to sell it 
they have to notify the local authority. The local authority then, in turn, has 
to notify any interested parties. If local 
groups are interested in buying the 
asset they have six months to prepare 
a bid to buy it before the asset can 
be sold. This initiative is governed 
by separate regulations out with the 
planning process.172
New development should make a positive 
contribution to creating safe and secure 
environments by integrating measures for 
security and designing out opportunities 
for crime.
Proposals should be designed with the 
following principles in mind in order to 
create secure environments which deter 
crime:
1. developments should be laid out 
and buildings positioned with the 
intention of creating active and vibrant 
neighbourhoods and maximising 
natural surveillance opportunities;
2. public and private spaces should have 
clearly defined boundaries, utilising 
appropriate physical treatments and 
promoting the concept of defensible 
space;
3. footpaths and cycleways should be 
designed to maximise legitimate use 
and consideration should be given Policy CM 4 - Planning Out Crime
to the route to avoid presenting 
direct opportunities for concealment, 
unobserved access, or an excess of 
routes that could aid escape;
4. effective lighting should be recognised 
as essential to deterring criminal and 
anti-social activity, but care should be 
taken to avoid nuisance, annoyance 
and unnecessary spill or pollution; and
5. careful consideration should be 
afforded to landscaping schemes 
to ensure that they do not create 
secluded areas, impede surveillance 
opportunities, or position elements that 
could be exploited as climbing aids.
Applicants will be expected (where 
appropriate) to demonstrate how the 
above principles have been adhered to.
The deployment of CCTV (Closed Circuit 
Television) may be considered necessary 
in certain circumstances.Justification
8.16 It is widely acknowledged that good 
design plays a key role in creating safe 
and secure environments. This policy 
seeks to ensure that developments 
create environments where crime 
and disorder, and the fear of crime, 
do not undermine quality of life or 
community cohesion. Developers 
should, at the earliest stage possible, 
consult the Police Crime Prevention 
Design Advisor for advice on measures 
to be incorporated for designing out 
crime. Advice will be given based on 
current crime trends or particular crime 
risk, in accordance with Secured by 
Design principles. The Council will 
also encourage applicants to apply to 
Cumbria Constabulary for the Secured 
by Design and/or the Park Mark Safer 
Parking Award(s), where appropriate.
8.17 The planning system can be 
instrumental in producing environments 
that are well managed, lively and 
attractive, which discourage crime 173
and anti social behaviour, for example 
through overlooking and active 
frontages. Developers will therefore 
be expected to adopt designs for 
new development that take fully into 
account the security of property and 
people but which are also sensitive 
to local circumstances. It is evident 
that insensitive approaches to crime 
prevention can result in an increased 
fear and perception of crime by 
creating environments which appear 
threatening and as such are avoided. 
Clearly therefore a careful balance 
needs to be struck to successfully 
achieve the objective.
8.18 In 2009 the City Council adopted a 
supplementary planning document 
(SPD) entitled ‘Designing Out Crime’. 
The SPD seeks to improve the safety 
and security of developments and 
aims to strike a balance between the 
need to reduce crime and creating a 
high standard of appearance in the design and layout of developments. 
This document provides advice to 
applicants relating to incorporating 
safety and security measures into 
developments and is used to assess 
and determine planning applications. 
A further adopted SPD ‘Achieving 
Well Designed Housing’ (April 2011) 
focuses on the development of/within 
residential areas and also emphasises 
that designing out crime is a key 
consideration at the concept stage of 
any development. It seeks to promote 
safe and secure environments and to 
design spaces and networks which 
minimise opportunities for crime or 
anti-social behaviour.
8.19 Additional guidance on creating 
successful spaces and achieving 
good design is detailed within Manual 
for Streets and Manual for Streets 
2 produced by the Department for 
Transport or successor documents.174
The Council will only support 
development which would not lead to 
an adverse impact on the environment 
or health or amenity of future or existing 
occupiers. Development will not be 
permitted where:
1. it would generate or result in exposure 
to, either during construction or on 
completion, unacceptable levels 
of pollution (from contaminated 
substances, odour, noise, dust, 
vibration, light and insects) which 
cannot be satisfactorily mitigated 
within the development proposal or by 
means of compliance with planning 
conditions;
2. it would cause demonstrable harm to 
the quality, quantity and associated 
ecological features of groundwater and 
surface waters or impact on human 
health;
3. it is on contaminated or unstable land 
which would pose an unacceptable risk Policy CM 5 - Environmental and Amenity Protection
to human health or the environment, 
unless suitable mitigation and/or 
remediation is or can be carried out to 
ensure safe development;
4. it would be subject to unacceptable 
risk from existing hazardous 
installations; and/or
5. proposals for new hazardous 
installations (e.g. certain gases, liquids 
and explosive chemicals) pose an 
unacceptable risk to the health or 
safety of users of the site, neighbouring 
land and/or the environment.
Proposals may be required to submit 
detailed assessments in relation to any 
of the above criteria to the Council for 
approval.
Where development is permitted 
which may have an impact on such 
considerations, the Council will consider 
the use of conditions or planning 
obligations to ensure any appropriate 
mitigation measures are secured.Justification
8.20 Development that poses a risk to the 
environment or human health will be 
carefully considered in conjunction with 
the City Council’s Environmental Health 
team and any relevant external agencies. 
New development for sensitive uses 
(such as residential development) should 
be located an appropriate distance away 
from existing operational uses with the 
potential to generate unacceptable levels 
of noise, odour or pollutants. This will 
ensure that new development would 
not negatively prejudice either use. 
Unless potential risks can be removed in 
their entirety or successfully mitigated, 
development proposals which would 
compromise the environment or human 
health will be resisted.175
Construction and Demolition Sites: 
Noise, Dust and Light Management
8.21 It is essential to have effective noise 
and dust emission control measures 
in place for every activity carried 
out on site. In order to successfully 
control demolition and construction 
activities, it is important to evaluate the 
risk from pollutants emitted from site. 
Applications for development proposals 
which, by virtue of the nature and/or 
scale are considered by the Council 
to be likely to give rise to an adverse 
impact during construction, demolition 
and/or generate construction waste, 
will be expected to be accompanied by 
a Construction Management Method 
Statement.
Planning and noise
8.22 Effective land use planning can help 
prevent or mitigate potential noise 
impacts. Where noise may be an 
issue, a noise impact assessment will be required and will be sought at the 
earliest possible stage of the planning 
process. By avoiding the location of 
noise sensitive uses near to noise-
producing premises, noise problems 
can often be prevented. Where this is 
not possible, noise controls will need 
to be incorporated into new noise-
producing developments and mitigation 
measures may be prudent for new 
noise sensitive developments.
Air Quality
8.23 The Environment Act 1995 established 
the current framework for the National 
Air Quality Strategy and placed 
statutory duties upon local authorities 
in respect of Local Air Quality 
Management. Since 1996 Carlisle 
City Council has been monitoring air 
pollution levels and comparing the 
results with the national air quality 
objectives. For the majority of key 
pollutants measured across the District 
the concentrations have been found to be well below the government’s health 
based objectives. However, six Air 
Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) 
have been declared in Carlisle since 
2005 as a result of NO2 exceedances. 
The declaration of these AQMAs 
placed a duty on Carlisle City Council 
to draw up an Air Quality Action Plan, 
which details the local measures from 
which air quality improvements can be 
realistically achieved.
8.24 Developers must have regard 
to the air quality implications of 
new developments. Large new 
developments may require the 
preparation of an Air Quality 
Impact Assessment to accompany 
the planning application. Further 
information on when an Air Quality 
Assessment will be required and a 
guide for developers is available on 
the City Council’s website. Developers 
must consider all aspects of the 
development including emissions to 176
air and the increased traffic volume 
that the development may generate. 
Planning applications should include 
mitigation measures to offset the 
negative impacts.
Artificial Light
8.25 There are three main types of light 
pollution: sky glow, glare and light 
trespass. Intrusive light can adversely 
impact residential amenity as well 
as causing road safety problems 
and harming wildlife. Applications 
involving significant external lighting 
such as floodlights for sports pitches 
or arenas must be accompanied by a 
robust lighting report and strategies as 
part of their submission for planning 
permission. Landscaping measures 
such as mounding and planting may 
in some situations help to protect 
residential amenity and reduce light 
spillage and glare.Insects
8.26 Some forms of development may give 
rise to a greater risk of insect nuisance. 
Where this is suspected, applicants 
may need to demonstrate appropriate 
strategies are or will be put into effect 
to mitigate the risk, the implementation 
of which may be secured through the 
imposition of planning conditions.
Groundwater Quality
8.27 The Environment Agency has statutory 
responsibility for managing water 
resources and has developed a 
strategy for the proper management 
and protection of the groundwater 
resource (‘Underground, Under 
Threat - The State of Groundwater 
in England and Wales’). This (or any 
successor documents) will be used 
as a guide to determine the suitability 
of developments in relation to 
groundwater impact. The Environment 
Agency has also established Source 
Protection Zones for public water 
supply and other human consumption 
uses.Contaminated/Unstable Land
8.28 Within the District there are many 
historic and current land uses that 
have impacted or have the potential 
to impact the quality of the land and 
result in land contamination or land 
stability concerns. 
8.29 It is important to identify potential 
contamination and ground stability 
problems at an early stage, since 
remediation of land contamination 
or instability can incur significant 
costs. It is strongly recommended 
that pre-application advice is sought 
from the Council’s Environmental 
Health Department regarding potential 
contamination/stability issues.
8.30 The Coal Authority has defined 
high risk areas, where the legacy 
of past coalmining activity poses a 
potential risk to land stability and 
new development. Most planning 
applications for non-householder 
development within high risk areas will 
need to be accompanied by a Coal 177
Mining Risk Assessment, prepared 
by a competent person. Further 
information on these requirements can 
be found at: www.gov.uk/government/
organisations/the-coal-authority
8.31 The requirement for a development to 
be sustainable and viable also extends 
to the remediation technology to be 
applied. For some developments, the 
technology required may impact on the 
design of the proposed development. 
If potential land contamination/
stability issues are not identified 
and an assessment of the risks not 
undertaken this may result in refusal of 
permission. 
8.32 The Council must be satisfied that:
• where there is information available 
which suggests the possibility of 
contamination or land instability or 
of unacceptable risk, these concerns 
have been addressed within the 
supporting information submitted with 
any application;• any unacceptable risks identified can be 
adequately dealt with in order that the 
completed development is suitable for 
its intended use and no unacceptable 
risks remain either to human health or 
the wider environment; and
• any steps needed to deal with 
unacceptable risks are either already 
in place or can be secured through 
suitable planning conditions or 
obligations.
8.33 The assessment of potentially 
contaminated sites should be carried 
out through a phased process. Ongoing 
dialogue with the City Council at each 
phase is recommended to ensure 
that the work undertaken is sufficient 
and necessary. Where development 
is proposed on a site known to be 
contaminated or has the potential to be 
contaminated as a result of industrial 
activity (e.g. gasworks, petrol stations, 
filled ground, steelworks, railway land) 
a preliminary risk assessment will be 
required.Hazardous Substances
8.34 Within the Plan area there are a number 
of notifiable hazardous substance 
installations, including high pressure 
pipelines and major hazard sites. 
Whilst these are subject to stringent 
controls under existing health and safety 
legislation it is considered prudent to 
control the kinds of development in the 
immediate vicinity of such installations, 
or where proposed new development 
would result in an additional safety 
hazard.
8.35 Applicants should have regard to 
Planning Advice for Developments 
near Hazardous Installations (PADHI) 
which provides the Health and Safety 
Executive’s advice on land use planning 
near hazardous installations. The aim 
of this is to manage population growth 
close to such sites to mitigate the 
consequences of a major accident 
should one occur. When determining 
applications for development around 
major hazards the Council will consult 
with the Health and Safety Executive.178
Proposals for the development of new cemetery or burial grounds 
or extensions to existing sites will be assessed against the following 
criteria:
1. the site is in an appropriate location, away from flood risk and with 
suitable ground conditions;
2. the use of the site and its operation is acceptable in terms of impact 
on adjoining uses;
3. the design approach, including the layout and any proposed 
landscaping act to minimise any adverse impacts on the landscape 
and/or townscape; and
4. there is a clear rationale for the size of the site proposed, including 
all necessary ancillary elements. Justification
8.36 This policy will enable the delivery of 
cemetery grounds/burial grounds or the 
extension of existing facilities across the 
District to meet identified future needs. 
A stand alone policy is considered 
necessary given the specific nature 
of this land use. The policy sets out a 
criteria based approach and highlights 
the key issues that will be required to be 
satisfied.Policy CM 6 - Cemetery and Burial Grounds Provision179
9
Historic EnvironmentContext
Carlisle possesses a rich historic environment comprising of 
many assets which range from international through to local 
significance. These assets are recognised as playing a key role 
in reinforcing the District’s distinctive identity and sense of place, 
as well as underpinning a strong tourism offer, opportunities 
for education and the wider economy through job creation and 
environmental quality. The policies within this chapter build on 
the strategic direction at the outset of the Plan to promote and 
protect this finite heritage resource.Objective
To conserve, enhance and promote Carlisle’s heritage 
and important historic landscapes whilst ensuring that 
development proposals respect and enhance Carlisle’s 
historic assets.180
Justification
9.1	 A	World	Heritage	Site	(WHS)	is	a	designated	heritage	asset	of	
the	highest	significance.	Accordingly	such	sites	are	afforded	
the	strongest	degree	of	protection	through	the	planning	
system.	The	overriding	objective	of	the	planning	system	in	this	
regard	is	to	ensure	that	the	Outstanding	Universal	Value	of	
such	sites	is	in	no	way	undermined	by	development.
9.2	 Hadrian’s	Wall	was	designated	a	WHS	by	the	United	Nations	
Educational,	Scientific	and	Cultural	Organisation	(UNESCO)	in	
1987	in	recognition	that	it	comprises	the	most	complex	and	
best	preserved	of	the	frontiers	of	the	Roman	Empire.	It	also	
forms	part	of	a	wider	WHS	designation	known	as	the	‘Frontiers	
of	the	Roman	Empire’.
9.3	 The	wall	is	an	internationally	known	icon	of	the	north	of	
England	and	a	unique	part	of	the	District’s	identity.	It	is	
valued	by	those	who	live	and	work	in	the	area	as	part	of	
their	geographic	and	social	identity,	and	visitors	to	the	area.	
It	has	significant	historical	and	archaeological	value	as	well	
as	being	important	from	recreation,	social	and	economic	
perspectives.	The	associated	Hadrian’s	Wall	Path	National	Trail	
and	the	Hadrian’s	Cycleway	also	provide	significant	access	
opportunities	for	large	numbers	of	cyclists	and	walkers.
9.4	 The	extent	of	the	WHS	designation	is	identified	on	the	Policies	
Map,	as	too	are	the	extents	of	the	site’s	buffer	zone.There is a presumption in favour of preserving the fabric, 
integrity and authenticity of archaeological sites that form part 
of the Outstanding Universal Value of Hadrian’s Wall World 
Heritage Site.
New development will not normally be permitted on currently 
open land on the line of the wall.
New development within the Hadrian’s Wall World Heritage 
Site and its buffer zone which enhances or better reveals its 
significance, or which accords with the approved Management 
Plan will be supported.
Proposed development in the buffer zone should be assessed 
for its impact on the site’s Outstanding Universal Value and 
particularly on key views both into and out of it. Development 
that would result in substantial harm will be refused.
Proposed development outside the boundaries of the buffer 
zone will, where appropriate, be carefully assessed for its 
effect on the site’s Outstanding Universal Value, and any that 
would result in substantial harm will be refused.
Where development proposals would result in less than 
substantial harm to the site’s Outstanding Universal Value, this 
harm will need to be assessed against the public benefit by 
way of reference to the above objectives.Policy HE 1 - Hadrian’s Wall World Heritage Site181
9.5	 There	is	a	statutory	requirement	to	have	and	work	to	a	five	
year	rolling	management	plan	for	world	heritage	sites.	The	
current	plan	for	Hadrian’s	Wall	covers	the	period	2015	-	2019	
and	provides	an	essential	framework	for	the	management	
of	the	site	to	ensure	its	preservation	for	present	and	future	
generations.	
9.6	 The	buffer	zone	for	Hadrian’s	Wall	World	Heritage	Site	was	
established	in	the	1996	Management	Plan	as	a	means	of	
helping	to	protect	the	site’s	Outstanding	Universal	Value.	
Within	the	City	this	buffer	highlights	areas	where	non-
scheduled	archaeological	remains	can	be	given	focussed	
protection,	which	reflects	that	those	parts	of	Hadrian’s	Wall	
that	are	not	scheduled	are	not	formally	included	within	the	
WHS	designation.	The	buffer	also	serves	to	protect	the	visual	
setting	of	the	site.
9.7	 It	must	equally	be	recognised	that	in	certain	circumstances	
proposed	development	out	with	of	the	buffer	zone	may	
potentially	impact	on	the	WHS	and	its	setting.	In	these	
circumstances	any	potential	impacts	will	need	to	be	
understood	and	will	weigh	heavily	in	determining	such	
proposals.
	9.8	 Development	proposals	(where	appropriate)	should	be	
accompanied	by	an	archaeological	assessment	and/or	
evaluation	of	the	site	to	demonstrate	the	impact	on	the	Outstanding	Universal	Value	of	the	Wall	and	its	setting.	A	
formal	Environmental	Impact	Assessment	(EIA)	will	be	required	
for	significant	developments	affecting	Hadrian’s	Wall	WHS	and	
its	buffer	zone.	182
Development will not be permitted where it would cause substantial harm to 
the significance of a scheduled monument, or other non-designated site or 
assets of archaeological interest, or their setting.
Proposals that affect non designated assets will be judged on the 
significance of the assets and the scale of likely harm to establish whether 
the development is acceptable in principle. The preferred approach will be 
to seek to avoid damage to such remains through their preservation in-situ. 
When in-situ preservation is not justified, the developer will be required 
to make adequate provision for excavation and recording and analysis of 
assets. Where possible and appropriate opportunities should also be taken 
to promote and interpret assets.
Where there is knowledge that there are archaeological remains, or where 
there are reasonable grounds for the potential of unknown assets of 
archaeological interest to be, proposals should be accompanied by an 
assessment of the significance of the asset and how it will be affected by 
the proposed development including where their significance, extent and 
state of preservation is not clear. The level of information required will be 
proportionate to the asset’s significance and to the scale of impact of the 
proposal, and may require, where necessary, archaeological desk-based 
assessment and field evaluation.Policy HE 2 - Scheduled Ancient Monuments and  
Non-Designated Archaeological AssetsJustification	
9.9	 Scheduled	and	non-designated	
archaeological	assets	are	valuable	as	
a	resource	for	research,	education,	
leisure,	tourism,	and	for	their	influence	
on	perceptions	of	identity	and	sense	
of	place.	They	are	also	a	finite,	
irreplaceable	and	fragile	resource	
and	are	vulnerable	to	a	wide	range	of	
human	activities	and	natural	processes.	 	
9.10	 The	Ancient	Monuments	and	
Archaeological	Areas	Act	1979	makes	
provision	for	the	designation	of	
scheduled	monuments.	Once	included	
in	the	schedule,	a	monument	(together	
with	land	in	or	on	which	it	is	situated,	
plus	any	land	essential	for	its	support	
and	preservation)	has	legal	protection.
9.11	 It	is	important	to	acknowledge	that	
where	a	monument	is	not	designated	
as	a	scheduled	monument,	that	this	
does	not	necessarily	imply	that	it	is	
not	important.	As	such	proposals	
affecting	important	but	non-scheduled	
monuments	will	also	be	subject	to	the	183
provisions	of	this	Policy,	as	too	will	
those	affecting	sites	within	the	District	
which	are	known	to	be	of,	or	likely	
to	be	of,	archaeological	interest	but	
are	not	scheduled.	This	approach	is	
entirely	in	keeping	with	national	policy.
9.12	 The	overriding	objective	of	the	Policy	
is	to	ensure	that	both	designated	and	
non-designated	assets	are	preserved	in	
perpetuity.	Where	in-situ	preservation	
is	not	deemed	to	be	appropriate,	
adequate	provision	for	excavation	
and	recording	and	analysis	will	be	
expected.	This	information	will	need	
to	be	made	publicly	accessible	in	the	
County’s	Historic	Environment	Record	
and	published	appropriately	if	the	
results	merit	this.	Where	possible	and	
appropriate	opportunities	should	also	
be	taken	to	implement	interpretation	
schemes	at	or	close	to	the	site.9.13	 Works	affecting	a	scheduled	monument	
will	also	require	Scheduled	Monument	
Consent	(SMC)	which	is	separate	
from	the	statutory	planning	process.	
However,	the	two	processes	may	run	in	
parallel	when	the	granting	of	planning	
permission	is	required.	Development	
affecting	the	setting	of	a	scheduled	
monument	is	dealt	with	wholly	under	
the	planning	system	and	does	not	
require	SMC.184
Listed buildings and their settings will be preserved and 
enhanced. Any harm to the significance of a listed building 
will only be justified where the public benefits of the proposal 
clearly outweighs the harm.
Applications for works to listed buildings including alterations 
or extensions, changes of use, or new development within the 
curtilage and/or its setting must have regard to:
1. the significance of the heritage asset, including its intrinsic 
architectural and historic interest and its contribution to the 
local distinctiveness and character of the District;
2. the setting of the asset and its contribution to the local 
scene;
3. the extent to which the proposed works would result in 
public benefits;
4. the present or future economic viability or function of the 
heritage asset; and
5. the preservation of the physical features of the building, in 
particular scale, proportions, character and detailing (both 
internally and externally) and of any windows and doorways.Development within the locality of a listed building should 
preserve or enhance its character and setting, and be 
sympathetic in scale, character and materials.
The demolition or total loss of the significance of a listed 
building will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances 
where it can be clearly demonstrated that the tests set 
out in national policy can be met. Such proposals must 
also be accompanied by clear details of the proposed 
redevelopment.Policy HE 3 - Listed Buildings185
Proposals that harm the significance of a designated park and 
garden or its setting will not be permitted.
Proposals affecting a historic park and garden or its setting 
should ensure that development does not detract from the 
enjoyment, layout, design character or appearance of that 
landscape, cause harm to key views from or towards these 
landscapes or, where appropriate, prejudice their future 
restoration.
Opportunities for their conservation and enhancement will be 
supported.
Proposals affecting the Registered Historic Battlefield of 
the Battle of the Solway Moss will not be permitted where 
it adversely affects its significance including the historic, 
archaeological or landscape interest of the site including 
potential for interpretation. Any opportunities for  
interpretation will be supported.Justification
9.14		 A	listed	building	is	a	building	or	structure	that	has	been	placed	
on	the	Statutory	List	of	Buildings	of	Special	Architectural	
or	Historic	Interest.	Inclusion	on	the	list	reflects	that	the	
importance	of	these	assets	are	of	national	significance.	
Accordingly,	the	City	Council	will	give	careful	consideration	
to	development	proposals	which	affect	a	listed	building	or	its	
setting.	The	overriding	objective	of	doing	so	is	to	ensure	that	
the	character	and	setting	of	listed	buildings	is	preserved.
9.15		 The	setting	of	a	listed	building	will	vary	greatly	and	often	
extends	well	beyond	the	building’s	own	curtilage	to	encompass	
a	number	of	other	properties	and	public	space.	Occasionally	
the	setting	may	incorporate	extensive	areas	of	townscape	and	
landscape.	In	urban	areas	it	should	be	noted	that	the	setting	
of	listed	buildings	often	owes	its	importance	to	the	harmony	
produced	by	a	particular	grouping	of	buildings,	and	to	the	
quality	of	spaces	between	them.
9.16		 Development	proposals	affecting	listed	buildings	will	be	
required	to	demonstrate	an	understanding	of	their	significance	
and	show	how	proposals	will	minimise	any	adverse	impacts	on	
the	asset	and	its	setting.	This	should	be	set	out	in	the	form	of	a	
Heritage	Statement	to	support	any	application	for	planning	or	
listed	building	consent.Policy HE 4 - Historic Parks and Gardens
Policy HE 5 - Historic Battlefields186
9.17	 Listed	buildings	in	keeping	with	other	
heritage	assets	are	an	irreplaceable	
resource	which	should	be	conserved	
in	a	manner	appropriate	to	their	
significance.	The	destruction	of	historic	
buildings	is	very	seldom	necessary	
for	reasons	of	‘good	planning’,	and	
is	more	often	the	result	of	neglect,	or	
of	failure	to	make	imaginative	efforts	
to	find	new	uses	for	such	buildings	
or	to	incorporate	them	into	new	
development.	Accordingly	permission	
will	not	be	given	for	development	
proposals	involving	the	demolition	
of	a	listed	building	without	clear	and	
convincing	evidence	that	all	reasonable	
efforts	have	been	made	to	sustain	
existing	uses	or	find	viable	new	uses,	
in	accordance	with	the	tests	set	out	
in	national	policy	regarding	the	loss	
of	heritage	assets.	In	addition	any	
proposed	redevelopment	must	be	able	
to	demonstrate	that	substantial	public	
benefits	would	clearly	outweigh	the	
loss	resulting	from	demolition.9.18	 The	District	contains	several	parks	
and	gardens	of	visual	and/or	historic	
interest.	These	include	the	grounds	
of	Corby	Castle,	which	are	listed	in	
Historic	England’s	Register	of	Parks	
and	Gardens	of	Special	Historic	
Interest.	Historic	England	also	hold	
a	Register	of	Historic	Battlefields	of	
Special	Historic	Interest	which	includes	
an	area	of	land	within	the	District,	
close	to	the	settlement	of	Longtown,	
identified	as	being	the	site	of	the	Battle	
of	the	Solway	Moss.	The	significance	
of	these	assets	will	be	protected	and	
unless	development	proposals	affecting	
them	and	their	settings	are	consistent	
with	the	preservation	or	enhancement	
of	their	character,	historical	significance	
and	appearance	they	will	not	be	
permitted.187
Throughout Carlisle District there are a number of buildings 
and structures of historic and architectural significance 
that, whilst not statutorily protected, help create the locally 
distinctive character of the area. The Council recognises the 
positive contribution these structures make to streetscape 
and/or landscape and will therefore designate such assets 
through the Local List to strengthen the presumption in favour 
of their retention when considering development proposals.
Development which would remove, harm or undermine the 
significance of a locally listed asset, or its contribution to the 
character of the area, will only be permitted where robust 
evidence can demonstrate that the public benefits of the 
development would clearly outweigh the harm.
A number of buildings on the Local List have also been 
included on the basis that together, and sometimes alongside 
statutory listed heritage assets, they make a particularly 
strong and positive contribution to the ‘townscape’ character 
of an area. These ‘key townscape frontages’ are identified on 
the Policies Map. Development proposals which would erode 
the significance of these frontages will be resisted.  
 Only in exceptional circumstances will the loss of a locally 
listed asset be permitted. Where this is the case the 
following may be required:
1. an appropriate level of survey and recording which may 
also include archaeological excavation;
2. provision of replacement buildings of comparable quality 
and design; and
3. the salvage and reuse within the replacement 
development of special features.Policy HE 6 - Locally Important Heritage Assets188
Justification
9.19	 Across	the	District	there	can	be	
pressure	for	redevelopment	potentially	
resulting	in	the	loss	of	unlisted	
structures	that	whilst	not	of	national	
importance	(and	therefore	not	
eligible	for	inclusion	on	the	statutory	
register	of	listed	buildings)	may	
be	of	local	heritage	or	townscape	
significance.	This	reflects	that	many	
of	these	structures	make	an	important	
contribution	to	the	streetscape	and/or	
landscape	of	a	particular	area,	or	that	
they	are	of	local	historic	or	architectural	
interest.
9.20	 The	Council	is	committed	to	
maintaining	a	list	of	such	assets	which	
is	to	be	known	as	the	list	of	locally	
important	heritage	assets	or	the	‘Local	
List’.	The	list	will	recognise	those	
structures	which	play	an	essential	role	
in	protecting	and	reinforcing	a	sense	
of	local	character,	distinctiveness	
and	identity,	or	which	have	significant	
local	historic	connections.	The	Local	List	will	continue	to	be	added	to	and	
monitored	against	assessment	criteria	
guided	by	Historic	England’s	Good	
Practice	Guide	for	Local	Listings,	to	
ensure	a	consistent	approach	is	applied	
in	the	identification	and	management	
of	Carlisle’s	local	heritage	assets	of	
significance.	The	most	up	to	date	list	
will	be	published	on	the	Council’s	
website.
9.21	 A	number	of	locally	listed	heritage	
assets	have	been	listed	on	the	basis	of	
their	collective	value	as	part	of	a	‘key	
townscape	frontage’.	These	frontages	
are	identified	on	the	Policies	Map.	
9.22	 There	will	be	a	presumption	against	
development	proposals	which	would	
result	in	substantial	harm	or	the	loss	of	
any	assets	included	on	the	Local	List,	
or	which	erode	the	significance	of	key	
townscape	frontages.189
Any new development and/or alterations 
to buildings in conservation areas 
should preserve or enhance the special 
character and appearance of the 
conservation area and its setting.
Specifically proposals should:
1. seek to harmonise with their 
surroundings and be sympathetic to 
the setting, scale, density and physical 
characteristics of the conservation 
area;
2. preserve or enhance features which 
contribute positively to the area’s 
character or appearance, in particular 
the design, massing and height of 
the building should closely relate to 
adjacent buildings and should not 
have an unacceptable impact on the 
townscape or landscape;
3. not have an unacceptable impact 
on the historic street patterns/
boundaries, roofscape, skyline and setting of the conservation area, 
important open spaces or significant 
views into, out of and within the area;
4. not, other than as a last resort, result in 
demolition and redevelopment behind 
retained facades;
5. wherever practicable, draw on a local 
pallet of materials to reinforce the 
distinctiveness of an area;
6. retain individual features of interest  e.g. 
doorways, windows, shopfronts, garden 
walls, railings, cobbled or flagged 
forecourts, sandstone kerbs, trees and 
hedges etc. Where this is not possible or 
practical any replacement should match 
the original; and
7. not generate a significant increase in 
traffic movements, heavy vehicles or 
excessive parking demands where these 
would be prejudicial to the character of 
the conservation area.Proposals to utilise vacant land for 
car parking for interim or longer term 
use within conservation areas, will 
be resisted except in exceptional 
circumstances.
Development which would result in harm 
to a public or private open space that 
contributes positively to the character 
of a conservation area will be permitted 
only where this harm is outweighed by 
the public benefits of the proposals.
There will be a presumption in favour of 
the retention of buildings and/or features 
which make a positive contribution to 
the special character and appearance 
of a conservation area. Demolition or 
other substantial loss of these assets 
will only be permitted where it can be 
clearly demonstrated that the tests set 
out in national policy can be met. Such 
proposals must also be accompanied 
by clear details of the proposed 
redevelopment.Policy HE 7 - Conservation Areas190
Justification
9.23	 Carlisle	City	and	parts	of	the	wider	
District	have	evolved	organically	over	
centuries	to	become	areas	of	special	
architectural	and	historic	interest.	
This	is	reflected	in	many	of	the	rural	
settlements	and	parts	of	the	urban	
area	being	designated	as	conservation	
areas.
9.24	 The	Council	will	continue	to	
review	existing	and	designate	new	
conservation	areas	to	ensure	that	
the	areas	continue	to	justify	their	
conservation	area	status	through	
their	special	architectural	and	historic	
interest	thus	ensuring	the	concept	
of	conservation	is	not	devalued	
through	the	inclusion	of	areas	lacking	
special	merit.	In	order	to	promote	the	
enhancement	of	conservation	areas	the	
City	Council	will	carry	out	appraisals	
for	each	area,	highlighting	its	special	
characteristics	as	well	as	any	existing	
problems	and	make	suggestions	
regarding	their	solution.		A	series	of	management	plans	for	each	
conservation	area	will	also,	as	far	as	
resources	 allow,	 be	prepared	 setting	 out	
the	way	in	which	development	pressure	
and	neglect	will	be	managed	to	ensure	
the	specific	character	of	each	area	is	
maintained.
9.25	 There	are	many	opportunities	for	the	
enhancement	of	conservation	areas	
and	these	should	be	taken	wherever	
possible.	For	example,	the	repair	and	
refurbishment	of	buildings,	revitalising	
vacant	and	underused	buildings,	or	
the	carrying	out	of	tree	planting	and	
paving	works	and	other	public	realm	
improvements.	Development	proposals	
in	conservation	areas	should	be	of	high	
design	quality	and	should	be	developed	
to	complement	and	enhance	their	
context.9.26	 Planning	permission	for	redevelopment	
proposals	involving	the	demolition	of	
an	unlisted	building	in	a	conservation	
area	will	only	be	given	if	such	
proposals	accord	with	the	tests	set	out	
in	national	policy	relating	to	the	loss	
of	heritage	assets	and	furthermore	are	
in	detail.	This	latter	requirement	seeks	
to	avoid	the	situation	of	derelict	gap	
sites	appearing	in	conservation	areas	
in	advance	of	development	proposals	
being	drawn	up.191
10
Green InfrastructureContext
Green infrastructure is a broad concept 
that put simply refers to the District’s 
collective network of green spaces and 
environmental features. Coverage ranges 
from individual components such as street 
trees through to strategically planned parks 
and open spaces and even the rolling, 
open landscapes of the rural area.
The policies in this chapter aim to deliver 
the objectives of the Carlisle Green 
Infrastructure Strategy: The Big Green 
City, which recognises the fundamental 
role green infrastructure and the natural 
environment play in creating an identity 
for the District and their contribution to 
creating a successful place where people 
want to live and work. Objective
To protect, enhance and increase 
the provision of the green and 
blue infrastructure across the 
District to create and maintain 
multifunctional, interconnected 
and attractive recreational and 
ecological networks for the benefit 
of residents, businesses, visitors 
and the wider natural environment.The aim of the policy framework is to 
protect and enhance green infrastructure 
assets and the functions they perform, 
ultimately for the sake of their own natural 
value, but also through recognition of the 
many wider social and economic benefits 
they perform, including: the opportunities 
they present for positively improving the 
health and wellbeing of the population; 
for sustainable travel; for mitigating and 
adapting to climate change and for their 
amenity value. Furthermore the framework 
seeks to secure qualitative improvements 
and to connect areas of fragmentation in 
order to create a continuous right of way 
network and integrated ecological system 
throughout the District and beyond.192
All landscapes are valued for their intrinsic character and 
will be protected from excessive, harmful or inappropriate 
development, particularly those areas less able to 
accommodate significant change. Where the opportunity 
arises, measures should be taken to enhance or restore 
valued landscapes.
Proposals for development will be assessed against the 
criteria presented within the Cumbria Landscape Character 
Guidance and Toolkit (or successor documents) with 
regard to a particular Landscape Character Area’s key 
characteristics, local distinctiveness and capacity for change. 
The relevant landscape features described within the toolkit 
should be reflected in the detailed design of individual sites.
Landscapes valued for their intrinsically dark skies, such as 
the area around Kershope Forest in the rural north-east of the 
District, will be protected from the adverse impact of artificial 
light pollution. Justification
10.1 The District is characterised by high quality and diverse 
landscapes from the remote upland moors and forests in and 
around Bewcastle, which offer some of the most intrinsically 
dark skies in Europe, to the lowland river valleys and farmland 
around Carlisle, all of which are valued and worthy of some 
degree of protection and enhancement. There are also two 
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) within the District, 
the Solway Coast AONB and the North Pennines AONB.
10.2 In 2011, Cumbria County Council, in association with the 
Cumbrian district planning authorities, produced a Landscape 
Character Guidance and Toolkit for the whole of Cumbria. This 
toolkit provides decision makers with a means to assess the 
impacts of a development on any of the different landscape 
character areas found across Cumbria. The core principle 
is that all landscapes matter, not just those that form part 
of national designations. Every landscape character area is 
important and, whilst some may be more sensitive to change 
than others, the planning process should seek to protect all 
landscapes from harmful development. It is important to note, 
however, that this does not mean that development which 
incurs changes to landscapes should be resisted; rather that 
new development should be appropriate to its surroundings 
and be suitably accommodated within the landscape. Policy GI 1 - Landscapes193
10.3 The Policy also seeks to limit the 
impact of light pollution from artificial 
light on intrinsically dark landscapes. 
Northumberland National Park and 
Kielder Water & Forest Park have 
been designated a Gold Tier Dark Sky 
Park, one of the largest in Europe. As 
Carlisle District bounds these areas, it is 
important that planning policy preserves 
the dark sky status on the periphery of 
the park. Whilst every effort to reduce 
light pollution should be made across 
the District, particular care should be 
taken in the areas north of Gilsland 
up and around Kershope Forest and 
Bewcastle. Under no circumstances 
should lights that beam light upwards or 
which would allow excess light to seep 
into the night sky be permitted in these 
areas. 194
Development proposals within the North Pennines or Solway 
Coast AONBs must conserve and enhance the natural 
beauty of the areas. Natural beauty includes landform and 
geology, plants and animals, landscape features and the 
history of human settlement. Development in the AONBs 
will be expected to protect the special characteristics and 
landscape quality of the areas and ensure that:
1. the scale, siting and design of the proposal is appropriate 
to the landscape setting; and
2. existing landscape features are incorporated in a way 
which preserves or enhances the character of the area 
and, where appropriate, mitigates the effects of the 
development.
Development in both AONBs must ensure that it is in 
accordance with the objectives of the AONB Management 
Plans. Proposals within the Solway Coast AONB will 
be expected to have regard to the Solway Coast AONB 
Landscape Character Assessment.
Planning permission will only be given for major 
development in exceptional circumstances and where it 
can be demonstrated to be in the public interest. Such 
developments will be considered against national policy.Justification
10.4 AONBs are designated under the Countryside and Rights 
of Way (CROW) Act (2000). They are designated in order to 
conserve and enhance an area’s natural beauty (which includes 
landform and geology, plants and animals, landscape features, 
and the rich history of human settlement over the centuries). 
The CROW Act also introduces the duty of local authorities to 
prepare management plans for AONBs within their boundaries.
10.5  Whilst aiming to ensure that development conserves and 
enhances the natural beauty of the AONBs, account should be 
taken of the needs of agriculture, forestry, other rural industries 
and of the economic and social needs of local communities. 
Promoting recreation is not an objective of AONB designation. 
However, the demand for recreation can be met so far as this 
is consistent with the conservation of natural beauty and the 
needs of agriculture, forestry and other uses. 
10.6  There are two AONBs in the District; The Solway Coast and 
the North Pennines. Both AONBs have adopted and up to date 
Management Plans. Proposals for development that are in line 
with or actively working towards delivering the objectives and 
outcomes of the Solway Coast and North Pennines AONB 
Management Plans will be considered favourably. A Landscape 
Character Assessment has been carried out for the Solway 
Coast AONB, which should be used when assessing the 
potential landscape impact of a scheme. The core principle of Policy GI 2 - Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty195
this document is that all landscapes 
within the AONB are important and, 
whilst some may be more sensitive 
to change than others, the planning 
process should seek to protect all 
landscapes within the AONB from 
harmful development. It is important to 
note, however, that this does not mean 
that development which incurs changes 
to landscapes should be resisted; 
rather that new development should 
be appropriate to its surroundings and 
be suitably accommodated within the 
landscape. 
10.7 Two adopted Supplementary Planning 
Documents (SPDs) provide detailed 
planning policy guidance within the 
North Pennines AONB (Planning 
Guidelines SPD and the AONB 
Building Design Guide). Appropriate 
development, in line with the aims and 
guidance in these documents, will be 
supported. 10.8 Protection of the landscape and 
scenic beauty of AONBs is given great 
weight when considering development 
proposals in these areas. Only in 
exceptional circumstances should 
major development be approved within 
an AONB and only when it can be 
demonstrated that the development is 
in the public or national interest.196
Biodiversity assets across the District 
will be protected and, where possible, 
enhanced. All proposals for development 
should protect and (where possible) 
enhance any priority habitats, European 
and nationally protected species, 
and priority species as defined in the 
England, Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities Act (2006). Development 
proposals should also maintain and 
(where appropriate) enhance any 
recognised geodiversity assets identified 
in the Local Geodiversity Action Plan for 
Cumbria which may be affected by the 
development.
When considering planning applications 
and the need to conserve and enhance 
biodiversity, the following principles 
apply:
1. permission for development will be 
refused if significant harm resulting 
from development cannot be avoided, 
adequately mitigated or, as a last 
resort, compensated for;2. proposals where the primary objective is 
to conserve or enhance biodiversity will 
be approved;
3.  the incorporation and integration of 
wildlife corridors and other habitats 
in and around development sites will 
be required, wherever the opportunity 
arises;
4. species appropriate provision will 
be sought on development sites to 
encourage an increase in biodiversity 
and;
5.  development which would result in the 
loss or deterioration of irreplaceable 
habitats, including ancient woodland and 
the loss of aged or veteran trees found 
outside ancient woodland will be refused 
unless the need for, and the benefits of, 
the development in that location clearly 
outweigh the loss.Internationally Designated Sites: 
internationally designated sites identified 
under the Natura 2000 network (European 
Sites) which consist of Special Areas of 
Conservation (SAC), Special Protection 
Areas (SPA) and Ramsar Sites will be 
afforded the highest levels of protection, 
as they are of exceptional importance in 
respect of rare, endangered or vulnerable 
natural habitats and species.
Development which is likely to have a 
significant effect on the integrity of such 
sites, and is not directly connected with 
or necessary to the management of the 
site will be resisted unless an overriding 
public interest can be demonstrated and 
no alternative solutions are available and 
necessary compensatory measures are 
taken to ensure that the overall coherence 
of Natura 2000 is protected. Proposals 
which may have an impact upon a Natura 
2000 site must be accompanied by a 
Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA). Policy GI 3 - Biodoversity & Geodiversity197
from development which would result in the 
loss or deterioration of the site, unless the 
need for, and benefits of, the development 
in that location clearly outweigh the loss. 
Species and habitats surveys should be 
provided where the potential to impact 
upon bio or geodiversity exists. Species 
and habitats surveys must be carried out at 
an appropriate time of year by a qualified 
ecologist.
Mitigation: Where the need for mitigation 
or compensatory measures has been 
identified this will be secured, through 
appropriate habitat creation, restoration 
or enhancement on site or elsewhere, 
via planning conditions, agreements or 
obligations. Where the HRA identifies the need for an 
Appropriate Assessment, the presumption 
in favour of sustainable development will 
not apply. 
Nationally Designated Sites: any proposal 
which is likely to have an adverse effect 
on the special interest features of a Site 
Of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) will 
only be permitted where the benefits of 
the development clearly outweigh both 
the impacts that the development is likely 
to have on the special interest features of 
the site, and any broader impacts on the 
national network of SSSIs.
Locally Designated Sites: local wildlife 
designations such as County Wildlife 
Sites, Local Nature Reserves and Ancient 
Woodlands, as well as Regionally 
Important Geological/Geomorphological 
Sites (RIGGS) and other, locally important 
and irreplaceable habitats including 
lowland raised mires, lowland valley mires 
and ancient meadow sites will be protected 198
10.11 Any development likely to have a 
significant adverse effect on sites 
protected under the Birds and 
Habitats Directives would not be 
sustainable under the terms of the 
presumption in favour of sustainable 
development. If development is 
proposed on an internationally 
protected site, consent may only be 
granted if no suitable, less harmful 
alternative sites or solutions are 
available and an over-riding need, 
as defined in Regulation 62 (2) of 
the 2010 Habitats Regulations (as 
amended), can be demonstrated.
10.12 The Cumbria Biodiversity Data Centre 
has drawn up a list of key species and 
habitats for the county, detailing how 
they should be protected, preserved 
and enhanced.  
 
 Key and endangered species present within 
Carlisle include:
 • bats (all species);
 • red squirrel;
 • water vole;
 • hen harrier;
 • reptiles (all native species);
 • otter;
 • barn owl;
 • pink-footed geese;
 • barnacle geese;
 • whooper swan;
 • song thrush; and
 • great crested newt.
10.13 It is a criminal offence to harm or 
disturb protected species, including 
the destruction of nests, roosts and 
dens. As such, the protection of these 
species should be given a high priority 
within planning policy. Further to this, 
principal species as listed in Section 
41 of the England NERC Act (2006) 
will also be strictly protected.Justification
10.9 The Plan aims to promote the 
preservation, restoration and re-
creation of priority habitats, ecological 
networks and the recovery of priority 
species populations. The protection of 
geological conservation interests will 
also be considered in response to new 
development proposals. It is the duty 
of both the local planning authority 
and the potential developer/landowner 
alike to ensure every effort is taken to 
protect and enhance biodiversity as 
part of new development.
10.10 This Policy sets out a clear hierarchy 
for the protection of important wildlife 
and nature conservation designations, 
which have also been identified on the 
Policies Map. It should be recognised 
that many of these designations do 
not stop at the District’s boundary. 
Biodiversity should be planned for 
at a landscape-scale, across local 
authority boundaries, through cross-
working initiatives with neighbouring 
authorities and other key stakeholders.199
10.14 The extent of important habitats 
across the District has been mapped 
by the Cumbria Biodiversity Data 
Centre (CBDC) team based at 
Tullie House Museum. Key habitat 
is important to protecting and 
enhancing biodiversity, and can be 
important to animal species beyond 
the key protected species listed 
above. Its loss should be prevented. 
Where resources allow the Council 
may, in consultation with Natural 
England, the CBDC and other 
relevant stakeholders, identify sites 
of significant biodiversity value or for 
the restoration and/or creation of new 
habitat to assist in revitalising key 
species within the District. Such sites 
will be protected from inappropriate 
development. Applicants are 
encouraged to access data from 
the CBDC to inform their planning 
application and/or any ecological 
surveys they are required to produce.10.15 There are also two Local Nature 
Partnerships (LNPs) currently 
operating within the plan area that 
have been established to provide 
local support and expertise on natural 
environment issues. The Council will 
continue to engage with both the 
Cumbria and the Northern Upland 
Chain LNPs and will actively consult 
with them on planning applications 
involving biodiversity and geodiversity 
issues.200
5. statutory obligations have been fulfilled if it is proposed to 
dispose of statutory open space (such as statutory allotment 
land).
Open Space within new development 
New housing developments of more than 20 dwellings will 
be required to include informal space for play and general 
recreational or amenity use on site according to the size 
of the proposal. The developer will be required to ensure 
that appropriate measures are put in place for the future 
management and maintenance of such spaces. On smaller 
housing sites, where on site provision is not appropriate the 
developer may be required to make commuted payments 
towards the upgrading of open space provision in the locality, 
especially if a deficit has been identified.
All new dwellings should have safe and convenient access 
to high quality open space, capable of meeting a range 
of recreational needs. Where deficits are identified, new 
development will be expected to contribute towards the 
upgrading of an existing open space to improve its accessibility 
or the creation of a new one within the immediate locality.
Standards for open space provision will be informed by an 
assessment of need and demand for the various types of open 
space, ensuring there is an adequate supply of accessible Development affecting Open Space 
Within areas of Open Space, proposals that relate to and 
complement the existing leisure use, or would be ancillary 
to it (such as changing rooms for sports pitches), and are 
appropriate in character and scale to the surroundings, will 
generally be acceptable. Development that would result in a 
partial or total loss of, an area of Open Space to non-sport or 
recreation uses, or would otherwise detract from the role and 
function an open space is valued for (be it visual amenity, noise 
attenuation, or other community use), will not be permitted 
unless:
1. an up-to-date needs assessment has been completed 
and clearly shows a surplus of open spaces within a given 
locality;
2. it can be demonstrated that alternative provision of the same 
or greater size, quality and accessibility will be provided 
nearby;
3. development of a small part of the area of open space would 
enable investment to improve the quality of the rest of the 
site; 
4. there is a strong and justifiable social or economic need for 
development and the open space is otherwise of low quality 
and has little community value; orPolicy GI 4 - Open Space201
Data regarding the need and demand 
for sports pitches and grounds is set 
out in the Playing Pitch Strategy (May 
2013). Further work will be carried out 
to assess the need and demand for 
other types of open space. Such an 
assessment will identify areas of both 
surpluses and deficits in open space 
provision, and will also attempt to 
anticipate how demands for new areas 
of recreational land will grow over the 
course of the plan period. In advance 
of this work, applicants can conduct 
a needs assessment to support any 
application. Such assessment must 
be conducted using an appropriate 
methodology that has been agreed by 
the Council.
10.18 Open space includes:
• parks;
• gardens; 
• areas of trees and woodland;
• natural and semi-natural areas;
• amenity green space;Justification
10.16 In line with national policy, existing open 
space, sports and recreational buildings 
and land, including playing fields, should 
not be built on unless:
• an assessment has been undertaken 
which has clearly shown the open 
space, buildings or land to be surplus to 
requirements; or
• the loss resulting from the proposed 
development would be replaced by 
equivalent or better provision in terms of 
quantity and quality in a suitable location; 
or
• the development is for alternative sports 
and recreational provision, the needs for 
which clearly outweigh the loss.
10.17 The National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF) highlights the importance of having 
an open space needs assessment as part 
of the evidence base for the Local Plan. 
A needs assessment is vital in identifying 
both deficits and surpluses of particular 
open space types across the District.  and high quality spaces across 
the District. The Council’s 
Playing Pitch Strategy (2013) 
(or successor documents) will 
be used to inform decisions for 
proposals involving or impacting 
upon sports pitches.202
• playing fields, including artificial grass 
pitches;
• play areas;
• outdoor provision for teenagers and 
young people;
• allotments; and
• cemeteries and churchyards.
10.19 An audit of open space across the 
district was completed in 2005, 
though this now needs updating it 
can still be considered indicative of 
provision.
10.20 In some cases, where local deficits 
in open space provision exist, 
contributions may be sought from 
new development. However, the 
establishment of a new area of open 
space may not always be appropriate 
within a development site or land 
nearby may not be available to 
be used as open space. In these 
cases a developer may be asked 
to contribute to upgrading existing 
local space to improve either its quality or accessibility. This could 
involve planting, path laying, new 
play equipment, new foot/cycle 
paths connecting the space to the 
proposed development, or other 
improvements recommended by the 
Council. Contributions to open space 
(be they either the creation of a new 
site or the upgrading of an existing) 
should be made in consultation with 
the Council’s Green Spaces team to 
ensure any work is in line with their 
strategies and plans.
10.21 New housing development will be 
expected to set aside informal space 
for play and general recreation, 
depending on the size of the proposal. 
These sites will be designated as 
Open Space, and may be expected 
to provide appropriate equipment, or 
less formal opportunities for natural 
play and space for games. Such 
areas must be designed to avoid 
conflict with residents through issues with noise, but must also remain 
overlooked to ensure the safety of 
children using the site and discourage 
anti social behaviour.
10.22 In the urban area there is currently 
in the region of 3.6 hectares of land 
per 1,000 population of informal 
and formal grassed, wooded or 
landscaped land and small amenity 
areas of open space, and 1.86 
hectares of playing pitches per 1,000 
population. The Council will ensure 
that any new development does not 
lead to a reduction in these standards.203
Justification
10.23 Carlisle District has an extensive 
system of public footpaths, cycleways 
and bridleways which form an 
integral component of the District’s 
Green Infrastructure (GI). These 
rights of way are a valuable resource 
fulfilling essential leisure, wildlife and 
transport functions, and as such will 
be protected and where possible 
enhanced.
10.24 Development proposals likely to 
impact upon a right of way should aim 
to maintain existing routes unchanged. 
Only if this can be demonstrated to 
be impossible or impractical should 
the rerouting of the right of way be 
considered. When an alternative route 
is proposed as part of an application 
for new development, the application 
will only be approved once it is clear 
that the route has been (or will be) 
established, and that the route is safe, 
convenient, of similar or better quality 
to the original, well integrated with the development and its setting, and not 
significantly longer than the original 
route.
10.25 Development proposals may 
sometimes present opportunities to 
provide new rights of way or improve 
existing ones in order to bring them 
to a standard suitable for use by all. 
Agreement will be sought between 
the Council and the developer(s) to 
explore such opportunities should 
they arise.Policy GI 5 - Public Rights of Way
New development will be expected 
to ensure that all public footpaths, 
bridleways, cycleways and other rights 
of way are retained. Development 
proposals that would affect existing 
rights of way will not be permitted 
unless an alternative route is available, 
or can be made available, which is safe, 
attractive, is well integrated with the 
existing network and is not significantly 
longer than the original route.
Where opportunities arise, local 
improvements and extensions to the 
rights of way network may be sought as 
part of development proposals.204
Proposals which would result in the 
unacceptable or unjustified loss of existing 
trees or hedges or which do not allow for 
the successful integration of existing trees 
or hedges identified within the survey will 
be resisted.
Ancient Woodland: Development which 
would result in the loss of any areas 
of recognised ancient woodland, or 
plantations on ancient woodland sites, 
will normally be resisted unless strong, 
overriding social or economic benefits or 
need can be demonstrated that clearly 
outweighs the potential harm.
Landscaping and Replanting: Any 
proposals for onsite landscaping 
schemes should seek to incorporate the 
planting of native tree species where 
practicable. Where trees are lost due 
to new development, the Council will 
require developers to replant trees of 
an appropriate species on site where it 
is practicable to do so, or to contribute via planning conditions and/or legal 
agreement, to the replanting of trees 
in an appropriate, alternative location. 
The extent of replanting required will be 
representative of the age, number and 
size of trees, or length of hedgerows, 
originally lost. 
All new development should also 
have regard to the current Trees and 
Development Supplementary Planning 
Document.Policy GI 6 - Trees and Hedgerows
Proposals for new development should 
provide for the protection and integration 
of existing trees and hedges where they 
contribute positively to a locality, and/or 
are of specific natural or historic value. 
Planning conditions requiring protective 
fencing around trees to be retained, in 
line with the current and most up to date 
British Standard: BS 5837 will be used 
to ensure adequate protection of valued 
trees during construction.
Tree Surveys: Where trees and hedges 
are present on a development site a 
survey, in accordance with the current 
and most up to date British Standard: BS 
5837 must be carried out by a qualified 
arboriculturist and presented as part of 
the planning application.
Layouts will be required to provide 
adequate spacing between existing 
trees and buildings, taking into account 
the existing and future size of the trees, 
and their impact both above and below 
ground.205
Justification
10.26 Trees and hedges add considerable 
value to our urban and rural 
environments, and are natural features 
in an ever-changing landscape. They 
can soften the impact of buildings and 
hard surfaces, contribute to the overall 
character of the development, help to 
hide unsightly views, provide shade, 
absorb noise and provide a screen 
from the wind. In addition, mature 
trees can give identity to an area, 
creating a real sense of place within 
communities.
10.27 Ancient woodland and veteran trees 
found outside of ancient woodland 
will be protected, in line with the 
NPPF , as irreplaceable habitat. 
Development that would result in their 
loss or deterioration should not be 
approved, unless an overriding social 
or economic need or benefit would 
outweigh the loss.10.28 Carlisle City Council has adopted 
the Trees and Development SPD. 
This document provides guidance 
on how trees and hedgerows should 
be incorporated into development 
schemes in a way that can both 
protect and enhance both the trees 
themselves as well as the overall 
natural quality of a development.
 206
207
11
Monitoring and Implementation208
11.1	 Monitoring	is	an	integral	part	of	the	
planning	process	and	an	important	tool	
to	help	understand	the	wider	social,	
environmental	and	economic	issues	
affecting	an	area,	and	the	key	drivers	
of	spatial	change.	The	Local	Plan	
needs	to	not	only	be	able	to	respond	
to	changing	circumstances	across	
the	District	over	its	intended	duration,	
but	to	know	when	action	needs	to	
be	taken.	There	also	needs	to	be	a	
way	of	measuring	the	effectiveness	of	
policies	and	sites	within	the	Local	Plan,	
and	that	they	are	meeting	the	Plan’s	
strategic	objectives	and	ultimately	its	
vision.	If	a	policy	is	not	contributing	
to	these	objectives,	or	if	a	site	simply	
isn’t	being	delivered,	there	needs	to	
be	a	way	of	recognising	this	in	order	to	
instigate	remedial	actions.	Depending	
on	the	scale	and/or	nature	of	the	
ineffectiveness	actions	may	include:•	 reviewing	the	circumstances	and	
engaging	with	stakeholders	as	
appropriate;
•	 reviewing	the	policy(ies)	concerned	
and	their	implementation	mechanisms	
which	may	lead	to	a	formal	partial	
review	of	the	Plan	and/or	the	
supporting	evidence	base;
•	 in	the	case	of	take	up	of	development	
land,	consider	interventions	which	
may	assist	in	overcoming	barriers	if	
identified;	and/or
•	 identify	reasonable	alternative	land	
through	further	Development	Plan	
Documents	and/or	Neighbourhood	
Development	Plans.
11.2	 A	monitoring	framework	has	been	
devised	for	the	Local	Plan	in	order	to	
enable	the	effectiveness	of	the	policies	
and	proposals	within	it	to	be	monitored.	
This	framework	can	be	found	at	
Appendix	2.11.3	 For	policies	with	clear	quantitative	
outputs,	for	example	in	relation	to	
housing	delivery,	there	are	specific	
targets	in	the	monitoring	framework	
against	which	it	will	be	easy	to	see	
whether	delivery	is	on	track	and	
therefore	whether	the	appropriate	
policies	and	site	proposals	are	proving	
effective.	For	policies	with	qualitative	
outputs	such	as	design,	heritage	or	
landscape	impact,	monitoring	of	their	
effectiveness	and	whether	they	are	
delivering	their	underlying	objectives,	
will	require	analysis	of	the	policy	use,	
its	outcomes	and	what	the	significant	
effects	are	to	enable	an	assessment	
to	be	made	of	its	effectiveness.	Data	
will	be	gathered	on	assessing,	for	
example,	how	often	a	policy	is	used	by	
Development	Management	in	decision	
making,	and	the	number	of	appeals	
upheld	or	dismissed	and	the	reasons	
for	this.	209
11.4	 The	Monitoring	Framework	has	a	clear	
objective	for	each	individual	policy	
within	the	Local	Plan	and	it	makes	
clear	what	indicators	will	be	used	for	
monitoring	purposes.	It	also	identifies	
what	circumstances	may	trigger	a	
review	and	what	remedial	actions	may	
be	pursued	as	a	consequence.	The	
monitoring	framework	also	identifies	
which	Sustainability	Appraisal	(SA)	
objectives	individual	policies	support.
11.5	 The	results	of	monitoring	will	be	
reported	annually	within	the	Council’s	
Authority	Monitoring	Report	(AMR),	
through	which	the	need	to	review	any	
policy	or	proposal	within	the	Local	Plan	
will	be	raised.	The	AMR	will	also	be	the	
process	through	which	any	significant	
effects	on	the	SA	objectives	are	
reported.
11.6	 The	effectiveness	of	some	policies	
and	many	of	the	site	allocations	
within	the	Local	Plan	will	ultimately	
depend	on	the	timely	and	co-ordinated	
delivery	of	new	and	upgrades	to	existing	infrastructure.	In	this	regard	
monitoring	whether	or	not	the	delivery	
of	infrastructure	identified	as	necessary	
is	keeping	pace	with	development	is	
of	equal	importance	to	understanding	
whether	the	Local	Plan	is	on	track	to	
achieve	its	intended	objectives	and	
vision.	This	will	be	achieved	through	
drawing	on	information	within	the	
Local	Plan	Infrastructure	Delivery	Plan	
(IDP),	and	reporting	on	this	annually	
in	the	AMR.	This	reflects	that	the	IDP	
is	a	‘living’	document	which	will	be	
updated	as	and	when	new	information	
on	investment	in	infrastructure	or	any	
pressures	 become	 known,	 or	previously	
identified	schemes	are	delivered.
11.7		 Both	the	implementation	and	
monitoring	of	the	effectiveness	of	the	
Local	Plan	will	be	supported	through	
continued	co-operation	with	a	host	
of	other	public	and	private	sector	
agencies	and	organisations	under	the	
Duty	to	Cooperate.	Such	co-operation	
has	helped	to	shape	the	Local	Plan,	
in	doing	so	ensuring	that	its	vision	is	shared,	and	in	this	regard	the	Council	
consider	that	they	have	an	excellent	
track	record	of	meaningfully	engaging	
with	others	particularly	where	to	do	so	
is	mutually	beneficial	or	in	the	public	
interest.	The	Council’s	continued	
engagement	under	the	Duty	to	
Cooperate	will	be	reported	in	the	AMR.210
211
12
GlossaryNOTE: This list is intended only to provide a general explanation of terms used in the 
Local Plan and does not constitute precise definitions in law.212
A 
Affordable housing - Social rented, 
affordable rented and intermediate housing, 
provided to eligible households whose 
needs are not met by the market. Eligibility 
is determined with regard to local incomes 
and local house prices. Affordable housing 
should include provisions to remain at an 
affordable price for future eligible households 
or for the subsidy to be recycled for 
alternative affordable housing provision.
Social rented housing is owned by local 
authorities and private registered providers 
(as defined in section 80 of the Housing and 
Regeneration Act 2008), for which guideline 
target rents are determined through the 
national rent regime. It may also be owned 
by other persons and provided under 
equivalent rental arrangements to the above, 
as agreed with the local authority or with the 
Homes and Communities Agency.
Affordable rented housing is let by local 
authorities or private registered providers 
of social housing to households who are 
eligible for social rented housing. Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require a 
rent of no more than 80% of the local market 
rent (including service charges, where 
applicable).
Intermediate housing is homes for sale and 
rent provided at a cost above social rent, but 
below market levels subject to the criteria 
in the Affordable Housing definition above. 
These can include shared equity (shared 
ownership and equity loans), other low cost 
homes for sale and intermediate rent, but not 
affordable rented housing.
Homes that do not meet the above definition 
of affordable housing, such as “low cost 
market” housing, may not be considered as 
affordable housing for planning purposes.
Affordable Housing Economic Viability 
Assessment (AHEVA) - An assessment of 
the costs of any requirements likely to be 
applied to development, focussing on the 
implications of developers having to  
provide affordable housing and to ensure 
that planning policies would not render 
schemes unviable.Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) -  
Where a national air quality standard or 
objective is not likely to be met, the relevant 
Council is required to declare an Air Quality 
Management Area and produce an Action 
Plan outlining how they intend to improve the 
air quality within that area.
Allocations of Land - The allocation of sites 
for specific purposes including housing, 
employment, retail and open spaces.
Amenity - A positive element or elements 
that contribute to the overall character or 
enjoyment of an area. For example open 
land, trees, historic buildings and the inter-
relationship between them, or less tangible 
factors such as tranquillity.
Amenity Open Space - The Local Plan 
identifies areas of land within settlements 
which make so significant a contribution 
to their character and to the amenity and 
enjoyment of nearby residents and the public 
at large as to warrant long term retention 
as open space. Such designation does not 213
signify that such areas are available for 
public access and use although this may 
be the case in some instances. Rather, it 
indicates an intention that proposals for 
built development which would encroach on 
identified areas will not normally be granted 
planning permission.
Amplitude Modulation - A technique 
used in electronic communication, most 
commonly for transmitting information via a 
radio carrier wave.
Ancient Woodland - Natural England is 
responsible for compiling the inventory of 
ancient woodlands in Cumbria. The term is 
applied to woodlands which have existed 
from at least medieval times to the present 
day without being cleared for uses other 
than timber production. The inventory 
includes ancient semi-natural woodland 
which is defined as woodland which does 
not originate from planting, the distribution 
of species generally reflecting natural 
variations in site and soil.Authority’s Monitoring Report (AMR) - 
Monitoring report recording the delivery of 
policies in the adopted plan.
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
(AONB) - Relatively large areas of land 
designated under the National Parks and 
Access to the Countryside Act 1949 by 
the Countryside Commission. The primary 
objective of designation is conservation 
of the natural beauty of the landscape. 
AONBs differ from National Parks in that the 
promotion of recreation is not an objective 
of their designation, though these areas 
should be used to meet the demand for 
recreation so far as that is consistent with 
the conservation of natural beauty, and the 
needs of agriculture, forestry and other uses.
B 
Backland - Land (usually landlocked) 
that lies to the rear of an existing property 
that often, but not always, fronts onto a 
road. Such land may be within the existing 
curtilage of a house, or adjacent to  
the curtilage.Best and Most Versatile Agricultural  
Land - To assist in assessing land quality, 
the then Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries 
and Food developed a method of classifying 
agricultural land by grade. There are five 
grades with grade 3 divided into two grades 
(3a and 3b). The best and most versatile 
agricultural land falls into grades 1, 2 and 3a. 
This land ranges from excellent (grade 1) to 
good quality (grade 3a).
Biodiversity - Refers to the variety of plants 
and animals and other living things in a 
particular area or region. It encompasses 
habitat diversity, species diversity and genetic 
diversity. Biodiversity has a value in its own 
right and has social and economic value for 
human society.
Blue Infrastructure (BI) - The network 
of aquatic components that lie within 
and between cities, towns and villages 
which provide multiple social, economic 
and environmental benefits. The physical 
components of blue infrastructure include 
waterways such as rivers, streams, marshes 
and lakes.214
Brownfield Land - Previously-developed 
land which is or was occupied by a 
permanent structure, including the curtilage 
of the developed land and any associated 
fixed surface infrastructure.
Business Park - High quality employment 
sites aimed at light industrial and office 
developments, particularly those related to 
high-tech industries.
C 
City Centre - The highest level of centre 
identified in development plans. In terms 
of hierarchies, they will often be a regional 
centre and will serve a wide catchment (as is 
the case in Carlisle). The centre may be very 
large, embracing a wide range of activities 
and may be distinguished by areas which 
may perform different main functions.
City Centre Development Framework 
(CCDF) - Sets out principles to guide 
the consideration of future development 
opportunities and interventions in the City 
Centre to 2030.Climate Change - Term used to describe 
changes in weather patterns which 
threaten our environment and the way we 
live our lives both now and in the future. 
It is a coherent and internally consistent 
description of the change in climate 
by a certain time in the future, using a 
specific modelling technique and under 
specific assumptions about the growth of 
greenhouse gas and other emissions and 
about other factors that may influence 
climate in the future. Climate change is 
sometimes referred to as global warming 
because it is currently concerned with rises 
in global temperatures.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) -  
A local charge on new developments. The 
money raised will be spent by the local 
authority on infrastructure. The justification 
for the charge is that new buildings have 
an impact on infrastructure need (i.e. new 
roads and schools), and should therefore 
contribute towards that provision.Comparison Shopping - The provision 
of items not obtained on a frequent basis. 
These include clothing, footwear, household 
and recreational goods.
Condition (or ‘planning condition’) - 
Requirements attached to a planning 
permission to limit, control or direct the 
manner in which a development is  
carried out.
Convenience Shopping - The provision 
of everyday essential items, including 
food, drinks, newspapers/magazines and 
confectionery.
Conservation - The process of maintaining 
and managing change to a heritage asset in 
a way that sustains and where appropriate 
enhances its significance.
Conservation Areas - ‘Areas of special 
architectural or historic interest the character 
or appearance of which it is desirable 
to preserve or enhance’. Such areas are 
designated by Local Planning Authorities 
under the Planning (Listed Buildings and 215
Conservation Areas) Act 1990. Provisions 
relating to conservation areas are contained 
in the Act. The Local Planning Authority has 
additional powers over the demolition of 
buildings and the removal of trees within such 
areas, and certain permitted development 
rights are either reduced or removed.
County Wildlife Sites - Cumbria Wildlife 
Trust designates some sites, which do 
not meet the criteria set out by Natural 
England for SSSI’s, as Wildlife Sites. They 
contain examples of important habitats with 
uncommon species of plants and animals.
Critical Drainage Areas - Areas with 
drainage problems and therefore at risk 
from surface water flooding, that have 
been identified as such by the Environment 
Agency.
Cumbria Landscape Character  
Guidance and Toolkit - A document which 
maps and describes the character of  
different landscape types across the  
County and provides guidance to help 
maintain their distinctiveness.Cumulative Effects - The state in which a 
series of repeated actions have an effect 
greater than the sum of their individual 
effects; noted here especially in the location 
of wind turbines.
D 
Decentralised Energy - Local renewable 
energy and local low-carbon energy 
usually but not always on a relatively small 
scale encompassing a diverse range of 
technologies.
Density - The volume of development 
relative to the size of the site on which it 
occurs. From a housing perspective density 
is generally measured as the number of 
homes per Hectare of land.
Designated Heritage Asset - A World 
Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed 
Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered 
Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or 
Conservation Area designated as such under 
the relevant legislation.Development Management - The 
process by which development proposals 
in the form of planning applications, are 
considered and decided. It is a positive 
and proactive approach to shaping, 
considering, determining and delivering 
development proposals. It is led by the local 
planning authority, working closely with 
those proposing developments and other 
stakeholders.
Duty to Cooperate - The Localism Act 2011 
introduced a Duty to Cooperate, which is 
designed to ensure that all of the bodies 
involved in planning work together on issues 
that are of bigger than local significance.
E 
Employment Land Review (ELR) -  
To assess the demand for and supply of land 
for employment.216
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) - 
A process by which information about 
the environmental effects of a proposal 
are collected and taken into account by 
the Planning Authority in forming their 
judgement about whether or not to grant 
planning consent. The Town and Country 
Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment 
etc.) Regulations 1999 as modified sets out 
the types of project for which an EIA  
is required.
European Marine Sites (EMS) - Also known 
as Natura 2000 sites these are Special 
Areas of Conservation (SACs) for habitats of 
European importance and Special Protection 
Areas (SPAs) for birds.
Equality Impact Assessment (EQIA) -  
A process designed to ensure that a  
policy, project or scheme does not 
discriminate against any disadvantaged  
or vulnerable people.Evidence base - A range of technical 
reports and studies that have been or are 
being prepared to support the development 
and implementation of policies and 
proposals in the Local Plan.
Examination in Public - This is the 
examination of a local plan document by an 
independent planning inspector acting on 
behalf of the Secretary of State.
F 
Flood Flows - The natural distribution of 
water during a flood event.
Flood Plain - All land adjacent to a 
watercourse over which water flows or 
would flow, but for the presence of flood 
defences, in times of flood. The limits of the 
flood plain are defined by the peak water 
level of an appropriate return period event 
on the watercourse or at the coast. On rivers 
this will normally be the greater of the 1 in 
100 year return period flood or the highest 
known water level. In coastal areas the 1 in 
200 year return period flood or the highest 
known flood will be used.Flood Risk - An expression of the 
combination of the flood probability or 
likelihood and the magnitude of the potential 
consequences of the flood event.
Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) -  
An assessment or test of the risk of flooding 
from river, tidal, coastal, groundwater and/
or local sources conducted to meet the 
requirements of national policy and practice 
guidance. The FRA will provide a framework 
for robust and sustainable flood risk 
management solutions within (re)developing 
areas.
G 
General Permitted Development Order - 
The Town and Country Planning (General 
Permitted Development) Order 1995 
(as amended) prescribes many of the 
procedures for the determination of 
planning applications and details those 
forms of minor development which may 
be undertaken without the need for an 
application for planning permission.217
Geodiversity - The range of rocks, minerals, 
fossils, soils and landforms.
Greenfield - Land on which no development 
has previously taken place unless the 
previous development was for agriculture 
or forestry purposes or the remains of any 
structure or activity have since blended into 
the landscape.
Green Infrastructure (GI) - The network 
of natural environmental components and 
green spaces that lie within and between 
cities, towns and villages which provide 
multiple social, economic and environmental 
benefits. The physical components include 
parks, rivers, street trees, moorlands, green 
corridors, gardens and amenity spaces.
Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 
Assessment (GTAA) - Assessment to 
ensure that the needs and wider demand 
of the Gypsy and Traveller communities for 
suitable accommodation can be considered 
and met equally and fairly alongside other 
sectors of the community.H 
Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) - 
Assesses the likely impacts of the possible 
effects of a plan’s policies on the integrity 
of the Natura 2000 sites (including possible 
effects ‘in combination’ with other plans, 
projects and programmes).
Homes and Communities Agency (HCA) - 
The national housing and regeneration 
agency for England. They provide 
investment for new affordable housing and 
to improve existing social housing, as well 
as for regenerating land. They are also the 
regulator for social housing providers in 
England.
Health Impact Assessment (HIA) -  
A combination of procedures, methods 
and tools by which a policy, programme or 
project may be judged as to its potential 
effects on the health of a population, and  
the distribution of those effects within  
the population.Heritage Asset - A building, monument, 
site, place, area or landscape identified as 
having a degree of significance meriting 
consideration in planning decisions, 
because of its heritage interest. Heritage 
asset includes designated heritage assets 
and assets identified by the local planning 
authority (including local listing).
Historic Environment - All aspects of the 
environment resulting from the integration 
between people and places through time, 
including all surviving physical remains 
of past human activity, whether visible, 
buried or submerged, and landscaped and 
planted or managed flora.
House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) -  
As defined in the 1985 Housing Act, one 
that is occupied by persons who do not 
form a single household.218
Housing Market Area - A geographical 
area defined by household demand and 
preferences for all types of housing, 
reflecting the key functional linkages 
between places where people live and work. 
Some housing market areas overlap.
Housing Need and Demand Study 
(HNDS) - Also referred to as a Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment (SHMA). 
The Assessment considers future housing 
requirements, in terms of the number of 
homes required to meet need and demand. 
It considers the mix of housing required, 
in both the affordable and market sectors. 
It also looks at the housing requirements 
of specific groups, including older people, 
Black and Minority Ethnic (BME) households, 
and those with support needs.
I 
Infrastructure - A collective term for 
services such as roads, electricity, sewerage, 
water, education, health facilities, parks and 
recycling and refuse facilities.Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) - 
Contains a list of all infrastructure needed 
to support sustainable growth, as set out 
in the Local Plan. Infrastructure projects 
are identified by location, cost and delivery 
timescale and funding.
K 
Key Townscape Frontage Buildings - 
Primarily located within conservation areas 
and are defined as buildings that make a 
contribution to the character of a particular 
area. Such conservation areas include 
the City Centre, Botchergate, Longtown, 
Brampton and Dalston.
L 
Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) -  
Are county councils and unitary authorities. 
For Carlisle, the LLFA is Cumbria County 
Council. Under the Flood and Water 
Management Act, LLFAs are required to:
• prepare and maintain a strategy for local 
flood risk management in their areas, 
coordinating views and activity with other local bodies and communities through 
public consultation and scrutiny, and 
delivery planning;
• maintain a register of assets – these are 
physical features that have a significant 
effect on flooding in their area;
• investigate significant local flooding 
incidents and publish the results of such 
investigations;
• establish approval bodies for design, 
building and operation of Sustainable 
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDs);
• issue consents for altering, removing or 
replacing certain structures or features on 
ordinary watercourses; and
• play a lead role in emergency planning 
and recovery after a flood event.219
Listed Building - The Secretary of State 
for Culture, Media and Sport, advised by 
Historic England, compiles a list of buildings 
of ‘special architectural or historic interest’. 
Any material alteration to or demolition/
part demolition of a listed building, whether 
external or internal will require an application 
for listed building consent.
Localism Act - Received Royal Assent in 
November 2011. In relation to Planning, 
the Act abolished Regional Strategies 
but introduced a duty for interested 
parties to co-operate in the preparation 
of development plans and introduced 
Neighbourhood Planning.
Local Development Scheme (LDS) - 
Provides information on how Carlisle City 
Council intends to produce its Local Plan. 
It sets out the planning policy documents 
that form the development plan for the 
Carlisle District area and their programme of 
preparation over a three year period.Local Distinctiveness - The positive 
features of a place and its communities 
which contribute to its special character and 
sense of place.
Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) - 
Locally owned partnerships between local 
authorities and businesses which play a 
central role in determining local economic 
priorities and undertaking activities to drive 
economic growth and the creation of local 
jobs. Carlisle is part of the Cumbria LEP .
Local Nature Reserves - May be 
established by Local Authorities under 
section 21 of the National Parks and Access 
to the Countryside Act 1949. They are 
habitats of local significance which can 
make a useful contribution both to nature 
conservation and to the opportunities for the 
public to learn more about and enjoy wildlife. 
Local nature reserves are predominantly 
ecological, but can also be established on 
geological sites.Local Planning Authorities (LPAs) -  
The public authority whose duty it is to 
carry out specific planning functions for a 
particular area. Carlisle City Council is the 
LPA for the administrative area it covers.
Local Strategic Partnership (LSP) -  
The Carlisle Partnership is a non-statutory, 
non-executive partnership bringing together 
different agencies to support each other 
and work effectively together on economic, 
community and environmental issues that 
matter to local people including crime, 
employment, education, health and housing. 
Their aim is to deliver sustainable economic, 
social and physical regeneration, improved 
public services, promotion of equality and 
inclusion, and improvements to the quality of 
life for local citizens, particularly those from 
deprived areas and disadvantaged groups. 
In order to achieve this, partners are required 
to assess local needs, plan services, set 
targets and monitor delivery.220
Local Transport Plan 3 (Draft) (LTP) - The 
Transport Act 2000 introduced a statutory 
requirement for local transport authorities (in 
Carlisle’s case Cumbria County Council) to 
produce a Local Transport Plan (LTP) every 
five years and to keep it under review. It 
sets out the statutory framework for Local 
Transport Plans and policies.
M 
Main Town Centre Uses - Retail 
development (including warehouse 
clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, 
entertainment facilities the more intensive 
sport and recreation uses (including 
cinemas, restaurants, drive-through 
restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, 
casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor 
bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices; 
and arts, culture and tourism development 
(including theatres, museums, galleries 
and concert halls, hotels and conference 
facilities).Masterplan - A type of planning brief 
outlining the preferred usage of land and 
the overall approach to the layout of a 
development, including the coordination 
of necessary infrastructure, to provide 
detailed guidance for subsequent planning 
applications.
Minerals and Waste Local Plan (MWLP) - 
The Draft Cumbria Minerals and Waste 
Local Plan is for the period up until 2030. It 
sets out Cumbria County Council’s policies 
for the provision for mineral working, 
for safeguarding mineral resources and 
associated mineral developments, and for 
waste management. It covers those parts of 
Cumbria that are outside of the Lake District 
and Yorkshire Dales National Parks.
N 
National Nature Reserve - Areas of national 
and sometimes international importance 
which are owned or leased by Natural 
England or managed in accordance with 
their wishes. The essential characteristic of 
such areas is that they are primarily used for 
nature conservation.National Planning Policy Framework  
(NPPF) - Sets out the Government’s 
planning policies for England and how these 
are expected to be applied. It provides a 
framework within which local people and 
their accountable councils can produce their 
own distinctive local and neighbourhood 
development plans, which reflect the needs 
and priorities of their communities.
Natura 2000 - Created by the European 
Union, this is a network made up of Special 
Protection Areas and Special Areas of 
Conservation. These designations form an 
internationally important network of  
wildlife sites.
Neighbourhood Development Plans 
(NDP) - Introduced by the Localism Act, 
‘Neighbourhood Planning’ aims to give people 
greater ownership of plans and policies that 
affect their local area. It enables local people 
to put together ideas for development  
(relating to land-use or spatial matters) in 
their area via a “Neighbourhood Development 
Plan”. Once adopted such plans form part of 
the statutory development plan.221
O 
Open Space - All open space of public 
value, including not just land, but also 
areas of water (such as rivers, canals, 
lakes and reservoirs) which offer important 
opportunities for sport and recreation and 
can act as a visual amenity.
Out of Centre - A location which is not in or 
on the edge of a designated retail centre but 
not necessarily outside the urban area.
Overarching National Policy Statement for 
Energy (EN-1) - A National Policy Statement 
(NPS) which sets out national policy for 
energy infrastructure.
P 
Permitted Development - The Town 
and Country Planning (General Permitted 
Development) Order 1995 permits certain 
minor alterations and extensions to be 
undertaken without the need to apply for 
planning permission from the local planning 
authority. Such development is known as 
permitted development.Pitch (with regards to Gypsies and  
Travellers) - An authorised area of land 
which is generally home to one Gypsy 
and Traveller household. There is no one-
size-fits-all with regards to the precise 
size of a pitch but as a general guide an 
average family pitch must be capable of 
accommodating an amenity building, a large 
trailer and touring caravan (or two trailers), 
drying space for clothes, a lockable shed (for 
bicycles, wheelchair storage etc.), parking 
space for two vehicles and a small garden 
area.
Planning Obligations - Private agreements 
made between local authorities and 
developers and can be attached to a 
planning permission to make acceptable 
development which would otherwise be 
unacceptable in planning terms.
Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) - 
Technical guidance published by the 
Government to support the practical 
implementation of the NPPF and the plan 
making process.Policies Map - Identifies geographically the 
adopted policies and proposals of the Local 
Plan.
Primary Employment Areas - Designated 
when the predominant land use relates 
to employment. Also included within this 
designation is land that has planning 
permission and land allocated for 
employment use. Such areas are located 
within Carlisle, Longtown, Brampton  
and Dalston.
Primary Residential Areas - Housing areas 
within Carlisle, Longtown and Brampton. 
These areas are predominantly residential, 
and they contain a number of other uses 
normally acceptable in housing areas 
such as churches, small shops and public 
houses.222
Primary Shopping Area - Contains all the 
important shopping streets and areas in the 
City Centre. All the major stores are included 
together with the streets with continuous 
shopping frontages and sites where 
shopping development is acceptable in 
principle. It also includes the main shopping 
streets in Brampton and Longtown.
Public Realm - This is the space between 
and within buildings that are publicly 
accessible, including streets, squares, 
forecourts, parks and open spaces.
R 
Ramsar Site - Wetlands of international 
importance, particularly as waterfowl 
habitats, listed by the Secretary of State. 
The provisions of the Ramsar Convention 
require the promotion of the conservation of 
the wetlands.Regionally Important Geological/
Geomorphological Sites (RIGS) - These are 
geological/geomorphological sites of local 
importance which complement the national 
network of geological SSSIs. The aim of 
designation is to maintain and enhance 
specific features of rock and landform, and 
the dynamic natural processes which create 
them.
Register of Battlefields - Identifies a  
limited number of areas of historic 
significance where important battles are 
sufficiently documented to be located on  
the ground. This register is compiled by 
Historic England.
Register of Parks and Gardens of Special 
Historic Interest - This is a register, 
produced by Historic England, which 
identifies parks and gardens of visual and/or 
historic interest.Renewable and Low-Carbon Energy - 
Includes energy for heating and cooling as 
well as generating electricity. Renewable 
energy covers those energy flows that 
occur naturally and repeatedly in the 
environment; from the wind, the fall of water, 
the movement of the oceans, from the sun 
and also from biomass and deep geothermal 
heat. Low carbon technologies are those 
that can help reduce emissions (compared 
to conventional use of fossil fuels).
Rural Exception Sites - Small sites used for 
affordable housing in perpetuity where sites 
would not normally be used for housing. 
Rural exception sites seek to address 
the needs of the local community by 
accommodating households who are either 
current residents or who have an existing 
family or employment connection. Small 
numbers of market homes may be allowed, 
for example, where essential to enable the 
delivery of affordable units without grant 
funding.223
Rural Masterplanning - Joint working with 
Parish Councils to establish the capacity for 
development within the rural area informed 
by community opinion.
S 
Scheduled Ancient Monument - Nationally 
important monuments usually archaeological 
remains, that enjoy greater protection 
against inappropriate development through 
the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological 
Areas Act 1979.
Section 106 Agreement - Planning 
Agreements (or ‘Planning Obligations’) are 
made under Section 106 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990. Agreements may 
be made between a local planning authority 
and a land owner (often a developer) or may 
be entered into unilaterally by such persons. 
Agreements are usually employed to restrict 
the development or use of land in ways 
which cannot properly or conveniently be 
achieved by the imposition of conditions.Setting of a Heritage Asset - The 
surroundings in which a heritage asset is 
experienced. Its extent is not fixed and may 
change as the asset and its surroundings 
evolve. Elements of a setting may make 
a positive or negative contribution to the 
significance of an asset, may affect the 
ability to appreciate that significance or may 
be neutral.
Significance of Heritage Assets - The 
value of a heritage asset to this and future 
generations because of its heritage interest. 
That interest may be archaeological, 
architectural, artistic or historic. Significance 
derives not only from a heritage asset’s 
physical presence, but also from its setting.
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) - 
Section 28 of the Wildlife and Countryside 
Act 1981 enables Natural England to 
designate areas of land which, by reason 
of their flora, fauna, or geological or 
physiographic features, it is in the national 
interest to conserve. To protect SSSIs from 
operations outside the scope of planning 
controls, Natural England specify to their owners and occupiers the operations 
which they consider to be harmful to their 
conservation interest. Local authorities have 
a responsibility under the Countryside and 
Rights of Way (CRoW) Act 2000 to take 
reasonable steps to further the conservation 
and enhancement of the features for which a 
SSSI has been notified.
Special Area of Conservation (SAC) - 
Areas established under the EU Directive 
on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and 
of Wild Fauna and Flora as contributing to 
the maintenance of a coherent Community 
wide network of habitats called Natura 2000. 
SAC’s are selected for their contribution 
to the survival of species and habitats of 
European importance. The areas proposed 
as SACs are also SSSIs.
Special Protection Area (SPA) - Areas 
established under the EC Directive on 
the Conservation of Wild Birds in order to 
safeguard habitats of migrating birds and 
certain threatened species and thereby to 
conserve populations. All SPAs are also 
SSSIs.224
Statement of Community Involvement 
(SCI) - Explains to the public how they 
will be involved in the preparation of local 
planning. It sets out the standards to  
be met by the authority in terms of 
community involvement.
Strategic Environmental Assessment 
(SEA) - A procedure (set out in the 
Environmental Assessment of Plans 
and Programmes Regulations 2004) 
which requires the formal environmental 
assessment of certain plans and 
programmes which are likely to have 
significant effects on the environment.
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  
(SFRA) - Informs knowledge of flooding, 
refines the information on the Flood Map 
and determines variations in flood risk  
from all sources of flooding across and  
from their area.Strategic Housing Land Availability 
Assessment (SHLAA) - A technical study 
to inform planning policy relating to planning 
for housing. It also assists in the monitoring 
of whether there is an adequate supply of 
deliverable and developable housing land.
Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA) - See ‘housing needs and demand 
study’.
Sui Generis (Use Class) - Certain uses 
do not fall within any use class and are 
considered ‘sui generis’. Such uses include: 
theatres, hostels providing no significant 
element of care, scrap yards. Petrol filling 
stations and shops selling and/or displaying 
motor vehicles. Retail warehouse clubs, 
nightclubs, launderettes, taxi businesses, 
amusement centres and casinos.Supplementary Planning Document  
(SPD) - Documents which add further detail 
to the policies in the Local Plan. They can 
be used to provide further guidance for 
development on specific sites, or on particular 
issues, such as design. Supplementary 
planning documents are capable of being a 
material consideration in planning decisions 
but are not part of the development plan.
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) - A statutory 
assessment undertaken on Local Plans to 
identify and evaluate the impacts of a plan 
on the community (social), economy and 
environment.
Sustainable Development - The Bruntland 
Report in 1987 brought a new approach when 
it proposed that an ongoing balance could 
be struck between economic growth and the 
needs of the environment through the concept 
of sustainable development. A definition of this 
concept is ‘development that meets the needs 
of the present without compromising the ability 
of future generations to meet their own needs’. 
The NPPF identifies a presumption in favour of 
sustainable development.225
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems 
(SUDS) - A sequence of management 
practices and control structures designed 
to drain surface water in a more sustainable 
way than some conventional techniques. 
SUDS manage surface water on site as 
near to source as possible by slowing down 
the rate of run-off and treating it naturally 
through such design techniques as porous 
pavements, infiltration trenches and basins, 
french drains, swales and passive treatment 
systems including filter strips, detention 
basins, retention ponds and wetlands. This 
approach will allow the release of good 
quality surface water into watercourses and 
the groundwater resource.
T 
Tree Preservation Order (TPO) - Under 
Section 198 of the 1990 Act a local planning 
authority may, in the interests of amenity, 
make provisions for the preservation 
of individual trees or woodlands. TPOs 
prohibit the cutting down, topping, lopping, 
uprooting, wilful damage or wilful destruction 
of trees without the prior consent of the 
Authority.U 
Use Classes Order - The Town and Country 
Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as 
amended) contains a number of Classes into 
which most uses of land or buildings fall. The 
change of use of land or buildings, from one 
class to another, normally requires planning 
permission. The change of use of land or 
buildings within a particular Class does not 
involve development requiring planning 
permission.
Use Class A1 Shops - Shops, retail 
warehouses, hairdressers, undertakers, 
travel and ticket agencies, post offices (but 
not sorting offices), pet shops, sandwich 
bars, showrooms, domestic hire shops, dry 
cleaners, funeral directors and internet cafes.
Use Class A2 Financial and Professional 
Services - Financial services such as banks 
and building societies, professional services 
(other than health and medical services) 
including estate and employment agencies 
and betting offices.Use Class A3 Restaurants and Cafes -  
For the sale of food and drink for 
consumption on the premises - restaurants, 
snack bars and cafes.
Use Class A4 Drinking Establishments - 
Public houses, wine bars or other drinking 
establishments (but not night clubs).
Use Class A5 Hot Food Takeaways -  
For the sale of hot food for consumption off 
the premises.
Use Class B1 Business Use - Offices  
(other than those that fall within A2), 
research and development of products and 
processes, light industry appropriate in a 
residential area.
Use Class B2 General Industrial Use -  
Use for industrial process other than one 
falling within class B1 (excluding incineration 
purposes, chemical treatment or landfill or 
hazardous waste).226
Use Class B8 Storage or Distribution 
Use - Storage or Distribution warehouses 
including wholesale cash and carry. This 
class includes open air storage.
V 
Village - A group of houses, other buildings 
and open spaces which can include 
businesses and community uses such as 
a village hall and village green, church or 
primary school. The pattern of dispersed 
villages in the rural area has resulted in a 
significant number of villages sharing one 
church, primary school or village hall.
W 
Wildlife Corridors - Areas of habitat 
connecting wildlife populations.
Windfall Site - An informal term used to 
describe a site where planning consent 
(usually for housing) is granted despite that 
site not being allocated for development in 
the Local Plan.World Heritage Sites (WHS) - The World 
Heritage Convention from which World 
Heritage Sites derive was ratified by the UK 
in 1984. The Convention provides for the 
identification, protection, conservation and 
presentation of cultural and natural sites of 
outstanding universal value. Hadrian’s Wall 
Military Zone was designated as a World 
Heritage Site in 1987.
World Health Organisation (WHO) - Is 
the directing and coordinating authority for 
health within the United Nations system.
Z 
Zero Carbon - That all emissions from 
a house or commercial property and the 
activities that take place within them must be 
net zero over the course of a year.227
Appendix 11
Sites Allocated within Policy HO 1
The following site profiles are intended to aid identification of the sites allocated for housing development in Policy HO 1, and 
identify some of the associated main issues. The profiles are not intended to include an exhaustive list of every matter to be 
considered. All of the allocated housing sites lie within Flood Zone 1. Anyone considering submitting a planning application is 
encouraged to undertake early discussions with the Council’s Development Management team.228Urban Area: 
U 1 and U 2: Land to the south east of 
junction 44 of the M6 - these two sites are 
immediately adjacent to each other at the 
northern edge of Carlisle and have good 
accessibility to the main public transport 
network and to the M6 via junction 44. 
Careful consideration needs to be given 
to the design of the development so that 
the two sites integrate, but also respect 
the privacy of the outdoor play spaces 
for the adjacent James Rennie School. 
Opportunities should be taken to link into 
the public footpath which lies adjacent to 
the site. In addition, noise attenuation from 
the M6/Kingstown Road will be required by 
a combination of planting and bunding. The 
main infrastructure issue in north Carlisle is 
the current lack of primary school places. 
Additional housing in this area has the 
potential to fund the development of primary 
school provision.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has indicated that the sites would need 
significant infrastructure works to create 
access off A7/C1022 signalised junction. Consideration should also be given to the 
development providing alternative access 
arrangements to the James Rennie School 
in order to help resolve school traffic related 
problems. 
Biodiversity: there are no statutory or non-
statutory designations within or adjacent to 
the site. The land is agricultural grassland, 
and is bordered by mature hedgerows which 
are likely to provide wildlife corridors and 
habitats for a variety of species.
Heritage assessment: the course of a Roman 
road is indicated along the eastern boundary 
of the site. An archaeological evaluation 
in the form of an appropriate desk based 
assessment (and where necessary a field 
evaluation) will be required at the planning 
application stage.
Flooding/drainage: 
•  some recent surface water flooding on 
California Road so any development 
here should incorporate a solution to 
limit surface water flows to the south of 
the site; • water course on site should remain 
open and road crossing limited to as 
few as possible; and
• most obvious drainage option would 
be into School Sike.
Other constraints: Tree Preservation Order 
207 on northern boundary of site. Public 
footpaths along northern (FP 109002 and 
120001) and eastern (FP 132012 and 
132020) boundary of site. These will need 
to be taken into account in the design and 
layout.
U 3: Site of Pennine Way Primary School, 
Pennine Way/Edgehill Road - the school is 
about to undergo redevelopment in order to 
accommodate an increased intake of pupils. 
This will involve relocating the school to an 
adjacent site on the south side of Edgehill 
Road. The redevelopment is part of a wider 
project including a new community hub. 
The redevelopment of the site provides an 
opportunity to diversify the housing mix in 
this area of Harraby.229
Highways advice: assumed access would 
be from Pennine Way and Edgehill Road. 
Arnside Way/Eastern Way junction may 
need improvement with contribution to A69 
corridor depending on total development 
of all proposed allocations in this part of 
Carlisle. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations within or adjacent to the site. 
As school playing fields the site is likely to 
have low biodiversity value. 
Heritage assessment: no known heritage 
assets within or adjacent to site.
Flooding/drainage: 
• significant surface water flooding issues 
within the site boundary – need to be 
managed on site; 
• historic records show flooding has been 
a problem in the area so needs careful 
approach to drainage; and
• could be significant cumulative impacts 
from concentration of allocations in the 
area draining into Durranhill Beck.U 4: Land north of Moorside Drive/Valley 
Drive - a previously allocated site which has 
residential development on its north, western 
and southern boundary and integrates well 
with the urban form in this area. Careful 
consideration should be given so that the 
design and layout leads to a development 
which harmonises with the surrounding built 
context, but has its own sense of place.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has indicated that the scale of development 
envisaged would need a link road from 
Edgehill Road to Moorside Drive. Extension 
of suburban bus services would also be 
required. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations within or adjacent to the site. 
Site currently used as agricultural land 
(arable) so likely to be species and habitat 
poor. No trees although hedges border the 
site. 
Heritage assessment: Bronze Age remains 
have been revealed adjacent to the site and 
the wider landscape is rich in prehistoric remains. An archaeological desk-based 
assessment and field evaluation will be 
required at the planning application stage.
Flooding/drainage: 
• localised surface water flooding to west of 
site, around Moorside drive – needs to be 
taken into consideration; 
• should connect to the watercourse as far 
down as possible; and
• cumulative impact on Durranhill Beck 
(culverted).
Other constraints: the site will require noise 
attenuation measures due to proximity of M6 
to east.
U 5: Land between Carlton Road and 
Cumwhinton Road - the southern edge of 
Carlisle in this location is characterised by 
mainly low density semis and bungalows, 
before the small village of Carleton, 
which has a range of designs and sizes 
of properties. Carlton also has a mix of 
services including a pub, restaurant, garage 
and offices. The development of this site 230
provides the opportunity to create an 
attractive edge to the City, whilst retaining 
the identity of Carleton as a village.
Highways advice: due to traffic issues 
associated with the standard of the existing 
access/lack of visibility onto London Road, 
an improved two way access such as the 
upgrading of Sewells Lonning to Local 
Access Road Standard will be required. The 
site also has poor accessibility and would 
require the provision of new bus stops and a 
developer contribution towards an increased 
frequency bus service. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations within or adjacent to site. 
Grazing land but good roadside hedgerows 
and some hedgerows within the site. 
Heritage assessment: no known heritage 
assets within or adjacent to site.
Flooding/drainage: 
•  Run-off rate should be QBAR (estimated 
annual greenfield runoff rate) if the site is to 
drain south to the Petteril; and•  United Utilities request no surface water to 
sewer.
U 6: Land at Garden Village, west 
of Wigton Road - this site is in two 
ownerships, with the western section being a 
long narrow strip of land. It will be necessary 
to develop the site as a whole for optimum 
design and layout and from an infrastructure 
planning perspective. The site wraps around 
four existing properties which front onto 
Wigton Road and one on the A689, and as 
such the design will need to minimise loss 
of amenity to these properties. The site is 
immediately adjacent to the A689, and some 
noise attenuation measures will be required.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has confirmed that satisfactory access is 
available off Wigton Road. The site would 
require the provision of new bus stops 
and potentially a developer contribution 
towards an increased frequency of bus 
service. The site should ensure good non-
motorised links to the surrounding area 
as well as improvements to the existing to 
accommodate the potential increase in use. Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations within or adjacent to the site. 
Fairy Beck lies adjacent to the site and is a 
tributary which ultimately discharges into the 
River Eden SAC/SPA. However, the proposal 
is not likely to have a significant effect on the 
interest features for which the designated 
site has been classified. Mature hedgerows 
within and on boundary of site, especially 
along north western boundary of site. Some 
mature trees in hedgerows.
Heritage assessment: no known heritage 
assets within or adjacent to site.
Flooding/drainage: 
• drainage into either Dow Beck or Fairy 
Beck possible, provided that satisfactory 
measures are incorporated to control run 
off during construction and completion of 
the site; 
•  SUDS system on site desirable; 
•  No historic surface water flooding has 
been reported for the site; and231
•  Fairy Beck - possible cumulative impact 
issues with Morton development (though 
Morton has SUDS included in plans so 
shouldn’t be a problem).
Other constraints: sensitive design required 
to integrate new development with four 
existing houses on south eastern edge of 
site.
U 7: Land at Newhouse Farm, south east 
of Orton Road - this is a significant site 
in terms of size and is predicted to come 
forward in the later part of the plan period. 
Access will be taken from Orton Road, 
as the southern boundary of the site is 
adjacent to the A689, the Carlisle western 
bypass. A masterplan approach will be 
required to guide the development of the 
site. The overall design and layout will need 
to consider ways of using the land beneath 
and around the power lines on the western 
boundary of the site in ways which will 
benefit the overall development. Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has indicated that the site would need to 
be accessed off Orton Road which would 
need corridor improvements and suburban 
bus service extension. Cycle path linkage to 
secondary school is essential. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to the 
site. Dow Beck crosses part of the site and 
is a tributary which ultimately discharges 
into the River Eden SAC/SPA. However, the 
proposal is not likely to have a significant 
effect on the interest features for which the 
designated site has been classified. The land 
is agricultural grassland, and is bordered 
by mature hedgerows which are likely to 
provide wildlife corridors and habitats for a 
variety of species. 
Heritage assessment: prehistoric 
remains have been revealed on an 
adjacent residential development site. An 
archaeological desk-based assessment 
and field evaluation will be required at the 
planning application stage.Flooding/drainage: 
• drainage into either Dow Beck or Fairy 
Beck possible provided that satisfactory 
measures are incorporated to control run 
off during construction and completion of 
the site; 
• should aim for standard greenfield run-off 
rates; 
• SUD system on site desirable; 
• no report of surface water flooding 
problems on site; 
• Dow Beck/Fairy Beck - possible 
cumulative impact issues with Morton 
development (though Morton has SUDS 
included in plans so shouldn’t be a 
problem); and 
• open watercourses need to be retained 
except where road crossings are required.
Other constraints: three high voltage 
overhead power lines cross the south 
western corner of the site.232
U 8: Land north of Burgh Road - the site 
has potential to integrate successfully with 
the built edge of Carlisle in this location. 
Established housing areas lie to the south, 
and to the east is further housing fronting 
onto Burgh Road, behind which is a small 
industrial estate. The design and layout 
of the site will need to address the site 
boundary with the industrial estate, and the 
western boundary adjacent to the overhead 
high voltage cables.
Highways advice: The Highways Authority 
has raised no particular issues with this 
site. Access is achievable from the C2042 
Burgh Road, although some upgrading of 
the current 40mph restriction section will be 
necessary, together with bus infrastructure 
provision. The size of the site is unlikely to 
cause any significant traffic impacts. 
Biodiversity: the site lies within 200m of River 
Eden SSSI, SAC. However, the proposal is 
not likely to have a significant effect on the 
interest features for which the designated 
sites have been classified, subject to satisfactory measures to control run off 
during construction and completion of the 
site. 
Heritage assessment: site lies within 150 
m of Hadrian’s Wall Military Zone World 
Heritage Site (WHS). However, the WHS is 
not physically in evidence in this location. 
The NPPF states that not all elements 
of a WHS will necessarily contribute to 
its significance. It is not considered that 
development in this location would cause 
harm or loss of the WHS. The site has been 
subject to a geophysical survey which 
revealed archaeological assets. These will 
need to be investigated and recorded prior 
to any development commencing.
Flooding/drainage: 
•  no major issues - small flooding issues 
further down but not on this site; and
•  drain directly into the Eden.
U 9: Former Morton Park Primary School, 
Burnrigg - originally the site of a primary 
school, this is now a cleared site offering 
potential to improve the character of the area through good design and incorporation of 
the exiting mature trees on the site which are 
protected by TPO 245. Development would 
need to be in accordance with the adopted 
SPD Trees and Development. The design 
and layout of the site needs to protect the 
amenity of the bungalows on Kingrigg. 
The site lies within walking distance of 
Newlaithes Primary School, neighbourhood 
shops, a community centre and the large 
area of public open space known as Morton 
Park.
Highways advice: no particular issues with 
the site considering previous use. Localised 
upgrade work will be needed to surrounding 
network. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to the 
site. 
Heritage assessment: no local or national 
designations apply within or adjacent to the 
site.233
Flooding/drainage: 
• no major issues; and 
• drainage into Dow Beck
Other constraints: Tree Preservation Order 
245 applies within the site.
U 10 and U 11: Land off Windsor Way 
and land east of Lansdowne Close/
Lansdowne Court - the main infrastructure 
issue in north Carlisle is the current lack of 
primary school places. Additional housing 
in this area has the potential to help fund 
the development of new primary school 
provision. Careful consideration needs to be 
given to the relationship/boundary between 
the two sites, as U 11 is landlocked. 
Therefore the development of U10 must 
maintain access to U 11. Access onto 
Tarraby Lane will not be permitted except 
for emergency vehicles. Existing flooding 
problems at the culvert on the adjacent 
Pennington Drive must not be exacerbated 
by any new development and plans must 
include a management regime for surface 
water run-off. Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has expressed some concern over traffic 
generation, and indicated that a loop road 
would be required so that a bus service can 
access the site and the adjoining housing 
area. Capacity issues are likely with M6 
junction 44 and onto Scotland Road, as 
well as other major junctions to the north 
of Carlisle. Tarraby Lane is not of sufficient 
standard to serve the development. Any 
further development will need improvements 
to the resilience of the site (i.e. additional 
access points). 
Biodiversity: the land is agricultural 
grassland, and is bordered by mature 
hedgerows which are likely to provide 
wildlife corridors and habitats for a variety of 
species. 
Heritage assessment: it is likely that 
archaeological remains will be encountered 
on the site, and appropriate measures will 
be required to record these remains. An 
archaeological evaluation in the form of an 
appropriate desk based assessment (and 
where necessary a field evaluation) will be 
required at the planning application stage.Flooding/drainage: 
• SUDS storage already proposed for the 
area; and
• contribution from development towards 
SUDS plans would be desirable. 
Contributions would need to clearly 
demonstrate relationship of development 
with the SUDS scheme.
Other constraints: public footpath 132011 
partially borders the north eastern boundary 
of the site.
U 12: Land to the rear of the Border 
Terrier, Ashness Drive - the site lies in 
an established area of housing close to 
neighbourhood shops, a primary school, 
and public open space. The character of the 
immediate area is nondescript, and therefore 
this site offers the potential to improve 
the environment of the area through good 
design. The site is owned by a registered 
affordable housing provider and as such the 
loss of incidental open space is mitigated 
by the gain of a significant proportion of 
affordable housing. 234
Highways advice: acceptable with minimal 
works. Footway fronting site required. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations within or adjacent to the site. 
Heritage assessment: no known heritage 
assets within or adjacent to site. 
Flooding/drainage: 
• United Utilities have issues with sewer 
flooded properties in this area (considered 
a High Risk area); and
• future development should ensure that 
surface water run-off into sewers is 
severely restricted; 
Other constraints: mobile phone mast lies 
adjacent to north eastern corner of site.
U 13: Land east of Beverley Rise, Harraby 
the site is adjacent to an established area 
of housing which had good local facilities 
and amenities including a primary school 
for which there are immediate plans for 
redevelopment in order to allow expansion 
for an increased pupil intake. Noise 
attenuation measures will be required between the site and the M6 which lies to 
the east. Careful consideration will also need 
to be given to the boundaries of the site 
adjacent to existing housing and the Carlisle 
Settle railway line to the north. 
Highways advice: proposed means of 
access is acceptable in principle. Local 
widening of existing access road needed 
Biodiversity: there are no statutory or non-
statutory designations which apply within or 
adjacent to the site. The site is agricultural 
grazing land with some hedgerows and 
trees which are likely to provide habitats for 
wildlife. 
Heritage assessment: the site lies 
immediately adjacent to the Carlisle/Settle 
line Conservation Area (CA). The special 
interest of the CA lies in the corporate 
architectural styles of the buildings along 
the route, the mainly civil engineering works, 
and the scenic nature of the route. There 
are no buildings associated with the line at 
this point, and the line cannot be seen as 
an element in the wider landscape, as it is 
screened by trees.Flooding/drainage: 
• bounded by railway embankment - 
drainage pipes should go to the south; 
• run-off rates will need to be restricted to 
QBAR (greenfield) 1 in 200 run-off rates (2 
year rainfall event); and
• drainage into Durranhill Beck - need to  
be wary of cumulative impact in this  
area - potentially need a masterplan 
approach towards Durranhill Beck.
Other constraints: noise attenuation 
measures will be required along eastern 
boundary of site due to proximity of M6 
motorway. Boundary treatment will be 
required along northern boundary of site 
for safeguarding from Carlisle/Settle railway 
line.
U 14: Land north of Carleton Clinic, east 
of Cumwhinton Drive - as part of the 
long term development strategy for the 
Carleton Clinic, Cumbria Partnership NHS 
is consolidating its operations into certain 
sectors of the site. As such U 14 surplus to 
NHS requirements. The eastern boundary 235
of the site extends to the motorway, and as 
such significant noise attenuation measures 
will be required, through layout and design, 
to mitigate any future adverse impacts on 
residents. A public footpath lies on the 
southern boundary, and currently has a 
semi-rural feel as it has fields on both sides. 
This footpath must remain unobstructed, 
and the ultimate layout and design should 
not have an overbearing effect. The buildings 
adjacent to the north west corner of the site 
are currently in ancillary use for the Carleton 
Clinic, and the northern boundary of the 
site is adjacent to Parklands Village. Layout 
and design of the site must respect these 
adjacent uses. 
Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has advised that Cumwhinton Drive at this 
point is a private road and would require 
upgrading to local distributer road standard. 
The development of the site should ensure 
satisfactory linkage to the A6. The traffic 
modelling results carried out by Cumbria 
County Council to inform the Local Plan 
should be considered for junction capacities. 
The development of the site should ensure good non-motorised links to the surrounding 
area as well as improvements to the existing 
to accommodate the potential increase in 
use. 
Heritage assessment: a Bronze Age 
cemetery and other prehistoric remains have 
been found at the former Garlands Hospital. 
An archaeological desk-based assessment 
and field evaluation will be required at the 
planning application stage.
Flooding/drainage: 
•  drainage into Durranhill Beck; 
•  reasonable opportunities for a number of 
SUDS features; and
•  needs to limit drainage due to cumulative 
impact.
U 15: Former dairy site, Holywell 
Crescent, Botcherby - planning permission 
has been granted for 66 houses on this site. 
Its allocation in the Local Plan safeguards 
the site for future development for housing 
over the plan period. It is one of a limited 
number of brownfield sites within the City which is available for housing development. 
The site is well located in relation to local 
services and facilities including a primary 
school and public open space. 
Highways advice: no highways issues have 
been raised. 
Biodiversity: the information submitted with 
the planning application recorded that the 
majority of the habitats on site are of low 
conservation interest in terms of vegetation. 
However, there was some potential for birds 
to use the trees/scrub, and therefore removal 
of such vegetation should not be undertaken 
during the breeding season. 
Heritage assessment: no known heritage 
assets within or adjacent to site.
Flooding/drainage: 
•  no further comment in view of planning 
permission for site.
Other constraints: site lies adjacent to gas 
pipeline.236
U 16: Land at Deer Park, Belah - the site is 
bordered by residential development to the 
south and east, and by employment uses to 
the north. The protected trees within the site 
provide a strong green presence, and any 
development must be in accordance with the 
adopted SPD Trees on development Sites. 
The layout and design of the development 
will need to make provision for adequate 
separation distance between the houses and 
the trees. Consideration should also be given 
to a buffer between new housing and the 
small industrial estate to the north. The main 
infrastructure issue in north Carlisle is the 
lack of primary school places. Development 
of housing in this area has the potential to 
fund the development of primary school 
provision.
Highways advice: access should be safe and 
the development of the site should ensure 
good non-motorised links to the surrounding 
area as well as improvements to the existing 
to accommodate the potential increase in 
use. Biodiversity: immediately to the west of 
the site lies the Kingmoor Sidings County 
Wildlife Site, which is also designated as a 
Local Nature Reserve. It contains a series 
of small ponds which support a population 
of Great Crested Newt. As an old railway 
siding, the succession of habitats colonising 
this site has resulted in a high species 
diversity. 
Heritage assessment: an archaeological 
desk-based assessment has identified 
that there is the potential for Roman 
archaeological remains to survive on the site. 
An archaeological investigation will need 
to be carried out prior to any development 
commencing.
Flooding/drainage: 
• drainage is achievable and there are no 
major surface water issues.
Other constraints: public footpath 109397 
crosses the site in a north westerly direction 
from Kingmoor Road, and must be retained 
and protected as part of the development. 
TPO 181 applies to a number of groups and individual trees within the site. These trees 
must be retained and protected as part 
of the development. There is potential to 
incorporate them as part of the open space 
requirement for the site. They are significant, 
mature parkland trees which will require 
adequate separation distances from any 
new development in order for them to be 
effectively protected.
U 17: Land to the south west of 
Cummersdale Grange Farm - this site 
formed part of a larger housing, retail, 
employment and open space allocation in 
the 2008 Local Plan. In November 2010 
outline planning permission was granted 
for the allocation, but excluded this site. 
As such it is almost entirely enveloped by 
land subject to the planning permission. In 
addition, the land to the south, bounded 
by Peter Lane, has approval for reserved 
matters and is under construction. It is 
therefore imperative that the development 
of this site integrates both visually and 
physically with the area subject to the wider 
planning permission.237
Highways advice: access should be safe and 
the development of the site should ensure 
good non-motorised links to the surrounding 
area as well as improvements to the existing 
to accommodate the potential increase in 
use. 
Biodiversity: Fairy Beck borders part of the 
northern boundary of the site, and ultimately 
drains into the River Eden SSSI and SAC. 
Housing development is not likely to have 
a significant effect on the interest features 
for which the designated site has been 
classified, subject to satisfactory measures 
to control run off during construction and on 
completion of the site. The hedgerows on 
the site may have potential as bird and bat 
roosting sites, and measures will be required 
to ensure the protection of these species. 
Heritage assessment: there is potential 
for unknown archaeological remains on 
site. The site has in the past been subject 
to an archaeological geophysical survey. 
Results show that it is highly unlikely 
that archaeological remains of national 
importance survive. The site should be subject to a programme of archaeological 
evaluation to be consistent with the 
requirements of the planning permission 
for the wider surrounding area. Where 
archaeological remains survive, these should 
be recorded.
Flooding/drainage: 
• Fairy Beck, which is classified as  
‘main river’, borders part of the northern 
boundary of the site; and
• the site must be drained on a separate 
system with only foul drainage connected 
to the foul sewer.
Other constraints: the site is almost 
entirely surrounded by land subject to an 
extant planning permission (09/0413), for 
residential, employment and public open 
space. Careful consideration will need to be 
given as to how this site can integrate into 
this wider area.
U 18: Land opposite Rosehill Industrial 
Estate - this site was allocated in the 2008 
Local Plan for a premier pedigree livestock 
centre. However, it is no longer needed for this use and has instead been promoted for 
housing. The site is well located on the edge 
of Carlisle in terms of accessing a range of 
services and facilities, and the wider road 
network. The site will require considerable 
noise attenuation measures from the M6, 
and also a physical barrier such as bunding 
and planting to reduce the visible impact of 
the motorway. 
Highways advice: access should be safe and 
the development of the site should ensure 
good non-motorised links to the surrounding 
area as well as improvements to the existing 
to accommodate the potential increase 
in use. Mitigation measures for traffic 
impact will be needed not merely to allow 
the additional motorised traffic, but also 
pedestrian movements to main attractors 
(schools, retail, leisure). 
Biodiversity: there are hedgerows bordering 
the site, and a number of isolated stretches 
of hedgerows within the site which could 
provide roosting, feeding or nesting sites for 
birds or bats etc. These should be evaluated 
as part of any planning application. There is 238
a semi-mature tree belt along the south side 
of Durranhill Road. This should be retained. 
Heritage assessment: prehistoric remains 
survive on the site. An archaeological desk 
based assessment and field evaluation will be 
required at the planning application stage.
Flooding/drainage: 
• Durranhill Beck - there are capacity issues 
further downstream. Need to be sure that 
development here won’t exasperate that 
situation.
U 20: Land south of Durranhill Road, 
Botcherby - this parcel of land was part of 
a larger allocation in the 2008 adopted Local 
Plan. There is an existing regular bus service 
along Durranhill Road, and the site is close to 
local services and facilities, including primary 
schools and an employment area at Rosehill. 
The layout and design of the site must take 
account of the protected trees, adequate 
separation distances between existing 
housing and the proposed new housing.
Highways advice: access will be from 
Durranhill Road, through the adjacent development known as Barley Edge, where 
an access road has been created to serve 
this site, unless a suitable alternative access 
can be provided in conjunction with, and 
without prejudice to, the development of 
site U18. Access should be safe and the 
development of the site should ensure good 
non-motorised links to the surrounding area 
as well as improvements to the existing to 
accommodate the potential increase in use. 
Mitigation measures for traffic impact will 
be needed not only to allow the additional 
motorised traffic, but also pedestrian 
movements to main attractors (schools, 
retail, leisure). 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to 
the site. TPO 254 applies along the north 
western boundary of the site and any new 
development would have to comply with 
the Council’s adopted SPD Trees and 
Development. 
Heritage assessment: Chapel Brow, a Grade 
II listed building sits on the opposite side 
of Durranhill Road. However, this proposed development will not detract from the 
setting of the listed building as new housing 
development (Barley Edge) exists between 
the site and the building. Prehistoric 
remains have been revealed on an adjacent 
residential development site and there is 
further potential for unknown archaeological 
remains to survive. An archaeological desk-
based assessment and field evaluation 
will be required at the planning application 
stage. 
Flooding/drainage: 
•  Small area of surface water flooding to the 
east of the site; and 
•  Durranhill Beck - there are capacity issues 
further downstream. Need to be sure that 
development here won’t exasperate that 
situation.
Other constraints: TPO 254 along the north 
western boundary of the site. The Carlisle to 
Newcastle railway line forms the southern 
boundary of the site. 239
U 21: Former Laing’s site, Stanhope Road  
to the east of this site, and fronting onto 
Dalston Road is a recently constructed  
1,532 m2 retail food store. The layout of the 
development incorporates an access road 
designed to link through to this allocated 
housing site. This is a brownfield site, which 
was allocated in the 2008 Local Plan for 
mixed use. High quality and design and 
layout will be required in order to contribute 
towards improving the character and 
appearance of the local area. Dow Beck, 
which is classified as ‘main river’ runs 
adjacent to the northern boundary of the site. 
Highways advice: the Highways Authority 
has advised that Stanhope Road is a local 
distributor road and there may be a need to 
improve its junctions with Wigton Road and 
Dalston Road. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to the 
site. Dow Beck runs along the north western 
boundary of the site and ultimately drains 
into the River Eden SSSI and SAC. However, 
the proposal is not likely to have a significant effect on the interest features for which the 
designated site has been classified subject 
to satisfactory measures to control run off 
during construction and on completion of 
the site. 
Heritage assessment: no known heritage 
assets within or adjacent to site.
Flooding/drainage: 
•  the Environment Agency’s surface water 
mapping indicates flooding around the 
edge of the site which may affect access; 
•  brownfield site - unlikely to reach 
greenfield run-off standards, but a 
betterment in run off rates should be 
sought through development; and
•  8m buffer from Dow Beck (culverted)  
main river required.Rural Area:
R 1: Land south of Carlisle Road, 
Brampton - this site is located on the 
edge, but within walking distance of the 
town centre, which has a wide range of 
local services and facilities. The site abuts 
existing housing development on its north 
eastern and eastern sides, and is opposite 
established housing and employment uses 
on the northern side of Carlisle Road. The 
western boundary of the site abuts open 
countryside, and care will need to be 
taken over the design of the boundaries 
to ensure that the development integrates 
with surrounding land uses. Within the site 
there will be land set aside for the provision 
of a medical centre to accommodate the 
relocation of the Brampton Medical Practice, 
which has a requirement to expand to 
purpose built premises.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has advised that this site is well positioned 
just to the west of the town centre and 
therefore close to local facilities. However, 
there are likely to be town centre parking 240
and school muster time issues with this scale 
of development, which will require mitigation 
measures. 
Biodiversity: there are no statutory or non-
statutory designations which apply within 
or adjacent to the site. Substantial roadside 
hedgerows (although species poor), should 
be retained as far as possible, with the 
exception of where their removal is required 
for site access sight lines. 
Heritage assessment: there is a grade II listed 
building (Green Lane House) on Greenhill. 
However the building lacks a strong presence 
as it is partly single storey and is screened 
by mature roadside trees. It is also not 
visible from the proposed housing site as it 
is separated from the site by a row of two 
story semi-detached houses, (Elmfield). 
Therefore the development of this site is 
unlikely to harm the setting of the listed 
building. Prehistoric and Roman remains 
survive around the borders of the site. An 
archaeological desk-based assessment 
and field evaluation will be required at 
the planning application stage. The north 
eastern corner of the site lies 100m from the boundary of the Brampton Conservation 
Area (CA). The CA is not visible from the 
site. New development should not directly 
imitate the existing development in this area, 
but should be well designed with respect 
for the local context, and have its own well 
established character and appearance. 
Flooding/drainage:
• no apparent flooding issues; and
• possible opportunities for infiltration SUDS 
due to sandy soil (this has been done in 
the locality).
R 2: Land west of Kingwater Close, 
Brampton - this site is City Council owned. 
There is agreement with the landowner at 
Kingwater Close to achieve access to the 
site. The land is within walking distance of 
the town centre, which has a wide range of 
local services and facilities. The landscape 
has the capacity to absorb additional 
development without adverse impacts.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has indicated that the site is well related to 
the town centre, but access would require obtaining rights over third party land. The 
adjoining land owner from Kingwater Close 
and Gelt Rise is Riverside. Discussions with 
Riverside have led to agreement in principle 
for access over their land to facilitate this 
development. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to 
the site. TPO 225 covers land immediately 
adjacent to the north west corner of the site. 
There are mature hedgerows around the 
boundary of the site. 
Heritage assessment: there is a Grade 
II listed building (Green Lane House) 
adjacent to the western boundary of the 
site. The property operates as a private 
residential care home, and is part single/
part two storey. There have been a variety of 
extensions over recent years, and there are 
a number of outbuildings. On the eastern 
boundary of the plot, between the building 
and the proposed development site there is 
a mature hawthorn and beech hedge, which 
stands on a one metre mound. This partially 
obscures the building and its setting from 
the adjacent site. It is considered that the 241
site can be developed whilst still preserving 
the setting of this listed building.
Flooding/drainage: 
• no apparent flooding issues; and 
• possible opportunities for infiltration SUDS 
due to sandy soil (this has been done in 
the locality). 
Other constraints: there is a public footpath 
running along the western boundary of the 
site which connects with Greenhill.
R 3: Land north of Greenfield Lane, 
Brampton - this is a large site which is 
connected to the built edge of Brampton 
at Dacre Road and Greenfield Lane. The 
southern corner of the site will require 
careful design considerations in the context 
of the small bungalow on the corner of 
Dacre Road, and the protected trees on the 
boundary of Garth House, which is a listed 
building. Care will need to be taken over the 
design of the site in relation to the Brampton 
to Longtown road frontage, in both matters 
of layout, design and boundary treatment. In 
addition, particular measures will need to be taken to either integrate or divert the route of 
the public footpath which crosses the site.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority has 
indicated that a development of this size 
would require a link road to Local Access 
standards. Direct access to properties from 
the A6071 (Brampton to Longtown Road) 
would not be permitted. A public footpath 
passes through the site. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within the site. However, 
there are a number of mature trees within 
the site, and a low roadside hedgerow which 
is predominantly hawthorn. The trees and 
the hedgerow are likely to provide feeding 
corridors and roosting sites for birds. 
Heritage assessment: the Grade II listed 
Garth House lies adjacent to the south 
western corner of the site. However, a 
dense tree screen which is protected by a 
TPO separates the two sites. As such the 
listed building has a very limited presence, 
and its setting is defined by the mature 
tree boundary. Development of this site 
would be unlikely to cause harm to the setting of the listed building. Roman remains 
survive around the borders of the site. An 
archaeological desk-based assessment 
and field evaluation will be required at the 
planning application stage.
The site lies within the buffer zone of 
Hadrian’s Wall World Heritage Site (WHS). 
The buffer zone protects the visual setting 
of the WHS, but at this point there is no 
inter-visibility between the WHS and the 
allocation.
Flooding/drainage: 
• main river abuts site to north - 8m buffer 
required; and
• the site could drain into river in the north. 
Other constraints: TPO 217 applies to 
trees on the eastern boundary of Garth 
House. These mature trees will require 
adequate separation distance from any new 
development as set out in the adopted SPD 
Trees and Development.242
R 4: Site of former Lochinvar School, 
Mary Street, Longtown - this is a former 
secondary school site owned by Cumbria 
County Council. The buildings have been 
cleared. The site is well contained within the 
existing built form of Longtown. The layout 
and design of the development on this 
site will need to protect the amenity of the 
community buildings and create a suitable 
buffer to the retained playing fields to the 
east. 
Highways advice: information provided 
shows an indicative access capable of 
allowing for an appropriate access for this 
scale of development. The development 
of the site should ensure good non-
motorised links to the surrounding area 
as well as improvements to the existing to 
accommodate the potential increase in use. 
Biodiversity: no local, national or 
internationally designations apply within or 
adjacent to the site. There are a number of 
mature trees adjacent to the entrance to the 
site. Flooding/drainage: 
• main river crosses the north west boundary 
of the site. Eight metre clearance applies; 
and
• the site is flat and will drain to the north. As 
this is a brownfield site, any development 
should result in a betterment in run-off 
rates.
R 5: Land south of Old Road, Longtown - 
this site lies on the eastern edge of Longtown 
and is bordered to the south by the Longtown 
to Brampton Road, and to the north by a 
minor link road (Old Road). The boundaries 
of the site are in the main established hedges 
or tree belts which should be maintained 
with any new development to help integrate 
the site with both the adjacent built edge of 
Longtown and the open countryside beyond. 
Careful consideration will need to be given to 
the boundary treatment of the site where it 
abuts the housing and employment site to the 
west.
Highways advice: main access off A6071 with 
potential secondary access of Old Road. Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to the 
site. The land is agricultural grassland, and 
is bordered by mature hedgerows which 
are likely to provide wildlife corridors and 
habitats for a variety of species. 
Heritage assessment: the site lies within the 
boundary of a much larger area which is 
on the English Heritage register of Historic 
Battlefields, (Battle of the Solway Moss). 
The purpose of the register is to offer 
battlefields protection and to promote better 
understanding of their significance. 
Flooding/drainage: no major surface water 
issues. 
Other constraints: within Ministry of Defence 
Safeguarding Zone but unlikely to preclude 
development.
R 6: Land west of Amberfield, Burgh by 
Sands - the site adjoins recent housing 
development to the south of the village, 
and is close to the primary school. Much 
of the village is covered by Conservation 
Area designation, whilst the north of the 
village lies within the Solway Coast AONB. 243
Hadrian’s World Heritage Site (WHS) 
crosses the central part of the village from 
west to east. This site lies outside all of 
these designations, and as such is less 
constrained. Development here should seek 
to create and enhance green infrastructure 
connections with the centre of the village. 
The creation of a pavement connecting 
the site with the Primary School is likely 
to be required to ensure any development 
is sustainable from an accessibility 
perspective.
Highways advice: access should be safe and 
the development of the site should ensure 
good non-motorised links to the surrounding 
area. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to the 
site. 
Heritage assessment: the site lies within 
the buffer zone of Hadrian’s Wall Military 
Zone WHS. As such any development will 
have to be assessed on its impact on the 
outstanding universal value of the WHS, and 
particularly on key views, into and out of it. The site also lies adjacent to the Burgh by 
Sands Conservation Area (CA) boundary. 
This boundary is marked by a screen of 
dense tree and hedge cover, giving limited 
views into or out of the CA. The CA at this 
point is mainly either private or public open 
green space, with very few buildings. New 
development will be expected to harmonise 
with the grain of the CA, and respond to the 
local form, context and character.
An archaeological evaluation has revealed 
Roman remains surviving on the site. These 
will need to be investigated and recorded 
prior to development commencing. 
Flooding/drainage: 
•  surface water flooding is an issue at 
various points throughout the village; 
•  need careful consideration of how it is 
intended to address surface water issues; 
and
•  surface water run-off must not exacerbate 
any existing problems. R 7: Land east of Cummersdale 
Road, Cummersdale - a small site with 
community and parish council support for a 
modest increase of up to 14 houses. There 
are a number of mature trees along the 
northern boundary of the site, and adequate 
separation distances will be required 
between new houses and the canopy of the 
trees. The location of the site on the edge 
of the village will not increase traffic flow 
through the village, as the primary school, 
pub and village hall are all located within 
walking distance. 
Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has indicated that the site is a logical 
extension to the village. The only constraint 
highlighted is that the site lies on a bend, 
and as such the development will need to 
be set back to provide the requisite visibility 
splays. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to the 
site. 
Heritage assessment: the Spinners Arms is 
a Grade II listed building which is separated 244
from the eastern boundary of the site by 
four houses. The development of the site is 
unlikely to have an impact on this building. 
An archaeological evaluation has revealed 
Roman remains surviving on the site. These 
will need to be investigated and recorded 
prior to development commencing. 
Flooding/drainage: 
• flat land so would look to see SUDS 
measures incorporated. 
Other constraints: a number of mature trees 
are located along the northern boundary of 
the site.
R 8: Land adjacent to Beech Cottage, 
Cumwhinton - the site has planning 
permission subject to the signing of a 
Section 106 agreement (application reference 
12/0856), for 15 dwellings including three 
affordable bungalows and one dwelling 
for an elderly person. The site is therefore 
allocated to safeguard the permission, as 
the principle of development on this site has 
been accepted.
Highways advice: the Highways Authority has 
not raised any highways issues. Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or immediately 
adjacent to the site. There is potential for 
a range of species to be present within the 
vicinity of the site due to the network of 
hedgerows in the area.
Flooding/drainage: 
•  foul drainage can connect to the public 
sewer via a pumping station; 
•  capacity exists in the existing sewage 
network to accommodate the foul flow from 
the development; and 
•  surface water to be disposed of via 
soakaways. 
R 9: Land west of How Croft,  
Cumwhinton - adequate provision for 
access can be made between a gap in 
existing properties on the B6263. The site has 
housing on its western, northern and eastern 
boundaries, and is well contained within 
the landscape. Any development proposals 
must ensure that any existing surface water 
drainage issues are fully addressed in the 
design of the development. The village has a 
number of local amenities and services, and 
an hourly bus service to Carlisle. Highways advice: the access visibility splays 
from the site require careful consideration. 
The access will need to comply with 
adoptable road criteria. A speed survey will 
be needed to inform the aforementioned 
splay requirements. 
Biodiversity: there are no statutory or non-
statutory designations which apply within 
or adjacent to the site. There is potential 
for a range of species to be present within 
the vicinity of the site due to the network of 
hedgerows in the area. 
Flooding/drainage: 
•  potential land drainage issues which will 
require further investigation.
R 10: Land at Hadrian’s Camp, Houghton -  
the site has outline planning permission for 
96 houses (planning application reference 
12/0610) and is allocated in the Local Plan to 
safeguard the permission. A reserved matters 
application (14/0930) was received at the end 
of October 2014 for 99 houses (including 25 
affordable dwellings). 
Highways advice: the Highways Authority 
has not raised any significant issues with the 245
proposal, subject to satisfactory visibility 
splays being provided onto Houghton Road, 
and no properties being accessed directly 
from Houghton Road. 
Biodiversity: Natural England has 
commented as follows: The watercourses 
- Brunstock Beck and Gosling Sike - both 
discharge into the River Eden and Tributaries 
SSSI and SAC. We advise that sufficient 
pollution prevention measures will need 
to be designed into the detailed drainage 
design, and employed on site during the 
construction period, in order to not impact 
on the interest features of the designated 
river. 
The site and the surrounding area is 
designated as a non-statutory County 
Wildlife Site. The biodiversity interest of the 
site is due to its mosaic of habitats including 
orchid rich grassland. The ecological 
assessment prepared to inform the planning 
application recommends that the species 
rich turfs are relocated to an area to the east 
of the application site which are currently 
under metalled road surfaces, the surfaces 
to be removed and broken up beforehand. Heritage assessment: Historic England has 
commented that it is likely that this site can 
be developed without unacceptable impact 
on the Hadrian’s Wall World Heritage Site, 
subject to a height limit of no more than 2½ 
storeys.
Flooding/drainage: 
• only foul drainage connected into the foul 
sewer - foul water must discharge into the 
manhole located at Brampton Old Road; 
• surface water drainage to discharge 
into either a soakaway/infiltration or 
watercourse; land drainage or subsoil 
drainage water must not be connected 
into the public sewer; 
• the connection of highway drainage from 
the proposed development to the public 
wastewater network will not be permitted; 
and
• the Environment Agency requires a 
greenfield rate of discharge.
R 11: Kingmoor Park Harker Estate, 
Low Harker - an underused brownfield 
site with outdated buildings which are something of an eyesore, and which are 
unsuitable for ongoing commercial use. Its 
redevelopment for housing would yield a 
significant amount of affordable housing, 
and lead to an improvement to the local 
environment. The site lies close to junction 
44 of the M6, and employment areas and 
other services in the north of Carlisle. There 
are a number of small businesses in Harker. 
There is a primary school at Blackford which 
is just over 2km away. Providing a safe route 
to school is likely to be an issue which will 
need to be addressed as part of any planning 
application.
Highways advice: would require cycle 
path along C1015/1022. Site has poor 
accessibility and would potentially require a 
developer contribution to improve bus service 
frequency. Improvements will be required to 
enhance pedestrian and cycle facilities linking 
the site to nearby schools etc. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to 
the site. The main river which runs along 
the southern boundary of the site ultimately 
drains to the River Eden and Tributaries SSSI 246
and SAC. However, housing development is 
not likely to have a significant effect on the 
interest features for which the SAC has been 
classified , subject to satisfactory measures 
to control run off during construction and on 
completion of the site. 
Heritage assessment: no known heritage 
assets within or adjacent to site. 
Flooding/drainage: 
• likely surface water issues on site; 
• main rivers border site – 8m buffer zones 
will be required; 
• potential for surface water flooding on 
south west corner – would need to be 
careful with the layout to this part of the 
site - may provide the opportunity for open 
space here; and 
• could cause surface water issues for any 
potential future land use to the south. 
Other constraints: brownfield site - some 
contamination may be present and 
remediation likely.R 12: Land east of Monkhill Road, 
Moorhouse - a modest increase of 10 
houses over the plan period is considered 
acceptable for the size and scale of the 
village. Although there are limited services 
within the village, other nearby villages of 
Burgh, Great Orton and Kirkbampton have 
primary schools, pubs, village halls and a 
shop. The primary school at Burgh by Sands 
is currently has spare capacity.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority has 
indicated that there may be a gradient issue, 
but the development is acceptable from a 
highways point of view in principle. Junction 
spacing will need to be considered.
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to 
the site. The roadside hedgerow is likely to 
provide a habitat for wildlife and should be 
retained after taking into account access 
arrangements. 
Heritage assessment: Grade II listed building 
(Fairfield) opposite southern boundary of the 
site. Any development on this site will be 
expected to minimise any adverse impact on the listed building and its setting. Prehistoric 
remains survive adjacent to the site. An 
archaeological desk-based assessment 
and field evaluation will be required at the 
planning application stage. 
Flooding/drainage: 
• there have been drainage issues within 
Moorhouse in the past; and
• United Utilities developed a first time 
sewerage project here but consideration 
would need to be given to surface water 
and where it might discharge to – this 
doesn’t rule out the development but it 
may be hard to find a suitable place to 
drain. 
Other constraints: mature tree within centre 
of site should be retained and protected, 
being incorporated within the layout to 
provide focal point and mature landscape 
element.
R 14: Land at Tower Farm, Rickerby  
A small village very close to the edge of 
Carlisle. The whole village is covered by 
a conservation area designation and the 
majority of the buildings, apart from this site, 247
lie within flood zones two and three. The 
scale of the proposed development, at 10 
houses, is considered appropriate for the 
scale and form of the village. The site is a 
gateway to the conservation area, and the 
19th century barns and stables should be 
retained and converted creatively into the 
redevelopment of this site. 
Highways advice: the Highway Authority has 
advised that there are no major issues with 
the site. A speed survey will be required to 
inform the visibility splay requirement. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within the site. However, 
the land lies within 150m of the River Eden 
and Tributaries SSSI and SAC. Sufficient 
pollution prevention measures will need 
to be designed into the detailed drainage 
design, and employed on site during the 
construction period, in order to not impact 
on the interest features of the designated 
river.
Heritage assessment: the site lies within the 
Rickerby Conservation Area. As such, the 
development of this site should harmonise with the grain of the conservation area by 
respecting historic layout, road patterns and 
land form etc. New development should not 
directly imitate existing, but should be well 
designed with respect for its context, and 
have its own well established character and 
appearance. New development should also 
protect important views into and out of the 
area. Prehistoric remains survive adjacent 
to the site. An archaeological desk-based 
assessment and field evaluation will be 
required at the planning application stage.
The Old School House, and Wayside and 
Old School Cottage are grade II listed 
buildings which lie approx 100m from the 
western boundary of the site. However, a 
large new bungalow has been constructed 
between the site and The Old School House, 
effectively resulting in neither listed building 
being visible from the site. 
The existing buildings on the site, while not 
statutorily listed, are nonetheless designated 
heritage assets by virtue of their setting 
within the conservation area. The Nineteenth 
Century stables and barns on the site would 
be expected to be incorporated creatively into any development of this sensitive 
site, effectively a gateway to the Rickerby 
Conservation Area.
Flooding/drainage: 
•  small amount of surface water flood risk 
susceptibility; and
•  drain to the south and/or west. 
Other constraints: TPO 191 covers a number 
of trees on the western boundary of the site.
R 15: Land east of Scotby Road and north 
of Hill Head, Scotby - the site lies at the 
northern end of Scotby, with easy access 
to the A69 and junction 43 of the M6, and 
to Carlisle. Careful design of the layout 
including type of dwellings and location of 
open space will be required to minimise 
impact on the occupiers of the existing 
housing and bungalows which border the 
site on both Hill Head and Scotby Road. The 
layout should ensure appropriate distances 
between existing and proposed dwellings to 
ensure no adverse effect on the residential 
amenity of existing residents. The boundary 
of the site with the open countryside to the 
east should reflect the transition from the 248
development to the open countryside for 
example by the use of hedgerows. The main 
access will be onto Scotby Road, but there is 
potential for a secondary access to Hill Head. 
The roadside hedgerow fronting the A69 
should be retained. The hedgerow fronting 
Scotby Road should also be retained unless 
some limited removal is required for sight 
lines.
Highways advice: the proposed access will 
require upgrading to be wide enough for two 
way traffic and pedestrian footways. No other 
highways issues raised, other than some 
junction capacity testing may be required. 
Biodiversity: the site lies within 150m of 
Powmaughan beck which is a tributary of 
the River Eden and Tributaries SSSI and 
SAC. However, housing development is 
not likely to have a significant effect on the 
interest features for which the SAC has been 
classified, subject to satisfactory measures 
to control run off during construction and on 
completion of the site. 
Heritage assessment: an unscheduled 
archaeological site lies approximately 50m to the east of the site. Prehistoric 
remains survive adjacent to the site. An 
archaeological desk-based assessment 
and field evaluation will be required at the 
planning application stage.
Flooding/drainage advice: potential  
drainage issues on site. 
Other constraints: the North Western 
Ethylene Pipeline lies to the east of the 
site, and is operated by Essar Oil (UK). It 
is a significant pipeline asset of strategic 
importance in the supplies of oil and gas from 
the North Sea. The pipeline is classified by 
the Health and Safety Executive as a major 
accident hazard pipeline (MAHP) and as such 
is subject to land use planning constraints. 
R 16: Land at Broomfallen Road, Scotby - 
the site has planning permission for 
28 houses (including seven affordable 
houses), subject to the signing of a Section 
106 agreement to secure the affordable 
units, open space, community transport, 
education contribution and waste bins. The 
site is allocated to safeguard the planning 
permission. Highways advice: there are no fundamental 
issues with the proposed development. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within or adjacent to 
the site. A key issue is that a length of 
hedgerow is to be removed for access 
to the site. This must be undertaken 
outside of the bird nesting season. The 
area is especially important for protected 
species such as yellowhammer, spotted 
flycatcher and tree sparrow. Some form of 
appropriate compensatory planting should 
be undertaken so as to avoid a net loss of 
hedgerow biodiversity. 
Heritage assessment: there is an 
unscheduled archaeological site to the 
north and south of this site. It is therefore 
recommended that an archaeological 
evaluation and, where necessary, a scheme 
of archaeological recording of the site be 
undertaken in advance of development. 
Other constraints: public bridleway 138049 
runs along the northern and north western 
boundary of the site.249
R 17: Land east of Little Corby Road, 
Little Corby/Warwick Bridge - the site 
presents an opportunity to enhance the 
approach to Corby Hill with a development 
that reflects local design. Any development 
here would need to have full regard to the 
setting of Little Corby Hall, a Grade II listed 
building. The development boundaries 
consist of mature hedges which should be 
retained and reinforced where necessary by 
additional planting to enhance biodiversity 
and to help integrate the development with 
its rural aspect to the north and east.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority 
has indicated that pedestrian linkages to 
the Hurley Road Estate would be essential, 
as would improvements along Little Corby 
Road. 
Biodiversity: no statutory or non-statutory 
designations apply within the site. However, 
the River Eden and Tributaries SSSI and 
SAC lies within 100m of the site. Appropriate 
measures will need to be taken to ensure 
that foul and surface water drainage does 
not impact on the interest features of the 
designated river.Heritage assessment: Grade II listed Little 
Corby Hall lies 100m north of the site. The 
Hall was built in 1702 from dressed red 
sandstone, with end walls of brick/part 
rendered. This is an attractive building in an 
open setting which has a strong presence 
in this location. There is clear visibility from 
the proposed housing site to Little Corby 
Hall. In order to preserve the setting of the 
listed building, the density of development 
on the site has been reduced to give scope 
for better design. The site presents an 
opportunity to enhance the approach to 
Corby Hill with a development that reflects 
local design better than the post war 
estate development that currently forms 
its northern edge. Any development here 
would need to have full regard to the setting 
of Corby Hall, which until post war years, 
enjoyed an isolated location, set apart from 
the small hamlet of Little Corby. 
Flooding/drainage: 
• relatively flat site; and
• drain into watercourse to the west.R 18: Land to the south of Corby Hill to 
Heads Nook Road, Corby Hill/Warwick 
Bridge - located to the east of Corby Hill, 
this site can be accessed from the Corby 
Hill to Heads Nook Road, and makes 
provision for up to 30 houses. Where the 
site abuts open countryside to the east and 
south, careful consideration will need to 
be given to boundary treatment in order to 
integrate the development with the open 
countryside. The frontage of the site onto 
the public highway will also need high 
quality design and layout to complement 
the attractive approach to the village at this 
point.
Highways advice: Main access off Heads 
Nook to Corby Hill road. 
Biodiversity: the site is located just under 
500m from the River Eden and Tributaries 
SSSI/SAC. Trout Beck which crosses the 
site is a tributary of this designated site. 
Development must ensure no adverse 
impact on the special interest features of the 
designated site from run off etc. 250
Heritage assessment: unlikely to impact on 
the setting of Warwick Mill Main Mill and High 
Buildings listed buildings. 
Flooding/drainage: 
• area around Trout Beck classified as flood 
zone 2 and 3; and
• Trout Beck classified as ‘main river’,  
8 metres clearance required either side.
R 19: Wetheral South - there are 
acknowledged issues with the capacity of 
the waste water treatment works (WWTW) for 
Wetheral. However, increasing the capacity 
of the WWTW is in the United Utilities 
forward funding plan. In the meantime United 
Utilities has advised that any surface water 
should discharge at the lowest possible rate. 
This will be at a rate which is less than the 
average greenfield run-off rate. The surface 
water drainage system should include on-site 
attenuation. The site lies adjacent to Wetheral 
Conservation Area (CA) boundary, and as 
such new development will be expected to 
harmonise with the local context.Highways advice: the Highways Authority 
has not raised any issues regarding this site. 
Biodiversity: there are no statutory or non-
statutory designations within or adjacent to 
the site. There are a number of hedgerows 
within and on the boundary of the site which 
are likely to provide habitats and feeding 
areas for birds.
Heritage assessment: Grade 1 listed 
Wetheral Priory and Gatehouse lies 250 
metres from the site. There are also two 
scheduled ancient monuments within the 
Wetheral Abbey Farm cluster. The land rises 
steeply to the west of the listed building, 
blocking views of the heritage asset from 
the wider landscape. The roofs of the 
westernmost houses on The Glebe are only 
just visible. It is unlikely that development of 
the proposed site would adversely impact 
the character and setting of the listed 
building. Wetheral CA boundary lies adjacent 
to part of the northern boundary of the site. 
The CA at this point has a range of designs 
and sizes of two storey properties, finished in 
stone, render and brick, in a compact layout. New development will be expected to 
harmonise with the local context both within 
and adjacent to the CA. 
Flooding/drainage: 
•  historically lack of WWTW capacity has 
been an issue with new development; 
•  initial assessment of capacity at WWTW 
has been revised. Monitoring has shown 
the situation is not as bad due to the 
brewery permission in Great Corby not 
being implemented; 
•  foul water connections can potentially 
connect now; 
•  increasing the capacity is in the United 
Utilities funding plan - expected delivery 
of improved works 2020 will upsize the 
works to take additional flow; and
•  some surface water flood risk within area 
to adjacent properties - the run off across 
the site would need to be managed to 
prevent this.251
R 20: Land west of Steele’s Bank, south 
of Ashgate Lane, Wetheral - whilst the site 
is bordered to the north and east by existing 
housing, the landscape in this location is 
flat and open, and very careful design of 
the layout and housing will be required to 
establish an attractive edge to the village 
and prevent any adverse impact on the 
properties on both Ashgate Lane and Steele’s 
Bank. Adequate separation distances will be 
required between the new development and 
the mature trees which fringe the cemetery, in 
accordance with the adopted SPD Trees and 
Development.
Highways advice: the Highway Authority has 
not raised any issues regarding this site. 
Biodiversity - there are no statutory or non-
statutory designations which apply within or 
adjacent to the site. There are a number of 
hedgerows within and on the boundary of the 
site which are likely to provide habitats and 
feeding areas for birds and other wildlife. 
Heritage assessment: no known heritage 
assets within or adjacent to site. Flooding/drainage: 
•  the main issue in Wetheral is lack of sewer 
capacity; 
•  initial assessment of capacity at WWTW 
has been revised. Monitoring has shown 
the situation is not as bad due to the 
brewery permission in Great Corby not 
being implemented; 
•  foul water connections can potentially 
connect now; 
•  increasing the capacity is in the United 
Utilities funding plan - expected delivery of 
improved works 2020 will upsize the works 
to take additional flow); and
•  some surface water flood risk within area 
to adjacent properties - the run off across 
the site would need to be managed to 
prevent this; 
R 21: Land west of Wreay School, Wreay  
Wreay is a small village with a good range 
of local services including a primary school 
with spare pupil capacity. Though not 
designated as a conservation area, Wreay 
is a notable location due to its association with local architect and landower Sarah 
Losh 1785-1853. A number of nearby listed 
buildings include St Mary’s Church, (Grade 
II*), the Grade II Mausoleum, and to the 
immediate north of the site is the Grade II 
Pompeian Cottage.
The site is sensitive given its high density 
of designated heritage assets and also the 
relative low-density of Wreay as a whole. 
Any design should be of extremely high 
quality and fully respond to the sensitivity of 
its surroundings. 
Highways advice: the Highway Authority has 
not raised any issues regarding this site. 
Biodiversity: there are no statutory or non-
statutory designations which apply within or 
adjacent to the site. There are good roadside 
hedgerows which are likely to provide 
habitats and feeding area for birds etc. 
Heritage assessment: Wreay is a notable 
location thanks to its association with local 
architect and landower Sarah Losh 1785-
1853. A number of listed buildings are in 
proximity to this proposed site, all by her 
hand. These include St Mary’s Church, 252
which is Grade II* listed, located on the 
opposite side of the road to the south eastern 
corner of the site. Associated with this are 
a number of other listed structures in the 
vicinity of the Church including the Grade II 
Mausoleum. There is a mature tree belt which 
provides some screening of the site from 
some of these structures. Any development 
would have to respect, and not cause harm 
to the significance and setting of these listed 
buildings. To the immediate north of the site 
is the Grade II Pompeian Cottage, built in 
1830 by Sarah Losh as a school master’s 
house, and a replica of a house excavated at 
Pompeii.
Flooding/drainage: 
• main river runs down western side of site - 
8m buffer would be required; and
• watercourse would provide point of 
discharge.253
Appendix 22
Local Plan Monitoring Framework
The below schedule should be read within the context of Chapter 11 of the Local Plan.254Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
Spatial Strategy and Strategic Policies
SP 1Timely approval of 
applications that 
represent sustainable 
development% applications 
determined within 
statutory timescalesSustained poor 
performanceReview circumstances with 
Development Management and 
identify further actions as necessaryAll
% appeals dismissed
SP 2Delivery of at least  
9,606 net additional 
dwellings between 
2013 and 2030Net cumulative 
total new dwelling 
completionsNegative deviation 
from trajectory for a 
sustained two year 
periodDepending on the scale and nature of 
the potential under-delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:
• engaging with stakeholders; 
• the preparation of an interim 
position statement; 
• bringing forward additional 
allocations; and/or
• a partial review of the Local Plan1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11, 
13, 16Projected rates of 
delivery as illustrated 
through the housing 
trajectoryAnticipated or actual 
shortfall in five year 
supply of housing 
land
Approximately 
70% of new homes 
delivered in the 
Urban areaUrban/rural split 
of gross housing 
completionsActual and projected 
completions 
significantly deviating 
from target.
Five years of 
deliverable housing 
land at all timesAnnual Five Year 
Housing Land 
Supply Position 
StatementAnticipated or actual 
shortfall in five year 
supply of housing 
land255Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
SP 2Adequate delivery of 
and forward supply 
of employment land 
to support economic 
growthEmployment Land 
uptake (Ha) and type 
(B1/B2/B8)Uptake analysis
Depending on the scale and 
nature of any shortfall, actions 
may include:
• engaging with stakeholders; 
and/or
• a partial review of the Local 
Plan1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 
16Amount of 
employment land 
available (Ha) and 
type (B1/B2/B8)Diminishing 
forward supply of 
employment land 
(Ha) and type  
(B1/B2/B8)
Realisation of 
the opportunity 
presented by the part 
commercialisation of 
MOD Longtown  
(Solway 45)Progress toward the 
delivery and take up 
of the opportunityStalled progress
Take up of additional 
18,700 m² (net) additional 
comparison retail 
floorspace between  
2012 and 2030New (net) 
Comparison Retail 
FloorspaceUnder delivery and 
no forward supply
Respond to opportunities 
and encourage 
development on 
previously developed 
landAmount of 
development on 
previously developed 
landLittle or no reuse of 
previously developed 
land256
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
SP 3Masterplan and 
infrastructure delivery 
strategy in place for 
Carlisle SouthProgress against 
timetable set out in 
LDSDeviation from LDS 
without legitimate 
reason (as reported 
in the AMR)• Review circumstances;
• engage with stakeholders;
• review LDS; and/or
• secure additional resources to 
accelerate delivery
1, 13
Housing delivery at 
Carlisle South in line with 
MasterplanActual dwelling 
completions at 
Carlisle South. Housing/
infrastructure delivery 
not in accordance 
with MasterplanDepending on the scale and nature 
of the potential under-delivery, 
actions may include:
• engaging with stakeholders; 
and/or
• partial Review of the Masterplan 
and IDP (including phasing)Progress against 
delivery of required 
infrastructure
SP 4Protect and enhance the 
vitality and viability of the 
City CentreCity Centre Health 
CheckSustained decline in 
health of City CentreDepending on the scale and nature 
of the decline/lack of progress, 
actions may include:
• review circumstances;
• engage with stakeholders; and/or
• partial review of the Local Plan1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11, 
13, 16, 17 Realisation of City 
Centre and Caldew 
Riverside development 
opportunitiesProgress towards 
the realisation 
of identified 
opportunitiesLack of published 
year on year 
progress towards 
implementation of a 
deliverable scheme257
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
SP 5To protect and enhance 
the strategic connectivity 
of the District and 
support delivery of 
priorities as identified 
in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan and Local 
Transport PlanProgress towards 
delivery of identified 
prioritiesStalled progressEngage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the IDP/
LTP1, 2, 4, 7, 11, 12
SP6High quality design 
which supports/ creates 
a strong sense of placePolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 9, 10, 12, 13, 
14, 15,16, 17
SP 7To protect, enhance and 
enable the enjoyment of 
the District’s heritage and 
cultural assetsNet change in 
designated heritage 
assetsNegative trends
Review circumstances, engage with 
stakeholders and consider options if 
necessary1, 6, 16, 17Number of 
conservation areas 
with up to date 
appraisals and 
management plansDeviation from 
agreed programme 
for appraisals
Number of 
designated heritage 
assets considered to 
be at riskNegative trends258
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
SP 8Protection and 
enhancement of an 
interconnected and 
multifunctional green 
and blue Infrastructure 
networkPolicy usage and  
S 106 MonitoringDecision monitoringEngage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the IDP1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 
11, 12, 14, 15, 
16, 18, 19
SP 9Improve the health and 
sense of wellbeing of the 
District’s population, and 
reduce health inequalitiesHealth Profile/Joint 
Strategic Needs 
Assessment of the 
DistrictNegative trendsReview circumstances, engage with 
stakeholders and consider options if 
necessary1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 
11, 12, 13, 14, 
19, 20
SP 10To support efforts to 
up-skill the District’s 
populationLevels of education 
attainmentNegative trendsReview circumstances, engage with 
stakeholders and consider options if 
necessary1, 2, 13, 20
Economy
EC 1To support economic 
growth and increase the 
level of high value jobs 
within the local economy 
through making land 
available for employment 
land purposesTake up of the 
allocated 45Ha 
employment landNo or limited 
prospect of take up 
of allocated land as 
reviewed annuallyDepending on rate of delivery and/
or speed of progress, actions may 
include:
• engaging with stakeholders; 
• review evidence; and/or
• a partial review of the Local Plan1, 2259
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
EC 2To safeguard primary 
employment areas 
to ensure land and 
premises are available to 
provide the wide variety 
of sites required to meet 
the needs of businesses 
across the plan periodVacant floorspace 
(m2) and/or land on 
designated Primary 
Employment AreasSustained net 
increase in vacancy 
ratesDepending on the scale and nature 
of the position, action may include:
• engaging with stakeholders; and/
or
• review appropriateness of 
designation1, 2, 7, 20Loss of Primary 
Employment 
Areas (Ha) and/or 
floorspace (m²) to 
non-employment 
(B1, B2, B8) usesSustained net loss 
of land (Ha) and/or 
floorspace (m²) to 
non-employment  
(B1, B2, B8) uses
EC 3To maintain the vitality 
and viability of Primary 
Shopping Areas through 
the retention of high 
levels of retailing (Use 
Class A1) at ground floor 
levels% of ground floor 
units within the 
Primary Shopping 
Areas in A1 use
Negative trendReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11 % of ground 
floor units within 
designated Primary 
Shopping Frontages 
in A1 use260
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
EC 4Delivery of a District 
CentreProgress towards 
the delivery and take 
up of the allocation 
including foodstore 
anchorLack of published 
year on year 
progress towards 
implementation of a 
deliverable schemeDepending on rate of delivery and/
or speed of progress, actions may 
include:
• engaging with stakeholders; 
• review evidence; and/or
• a partial review of the Local Plan1, 2, 7, 11, 14
Superseded master 
plan
EC 5To protect the vitality and 
viability of District and 
Local CentresDistrict and Local 
Centre Health 
ChecksNegative trendsReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
designations1, 2, 7, 11, 16, 20
EC 6To protect the vitality 
and viability of defined 
retail centres through 
controlling inappropriate 
out of centre retail and 
leisure developmentsRetail Centre Health 
Checks
Negative trendsReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 5, 7, 11New Comparison 
Retail floorspace 
(m2) in out of centre 
locations
EC 7To help establish a strong 
sense of place through 
well designed shop 
frontsPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives7, 16, 17261
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
EC 8To facilitate the creation 
of a vibrant and viable 
food and drink offer 
across the DistrictRetail Centre Health 
ChecksNegative trends Review circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 7, 11, 20
Policy usage Decision monitoring
EC 9To protect and enhance 
the District’s arts, 
cultural, tourism and 
leisure offerPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 7, 11, 12, 
14, 16
EC 10To facilitate visitor 
accommodation in 
appropriate locationsPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 4, 16, 17
EC 11To enable rural 
diversification in order 
to support the rural 
economyPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 5, 16
EC 12To support ongoing 
agricultural investment 
and activities within the 
DistrictPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 16, 20
EC 13To support ongoing 
equestrian investment 
and activities within the 
DistrictPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 12, 16, 20262
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
Housing
HO 1Site allocations 
contributing to housing 
delivery as anticipated Delivery of site 
allocations in line 
with policyCumulative reduction 
in indicative yieldsDepending on the scale and nature 
of any potential under-delivery, 
actions may include:
• engaging with stakeholders; 
• bring forward additional 
allocations utilising evidence from 
the SHLAA; and/or
• a partial review of the Local Plan1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11, 
12, 13Allocations not 
coming forward 
within the plan period 
indicated.
HO 2Annual average of 
at least 100 windfall 
dwelling completionsActual and projected 
rates of windfall 
deliverySustained lower 
windfall delivery ratesReview windfall rate employed in 
trajectory and land assessments1, 2, 6, 9, 13
HO 3To preserve the character 
and quality of housing 
areasPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 9, 13, 14, 16263
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
HO 4To contribute towards 
meeting affordable housing 
needs through securing 
affordable homes from 
qualifying open market 
housing developmentsNo. of affordable 
homes delivered
Negative trends 
in percentages 
secured and 
delivered on sitesReview circumstances and if 
appropriate:
• engage with stakeholders;
• review housing need and/or 
viability evidence;
• the preparation of an interim 
position statement; 
• bring forward additional 
allocations utilising evidence from 
the SHLAA; and/or
• a partial review of the Local Plan1, 6, 13, 14No. of affordable 
housing secured 
via Development 
Management 
process
HO 5To make provision for rural 
housing needPolicy usageDecision 
monitoringReview circumstances and engage 
stakeholders and if appropriate 
review Policy and alternatives1, 2, 13
HO 6To protect the open 
countryside from 
inappropriate housing 
development whilst 
recognising there may be 
special circumstances where 
new housing will be allowedPolicy usageDecision 
monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 5, 13, 14
HO 7To assist in protecting 
Heritage AssetsPolicy usageDecision 
monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review policy and 
alternatives1, 5, 6, 9, 13, 17, 
20264
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
HO 8To assist in adaption 
of existing dwellings to 
meet changes in lifestylePolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and 
if appropriate review Policy 
and alternatives1, 2, 9, 13, 
16, 20
HO 9To contribute to the mix 
of housing offer within 
the DistrictPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and 
if appropriate review Policy 
and alternatives6, 10, 13, 14
HO 10To contribute to the mix 
of housing offer within 
the DistrictPolicy usage  
Number of additional 
specialist and/or 
supported housing 
units deliveredDecision monitoring  
No additional specialist and 
or supported housing units 
deliveredReview circumstances and 
engage stakeholders and 
if appropriate review Policy 
and alternatives2, 7, 9, 11, 
12, 13, 14
HO 11To meet the 
accommodation 
needs of Gypsies and 
Travellers and Travelling 
ShowpeopleNet increase in 
permanent pitches 
and plots deliveredProgress towards the build out of 
the allocations
Review circumstances and if 
appropriate: 
• engage with stakeholders;
• review evidence;
• bring forward additional 
allocations; and/or
• a partial review of the 
Local Plan11, 12, 13, 14Sustained increase in number 
of unauthorised pitches/
developments
Turnover on 
permanent sitesLower than cumulative 10% 
turnover on rented sites within 
the District over a two year period
Net increase in 
transit pitches and 
plots deliveredProgress towards the build out of 
the allocations
Sustained increase in number of 
unauthorised encampments265
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
HO 12To protect the amenity of 
Primary Residential AreasPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 13, 14, 20
Infrastructure
IP 1To ensure timely delivery 
of infrastructure needed 
to support delivery of the 
PlanDelivery mechanisms 
within IDPContinued deficit as 
identified in the IDPEngage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the IDP1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11, 
12, 14
IP 2To minimise the impact of 
new developments on the 
transport networkType, nature and 
location of new 
developmentsContinued deficit as 
identified in the IDPEngage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the IDP1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 11, 
16, 18, 19, 20
IP 3To ensure appropriate 
parking standards are 
adhered toCompliance with 
any standards in 
operationDeviation from LDS 
without legitimate 
reason (as reported 
in the AMR)• Review circumstances;
• engage with stakeholders;
• review LDS; 
• secure additional resources to 
accelerate delivery; and/or
• partial review of the Local Plan1, 2, 6, 9, 13, 
14Adoption of SPD setting 
out parking standardsProgress against 
timetable set out in 
LDS
IP 4To ensure new 
developments benefit 
from access to high speed 
internetPolicy usage Decision monitoring
Engage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the IDP1, 2, 13Infrastructure 
Delivery PlanDecision monitoring 
Continued deficit as 
identified in the IDP266
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
IP 5To reduce the level of 
waste and improve levels 
of recyclingLevels of residual 
household waste per 
household (kg)Negative trendEngage with stakeholders 
and review circumstances 
and if appropriate review 
Policy and alternatives4, 10 ,13, 19, 
20 Levels of household waste 
sent for re-use, recycling or 
composting (%)
IP 6To ensure sufficient 
capacity for foul water 
drainage to support 
growthPolicy usage Decision Monitoring Engage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the 
IDP3, 13, 20
Infrastructure Delivery PlanContinued deficit as 
identified in the IDP
IP 7To facilitate the ongoing 
operation of Carlisle 
AirportPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 2
IP 8To secure any measures 
agreed as necessary 
to make development 
acceptable in planning 
termsS106/CIL monitoring  
as reported annuallyIssues raised through the 
annual reportingDepending on scale and 
nature of the issues, action 
may include:
• engage with stakeholders; 
and/or
• partial review of the Local 
Plan1, 7, 11, 12, 
13, 14267Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
Climate Change and Flood Risk
CC1To facilitate/enable 
development which 
contributes to generating 
renewable energyCapacity in kW 
output of approved 
applicationsDecline in the number 
of applications 
received and/or 
capacity kW output 
over a five year periodDepending on scale and nature of 
the decline, action may include:
• engage with stakeholders; and/
or
• partial review of the Local Plan1, 2, 4, 8, 10, 19
Number of 
applications received
CC 2To facilitate/enable 
development which 
contributes to generating 
renewable energy from 
windCapacity in kW 
output of approved 
applicationsDecline in the number 
of applications 
received and/or 
capacity kW output 
over a five year periodDepending on scale and nature of 
the decline, action may include:
• engage with stakeholders; and/
or
• partial review of the Local Plan
1, 2, 4, 8Number of 
applications received
DPD to identify suitable 
areas for wind energy 
development is in placeProgress against 
timetable set out in 
LDSDeviation from LDS 
without legitimate 
reason (as reported in 
the AMR)• Review circumstances;
• engage with stakeholders;
• review LDS; and/or
• secure additional resources to 
accelerate delivery
CC 3To ensure development 
proposals are energy 
efficient and resilient to 
the impacts of climate 
changePolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives4, 8, 9, 10, 13268
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
CC 4No development which 
would be subject to 
flood risk or increase the 
possibility of flood risk 
elsewhereNumber of 
applications granted 
against flood authority 
adviceNegative trendEngage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the IDP1, 3, 4, 13, 14, 
20
CC 5Prioritisation of SUDs in 
new development sitesNumber of 
applications approved 
contrary to advice of 
appropriate bodiesYear on year increase 
in number of 
applications approved 
contrary to advice of 
appropriate bodiesDepending on the scale and nature 
of issues, actions may include:
• engage with stakeholders; and/or
• consider introduction of further 
guidance /SPD3, 4, 9, 12, 13, 
14, 15
Health, Education and Community
CM 1Support New Health Care 
ProvisionType, nature and 
location of new 
healthcare provisionContinued deficit as 
identified in the IDPEngage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the IDP1, 12, 14
CM 2Support Educational 
ProvisionSufficient capacity 
to support proposed 
growthContinued deficit as 
identified in the IDPEngage with stakeholders in 
particular in context with the IDP1, 2
CM 3Avoid loss of valued 
community facilities and 
servicesPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 7, 12, 14Number of facilities 
registered as a 
Community AssetIncrease of assets at 
risk269
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
CM 4Design of development 
deters crimePolicy usageDecision 
monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and1, 4
CM 5To protect the 
environmental and 
residential amenityPolicy usageDecision 
monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 
12, 13, 14, 15, 
16, 18, 19, 20
CM 6To facilitate and enable 
additional cemetery and 
burial groundsType, nature and 
location of new 
cemetery provisionContinued deficit 
as identified in 
the IDPEngage with stakeholders in particular in 
context with the IDP3, 4, 12, 18, 20
Historic Environment
HE 1To protect Hadrian’s Wall 
World Heritage Site from 
inappropriate developmentPolicy usageDecision 
monitoringReview circumstances and engage with 
stakeholders1, 12, 16, 17
HE 2To protect scheduled 
and non-designated 
archaeological assets as 
a resource for research, 
education, leisure, tourism 
and for their influence on 
perceptions of identity and 
sense of placeNet change in 
designated heritage 
assetsNegative trendsReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 16, 17270
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
Historic Environment
HE 3To protect buildings 
and/or structures that 
have been placed on 
the Statutory List of 
Buildings of Special 
Architectural or Historic 
InterestNet change in 
designated Heritage 
AssetsNegative trendsReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 6, 9, 16, 17
HE 4 1, 12, 15, 16, 17
HE 5 1, 12, 15, 16, 17
HE 6To protect locally 
important heritage assets 
that have not been 
placed on the Statutory 
List of Buildings of 
Special Architectural or 
Historic InterestPolicy usage Decision monitoring
Review circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 6, 9, 16, 17No of assets 
included on a Local 
ListNegative trends
HE 7To preserve or 
enhance the character 
and appearance of 
conservation areasPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 6, 9, 16, 17271
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
Green Infrastructure
GI 1To protect against 
insensitive developmentPolicy usage Decision monitoringReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 12, 14, 15, 16, 
20
GI 2To protect and enhance 
the natural beauty and 
special characteristics 
and landscape quality of 
the Solway Coast and the 
North Pennine AONBsPolicy usage Decision monitoring Review Policy and alternatives1, 9, 12, 14, 15, 
16, 17
GI 3No net loss of biodiversity 
or geodiversityNet change 
in designated 
biodiversity and 
geodiversity assetsNegative trendReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives3, 4, 15, 16, 18, 
19
GI 4No unacceptable loss of 
public open spaceAmount of public 
open space (Ha) lostLoss of public 
open  space / failure 
to provide new 
provision contrary 
to advice of the 
Council’s Green 
Spaces teamDepending on the scale and 
nature of issues, actions may 
include:
• engage with stakeholders;
• consider introduction of further 
guidance /SPD; and/or
• partial review of the Local Plan1, 4, 11, 12, 14, 
15, 16, 18, 19, 20Ensuring new housing 
developments in excess of 
20 units, where required, 
provide or contribute to the 
creation of additional public 
open spaceAmount (Ha) 
of public open 
space secured 
on new housing 
developments272
Policy Objective Indicator Trigger Possible Actions SA Objective
GI 5No net loss of public 
rights of wayAmount of public 
rights of way (Km)Negative trendReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives1, 2, 7, 11, 12, 
14, 16, 18, 19
GI 6No unauthorised loss of 
trees subject to a TPO 
or hedgerows qualifying 
as ‘important’ under the 
Hedgerow Regs 1997Number of TPOs 
Negative trendReview circumstances and if 
appropriate review Policy and 
alternatives4, 15, 16, 18, 19 Amount of 
‘important’ 
hedgerowsImages courtesy of Eden Housing Association, Nick Fox and Graeme Peacock