1 
 Appendix – Main Modifications  
The modifications below are expressed either in the conventional form of strikethrough  for deletions and underlining  for additions of text, or by specifying the 
modification in words in italics . 
The page numbers and paragraph numbering below refer to the submission local plan, and do not take account of the deletion or addition  of text.  
  
Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
MM1  
 2 Paragraph 
2.2 Policies in this plan will replace  in their entirety  the 2007 saved  policies  from the Castle Point Borough Local 
Plan adopted  in 1998.  
MM2  3 Strategic 
Priorities 
Bullet Point 3  Promote sustainable development through the effective use of land and ensuring appropriate infrastructure, 
including flood and transport infrastructure, supports development.  
4 Strategic 
Priorities 
Bullet Point 8  Promote active and  sustainable modes of  travel (including public transport)  and reduce travel times by enhancing 
existing transport infrastructure , and facilities and services.  
4 Strategic 
Priorities 
Bullet Point 
10 Ensure attractive design that accentuates the positive features in the natural, built and historic environment and 
results in well —designed beautiful and safe places.  
4 Strategic 
Priorities 
Bullet Point 
13 Protect and enhance the environment to ensure that there is a are measurable  net biodiversity and  environmental 
gains. 
6 Paragraph 
3.9 At the heart of the NPPF  is the presumption in favour of sustainable development. The achievement of sustainable 
development requires consideration of several themes, including but not limited to economic growth, infrastructure, 
housing, biodiversity and health. When read as a whole this  The Local Plan responds positively to the presumption 
in favour of sustainable development by positively seeking to meet the development needs of the borough in a way 
which takes local circumstances into account. The Local Plan  addresses these development needs through  themes  
themed in policies throughout the Plan. These themed development policies should be read in conjunction with one 
another, and in conjunction with those policies that are intended to protect and enhance the environment and 
achieve sustainable outcomes.  
15 Vision for the 
Future 
Paragraph  
2 Communities will have been improved through appropriate, high quality development that creates beautiful and safe 
places and  that provides a good mix of homes to support citizens throughout the different stages of their live s. 
15 Vision for the 
Future 
Paragraph  
6 Important features in the natural and historic environment including wildlife, habitats, landscape features, historic 
buildings and archaeology will have been protected and where possible  enhanced  
16 Objective 1  Objective 1: To protect and enhance the range of services that support healthy and active communities within 
Castle Point and create beautiful and safe places.  
16 Objective 5  Objective 5: To promote more active and sustainable travel patterns within Castle Point through the location of 
development, and the provision of public transport and cycling active and sustainable transport infrastructure and 
services, to complement and provide an attractive alternative to the existing highway ne twork.  
16 Objective 6  Objective 6: To protect and enhance the network of green infrastructure and high quality, accessible green and 
open space throughout Castle Point.  
16 Objective 7  Objective 7: To protect and enhance the quality of the natural, bui lt and historic environment within Castle Point, 
having regard to features of ecological, landscape and heritage importance, with the aim of securing measurable 
environmental and biodiversity net gain and resilient ecological networks.  
MM3  17 Chapter 8 
Subtitle  Making Effective Use of Land  and Creating Sustainable Places  
 
17 Paragraph 
8.5 In considering the location of new residential development the Council has prioritised development within the existing 
urban areas and previously developed land. Accordingly, together with extant planning permissions and sites 
development since the 1st April 2018, urban or previously developed sites account for nearly over 50% of the total 
land supply during the plan period. This includes sites on t he brownfield register; sites promoted in the SHLAA  that 
are policy compliant but too small to include as allocations in this Plan; and allocated sites within the urban areas. It 
is assumed that due to Green Belt policy constraints most of the expected win dfall will also be within urban areas.  
 
17 Paragraph 
8.7 Canvey island is a high -density settlement based on shallow plots with a tight street pattern. Whilst there are several 
small sites identified in the SHLAA  which are policy compliant for development they do not make a significant 
contribution towards the overall housing need target. It is not therefore possible to secure significant levels of 
additional growth on Canvey Island through urban intensification . Increasing density within Canvey  is not possible.  
As on the ‘mainland’…  
19 Paragraph 
8.10 Therefore, the Council has optimised development within the urban areas. Strategic Policy SD1 sets out the general 
principles against which the Council will favourable  consider applications for ne w development which meet the 
objectives of this Plan , this includes the requirements of the Habitats Regulations and how place making objectives 
will be applied . 
 
19 Paragraph 
8.10 INSERT NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 8.10 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
Strategic Policy SD1 sets out the requirement for development proposals to meet the requirements of the Habitats 
Regulations by avoiding adverse effects on the integrity of Habitats sites through an appropriate approach to 
development. The Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) which accompanies this plan identifies the potential for 
some of the proposals within the plan to cause adverse effects on the integrity of either the Benfleet and Southend 
Marshes SPA and Ramsar Site, or the Thames Estuary and Marshes SPA and Ramsar site, either alone or in 
combination with other plans or projects, unless appropriately mitigated. This is highlighted in the relevant policies. It 
will be necessary for those proposals which ha ve been identified as having the potential to cause an adverse effect 
on the integrity to be subject to project level HRA to demonstrate that the necessary mitigation measures have been 
secured, and the proposal will not impact on the integrity of Habitats  sites.  
 
19 Paragraph 
8.10 INSERT NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 8.10 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
To ensure that development positively contributes to the Borough by creating beautiful, healthy and sustainable 
places and spaces consis tent with the NPPF, policy SD1 sets out key place making criteria. To support the Plan an 2 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) has been prepared, this identifies the location, scale, timeframes for delivery and 
cost of infrastructure required within this Pla n. The Council’s approach to developer contributions to achieve these 
place making objectives are set out in strategic policy SD2.  
 
18 Policy SD1  
 Making Effective Use of Land  and Creating Sustainable Places  
 
1.The Council will seek to make the most effective use of development land in the Borough by:  
1. Granting permission where detailed proposals come forward for development on sites allocated in this 
Plan for that purpose and which comply with all other relevant policies in the Plan;  
a. Approving d evelopment proposals that accord with the development plan where it can be demonstrated 
that there would be no adverse effect on the integrity of the Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA and 
Ramsar site or the Thames Estuary and Marshes SPA and Ramsar site, e ither alone or in combination with 
other plans and projects. This should be demonstrated through project level HRA for all development 
proposals where the potential for adverse effects on integrity has been identified in this plan, or because of 
subsequent  information about the condition of Habitats sites.  
 
2b. Favouring a design -led approach to establishing site density that maximises the use of land and ensures 
that proposals are of high quality and compatible with the character of the area.   
 
3c. Favouring a design led approach to development, ensuring that proposals are of high quality and 
compatible with the prevailing character of the area.   
 
4d. Recognising  this urban intensification and brownfield redevelopment  as an important  source s of suppl y, 
the Council  will support proposals for  redevelopment and intensification in existing residential areas where 
appropriate, and  development on previously developed land, including land within the Green Belt where 
those proposals are consistent with the Gr een Belt policies in this Plan and the provisions of the NPPF.   
 
2. In order to ensure that new development contributes positively towards the quality of the Borough as a place to 
live and do business, and enable communities and businesses to be sustainabl e and thrive, the Council will require 
the following  place making objectives to be delivered  as part of all proposals in a proportionate  way having regard to 
their scale:   
 
a. The delivery of development must be aligned with the provision of necessary infrastructure;   
 
b. High standards of design that create places people want  to live in and work in now and in the future;   
 
c. High standards of sustainability within the design and construction of new buildings so that residents and 
businesses can enjoy a low cost, healthy living environment;   
 
d. The provision of integrated public open space, and the enhancement of  the green infrastructure network  to 
offer a range of  health  and environmental benefits; and   
 
e. High levels of accessib ility by public transport and active modes of travel to employment, education, services 
and recreation  opportunities in order to promote inclusion and encourage community cohesion.    
 
MM4  
 19 Paragraph 
8.16 The Council will implement a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  charging schedule to enable contributions to be 
made towards infrastructure and services from all new development, including those schemes  below the qualifying 
threshold set out in national Planning Practice Guidance for the use of planning obligations .   
 
20 Policy SD2  1.The Infrastructure Delivery Plan identifies the infrastructure required to meet the demands of new development.  
 
12.Where necessary , T the Council will seek appropriate contributions towards the provision of infrastructure required 
to make a development proposal acceptable in planning terms, in accordance with the tests set out in the National 
Planning Policy Framework and the provisions of the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations and having regard 
to the provisions of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. from qualifying developments in order to support the delivery of 
new or improved infrastructure necessary to deliver the sustainable development promoted in this Plan.  
 
2.Permission will only be granted if it can be demonstrated that there is enough infrastructure capacity to support the 
development or that additional capacity will be delivered by the proposal. It must further be demonstrated that capacity 
as is required will prove sustain able over time both in physical and financial terms. Where there is insufficient capacity, 
development will be constrained until such time as capacity is provided to meet demands: this will apply to health and 
education.  
 
3.Where a development proposal re quires additional infrastructure capacity,  t The mechanism for providing the new 
infrastructure must be agreed with the Council and where necessary,  the appropriate infrastructure provider. Such 
measures, to will be set out in Section 106 Agreements and ma y include  including : 
o financial contributions towards new or expanded facilities;  
o on-site construction of new provision;  
o off-site capacity improvement works;  
o the provision of land;  
o financial contributions to the future maintenance and management of new infrastructure; and/or  
o Local Management Organisations to maintain and manage public open space and public realm within 
developments.  
 
4. Developers and landowners are expected to work positively with the Council, neighbouring authorities and 
infrastructure providers throughout the planning process to ensure that the cumulative impact of development is 
considered and then mitigated, at the appropriate time.  
 
5.The Infrastructure Delivery Plan sets out the infrastructure needs of the Borough to  meet the demands of new 
development. Sites allocated and where appropriate other development will be expected to contribute towards the 
provision of the infrastructure identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 
MM5  
 21 Paragraph 
9.5 Since September 2018 the standard methodology has been used as a method to calculate objectively assessed 
needs. The standard methodology, as set out in national Planning Practice Guidance uses the 2014 -based 
Subnational Household Projections and an adjustment c apped at 40% arising from the median house price to 
workplace -based earnings ratio published by ONS. Due to affordability issues in Castle Point the full 40% applies to 
the standard methodology calculation, and consequently the need for housing in the Boro ugh derived using the 
Standard Method sits at 355 homes per year. The SHMA Addendum was produced using the same Subnational 3 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
Household Projections but tested different scenarios having been prepared prior to the introduction of the standard 
methodology. Non etheless, that evidence also indicates that the need in Castle Point is of the order arising from the 
standard methodology calculation, and the  Prior to that the government published housing targets for all local planning 
authorities in England in Septembe r 2017 in the Housing Need Consultation Data Table. Based on the standard 
methodology the identified target for Castle Point was 342 new homes to be built per annum or 5,130 homes for the 
Plan period. The Council does not dispute this target and has used it for this plan. Therefore, this Plan will provide a 
minimum of 5,325 new homes over the Plan period.    
21 Paragraph 
9.6 The NPPF expects Local Plans to identify deliverable and developable sites to meet the need of the Borough for at 
least ten years after the adoption of the plan, and if possible, for the final five years of the plan period. This means 
that the housing supply identified in this plan needs to ensure that there is sufficient supply to meet needs to 2032 as 
a minimum. This would re quire a supply of at least 4,970 homes for the period 2018 to 2032.  This Plan identifies land 
for 5,284 5,510  new homes, providing enough supply for the plan period to 2033, with a small margin for headroom. 
In the meantime, the Council will continue to wo rk with partners across South Essex through the preparation of the 
Joint Strategic Plan to identify a strategic approach to growth across the entire area over the longer term. This will 
enable the review of this Local Plan to establish how housing needs wi ll be met in full to 2037.  This exceeds the OAN 
by 154 homes and equates to 352 new homes per annum. This exceeds the target of 342 homes per annum. 
Therefore, there is no unmet need which other local planning authority areas need to include within their emerging 
local plans.  
 
21 Paragraph 
9.7 This plan sets out how the supply of 5,284  5,510  will be met during the plan period. The priority has been to 
accommodate as much of this supply within existing urban areas. However, as set out in the Housing Sites Topic 
Paper 2018, developable urban land is a finite resource, and not all the forecast growth can be met within the existing 
urban areas.  
22 Paragraph 
9.9 Subsequent work from the 2018 Housing Sites Options Topic Paper means that housing needs can be met in full. 
This includes the  However, that report which was used to support a November 2018 version of this plan, did not take 
into consideration  inclusion of  existing planning consents or completions since April 2018 and , both of w hich boost 
the overall supply of new homes. Furthermore, there were  several urban sites which were discounted from the 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) policy compliant schedule, as the landowner did not 
respond to the 2018 Call for s ites, despite having responded to earlier ‘Call for Sites’ . These are small sites, which 
provide a total of 166 dwellings and if they come forward are likely to secure planning consent. These have been 
added to the housing supply towards the end of the pla n period . Therefore, the work completed since 2018 highlights 
that the OAN can now be met in full.   
22 Paragraph 
9.9 INSERT THE FOLLOWING PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 9.9 AND AMEND THE NUMBERING ON ALL 
SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER  
 
Whilst the SHLAA identifies specific sites for the purposes of development, it is known that sites have come forward 
unexpectedly over time for the purpose of redevelopment, increasing housing provision. Typically, this has secured 
upwards of 20 homes per annum in Castle P oint, normally on smaller sites where the intensity of built development 
can be optimised. It is also common for windfall sites to arise through changes in economic cycles. As an example, 
the retail sector is currently experiencing significant changes in t he way people shop impacting on the amount of built 
floorspace required in town centres. It is therefore anticipated that these economic changes with drive windfall 
provision up to around 60 homes per annum.  
 
22 Paragraph 
9.10 Therefore, the borough has capacity to accommodate in the region of 5,284  5,510  homes. The Council has prioritised 
capacity within urban areas and / or on brownfield sites from a variety of sources as set out in the table below. This 
capacity is drawn from the following:  
• Housing completions from 1 April 2018 until 31 March 2019 2021 ; 
• Current extant planning permissions and prior approvals for net new dwellings;  
• Policy compliant sites, which are small sites within the urban area that are featured in the SHLAA ; 
• The Brownfield Land Register (BLR)  which is a document agreed by the Council which has a number 
of brownfield sites that are suitable and available for development in the Borough;  
• Small Windfall sites; and  
• Strategic housing allocations, those within urban ar eas and those outside urban areas.  
22 Paragraph 
9.11 The total housing supply for the plan period is set out in Policy HO1. Of the total 5,284 5,510  new homes, 
approximately half are strategic allocations in non -urban areas:  
 
23 Paragraph 
9.17 INSERT THE FOLLOWING TWO PARAGRAPHS AFTER PARAGRAPH 9.17 AND AMEND THE NUMBERING ON 
ALL SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER  
 
Due to the significant level of provision expected to be delivered on former Green Belt sites, there is an impact on the 
delivery of n ew homes and the housing trajectory over the plan period. This is because in the period prior to the 
adoption of the plan Green Belt sites are not available for development and it will take some time for them to come 
forward after the adoption of the plan.   
 
The Council is however putting in place mechanisms to enable permissions on Strategic Allocation Sites come forward 
promptly after the adoption of this plan. Nevertheless, the report Start to Finish Second Edition February 2020  
indicates that it can take time for the first completions to be secured on larger sites. To this end, once the plan is 
adopted there will be stepped increase in housing supply within Castle Point, although ultimately, the level of housing 
required will be secured over the plan period. To this end the housing requirement set out in Policy HO1 is stepped, 
at a minimum of 291 new homes per annum for the years 2018/19 to 2025/26, and at least 430 homes per annum 
from 2026/27 and for the rest of the plan period.  
 
23 Table 9.1  REPLACE TABLE 9.1 IN ITS ENTIRETY WITH THE TABLE BELOW  
 
 
 
Ref Site Completions  Extant 
Permission  2018 -
2023  2023 -
2028  2028 -
2033  TOTAL  
HO9  Land west of Benfleet  0 0 100  460   290  850 4 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
HO10  Land between Felstead 
Road and Catherine 
Road  0 22  0 101 0 101 
HO11  Land off Glyders  0 0 5 25 0 30 
HO12  Site of the former WRVS 
Hall, Richmond Avenue  0 0 20 19 0 39 
HO13  Land east of Rayleigh 
Road  0 0  100  290   65  455 
HO14  Land at Brook Farm  0 0 0 173 0 173 
HO15  Land south of Scrub 
Lane  0 0 0 55 0 55 
HO16  Land at Oak Tree Farm  0 0 0 65 0 65 
HO17  Hadleigh Island  0 0 0 52 0 52 
HO18  Land north of Grasmere 
Road and Borrowdale 
Road  0 0 30  0 0  30 
HO19  Land at Glebelands  0 0 10 145 0 155 
HO20  The Chase  0 10 0 320 20 340 
HO21  Land fronting Rayleigh 
Road  0 0 0 0 60 60 
HO22  Land at Thames Loose 
Leaf 0 0 0 0 12 12 
HO23  Land east of Canvey 
Road  0 0 0 262 38 300 
HO24  Land west of Canvey 
Road  0 57 0  19  177  196 
HO25  Land at Thorney Bay 
Caravan Park   90  0  0   210   300   510  
HO26  Land at The Point  0 0 0 0 100 100 
HO27  Walsingham House  0 0 16 16 0 32 
HO28  Land at Admiral Jellicoe  0 0  40   0  0 40 
HO29  Land south of Haron 
Close  0 0  10   0  0 10  
HO30  Land at Haystack car 
park 0 0 14 0 0 14 
HO31  Land at Kings Park  0 0  25   25  0 50 
HO32  244-258 London Road  0 0 0 0 50 50 
Total from strategic allocations  90  89   370   2,237   1,112  3,719  
Completions   200  0 0  200  
Extant planning permissions   605  0 0  605 
Policy compliant sites   29  78  186  293  
Brownfield Land Register   125   63   15  203  
Windfall   80   110   110   300  
Gross total   1,409   2,488   1,423   5,320  
 Replacement dwellings on strategic 
allocations  -36 
 Net Total  5,284  
 
 
Ref Site Cap
acity Losses  Extant 
Permission 
(as of 
31.03.21)  2018
/19-
2020
/21 2021
/22-
2025
/26 2026
/27-
2030
/31 2031
/32-
2032
/33 
HO9 Land west of 
Benfleet  850     0 150 500 200 
HO9 Land west of 
Benfleet Care 
Home (60 bed)  33     0 0 33 0 
HO10  Land between 
Felstead Road 
and Catherine 
Road  125 -12 24 0 65 60 0 
HO11  Land off Glyders  30     0 30 0 0 
HO12  Site of the former 
WRVS Hall, 
Richmond Avenue  39     0 15 24 0 
HO13  Land east of 
Rayleigh Road  455     0 165 275 15 
HO14  Land at Brook 
Farm  173     0 165 8 0 
HO15  Land south of 
Scrub Lane  55     0 55 0 0 5 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
HO16  Land at Oak Tree 
Farm  65     0 65 0 0 
HO17  Hadleigh Island  52     0 38 14 0 
HO18  Land north of 
Grasmere Road 
and Borrowdale 
Road  30     0 0 0 30 
HO19  Land at 
Glebelands  155     0 155 0 0 
HO20  The Chase  430 -13 18 0 183 247 0 
HO20  The Chase Care 
Home (60 bed)  33     0 33 0 0 
HO21  Land fronting 
Rayleigh Road  60 -1   0 0 0 60 
HO22  Land at Thames 
Loose Leaf  12     0 12 0 0 
HO23  Land east of 
Canvey Road  300     0 150 150 0 
HO24  Land west of 
Canvey Road  199 -3   0 0 150 49 
HO24  Land west of 
Canvey Road 
Care Home (57 
bed) 32   32 0 32 0 0 
HO25  Land at Thorney 
Bay Caravan Park  820 -590   195 375 250 0 
HO26  Land at The Point  100 -2   0 0 50 50 
HO27  Walsingham 
House  32   32 0 32 0 0 
HO28  Land at Admiral 
Jellicoe  14     0 14 0 0 
HO29  Land south of 
Haron Close  24   24 0 24 0 0 
HO30  Land at Haystack 
car park  14   14 0 14 0 0 
HO31  Land at Kings 
Park  50     0 0 50 0 
HO32  244-258 London 
Road  50 -5   0 0 0 50 
Total from strategic 
allocations  4232  -626 144 195 1772  1811  454 
Other Completions 2018 – 
2021 (Net)  434 -88   434 0 0 0 
Extant planning permissions 
at 1 April 2021  (Net)  502     0 475 27 0 
Policy compliant sites  272     0 20 138 114 
Brownfield Land Register  179     0 44 85 50 
Windfall  600     0 180 300 120 
Total from other sites  1987   -88   434 719 550 284 
Total Supply  6219   
Losses  -709  
Total (Net)  5510   
 
 
24 Policy HO1  1. In order to deliver sufficient homes to meet housing need  at least 5,284 homes within Castle Point Borough during 
the period 2018 to 2033 the Council will  This will be achieved by : 
a. Identify a specific supply of at least 5,325 homes for the period to 2033, comprising the following:  
Source  Total  Percentage of net total  
Completions (2018/ 192021 ) 200 434 3.75 6.9% 
Extant permissions (31.3. 2019 2021 )  605 502 11.37 8% 
Brownfield Register  203 179 3.81 2.8% 
Policy Compliant SHLAA  293 272 5.5 4.3% 
Windfall  300 600 5.63 9.6% 
Strategic Allocations on Urban or  Brownfield sites  974 1,272  18.3 20.4% 
Total completions, consented, urban or brownfield  2,575  3,259  48.4 52% 
Strategic allocations outside urban areas  2,745  2,960  51.6 48% 
Gross total  5,320  6,219  100%  
Potential demolitions   -36 -709  
Net Total Supply  5,284  5,510   
 
b. Prepare a Joint Strategic Plan in conjunction with partner authorities in South Essex to determine how 
longer -term housing needs will be secured across the area and review this plan to reflect the outcomes of the 
Joint Strategic Plan.  6 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
2. The housing requirement for the p lan period as a whole is a minimum of 5,325 homes. For the years 2018/19 to 
2025/26 an annualised housing requirement of at least 291 homes per annum applies. For the years 2026/27 and for 
the remainder of the plan period, the annualised housing requiremen t is at least 430 homes per annum.  
2.To deliver homes to meet need, the Council will:  
a. Make the most effective use of land within existing residential areas for the provision of new homes;  
b. Support development in town centres to incorporate residentia l development on upper floors, and in 
locations on the edge of town centres;  
c. Support development on the Housing Strategic Allocations sites;  
d. Ensure that the mix of new homes provided in the Borough is aligned with the local needs. This will enable 
first time buyers, growing families and those looking to downsize to meet their accommodation needs;  
e. Secure specific provision of specialist accommodation for older people, and other vulnerable adults living 
in our communities;  
f. Publicise and maintain its self -build and custom build housing register, and provide opportunities for local 
people to build their own homes through the identification of sites identified either specifically for self -build 
development, or as part of a larger development  site; and  
g. Put in place appropriate policies which seek to meet the special accommodation needs of our Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople population.  
3. For local people whose housing needs are not met by the market, the Council will seek to ensure that provision is 
made for affordable homes inclusive of the total housing target for the Borough. This will be achieved by:  
a. Seeking a proportion of new homes provided by developers to be affordable;  
b. Delivering affordable homes via the Counc il’s own house building programmes; and  
c. Appropriate policies to meet the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers.  
4. In order to ensure new homes contribute positively towards the quality of the Borough as a place to live, and enable 
communities to be sustainable and thrive, the Council will require the following:  
a. The delivery of homes must be phased to align with infrastructure provision;  
b. High standards of design that create places people want to live now and in the future;  
c. High stand ards of sustainability within the design and construction of new homes so that residents can 
enjoy a low cost, healthy living environment;  
d. The provision of integrated public open space, and the enhancement of the green infrastructure network to 
offer a  range of health and environmental benefits; and  
e. High levels of accessibility by public transport and active modes of travel to employment, education, 
services and recreation opportunities in order to promote inclusion and encourage community cohesion.  
MM6  26 Policy HO2  1. The Council expects master plans and/or planning or development briefs for all major allocations for  housing 
development within this plan, to be prepared having regard to local design guidance set out in the Essex Design 
Guide, and where relevant the National Design Guide and National Model Design Code proposals . 
2. The Council will expect entering into voluntary planning performance agreements (PPA)  with promoters of such 
development, to cover matters such as master planning, the pre -application process and a timetable for key events 
and the nature of engagement with the Council and the community.  
3. In order to demonstrate its commitment to the master plan process, the Council will in appropriate cases, adopt 
master  plans/planning development briefs as supplementary planning documents and will then accord significant 
weight to them in the determination of any subsequent planning applications. The Council will consider the complexity 
of landownership, the infrastructu re requirements of the site, and the scale of development when determining whether 
to adopt a masterplan/development brief as an SPD.  
MM7  27 Paragraphs 
9.26 to 9.32 
and Table 
9.2 RENUMBER PARAGRAPH NUMBERS AS APPROPRIATE  
 
9.26 The Addendum to the  South Essex  Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) for Castle Point (2020)  (2016) 
identified reviewed the need for different house sizes and types  to meet the changing needs of the Borough’s 
population. This Addendum  concluded that there will be demand from a range of different household types, although 
demand will be particularly strong from families with children and people of retirement age.  There is a demand of 32% 
of total supply for smaller units (1 or 2 bedroom housing), reflecting the demo graphic trends of the Borough led by 
younger people looking to set up their first home. This means that  Tthere is also a strong demand, for 3 or 4 -bedroom 
properties reflecting the need of growing families. It is important that these homes are provided as they will help to 
attract more professional and working aged  people to live in the area. This is particularly important for both business 
growth and in sustaining public services, such as healthcare.  
 
9.27 The SHMA  Addendum  also identifies in identifying  a housing pressure arising from the growing population of 
older people , highlights the desirability of bungalows in Castle Point. Bungalows make up 29% of the housing stock 
currently, and it is expected that there will be demand for additional bungalows in the plan period, reflecting the 
characteristics of the local housing stock. It also identifies the need for specialist accommodation for older people, 
suggesting a need for around 45 units per annum of sheltered housing types. In addition to t his around 20 additional 
bedspaces are required each year in residential care/nursing accommodation. Despite the need for specialist 
accommodation, it is expected that the majority of older people will however live in bungalows or houses within the 
communi ty, and these will therefore require adaptations to remain fit for purpose. Where homes have been built to 
higher accessibility standards as outlined in Part M of the Building Regulations, these adaptations can be easier to 
deliver and ensure people can re main in their homes for longer. Properties designed to such standards may also be 
suitable for other people who require support such as children and working aged adults with disabilities . This has 7 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
implication for the turnover of existing homes and for the demand for homes suitable for older people who may need 
to live in supported housing  
 
9.28 The SHMA 2016 and the SHMA Addendum 2017 examined the current dwelling characteristics for all authorities 
across South Essex  Addendum  identifies the potential deman d for different housing types and sizes, as set out in 
table 9.2 below. It is anticipated that by securing this mix of development across the borough, the future needs of the 
borough will be met, although it is noted that this demand may shift over time ba sed on changes in the local market . 
 
9.29 Given the mix of house types and sizes required, the Council will be seeking a mix of different housing types and 
sizes on appropriate sites in order to ensure that development proposals are contributing to  The Council will consider 
accommodation requirements for specific groups as part of creating sustainable, mixed, socially inclusive 
communities. In relation to the size of properties, the SHMA identifies the proportional split by type and n umber of 
bedrooms for additional households. The Council will therefore expect developers to have regard to table 9.2 in 
making provision for a housing mix on an individual development site. To remain flexible and reflect changes in local 
market factors, t he most recent SHMA outputs will guide the appropriate mix in future.    
 
Table 9.2 Housing Mix requirements in the SHMA  
 
Type of Accommodation Required  
Detached Semi Detached  
Houses  Terraced 
Bungalows  Flats 
43.6% 41.7% 68%  5.5% 25%  9.2% 7% 
Size of Accommodation Required  
1-bed 2-bed 3-bed 4 or more bed  
7% 6% 25% 22%  42% 43%  27% 29%   
 
9.30 The evidence base indicates that there is a clear need for a diverse mix of house sizes and types in Castle Point 
in order to respond to demographic trends in the borough for first time buyers and an including an  increasing number 
of older people. By securing an appropriate mix of homes on development sites, these difficulties can be addressed  
needs can be met . 
 
9.31 In addition, the housing mix should also reflect the local context of the site , as it is recognised that  I it will not be 
possible to secure a full mix of house sizes and types on all sites. Very small sites will be constrained by site capacity 
and the existing street scene. However, larger sites  will be able to make an increasingly more significant contribution 
to the mix within the local housing market. In taking the local context into account it is recognised that some sites may 
provide mainly flatted developments, whilst others will potentiall y provide more houses and bungalows.  Consideration 
will be made on an individual site basis.  
 
9.32 Some sites in highly sustainable locations such as near railway stations and town centres should secure a 
significant uplift in density, consistent with the  requirements of the NPPF. This may see more flatted developments, 
and alternative house types such as town houses and maisonettes provided in these locations.  The Essex Design 
Guide  considers densities for sustainable development, areas that are located w ithin sustainable locations such as 
these and should be referred to when seeking to prepare proposals which  are encouraged to  produce a higher density. 
The Castle  Point Large Site Capacity Assessment 2018 assesses various sites within Castle Point and  evaluates the 
optimum density based on constraints and the surrounding environment. This provides an indication of the house 
types that may be appropriate on the strategic allocations set out in this plan. For other sites, a context appraisal will 
be required.   
 
ADD NEW PARAGRAPH AND NUMBER ACCORDINGLY  
 
Within this plan are two allocations which are expected to come forward for the provision of park homes, aimed at 
retirees. These will make a substantial contribution to addressing the needs of this age group but may not be a form 
of development which is desirable or appropriate for all, especially those requiring additional support. To this end, 
there will remain a need for accommodation for older people to be met on sites across the borough, through mor e 
traditional or formalised forms of accommodation.  
 
28 Policy HO3  REPLACE POLICY HO3 WITH THE FOLLOWING POLICY TEXT:  
 
In order to achieve a local housing supply that responds to local housing need, the following sizes and types of homes 
should be included:  
Sites of between 0.5 and 4ha should comprise at least 35% 1 or 2 -bedroom homes for general needs; and  
Sites over 4ha should comprise at least 25% 1 or 2 -bedroom homes for general needs.  
The requirements of this policy will be weighed against regeneration objectives where the proposal under 
consideration is for a mixed -use development comprising an element of housing and is within the following areas 
identified on the Policies Map:  
A town centre location; or  
Canvey Seafront Entertainmen t Area.  
 
In order to achieve a local housing supply that responds to local housing need, the Council will require a mix of 
different sized and type homes to be secured within developments, contributing to the creation of sustainable 
communities. In determi ning if a sufficient and appropriate mix has been achieved, the Council will have regard to the 
most recent SHMA outputs (currently set out in Table 9.2), and the location and context of the site.  
 
Where a site is 1ha in size or larger, the Council will ex pect developers to have considered how homes specifically 
aimed at older people can be accommodated within the site, and where appropriate made provision for such homes 
as part of the overall housing mix. Such homes could take the form of bungalows, specia list accommodation, or 
houses which meet Part M4(2) of the Building Regulations. In determining an appropriate form for older people’s 
accommodation regard should be had to the requirements of policy CC2 on Canvey Island.  
 
MM8  28 Paragraph 
9.35 The Whole Plan Viability Assessment identifies a viable level of affordable housing taking into account other 
infrastructure requirements and development costs. In the case of Canvey Island, the additional groundwork costs 
indicate that the provision of afford able housing at the same level as the mainland, will affect commercial viability of 
development. Therefore, separate rates are proposed for Canvey Island of between 15% and 40% and for South  
Benfleet, Hadleigh and Thundersley of 40%. Whilst the requirement  for affordable housing can be applied to 
specialist accommodation for older people in the South Benfleet, Hadleigh and Thundersley area without affecting 
viability, the additional costs associated with building such schemes on Canvey Island is likely to r ender such 8 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
development unviable. Therefore, specialist accommodation for older people on Canvey Island cannot provide 
affordable housing without affecting overall delivery.   
 
29 Paragraph 
9.39 The Council will therefore seek the affordable housing element of development proposals to provide at least 50% 
social or affordable rented accommodation affordable housing for rent , as defined in the NPPF , available to those in 
need of social housing, and with the remainder  no more than 50% provided in the fo rm of affordable homes to buy, 
as defined in the NPPF , intermediate housing aimed at helping local first -time buyers access the housing market. Any 
national requirements aimed at improving access to affordable homes to buy, such as First Homes, should be m et 
from that element of the affordable housing supply, and does not affect the requirement for 50% of affordable homes 
to be affordable housing to rent. Affordable housing definitions may change over the life of this Plan, and proposals 
should have regard to the latest definitions as set out in national policy.  
 
29 Paragraph 
9.41 Payment in lieu of on -site provision will only be accepted in exceptional circumstances. In such circumstances, the 
payment will be equivalent to the cost of on -site provision proposals as well as large housing proposals. However, in 
accordance with the NPPF  affordable housing will only be sought for proposals of 10 units or more .  Details on how 
off-site provision should be provided will be set out in a Developers Con tributions Guidance  n Affordable Housing  
Supplementary Planning Document.  
30 Policy HO4  1. All proposals for housing development, and mixed -use proposals that include an element of housing, resulting 
in 11 10 or more net additional homes will be required to make the following level of  provision for 40% affordable 
housing  of affordable housing , with the following exceptions : 
a. Up to 40% for development sites on the mainland (Benfleet, Hadleigh and Thundersley)  
b. On Canvey Island:  
a. 0% affordable  housing is required for standalone developments comprising solely specialist 
accommodation for older people on Canvey Island;  
 
bi. 15% affordable housing is required  for all developments of less than 100 dwellings which includes 
comprise solely  flats on Canvey Island; and  
 
cii. 25% affordable housing is required  for all other  developments of less than 100 dwellings on Canvey 
Island which does not include flats; and . 
 
iii. Up to 40% for all developments of 100 dwellings or more.  
2. Affordable housing provision will normally be provided on -site. The Council will also consider proposals for off -
site provision where the provision of affordable housing is equivalent to the level of requirement set out under part 
1 of this policy. Payments in lieu o f on-site provision will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances. Such 
payments should be equivalent to the cost of on -site provision.  
3. The targets set out in  Part 1a above represent the target for all development of 11 10 or more units. In 
except ional circumstances where there is evidence that a development is unviable at those levels, including below 
40%,  it will be the responsibility of the applicant  development  to make the case to the satisfaction of the Council.  
 
4. The Council will seek no less than 50% of all new affordable housing as affordable or social rented to be 
affordable housing for rent, with the remainder  and 50% as intermediate housing affordable home ownership 
products, as defined in the NPPF.  The Council will seek nomination ri ghts in the Section 106 Agreement.  
 
MM9  32 Paragraph 
9.54 Thorney Bay provides rented accommodation within previous holiday type caravans, as well as owner -occupied 
accommodation in modern ‘park homes’. There are some health and well -being issues associat ed with the residential 
use of holiday -type caravans, particularly during winter months. There are proposals to redevelop most of this park 
for traditional homes, however around 300 caravans may continue to be provided towards the western extent of the 
site under existing planning permissions.  
 
32 Policy HO6  1.Proposals for new caravan parks, and for extensions to existing caravan parks in Castle Point will only be 
supported where robust evidence can be provided that demonstrates a significant need for such additional provision 
in Castle Point, and that the proposed site is suitable for the accommodation of caravans in terms of access, layout , 
amenities, flood risk and impact on the surrounding area. Where appropriate a project level HRA may be requi red 
alongside consideration of the proposal, as per the requirements set out in policy SD1  
 
2. In the instance where the above requirements can be met, consideration will be given as to whether a condition 
should be used to restrict the winter use of carav ans. Winter use will be restricted where:  
 
a. The site has been exceptionally permitted following the application of the sequential and exception tests 
but is not suitable for permanent residential use due to its location in flood risk zone 3; or  
 
b. The q uality of the proposed caravans to be located on the site is not suitable for year -round occupation 
without risk to the health and well -being of potential occupiers.  
 
MM10  34 Paragraphs 
9.64 – 9.66 DELETE PARAGRAPHS 9.64 AND 9.66 AND INSERT THE NEW PARAGRAPHS BELOW. RENUMBER 
SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS ACCORDINGLY  
 
There is no need for additional pitches in Castle Point from the CPLNAA period to 2034 for Gypsy and Traveller 
households that meet the planning definition as none were identified; a need for u p to one additional pitch for Gypsy 
and Traveller households that may meet the planning definition; and a need for five additional pitches for Gypsy and 
Traveller households who do not meet the planning definition.  
 
There are currently two existing Gypsy and Traveller sites within the borough these are called Janda Fields and 
Orchard Place. Since the publication of the Greater Essex Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Assessment in 2018 an application for additional static caravans on the existing private Janda 
Fields site was allowed on appeal (PINS Ref: 3213684). At the Appeal Hearing the residents of the site confirmed 
that the additional static caravans would be sufficient to meet all of their current and future needs.  
 
There was no need identified in the Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment for 
households that met the PPTS planning definition of a Traveller, other than that which has now been addressed 
through the additional static caravans at the si te at Janda Fields. The remaining need in the Gypsy, Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment arises from households where it was not possible to complete 
an interview (undetermined households), and from households that did not meet the  PPTS planning definition of a 
Traveller.  
 9 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
In order to meet the needs of Gypsies and Travellers in the borough and due to the size of Orchard Place, there is 
scope to provide further pitches. As a result, this site is allocated for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation needs 
only. This site, as identified on the Policies Map, is inset from the Green Belt and allocated for Gypsy and Traveller 
accommodation only. Applications for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation outside of this site and within the Green 
Belt would be inappropriate development and relevant Green Belt policies within this Plan would apply.  
 
There were no Travelling Showpeople identified living in Castle Point so there is no current or future need for 
additional plots.  
 
The needs of those households that may meet the planning definition and households that do not meet the planning 
definition results in requirement for a total of six dwellings over the plan period. Due to the acute housing constraints 
in the borough, and the relatively  limited scale of need identified by independent objective research, no specific sites 
have been identified to meet the needs of these households, instead a local criteria -based policy will be applied.  
 
34 Policy HO7  
 1. Orchard Place as identified on th e Policies Map, is allocated for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation only.  
 
2. Applications  Sites  for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation outside of the Gypsy and Traveller Site identified on 
the Policies Map  will be permitted in Castle Point where proposals meet the following criteria:  
 
a. A project level HRA, where appropriate, may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as 
per the requirements set out in policy SD1 ; 
 
ab. The proposed site location has good access to healthcare, schools and other community facilities;  
 
bc. The location of the proposed site is safe , achieves adequate living conditions  and does not pose a risk 
to potential occupants from natural or man -made hazards, including but not limited to:  
i. Flood risk;  
ii. Proximity to hazardous installations or operations;  
iii. Air quality;  
iv. Excessive noise; and  
v. Highway safety.  
 
cd. The privacy and amenity of neighbouring properties would not be adversely affected; and  
 
de. The proposed design and layout of th e site should be sensitive to the local environment, setting and 
landscape in which the site is located.  
 
2. A proposal for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation within the Green Belt will only be permitted where It can be 
demonstrated that very special circu mstances justify an exception to Green Belt policy.  
 
3. In order to protect the limited supply of lawful Gypsy and Traveller sites in the borough, proposals that would lead 
to the loss of sites will only be permitted where it is demonstrated that there is  no longer an identified need for the 
site, or that replacement provision on a site that is equal or of better quality is provided subject to the policies in this 
plan.  
 
MM11  35 Paragraphs 
9.68 – 9.70 DELETE PARAGRAPHS 9.68 – 9.70 AND REPLACE WITH THE BELOW TEXT  
 
9.68 Residential annexes are a common form of development that are generally proposed in order to allow relatives 
to live with their family with a degree of independence. This type of development can be very beneficial and provides 
suitable accommodation which allows vulnerable or less able people within the community the opportunity to live 
independently in close proximity to family members.  
 
9.69 In many cases, such proposals may be considered acceptable, however, caution needs to  be exercised to ensure 
that this does not result in proposals which effectively create new independent dwellings to the rear of existing homes 
as in many cases this can result in the provision of accommodation of a poor design, inappropriately located and  
lacking adequate facilities and amenities.  
 
9.70 The addition of annexes to residential properties can also have a considerable impact upon the character and 
amenity of an area through the intensification of development. Through this policy the Council will seek to ensure that 
any residential annexe development is solely provided as ancillary accommodation to the original dwelling and not as 
a new dwelling.  
 
Limited housing supply, increasing house prices and an increase in the number of people i n the community with care 
needs, can result in extended families, including adult children, in some cases with children of their own, and elderly 
parents all occupying a single residential property. Annexes for family members, particularly elderly relative s, can help 
to meet social needs whilst reducing pressure on other types of accommodation. However, such accommodation can 
have other implications such as on -site car parking provision, amenity space and local amenity.  
 
Annexes may be created through the extension of host dwellings, the conversion of attached and detached 
outbuildings and the provisions of new structures within the curtilage of the host dwelling. In order to most effectively 
maintain a long term ancillary link and to consolidate the built form, where possible, the Planning Authority will 
encourage the provision of annexes through the extension of the host dwellinghouse.  
 
Where annexes are no longer required for their original purpose, some homeowners may seek to dispose of the 
Annexe as se lf-contained and independent accommodation. Such disposal can result in the creation of dwellings out 
of character with their surrounding pattern of spatial development which lack appropriate setting and amenities and 
place pressure on parking and infrastr ucture provision.  
 
Where it appears likely that an annexe has the potential to be used in the future as self -contained and independent 
accommodation, and this would be inappropriate spatially or have a detrimental impact on character, amenity or 
infrastru cture, where consistent with the statutory tests for planning obligations, applicants will be required to enter 
into a S106 Agreement to ensure that the permitted Annexe is retained as such.  
 
 
 
 
 
36 Policy HO8  DELETE WORDING OF POLICY HO8 AND REPLACE WITH THE BELOW TEXT  
 
1. Planning permission for the creation of a residential annexe will only be granted if all the following criteria are 
met:  
 10 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
a. the annexe shall be within the same ownership as, and will be occupied in conjunction with, the original 
dwelling;  
 
b. the annexe does not appear tantamount to the creation of a new dwelling or separate planning unit;  
 
c. the annexe is ancillary and subordinate in size and scale to the original dwelling, and of a design which, 
taken as a whole, complemen ts the original dwelling;  
 
d. the occupant(s) of the annexe share(s) the access, garden and parking areas of the original dwelling;  
 
e. there is a clear functional relationship between the occupant(s) of the annexe and the original dwelling;  
 
f. the provision of services and utilities to the annexe are provided via the original dwelling; and  
 
g. the proposal does not cause any other harm, such as, but not limited to, amenity (including on occupiers 
of the annexe, the original dwelling and neighbours), heritage and b iodiversity assets, highways, parking, 
flood risk or character of the locality.  
 
2. Development of detached residential annexes within the defined property boundary will only be permitted where 
it is demonstrated that the accommodation cannot reasonably b e provided as an extension to the original 
dwelling. Development of residential annexes within the Green Belt will only be permitted where they are an 
extension to the existing dwelling or the conversion of an existing outbuilding where there is a close ph ysical 
relationship with the main dwelling. Any proposal for the creation of a new detached building for use as an 
annexe in the Green Belt will be treated as a new dwelling, and proposals considered as such.  
 
 
1. In the determination of any application for the provision of a residential annexe within the curtilage of an existing 
dwellinghouse, either through extension, conversion or new build, the Local Planning Authority will give weight to the 
following considerations:  
  
(a) Ancilliarity:  
The proposed Annexe shall be ancillary to the host dwellinghouse. The applicant will be required to 
demonstrate a clear functional connection with, and degree of dependency on, the host dwellinghouse.  
 
(b) Size:  
The proposed Annexe shall be subordinate i n size and scale to the host dwellinghouse and shall demonstrate 
a level and scale of accommodation that can be justified for its intended users.  
 
(c) Design and Layout:  
The design of the Annexe shall be sympathetic to the locality and the Annexe shall n ot be sited in a manner 
likely to result in an unacceptable loss of parking or amenity space for the residents of the host dwellinghouse, 
or the privacy and amenity of adjoining residents. There shall be no demarcation or subdivision of the garden 
areas be tween the Annexe and the host dwellinghouse and access to the Annexe shall be shared with the 
host dwelling.  
  
2. Proposals for the provision of Annexes to dwelling houses in the Green Belt will also be considered within the 
context of Policies GB1, GB2 an d GB3 of this Local Plan.  
 
3. Where consistent with the statutory tests for planning obligations, applicants will be required to enter into a S106 
Agreement to secure the retention of the Annexe for purposes ancillary to the host dwelling  
 
MM12  37 Paragraph 
10.1 The sites identified in this Plan aim to achieve the total supply of 5,284  5,510  new homes by 2033.  
 
37 Paragraph 
10.3 INSERT NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 10.3 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS  ACCORDINGLY  
 
The site capacities for the allocations within this chapter are a consequence of site capacity evidence work through 
the Large Site Capacity Assessments or the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA). For the 
purposes of plan making an indicative number of dwellings ex pected to be delivered on each site is stated, taking into 
account individual site constraints and infrastructure requirements. The specific number of dwellings expected on 
each site will however be determined through the development management process, ha ving regard to site 
constraints, opportunities and housing mix.  
 
MM13  
 38 Paragraph 
10.13  It is considered that given the diverse nature of the site, it should be developed through a master plan approach. 
Taking a plan -led approach to development in this location presents the opportunity to design and create a landscaped 
western gateway into the borough framed by a landscaped buffer along the whole of the western boundary of the 
borough, both to the north and south of the A130 creating  an attractive, high quality development and environment. 
The master plan will also set out the detailed infrastructure requirements as outlined in the policy and the phasing.  
 
38 Paragraph 
10.14  Furthermore, such a The provision of a  landscape buffer provides the opportunity to create a strategic greenway 
running north south along eastern boundary, which can incorporate accessible public footpaths and cycleways, linking 
to existing and proposed footpaths, cycle routes, open spaces, and natural f eatures. It also provides the opportunity 
to effectively integrate biodiversity into the development through the creation of a community woodland which will also 
lessen the visual impact of the development. Due to the location of this site, and the scale o f development proposed, 
it will be necessary for the master plan for this site to be accompanied by a project level Habitats Regulation 
Assessment which ensures that the detailed proposals do not pose a risk of adverse effects to the integrity of the 
nearb y Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA. On -site green infrastructure provision within this development is 
expected to play a significant role in ensuring harm is prevented to this off -site natural asset.  
 
38 Paragraph 
10.15  In terms of Green Infrastructure, it is expected that a  A master plan will establish how the public open spaces 
throughout the site are to be utilised. Furthermore, a master plan will need to consider how to integrate any 
development with the diverse topography of the site,  as well as the existing landscape features and the strategic 
landscape buffer and Ggreenway. The masterplan will set out the detailed infrastructure requirements as outlined in 
the policy and phasing.  
 
38 Paragraph 
10.16  It will also be necessary to dem onstrate integration of sustainable drainage techniques as part of the green 
infrastructure requirements , particularly given the site's topography, and proximity  to Flood Zones 2 and 3 to the 
south east of the site. This will be to ensure that surface wate r is managed appropriately in order to prevent flooding 
of properties on or nearby the site. Furthermore, there is existing Anglian Water infrastructure within the boundary of 
the site. This existing infrastructure is protected by easements and should not be built over or located in private 
gardens where access for maintenance and repairs could be restricted. The layout of any development should 11 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
ensure existing sewers are located within the highway or open space. If this is not possible a formal application  to 
divert these assets may be required.  
 
38 Paragraph 
10.17  To support the scale of the development on this site community infrastructure provision is also required . tThe 
development will provide a residential care home, a new co -located primary school with early years and childcare 
nursery and medical facilities are also required  as set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan . Community Infrastructure, 
including the residential care home should be appropriately located on site to provide good acc ess to residents, 
preferably via active travel modes. Guidance should be sought from the relevant infrastructure/service providers in 
this regard, with ECC setting out detailed guidance on the location for school sites in the Developers Guide to 
Infrastructure Contributions. The Essex Design Guide  meanwhile provides guidance on the location of 
accommodation for older people within developments to support their ongoing wellbeing.  
 
39 Paragraph 
10.19  The principal access to the site will be from the A130, but the education and medical facilities will need to be accessible 
from the existing communities to the east. In providing such access from roads to the east, a no t through road (for 
non-public transport and emergency vehicles)  shall be created to the A130, however this route will be accessible for 
public transport and emergency vehicles only . This is to avoid an alternative through route being created to the 
detriment of the existing highway network and residential amenity of the area. It is exp ected that active and sustainable 
travel infrastructure, facilities and services will be secured alongside the highway improvements, including the 
provision of a bus service through the site, to which the development will be expected to contribute towards.   
 
39 Paragraph 
10.19  INSERT NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.19 AND RENUMBER ALL REMAINING PARAGRAPHS 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
Given the location of this site on the borough boundary, the adjoining borough and parish Councils will be invited to 
be engaged in the master planning process. Due to the highway, education and social care infrastructure requirements 
it will also be critical to engage with the County Council and other relevant infrastructure and service providers.  
39 Policy HO9  1. Land West of Benfleet, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to deliver around  850 
new homes; a nursery and primary school co-located with early years and childcare nursery ; medical facilities; a 
residential care home; and, associate d infrastructure as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 
2. A master plan should be prepared and submitted to the Council for its approval for  approach to  this site will be  
taken to ensure that the development is attractively designed, contributing to environmental quality, and that enough 
infrastructure is provided. The master plan must include the following:  
 
a. An urban design framework using a mix of urban design approaches for all development  having regard to 
the local context to cr eate an attractive, green, parkland environment, integrated into the existing landscape 
and topography;  
 
b. A landscape , ecology and biodiversity  strategy for the site that includes:  
i. The provision of a landscaped buffer along the whole of the site’s western boundary, to create a 
green and attractive character to the entrance into the borough;  
ii. The provision of a strategic greenway running along the whole of the site’s eastern boundary, 
incorporating and linking to existing network of public footpaths, cycleways, public open space 
including a new community woodland and equipped children’s play areas, natural features, and green 
infrastructure  to meet daily recreational needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors from 
Habitats sit es; 
iii. An approach to wildlife that results in a measurable net gain in biodiversity;  
iv. Retains, as far as possible, the established hedgerow field boundaries;  
v. Access to the adjoining allotments and recreational open space;  
vi. An increase in publ ic open space provision across the site, including additional children's play 
areas; and  
vii. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface 
water flooding to the site or nearby properties.  
 
c. The principal access to the site from the A130 Canvey Way, comprising a roundabout junction and a segregated 
northbound carriageway for existing traffic which will be provided before the homes are occupied. Access from the 
existing highway network to the east shall be restricted to accessing the school and medical facilities only and no 
through route shall be created, except for public transport and emergency services. The installation of a roundabout 
will be dependent on the outcomes of a transport modelling e xercise to determine the impact of the strategic route 
network and any mitigations required, including increased capacity on the A130 northwards of the roundabout to 
Sadlers Farm and improvements to the slip road from Canvey Way to A13. Active and sustaina ble travel infrastructure, 
facilities and services should be provided alongside these highway infrastructure improvements.  
 
d. A Community hub at a suitable location within the site with good access to active and sustainable travel modes. 
This shall compri se: 
 
i. 2.9ha of land  to deliver a new primary school with commensurate  co-located with early years an d 
childcare nursery  provision , with and associated play space;  
ii. Land for a 1,500sqm healthcare facility with adequate parking and servicing provision; and  
iii. A residential care home comprising around 60 bedspaces.  
 
e. A development layout which safeguards suitable access for the maintenance of foul and surface water drainage 
infrastructure, and any other utility assets identified as being p resent on site.  
 
3. Planning applications for development within the allocation area must have regard to the master plan and must 
contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are necessary to make the proposal for 
that indivi dual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
4. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
54. Ensure access to public transport facilities and services in order to promote sustainable transport patterns.  
 
MM14  40 Paragraph 
10.20  This site is approximately 12 ha in size. The northern section of the site fronting London Road has been developed 
for housing over the past 5 years or has extant planning permission for new homes. The remainder of the site is 
heavily wooded, interspersed by sporadic dwellings and unmade roads. 0.6 ha of the site has a Local Wildlife Site 12 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
designation of a Lowland mixed deciduous woodland and 0.7 ha of the site is designated as a Potential Local Wildlife 
Site. 
 
40 Paragraph 
10.21  Any development of this site would need to consider how biodiversity, particularly in relation to the trees and woodland, 
the topography, as well as the compartmentalised landscape and semi -rural nature of the site, could be effectively 
integrated into the development, and how an overall net gain in biodiversity could be achieved. Also, any development 
should take into account the requirements of policy NE4 in relation to Local Wildlife Sites and Potential Local Wildlife 
Sites . The site is dissected by a number of footpaths, plotland roads and bridleways, some of which are Public Rights 
of Way, and  which should be retained and enhanced.  
 
40 Paragraph 
10.22  The main part of the development could be adjacent to Felstead Road with a of master planned ‘Arcadia’ urban 
design approach with discrete groupings of dwellings, and create an attractive green, woodland environment where 
the natural environment and residential homes co -exist side by side. This environment sh ould include open spaces, 
pocket woodlands, and greenways which create links to be enjoyed by all. This should be integrated into the 
development already underway on the northern part of the site adjoining the A13. The master plan for this site will 
be pre pared and approved by the Council with input from landowners, key stakeholders and the public. The master 
plan will set out how applications for different parcels of land within the site can come forward.  
 
40 Paragraph 
10.23  The site is allocated for a total of  around  183 185 dwellings. A higher density of development has been secured 
through consents on the frontage of the London Road where there is outstanding planning permission for  of which 22  
24 flats, and where  have permission and  60 flats have been built. The Large Site Capacity Assessment 2019 reviewed 
the potential for the remainder of the site. Taking into account environmental constraints and the character of the 
area, this concluded that around a further 101 homes could be secu red. This leaves 101 homes to be built.  However, 
as the site is already scattered with houses, the replacement or retention of these dwellings, leaves a remaining  would 
deliver a  net addition of around  89 units  new homes . Therefore, this policy only sets o ut the requirement for the 
remaining net additional 89 units provision.  
 
41 Paragraph 
10.25  Given the proximity to the two primary schools and the access onto the A13, consideration should be given to how 
additional traffic flows in the area around this site will be accommodated and directed to minimise off -site junction 
congestion and any negative impact on the environment around the schools . The need for improving public transport 
facilities and services to encourage their use is required.  
 
41 Policy HO10  DELETE WORDING OF POLICY HO10 AND REPLACE WITH THE BELOW TEXT  
 
1. Land between Felstead Road and Catherine Road, Benfleet, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for 
residential purposes, to deliver up to 89 additional new homes by 2033.   
2. A master plan approach to this site will be taken to ensure that the development is attractively designed, 
contributing to environmental quality, and that sufficient infrastructure is provided to support growth in this 
location. The master plan must  deliver the following:  
 
a. An Arcadia urban design approach, to create an attractive green, wooded environment, integrated into the 
existing landscape and topography;  
 
b. An approach to wildlife that results in a net gain in biodiversity;  
 
c. Respects and retains, as far as possible, the hedge and tree -lined established plot boundaries;  
 
d. The provision of greenways and public pathways through the site, linking to the existing network of green 
infrastructure;  
 
e. An increase in public open space provision across  the site, delivering additional accessible natural green 
space and children's play equipment; and  
 
f. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties  
 
3. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
4. Development of homes on this site will require improvements to public transport waiting facilities and junction 
improvements to access on Kent’s Hill  Road and the A13.  
 
 
1.Land between Felstead Road and Catherine Road, Benfleet, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for 
residential purposes, to deliver around 89 additional new home by 2033.  
 
2.The site is comprised of two distinct development areas:  
a. Land south of Bowers Road and between Felstead Road and Downer Road  
 
b. Land to the east of Downer Road  
 
3. A master plan approach should be taken which establishes the capacity and access arrangements for each 
development area within the overall site and secures:  
 
a. Urban design which echoes the principles of the Arcadia approach as defined in Appendix 2, to create an 
attractive, green, parkland environment integrated into the existing landscape;  
 
b. A comprehensive strategy f or wildlife protection, management, mitigation and compensation for the 
allocation area that results in a measurable net gain in biodiversity;  
 
c. A comprehensive Green Infrastructure Strategy which:  
 
i. Ensures the retention of existing Public Rights of W ay and through a comprehensive approach 
identifies where new greenways should be provided to enhance opportunities for active travel and 
recreation  to meet daily recreational needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors from 
Habitats sites;  
ii. Identifies where new public open space provision should be secured within the allocation area, to 
deliver accessible natural green space and children’s play equipment.  
 13 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
d. A comprehensive approach to securing sustainable drainage measures which integrate s with Green 
Infrastructure provision and ensures that there is no increase in the risk of surface water flooding to any of 
the proposed development areas within the allocation, or to existing properties nearby.  
 
e. General design principles for the site which will ensure development is well landscaped and integrated 
into the existing landscape and topography, respecting and retaining as far as possible existing hedge and 
tree-lined plot boundaries.  
 
4. Detailed applications for individual development  sites within the allocation area must have regard to the master 
plan and must contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are necessary to make 
the proposal for that individual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
5. Detaile d design proposals for individual development sites within the allocation must have regard to the Council’s 
Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
6. Development of homes within this allocation should ensure that any local environmental impacts around the 
adjac ent primary schools are minimised and will be required to deliver necessary improvements to public transport 
waiting facilities and junction improvements on Kents Hill Road and the A13.  
 
MM15  42 Paragraph 
10.26  This site is approximately 1.95 ha in size. The site is bounded on three sides by residential development, with the 
Hadleigh Castle and Marshes Historic Natural Landscape to the east . A Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) sits 
adjacent to the south -eastern corner of the site within the Historic Natural Landscape.  The site itself is open land 
bisected through the centre in a north south direction by a bank of hedgerow trees and scrub. The topography of the 
site is challenging, sloping upwards in both a west to east direction and north to south, resulting in the south eastern 
section of the site being highly prominent.  
 
42 Paragraph 
10.28  It will also be necessary to demonstrate integration of sustainable drainage techniques, to ensure that surface water 
is managed appropriately in order to prevent flooding of properties on or nearby the site, given the site's topography, 
its location within a Critical Drainage Area, and immediately adjacent to a potential surface water flooding location. 
This can be achieved through  the provision of open space and Green Infrastructure that will also provide benefits in 
terms of recreation, nature conservation and active travel. It may be necessary for sustainable drainage measures to 
be provided on adjacent Green Belt land to the eas t of the site, such measures may be above or below ground and 
appropriate engineering works may be required. Due to the Green Belt designation on the adjacent land such 
measures are required to be compatible with the Green Belt and maintain openness.   
 
INSERT TWO NEW PARAGRAPHS AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.28 AND RENUMBER THE REMAINING 
PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
 
Alongside demonstrating that sustainable drainage measures can be implemented to manage flood risk on this site, 
measures should also be undertaken t o ensure land stability is achieved and the development does not pose a risk 
to neighbouring or nearby properties. The NPPF directs that assessments of land stability should be carried out by a 
competent person and the developer is responsible for ensuring  that the development is safe in relation to land 
stability.  
 
A high -pressure underground gas pipeline that runs from north to south is adjacent to the site boundary. Any 
development or tree planting on this site should have regard to restrictions on the t ypes permitted within specific buffer 
zones from the edge of the pipeline. Applicants must consult with relevant bodies on the types and location of 
development or planting in the development brief preparation and at the planning application stage.  
 
42 Paragraph 
10.29  … Having regard to this design approach, it is considered that up to  around  30 homes could be accommodated 
across the site.  
 
42 Paragraph 
10.29  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.29 AND RENUMBER THE REMAINING PARAGRAPHS 
THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
 
Highway access to this site is from Glyders. However, this site is close to Benfleet Railway Station which is a public 
transport hub providing opportunities for residents of this site to travel via multiple modes. This si te is also adjacent to 
the western extent of Hadleigh Castle Country Park and the Public Rights of Way network, providing opportunities for 
active leisure within the vicinity of this site. The proposals for this site, and associated transport infrastructur e 
improvements should focus on enhancing these active and sustainable travel linkages to promote active travel and 
to improve connectivity for the future occupants of this site.  
 14 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
42 Policy HO11  1. Land off the Glyders, Benfleet, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to deliver up 
to around  30 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. It is expected that a  A development brief will be prepared  approach to  for this site and applications must have 
regard to the development brief  will be taken  in order to ensure that the development is of a high quality and responds 
to local circumstances. The development must:  
 
a. Adopt a Contextual approach to urban design in order to integrate with the existing built form and existing 
landscape, the topography and the Historic Natural Landscape;  
 
b. Deliver a landscape strategy that comprises mature planting along the eastern boundary of the site;  
 
c. Make provision for open spaces and green infrastructure within the site, with links to existing green 
infrastructure to meet daily recreational needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats 
sites; 
  
d. Adopt an approach to wildlife that protects and enhances the adjacent SSSI, and  results in a  measurable  
net gain  in biodiversity;  
 
e. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties . This may include the provision of attenuation and conveyance of 
water on land adjoining t he allocation, provided such measures do not harm the Green Belt except in very 
special circumstances ; and  
 
f. Measures will be implemented by the developer to ensure no increase in the risk of land instability to the 
site or nearby properties; and  
 
f g. Main vehicular access to the site will be from Glyders , with improvements also made to active and 
sustainable travel infrastructure, facilities and services nearby the site to promote modal shift and improve 
connectivity to services, jobs and to the natur al environment . 
 
3.Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
MM16  
 43 Paragraph 
10.31  The site is classed as  adjacent to a  flood storage area as classified  by the Environment Agency. The South Benfleet 
Playing Fields flood storage area, which is recognised by the Environment Agency as a large raised reservoir under 
the Reservoirs Act  provides a 1 in 1,000 -year standard of protection to people and property at the southern end of 
Benfleet Ha ll Sewer.  Benfleet Hall Sewer is adjacent to the site, and therefore the site itself  is within a Critical 
Drainage Area and is located in flood zones 2 and 3 a. It is therefore it is essential that tidal, fluvial and  surface water 
is managed appropriately on this site  in order to prevent flooding of properties on or nearby the site. This may 
require flood attenuation mitigations within Richmond Park the open space provision nearby . Benfleet Hall Sewer 
enters the South Benfleet Playing Fields flood storage ar ea, which is recognised by the Environment Agency as a 
large raised reservoir under the Reservoirs Act. This flood storage area provides a 1 in 1,000 year standard of 
protection to people and properties at the southern end of Benfleet Hall Sewer.  
 
43 Paragraph 
10.31  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.31 AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
Further to the matters above, there are existing foul and surface water sewers in Anglian Water’s ownership within 
the boundary of this site and the site layout should be designed to take these into account. This existing infrastructure 
is protected by easements and should not be built over or located in private gardens where access for maintenance 
and repair could be restricted. The exist ing sewers should be located in highway or public open space. If this is not 
possible a formal application to divert Anglian Water’s existing assets may be required . 
 
43 Policy HO12  1.The site of the former WRVS Hall, Richmond Avenue, Benfleet, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for 
residential purposes, to deliver up to  around  39 new homes by 2033.  
 
2.A development brief approach  will be prepared for  taken to  this site, and should follow a village green urban design 
approach. Applicat ions must have regard to the development brief in order to ensure that the development is of a high 
quality and responds to local circumstances.  The development must deliver the following:  
 
a. High quality design and layout which integrates into the existing landscape;  
 
b. An approach to wildlife that results in a measurable  net gain in biodiversity;  
 
c. The provision of open space across the site, delivering accessible natural green space and greenways 
through the site, linking to the existing network of green infrastructure  to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites ;  
 
d. The management of tidal flood risks from the Thames Estuary and fluvial flood risks from the Benfleet Ha ll 
Sewer ;  
 
e. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented  to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties. No development shall impede upon  or impact on the flood storage 
area in Richmond Park  at South Be nfleet Playing Fields; .  
 
f. Improvements to the footpaths and cycleways through Richmond Park.  South Benfleet Playing Fields;   
 
g. The safeguarding of suitable access for the maintenance of foul and surface water drainage infrastructure; 
and  
 
h. Main veh icular access to the site will be from Richmond Avenue.  
 
3. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD  
 15 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
MM17  44 Paragraph 
10.33  This site is approximately 28 ha in size. In the eastern part of the site, 3.5ha is designated as part of a Historic Natural 
Landscape. This eastern edge also coincides with the extent of the Little Haven Complex nature reserve managed by 
Essex Wildlife Trust. The Cottage plantation woodland reserve (now known as the  Valerie Wells Wood) sits nearby 
to the south -east of the site.  The site itself is mainly open farmland which is compartmentalised by established hedge 
and tree lined field boundaries. There is a cluster of existing farm buildings occupied by several small  commercial 
uses, as well as some stables located to the southern part of the site. An existing community use fishing lake is also 
contained within the site.  
 
44 Paragraph 
10.34  Any development in this location should seek to follow urban design approaches, which ensure low density and  
integration into the existing landscape.  
 
44 Paragraph 
10.35  Given the mainly undeveloped nature of the site, and the ancient landscape area a master plan would need to consider 
how biodiversity, the topography, the compartmentalised landscape and semi -rural nature of the site could be 
effectively integrated into the development, and how an overall net gain in biodiversity could be achieved. Buffering 
should be provided to the Little Haven Complex, and  consideration should be given as to how additional recreational 
disturbance of nearby wildlife assets should be avoided.  
 
44 Paragraph 
10.36  Due to the size of the site, its varying landscape and neighbouring land uses there is the opportunity to integr ate 
several different urban design approaches. The ‘Arcadia’ approach is considered appropriate for the areas of the site 
located within the Historic Natural Landscape and in the vicinity of important landscape features within the site, with 
the Boulevard approach being appropriate for the main routes through the site. Any entrances to this site lend 
themselves to being designed using elements of the Major Entry Point urban design approach. It is considered with 
these main urban design approaches setting th e framework for the site, the remainder of development could result 
from a combination of the other urban design approaches set out in Appendix Two. All approaches should be linked 
together by public open spaces, and greenways which provide multi -user acce ss to all  and connect  to the wider 
network. Having regard to these design approach, it is considered that approximately 455 homes could be 
accommodated across the whole site.  
 
44 Paragraph 
10.37  It will also be necessary to demonstrate integration of sustainable drainage techniques, to ensure that surface water 
is managed appropriately in order to prevent flooding of properties on or nearby the site. This can be achieved through 
the provision of open space and Green Infrastructure that w ill also provide benefits in terms of recreation, nature 
conservation and active travel. Additionally, there are existing foul and surface water sewers in Anglian Water’s 
ownership within the boundary of the site and the site layout will need to be designe d to take these into account. The 
existing infrastructure is protected by easements and should not be built over or located in private gardens where 
access for maintenance or repair could be restricted. The existing sewers should be located in highways or public 
open space. If this is not possible a formal application to divert Anglian Water’s existing assets may be required.  
 
45 Paragraph 
10.40  Community facilities should be provided in the form of local shops,  an early years and childcare nursery,  a mu lti-
purpose community hall (equivalent to being able to accommodate a minimum of 2 badminton courts in terms of size 
and height) , the need for which is identified through the Castle Point Built Facilities Strategy 2018, and a healthcare 
facility to serve t he Daws Heath area comprising  750 - 1000sqm of floorspace , as required by the NHS Mid and South 
Essex STP.  
 
45 Policy HO13  1. Land east of Rayleigh Road, Hadleigh, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to 
deliver around 455 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. A master plan should be prepared and submitted to the Council for its approval for  approach to  this site to ensure  
will be taken to ensure  that the development is attractively designed, contributing to environment al quality, and that 
infrastructure is provided to support growth in this location. The master plan must deliver the following:  
 
a. Access arrangements for the site, which also addresses peak time congestion at nearby junctions;  
 
b. An urban design framework using a mix of urban design approaches built around the Arcadia approach in 
areas located within the Historic Natural Landscape and in the vicinity of important landscape features, and 
the Boulevard and Major Entry Point approaches, to create an attractive green, parkland environment, 
integrated into the existing landscape and topography;  
 
c. Respects and retains as a far as possible the hedge and tree -lined boundaries established;  
 
d. An approach to wildlife that results in a measurable  net gain  in biodiversity, including the provision of a 
buffer to the Little Haven Complex nature reserve;  
 
e. The provision of greenways providing multi -user access  through the site, linking to the existing network of 
green infrastructure which provide opportunity for active travel and recreation but which avoid or otherwise 
manage additional recreational disturbance to sensitive wildlife assets nearby;  
 
f. An increase in public open space provision across the site consistent with the requirement of poli cy HS3, 
delivering children’s play equipment and  additional accessible natural green space and children's play 16 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
equipment  to meet daily recreational needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats 
sites;  
 
g. Sustainable drainage mea sures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties;  
 
h. The provision of a multi -use community hall, and the provision of land or a suitable  building to provide  up 
to 1000sqm  of space for healthcare services  building on site ;  
 
i. Provision of 0.13ha of land  Land (circa 0.13 hectares) for a stand -alone early years and childcare nursery;  
 
j. Main vehicular access will be taken from Stadium Way in the north and Daws Heath Road in the south.  
 
k. Safeguarding of suitable access for the maintenance of foul and surface water drainage infrastructure, and 
any other utilities infrastructure identified on site .  
 
3. Planning applications for the development within the allocation area must have  regard to the master plan and 
must contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are necessary to make the 
proposal for that individual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
34. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance.  
 
45. Public transport waiting facilities and services must be improved on Rayleigh Road and Daws Heath Road. 
Improvements to active and sustainable infrastructure, facilities and services should be secured within and as part of 
this development to promote modal shift and improve connectivity. This should include a public transport only route 
through the site, bringing all new homes on the site within 400m of public transport provision.  
 
MM18  46 Paragraph 
10.42  Given the mainly undeveloped nature of the site, any development of this site would need to consider how 
biodiversity could be effectively integrated into the development and an overall net gain in biodiversity could be 
achieved. Fu rthermore, the compartmentalised landscape and semi -rural nature of the site are important features 
and should be used to aid the integration of development into this important landscape. The development must 
provide access to the open areas to the south a nd west east of the site whilst ensuring they are protected and 
enhanced. This area of land,  as identified in the  Policies Map  as ‘new open space’  can be utilised for compensatory 
improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility of remaining Green Belt land, so long as the use is 
compatible with the functions of Green Belt policy.     
 
46 Paragraph 
10.44  The overall design for the site should ensure linkages to nearby public open spaces, and greenways  providing multi -
user access through the site and  linking to  adjacent land . It will also be necessary to demonstrate integration of 
sustainable drainage techniques, as the site is identified as being in a Critical Drainage Area. This can be achieved 
through the provision of ope n space,  greenways  and Green Infrastructure. Having regard to these design 
approaches, it is considered that approximately 173 homes could be accommodated across the whole site.    
  
46 Paragraph 
10.45  There are plenty of opportunities within the vicinity of this site for walking, cycling and horse riding for leisure 
purposes, and new or improved links to this network should be provided. However, t This site is not within easy 
walking distance of local services and facilities and it is therefore imp ortant that cycling infrastructure, and  public 
transport services are improved, in terms of routing and frequency, in this part of the borough.  
 
46 Paragraph 
10.46  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.46 AND RENUMBER REMAINING PARAGRAPHS 
THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY.  
 
Anglian Water has identified existing foul and surface water sewers within the boundary of this site which they own, 
and which need to be taken into account in the site layout. This existing infrastructure is protected by easements  and 
should not be built over or located in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted. 
The existing sewers should be located in the highway or in public open space. If this is not possible a formal application 
to divert An glian Water’s existing assets may be required.  
 17 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
47 Policy HO14  1. Land at Brook Farm, Hadleigh, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to deliver  up 
to around  173 new homes by 2033.  
 
2.It is expected that a  A master plan should be prepared and submitted to the Council for its approval for this site. 
approach will be taken to this site, using  . The master plan should incorporate  using  multiple urban design approaches 
to ensure that the development is of a high quality and responds to local circumstances.  
 
3. The development should:  
a. Adopt a Contextual approach to urban design to the northern parts of the site immediately adjacent to the 
existing development in order to integrate with the existing built form;  
 
b. Adopt the Arcadia approach to urban design across the southern parts of the site adjacent to the open 
farmland in order to integrate with the semi -rural environment;  
 
c. Deliver a landscape strategy that comprises mature planting along the sout hern boundary of the site;  
 
d. Respects and retains, as far as possible the established hedge and tree -lined field boundaries;  
 
e. Make provision of multi -user greenways through the site, linking to the existing network of green 
infrastructure and providi ng opportunities for active travel and daily recreation and to divert and deflect visitors 
from Habitats sites;  
 
f. Adopt an approach to wildlife that results in a measurable  net gain in biodiversity. This may include habitat 
enhancement on land adjoining the allocation, provided such measures are compatible with the Green Belt;  
 
g. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties. This may include the provision of attenuation and conveyance of 
water on land adjoining the allocation, provided such measures do not harm the Green Belt except in very 
special circumstances;  and  
 
h. Take m Main vehicular access will be taken  from Daws Heath Road; and 
 
i. Safe guard suitable access for the maintenance of foul and surface water drainage infrastructure, and any 
other utility infrastructure identified to be on site.  
 
4. Planning applications for development within the allocation area must have regard to the master plan and must 
contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are necessary to make the proposal for 
that individual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
45. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
56. A contribution should be made to the necessary  improvement of active and sustainable travel infrastructure, 
facilities and services for this site, including improvements to cycling infrastructure and  public t ransport services along 
Daws Heath Road to improve accessibility to the site and reduce the need for travel by car.  
 
MM19  47 Paragraph 
10.47  This site is approximately 1.5 ha in size. The site is adjacent to the Hadleigh Infant School and is an undeveloped, 
unused piece of land fenced off from the school playing fields, which are shared with Hadleigh Junior School. The site 
is within reasonable walking distance of Hadleigh Town Centre , and opportunities to promote active and sustainable 
travel to  this centre should be secured alongside development . 
 
48 Policy HO15  1. Land south of Scrub Lane, Hadleigh, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to 
deliver up to  around  55 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. A development brief will be prepared for  approach to  this site and applications must have regard to the development 
brief in order  will be taken  to ensure that the development is attractively designed and contributing to environmental 
quality. The development brief should deliver the following:  
 
a. A Boulevard urban design approach to the Scrub Lane frontage, complemented by a contextual urban 
design approach to the remainder of the site;  
 
b. Access for the school to maintain and improve accessibi lity to the school from Scrub Lane;  
 
c. Provide access to natural greenspace within walking distance to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites;  
 
cd. Sustainable drainage measures will be imple mented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties; and  
 
de. Main vehicular access will be taken from Scrub Lane with improvements also made to active and 
sustainable travel infrastructure, facilities and se rvices nearby the site to promote modal shift and improve 
connectivity to services and jobs in Hadleigh Town Centre.  
 
3. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
4. The loss of playing field land and land last used as playing fields should be mitigated by an appropriate financial 
contribution being secured towards new or enhanced playing field  projects within the Borough.  
 
MM20  49 Paragraph 
10.51  The northern edge of the site co incides with a watercourse which puts the northern boundary into a flood risk zone 2 
and 3. The overall design for the site should follow the sequential approach and avoid development on land within 
flood risk zones 2 and 3. Elsewhere within the site devel opment proposals should integrate  ensure integration of 
sustainable  drainage techniques, in order to ensure that surface water is managed appropriately. This can be 
achieved through the provision of open space and green infrastructure that will also provi de benefits in terms of 18 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
recreation, nature conservation and active travel. Having regard to these design approaches it is considered that 65 
homes could be accommodated on this site.  
 
49 Paragraph 
10.52  Given the mainly undeveloped nature of this site and the proximity to a Potential  Local Wildlife Site and SSSI, any 
development of this site would need to consider how biodiversity could be effectively integrated into the development, 
impacts on the SSSI can be avoided, managed or mitigated,  and an overall net gain in biodiversity could be achieved. 
The use of landscaping to mitigate the impacts of the development on the semi -rural landscape in this location could 
for example provide the opportunity to create wildlife corridors that link the network of woodlands and support this 
areas role as a Historic Natural Landscape. Vehicular access to the site will be from Central Avenue only, in order to 
avoid conflict with the Public Rights of Way on Poors Lane and to avoid the unnecessary harm to the adjacen t Local 
Wildlife Site and SSSI.    
 
49 Paragraph 
10.53  The SHLAA  2018 estimates an additional 61 dwellings and this is corroborated by the Castle Point Large Site Capacity  
Study which estimates that the site has a capacity for 65 additional dwellings made up of semi -detached and detached 
homes as well as open space.  The northern part of the site with within Flood Zone 3 and appropriate mitigation should 
be put in place including on -site SUDS and / or attenuation.   Vehicular access to the site  should be taken from Central 
Avenue, with improvements also made to active and sustainable travel within and around the site to promote active 
travel and access to the countryside in this part of the borough. There is scope for non -vehicular access to be secured 
from Poors Lane.   
49 Policy HO16  1. Land at Oak Tree Farm, Hadleigh, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to deliver  
up to around  65 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. It is expected that a  A master plan should be prepared and submitted to the Council for its approval for  approach 
will be taken to this site using a contextual urban design approach to ensure that the development is of a high quality 
and responds to the local circumstances.  
 
3. The development should:  
 
a. Adopt a contextual approach to urban design which integrates with the existing built form and is also 
sensitive to the openness of the surrounding farmland and ancient woodland;  
 
b. Adopt the sequential approach and ensure that no housing development is proposed on land within flood 
risk zones 2 and 3 on the site as defined by the most up to date modelling, and taking climate change into 
account;  
bc. Implement  Ssustainable drainage measures will be implemented  to ensure no increase in the risk of 
surface water flooding to the site or nearby properties;  
 
d. Adopt an approach to wildlife that protects and enhances the adjacent SSSI, and results in a measurable 
net gain in biodiversity. Where greenways are provided as part of the design  for this site, they should avoid 
or otherwise manage recreational disturbance in the adjacent SSSI including access from Poors Lane to the 
SSSI.  Access should be p rovided to natural greenspace within walking distance to meet daily recreational 
needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites;  
 
ce. Respects and retains, as far as possible the established hedge and tree -lined field boundaries; and  
 
df. Main v Vehicular access will be taken from Central Avenue only,  with improvements also made to active 
and sustainable travel infrastructure, facilities and services nearby the site to promote modal shift and improve 
connectivity to services, jobs and to the natural environment. ; 
 
4. Planning applications for development wit hin the allocation area must have regard to the master plan and must 
contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are necessary to make the proposal for 
that individual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
45. Detailed design p roposals for the site must deliver a mix of high quality, sustainable homes, having regard to the 
Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
MM21  50 Paragraph 
10.55  Control of the land is vested in the County Council and Borough Council, both of whom aspire to bring forward mixed 
use redevelopment in order to support the town centre. The site will be subject to a development brief  master plan  
which sets out how the new development can be integrated into the existing fabric of the town centre; seek to r etain 
if viable the old fire station; retain and provide facilities for the community uses on the site; provide commercial ground 
floor opportunities; and residential development. The proposals for this site will seek to support and contribute towards 
oppo rtunities to promote active and sustainable travel in this already accessible location.  
 
50 Paragraph 
10.56  This site is identified as being within a Critical Drainage Area and within the Southend Water Recycling Centre 
catchment area, and it is necessa ry to ensure that surface water is managed appropriately in order to prevent flooding 
of properties on or nearby the site. Anglian Water has also identified the presence of existing surface water sewers 
on this site, and these will need to be considered in  the layout of the development. This existing infrastructure is 
protected by easements and should not be built over or located in private areas where access for maintenance and 
repair could be restricted. The existing sewers should be located in the highwa y or public open space. If this is not 
possible a formal application to divert Anglian Water’s existing assets may be required.  
 19 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
50 Policy HO17  1. Land at Hadleigh Island, Hadleigh, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for mixed use residential purposes, 
to deliver up to  around  52 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. It is expected that a planning and development brief approach will be taken to this site,  A development brief will be 
prepared for this site and applications must have regard to the d evelopment brief in order to ensure that the 
development is of a high quality and responds to local circumstances. The development brief will use ing a contextual 
urban design approach.  
 
3. A master plan  development brief for the site should deliver:  
 
a. A high -quality design and layout which complements the existing urban environment and seeks to enhance 
the character of the town centre;  
 
b. Enhancements to the public realm within the site and along the A13 frontage , including contributions 
towards active and public transport provision within the vicinity of the site to promote modal shift in a town 
centre location ; 
 
c. Enhancements to the public realm within the site and along the A13 frontage; and  
 
d. Provide access to natura l greenspace within walking distance to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites;  
 
de. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
floodin g to the site or nearby properties .; and  
 
f. Safeguarding of suitable access for the maintenance of surface water drainage infrastructure, and any other 
utility infrastructure identified within this site.  
 
4. Detailed design proposals for the site must deliver a mix of high quality, sustainable homes, having regard to the 
Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
MM22  51 Paragraph 
10.58  Grasmere Road Pastures (PLoWS 8) is a potential wildlife site that lies immediately north and west of the site, 
therefore it is important for any new development to take into account and achieve an d overall net gain in biodiversity. 
An existing Public Right of Way passes through the site in the form of a bridleway.  
 
51 Policy HO18  1. Land north of Grasmere Road and Borrowdale Road, Thundersley, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated 
for residential purposes, to deliver  up to  around 30 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. It is expected that a  A development brief approach will be prepared for this site will be taken to this site  using a 
contextual urban design approach to ensure that the development is of a high quality and responds to the local 
circumstances. Applications for this site must have regard to the development brief.  
 
3. The development should:  
 
a. Adopt a contextual approach to urban design which integrates with the existing built form and is also 
sensitive to surrounding uses;  
 
b. Implement s Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface 
water flooding to the site or nearby properties;  
 
c. Respects and retains, as far as possible the established hedge and tree -lined field boundaries;  
 
d. Retain the existing Public Right of Way passing through the site, and ensure it remains suitab le for use as 
a bridleway;  
 
ge. Take Aan approach to wildlife that results in a measurable  net gain in biodiversity;  
 
f. Provide access to natural greenspace within walking distance needed for daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites; and  
 
hg. Vehicular access will be from Grasmere Road , Borrowdale Road,  and Silverdale with improvements also 
made to active and sustainable travel infrastructure, facilities and services nearby the site to promote moda l 
shift and improve connectivity to services, jobs and to the natural environment . 
 
4. Detailed design proposals for the site must deliver a mix of high quality, sustainable homes, having regard to the 
Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
MM23  
 52 Paragraph 
10.65  Access for this site is taken from residential side roads which also serve two primary schools. Public transport services 
and facilities should also be improved near to the development site on the A13 London Road and Rushbottom Lane . 
The transport assessment for this site should include the Tarpots junction in order to identify the extent of any 
improvements needed as a result of the development of the site.  
 20 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
52 Policy HO19  1. Land at Glebelands, Thundersley, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to deliver 
up to  around  155 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. A master plan  should be prepared and submitted to the Council for its approval for this site  approach to this site 
will be taken  to ensure that the deve lopment is attractively designed, contributing to environmental quality, and that 
contributions to health and school infrastructure is made to support growth in this location. The master plan must 
deliver the following:  
 
a. An urban design framework using a mix of urban design approaches built around the Arcadia approach 
with elements of the Village Green and Landscape Square approaches, to create an attractive green, 
parkland environment, integrated into the landscape; and  
 
b. A landscape strategy for the site that includes:  
 
i. The provision of a strategic landscaped buffer along the whole of the sites western boundary, to 
create a green and attractive character to the entrance into the borough;  
ii. The provision of a strategic greenway ru nning along the whole of the site’s western boundary, 
incorporating and linking to existing network of public footpaths, cycleways, public open space, 
natural features, and green infrastructure  to meet daily recreational needs of new residents and to 
diver t and deflect visitors from Habitats sites ; 
iii. An approach to wildlife that results in a measurable net gain in biodiversity;  
iv. An increase in public open space provision across the site consistent with the requirement of policy 
HS3; and  
v. Sustainabl e drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface 
water flooding to the site or nearby properties  
 
3. Planning applications for development within the allocation area must have regard to the master plan and must 
contribut e towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are necessary to make the proposal for 
that individual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
34. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Gui dance SPD.  
 
45. A contribution will be made towards the improvement of active and sustainable transport infrastructure, facilities 
and services within and nearby the site in order to encourage modal shift. This includes improvements to  public 
transport waiting facilities and services near to the site  in order to promote sustainable travel . 
 
56. Main vehicular access will be from Glebelands.  
 
MM24  53 Paragraph 
10.69  Throughout the remainder of the site it is considered that the principles of an  Arcadia urban design approach , as set 
out in appendix two  should be applied to create an attractive green, parkland environment where the natural 
environment and residential homes co -exist side by side. This environment should include open spaces and 
greenways which create links and build on the existing public rights of way network which already exists in this 
location.  It should also integrate sustainable drainage techniques given that the site is within a Critical Drainage 
Area, and there is potential f or a small area of surface water flooding towards the north of the site. The SHLAA  2018  
indicated that the site could deliver 476 new homes. Having regard to the most appropriate design approach taking 
account of landscape constraints, it is considered that approximately 430 350 homes could be accommodated on 
the site.  
 
54 Paragraph 
10.70  Part of the site already has planning permission for 1 80 units, therefore this policy will look to accommodate the 
remaining 340 412 units.  
 
54 Paragraph 
10.70  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 10.70, AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
Due to the existing development in this area, there are existing foul and surface water sewers in Anglian Water’s 
ownership within the boundary of the site. The site layout will therefore need to be designed to take these into account. 
This existing infrastructure is protected by easements and should not be built over or located in private gardens where 
access for maintenance and repair could be rest ricted. The existing sewers should be located in highways or public 
open space. If this is not possible a formal application to divert Anglian Water’s existing assets may be required.  
 
54 Paragraph 
10.71  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 10.71, AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
Main vehicular access to the site from the south of The Chase will primarily be from Kiln Road, and land to the north 
of The Chase will primarily be accessed from Runnymede Chase or Rayleigh Road. There may be limited access 
from other roads to small pockets of development.  
 
54 Paragraph 
10.72  The site also contains playing fields used by the nearby USP College. These are remote from the college which limits 
their use. It is intended that these are relocated t o facilitate greater use by the community. To enable greater use, it 
is intended that the relocated provision will principally be in the form of a full size flood lit 3G pitch capable of use for  
both football and rugby. The location of the new pitch should  be determined through the master planning process and 
ensure that the flood lighting and noise does not give rise to amenity issues for existing or future residents.  Any 
development of these playing fields should be supported by the provision of a new 3G pitch to serve the needs of the 
college.  The relationship between the site and adjoining land uses is critical and the master plan should set out how 
the site integrates with, inter alia, the USP college campus and the Council Offices and leisure uses off Kiln Road. 
Land for a new pre -school will also be required to increase capacity within the area as a result of this development.  
 
54 Paragraph 
10.72  INSERT TWO NEW PARAGRAPHS AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.72 AND RENUMBER ALL SUBSEQUENT 
PARAGRAPHS ACCORDINGLY  
 
The IDP indicates that specific improvements to community infrastructure are required to support the growth arising 
at this site. There is a requirement for a 26 -place pre -school to be provided. This is in addition to the pre -school 
which alre ady operates out of Runnymede Hall. There is also a need, as identified by the NHS, for a new healthcare 
hub in this location comprising between 750sq m and 1,000 sq m of floorspace. It is anticipated that these 
requirements will be secured alongside the r esidential development through a master planned approach. It may be 
that this could be through the reuse of existing buildings if they are available, and if they are suitable for the 
intended purpose.  21 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
 
The site is in multiple ownership and lends itself to a multi -phased scheme. In order to ensure a co -ordinated 
response to development across the site a master plan will be prepared by the Council within six months of adoption 
of the Local Plan. The master plan will be informed by the development aspirations for the various parcels within the 
site. The role of the master plan will be strategic place -making, establishing parameters for development and 
dealing with site wide issues such as drainage, flooding, infrastructure and net biodiversity gain.  
 
54 Policy HO20  DELETE WORDING OF POLICY HO20 AND REPLACE WITH THE BELOW TEXT  
 
1. 28ha of land off Kiln Road, Thundersley, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, 
to deliver up to 340 new homes by 2033. It is expected that a comprehensive master plan approach to this site 
will be taken to ensure that the development is attractively designed, contributing to environmental quality, and 
that enough infrastructure is provided to support growth in this location.  
 
2. A master plan will  be required to deliver:  
 
a. An Arcadia urban design approach, to create an attractive, green, parkland environment, integrated into the 
existing landscape;  
 
b. An approach to wildlife that results in a net gain in biodiversity;  
 
c. Sustainable drainage measures wi ll be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water flooding 
to the site or nearby properties;  
 
d. The provision of greenways through the site, linking to the existing network of green infrastructure;  
 
e. The provision of open space and where appropriate, playing fields within the site consistent with the 
requirement of policy HS3, delivering additional accessible natural green space;  
 
f. Identify means of access to the site without the creation of a through route and highways improvements t o 
the unmade highway sections within the allocated area to ensure the accessibility of new development and 
junction improvements on Kenneth Road;  
 
g. Integration with the USP College and Council Offices and adjoining leisure uses off Kiln Road. This includes 
the re -provision of a 3G pitch to compensate for the loss of the USP playing pitch if required;  
 
h. Land (circa 0.058 ha) for a stand -alone 26 place Pre -school (Use Class D1); and  
 
i. Main vehicular access to the south of the Chase will be taken from Kiln Road,  and land to the north of The 
Chase from Runnymede Chase or Rayleigh Road.  
 
3. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
4. Public transport waiting facilities and services will be improved near to the site on Kiln Road, Rayleigh Road and 
Kenneth Road in order to promote sustainable travel patterns.  
 
 
1.28ha of land off Kiln Road, Thundersley, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to 
deliver around 412 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. A master plan covering the allocated 28ha will be prepared for the site to ensure that the development is 
attractively designed, contributing to environmental quality, and that the identified infrastructure is provided to 
support growth  in this location. The master plan will set out how applications for different development parcels within 
the site can come forward.  
 
3. A master plan will be prepared within six months of the adoption of the Plan, which will establish the capacities of 
development parcels within the overall site. Each development parcel should have regard to the master plan which 
will secure:  
 
a. Urban design which echoes the principles of the Arcadia approach as defined in Appendix 2, to create an 
attractive, green, par kland environment, integrated into the existing landscape;  
 
b. An approach to wildlife that results in a measurable net gain in biodiversity;  
 
c. The retention of existing Public Rights of Way through the site, and the provision of greenways through 
the site, linking to the existing network of green infrastructure;  
 
d. The provision of open space and where appropriate, playing fields within the site consistent with the 
requirement of policy HS3, delivering additional accessible natural green space to meet daily recreational 
needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites;  
 
e. An approach to playing pitch provision which fully compensates for any losses arising on site or in an 
accessible location nearby, and prov ides for any additional need arising from growth at the site, in 
consultation with Sport England and the relevant sport governing bodies;    
 
f. Main vehicular access to the south of the Chase from Kiln Road, and land to the north of the Chase from 
Runnyme de Chase or Rayleigh Road;  
 
g. Coordinated access to the development areas within the site without the creation of a motorised vehicular 
through route. As appropriate, the need for highways improvements, including to unmade sections of 
highway within the s ite will be secured to enable access to new development;   
 
h. Active travel connections through the site linking through the new development to the USP College and 
Council Offices and adjoining leisure uses off Kiln Road;  
 
i. The provision of a new stand -alone 26 place Pre -school, and the provision of a building to accommodate 
1,000sqm of space for healthcare services. This may be provided in -kind, or through the provision of land 22 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
comprising 0.058ha for the pre -school and 0.3ha for the healthcare building , with proportionate financial 
contributions towards the delivery of the facilities;  
 
j. Sustainable drainage measures to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water flooding to the site or 
nearby properties; and  
 
k. The safeguarding of suitable acces s for the maintenance of foul and surface water drainage 
infrastructure, and any other utility infrastructure identified on site.  
 
4. Applications for individual development parcels within  the allocated site must have regard to the master plan and 
must contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are  necessary to make the 
proposal for that development parcel acceptable in planning terms.   Any applications received in advance of the 
master plan must incorporate the requi rements of part 3 of this policy as appropriate and must not undermine the 
comprehensive development of the wider allocated site.  
 
5. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
6. In order t o mitigate impacts of the development at this site on the surrounding road network necessary 
contributions will be secured towards junction improvements on Kenneth Road, and towards public transport waiting 
facilities and services nearby the site on Kiln R oad, Rayleigh Road and Kenneth Road in order to promote 
sustainable travel patterns.  
 
MM25  55 Paragraph 
10.73  INSERT AN ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.73 AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS 
THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
 
This site is adjacent to the Rayleigh Road and has regular bus services passing by and experiences high traffic 
flows. There is therefore a need for any development in this location to support localised improvements to active 
travel and enable mode shift to public transport in ord er for occupants of this site to be able to travel by these 
means, reducing the impact of this development on local congestion.  
 
55 Policy HO21  1. Land fronting Rayleigh Road, Thundersley, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, 
to deliver  up to  around  60 new homes, by 2033.  
 
2. A master plan should be prepared and submitted to the Council for its approval for this site  approach will be taken 
to this site  using a contextual urban design approach to ensure tha t the development is of a high quality and responds 
to the local circumstances.  
 
3. The development must:  
 
a. Deliver a high -quality design and layout which complements the existing urban environment and reflects 
the surrounding character given the prominence of the site. In particular, the site layout must seek to mitigate 
against noise impacts arising from surrounding junctions and main roads and respect the surrounding land 
uses;  
 
b. Provide access to natural greenspace within walking distance fo r daily recreational needs of new residents 
and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites;  
 
bc. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties; and  
 
cd. Take m Main vehicular access will be taken from Kingsley Lane , and contribute towards active and 
sustainable transport infrastructure, facilities and services nearby the site in order to encourage modal shift. 
This includes improvements  to public transport waiting facilities and services near to the site.  
 
4. Planning applications for development within the allocation area must have regard to the master plan and must 
contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan wh ich are necessary to make the proposal for 
that individual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
 
45. Detailed design proposals for the site must deliver a mix of high quality, sustainable homes, having regard to the 
Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD . 
 
MM26  
 56 Paragraph 
10.75  This site is approximately 0.16 ha in size and is bounded by residential development on the western, northern and 
eastern boundaries. Kiln Road offers the southern boundary and will act as the main access to the site. There are 
existing active and sustainable travel opportunities on Kiln Road, which this development should contribute toward 
the improvement of in order to support a shift to these modes of travel.  
 
56 Paragraph 
10.76  The site is comprised of a manufacturing commercial business, but located within a predominately residential area, 
and close to residential property. The site is adjacent to three storey terraced town houses to the west and two storey 
chalet style homes to the east, with large semi -detached homes on the opposite side of Kiln Road. Based on the scale 
of surrounding development it is considered that this site can accommodate around 12 new homes.   
 
56 Paragraph 
10.76  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.76 AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
There is an existing surface water sewer in Anglian Water’s ownership within the boundary of this site, and 
consequently the site layout should be designed to take this into account. This existing infrastructure is protec ted by 
easements and should not be built over or located in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could 
be restricted. The existing sewer should be located in highway or in public open space. If this is not possible a formal 
application t o divert the asset may be required.  
 23 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
56 Policy HO22  1. Land at Thames Loose Leaf, Thundersley, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, 
to deliver up to  around  12 new homes by 2033.  
2. A planning and  development brief will be prepared for this site and applications must have regard to the 
development brief . approach will be taken to this site,  This site will  useing a contextual urban design approach.  
3. The development must deliver:  
a. A high -quality  design and layout which complements the existing urban environment and reflects the 
character of adjacent uses;  
b. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby propert ies; and 
c. Provide access to natural greenspace within walking distance to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites;  
cd. Main vehicular access from Kiln Road , and contribute towards active and s ustainable transport 
infrastructure, facilities and services nearby the site in order to encourage modal shift; and  
e. Safeguarding of suitable access for the maintenance of surface water drainage infrastructure, and any 
other utility infrastructure identi fied on this site.  
4. Detailed design proposals for the site must deliver a mix of high quality, sustainable homes, having regard to the 
Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
MM27  
 57 Paragraph 
10.78  The site is located on Canvey Island, and as such is located within Flood Risk Zone 3. The Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA)  Level Two 2018  indicates that this site is at high risk of flooding and therefore its development 
needs to be considered against the Sequential Test, and Exception Test . The Sequential Test, prepared to 
accompany this plan, indicates that the site would pass the Sequential Test in attempting to deliver the objectively 
assessed need for housing and when it can be demonstrated that there is an insufficient five -year land s upply from 
sites with  a lower flood risk . It will however  be necessary for any planning application to demonstrate that any 
proposals are designed to meet the Exceptions Test, particularly in relation to flood resistance and flood resilience.  
 
57 Paragraph 
10.79  The Essex County Council Interactive Flood and Water Management Map  identifies areas of high risk of surface 
water flooding including areas on Canvey Island . The Canvey Island Six Point Plan is a multi -agency plan which 
sets out how surface water flood risk on Canvey should be managed. This includes increasing the capacity of the 
drainage network and investing in green surface water storage. On this site there are existing drainage ditches 
running along the southern and part of the ea stern boundary of the site. It will therefore be necessary to 
demonstrate integration of sustainable drainage techniques, to ensure that surface water is managed appropriately 
in order to prevent flooding of properties on or nearby the site. This can be ac hieved through the provision of open 
space and Green Infrastructure that will also provide benefits in terms of recreation,  active travel and nature 
conservation , including helping to ensure the integrity of the nearby Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA an d 
Ramsar site by assisting in the management of water quality.  and active travel .  
 
57 Paragraph 
10.79  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.79 AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
There are also built drainage assets on this site. There is an existing foul sewer and a number of discharge points 
(both foul and surface water) in Anglian Water’s ownership within the boundary of the site. The site layout will therefore 
need to be designed to take these into account. This existing infrastructure is protected by easements and should not 
be built over or located in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted. The existing 
sewer should be located in a highway or public open space. If this is not possible  a formal application to divert this 
asset may be required. There is also a foul sewerage pumping station adjacent to this site. Improvements may be 
required to this pump to accommodate the development of this site. To avoid odour complaints arising from a ny new 
residents, a 15m buffer should be applied around the pumping station.  
 
57 Paragraph 
10.80  This site is nearby the Canvey Wick SSSI, valued for its invertebrate species.  Due to the sites  its undeveloped nature 
it is necessary for ecological survey  work to be undertaken having regard to invertebrates,  flora, reptiles and nesting 
birds. Consideration should be given as to how any biodiversity can be effectively integrated into the development 
proposals to achieve a net gain.  
 
57 Paragraph 
10.80  INSERT TWO NEW PARAGRAPHS AFTER PARARAPH 10.80 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
A Scheduled Monument comprising the remains of a Roman saltern is located to the north -east of this site. A 
Heritage Impact Assessment has been undertaken in order to understand the implications of development on this 
heritage asset. There is the potential for development of this site to harm the setting of this scheduled monument, 
and to disturb archaeology related to the saltern within the wider area. To t his end, it is necessary for further 
archaeological assessment to be undertaken prior to master planning, and for master planning to seek to conserve 
the scheduled monument, its setting and any archaeological remains of significance related to the saltern.    
 
In order to minimise potential impacts to the setting of the Roman Saltern,  the openness  of the area to the west and 
north of the Saltern should be retained as far as possible.  Development to the boundary  would  isolate the Roman 
Saltern from the wider historic marshes to the west. It is recognised that  a new access from Canvey Road is 
required for this development and  any such highway should be designed into the landscape  respecting the 
character of the historic setting  and reducing the visual impact fr om the highway.  Development should take 
opportunities to sustain, enhance and protect the significance of the Scheduled Monument, this could 
include  diverting pedestrians away from the  historic asset, provision of information boards and fencing.    
 24 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
58 Policy HO23  1. 16.7 ha of Land east of Canvey Road, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential 
purposes, to deliver  up to  around 300 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. Housing development may be brought forward on this development site only at a time where these is an 
insufficient supply of land to ensure a five -year housing land supply, thereby passing the sequential test for flood 
risk. 
 
32. A master plan should be prepared and submitted to the Council for its approval  for this site  approach to this site 
will be taken  to ensure that the development is attractively designed, contributing to environmental quality and that 
infrastructure is provided to support growth in this location. The master plan must deliver the follo wing:  
 
a.  Protection of the Scheduled Monument located to the north -east of the site and the preservation and 
enhancement of its setting . To secure this, any development of the land to the west and the north of the 
Scheduled Monument which would result in  substantial harm to the setting of the Scheduled Monument, or 
will lead to less than substantial harm to the setting of the Scheduled Monument, will be determined in 
accordance with national planning policy as set out in the NPPF.   
 
b. Preservation of an y archaeological remains of significance related to the Scheduled Monument identified 
within the wider site. This should be informed by detailed heritage assessment work, the scope of which 
should be agreed with the Council and inform the master plan;  
 
ac. An urban design framework using a mix of urban design approaches built around the Boulevard urban 
design approach, complemented with the design of a Major Entry Point to the site , to create an attractive, 
green environment that complements the local land scape ; 
 
bd. A landscape strategy for the site that includes:  
i. The provision of a strong landscaped buffer along the whole of the sites northern boundary;  
ii. The provision of greenways running through the site connecting the development with existing 
residential areas and with open spaces and green infrastructure nearby  to meet daily recreational 
needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites ;  
iii. An approach to wildlife that protects and enhances the nearby SSSI and  results in a measurable  
net gain in biodiversity;  
iv. The provision of public open space within and on land adjacent to  the site including a new 
community park with play equipment at the southern end of the site. This will be accessible to the 
new and existin g communities; and  
v. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface 
water flooding to the site or nearby properties. This may include the provision of attenuation and 
conveyance of water on land adjoining th e allocation, provided such measures do not harm the 
Green Belt except in very special circumstances. Any sustainable drainage measures taken should 
take into account the Canvey Island Six Point Plan and the requirements of part 2a of this policy.  
 
ce. Homes designed to be resistant and resilient to flooding from tidal and surface water sources, and with 
the provision of safe, on -site refuge facilities. Self-contained residential accommodation at ground level and 
bedrooms at ground level are not permitte d; and 
 
f. The safeguarding of suitable access for the maintenance of foul and surface water drainage 
infrastructure, and other utilities infrastructure identified on the site, and the provision of a 15m buffer 
around the foul sewerage pumping station loca ted on the south western corner of this site to avoid odour 
nuisance to any adjoining properties; and  
 
dg. As identified on the Policies Map,  Tthe provision of 6 ha of  an area of adjacent  land to the north east of 
the site  be made available for community us es at the north east corner of the site, adjacent to a new 
access, of 6 ha in extent . 
3. Planning applications for development within the allocation area must have regard to the master plan and must 
contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are necessary to make the proposal for 
that individual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
4. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council’s Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
5. Homes on this site may not be occupied until such time as:  
a. A new access to Canvey Road has been created to serve the site  comprising a roundabout , which is 
designed to  respect the landscape, to preserve the openness of the Green Belt and conserve the 
significance of the adjacent Sch eduled Monument and its setting.  Access from Dyke Crescent will be for 
emergency vehicles only;   
b. A safe pedestrian crossing route has been provided from the site to the open space located on the 
western side of Canvey Road; and  
c. A secondary vehicular  access has been created from the site to serve the adjacent secondary school.  
 
6. A contribution towards the improvement of active and sustainable transport infrastructure, facilities and services 
within and nearby the site in order to encourage modal shift. This includes improvements to public  Public transport 
waiting facilities and services should be improved on Canvey Road in order to promote sustainable travel patterns . 
 
7. The main vehicular access to the site will be from Canvey Road.  
 
MM28  59 Paragraph 
10.86  The site is located on Canvey Island, as such is located within Flood Risk Zone 3. The Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment Level Two 2018  indicates that this site is at high risk of flooding and therefore its development needs to 
be considered against the Sequential Test, and Exceptions Test. The Sequential and Exceptions Test  prepared to 
accompany this plan indicates that the site would pass the Sequential Test in attempting to deliver the objectively 
assessed need for housing and whe n it can be demonstrated that there is an insufficient five -year land supply from 
sites with a lower flood risk . It will however be necessary for any planning application to demonstrate that any 
proposals are designed to meet the Exceptions test, particula rly in relation to flood resistance and flood resilience.  
 
59 Paragraph 
10.87  The Essex County Council Interactive Flood and Water Management Map  identifies existing drainage ditches running 
through the site and  along the southern and part of the eastern boundary of the site. It will therefore be necessary to 
demonstrate integration of sustainable drainage techniques, to ensure that surface water is managed appropriately 
in order to prevent flooding of properties on or nearby the site and ensure th at land is safeguarded either side of these 
drainage ditches to allow for enhancements of the associated flood defences.  This can be achieved through the 
provision of open space and green infrastructure that will also provide benefits in terms of recreatio n, nature 
conservation and active travel. The Canvey Island Six Point Plan is a multi -agency plan which sets out how surface 
water flood risk on Canvey should be managed. This includes increasing the capacity of the drainage network and 25 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
investing in green surface water storage, as suggested above. In managing surface water in this way, the development 
will be helping to ensure the integrity of the nearby Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA and Ramsar site through 
improved water quality.  
 
59 Paragraph 
10.88  This site is nearby the Canvey Wick SSSI, valued for its invertebrate species, and is itself identified as a Local Wildlife 
Site (CPT4) in the Local Wildlife Site Register  2019. It is therefore necessary for ecological survey work to be 
undertaken having regard to invertebrates , flora, reptiles and nesting birds for this site. Consideration should be given 
as to how any biodiversity can be effectively integrated into the development proposals to achieve a net gain and or 
investment made to s upport biodiversity and the protection of species rich areas in west Canvey. This should include 
improving access for pedestrians, cyclists and horse riders across Canvey Way to link the site with the West Canvey 
Marshes and Canvey Wick Nature Reserves. Th is crossing should include provision for horse riders.  
 
59 Paragraph 
10.88  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 10.88 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS ACCORDINGLY  
 
A Grade II listed building, the Dutch Cottage is located adjacent to Canvey Road. A Scheduled Monument comprising 
a Roman saltern is located further away also to the west. A Heritage Impact Assessment has been prepared for this 
site which recommends that the master plan for this site preserves and enhances the setting of the Dutch Cottage , 
which historically sat in a rural setting. It also recommends that further archaeological work is undertaken to determine 
if any significant remains associated with the Roman saltern are present within this site, albeit it is removed from the 
Scheduled M onument. This work should be undertaken prior to the master planning in order to ensure the preservation 
of any significant assets which may exist.  
 
60 Paragraph 
10.90  Part of the site already has outline  planning permission for a 57 bed care home,  units, therefore this policy will look to 
accommodate the remaining 196 units.  
60 Policy HO24  1.Land west of Canvey Road, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, 
to deliver up to  around 196 new homes and a residential care home by 2033.  
 
2. Housing development may be brought forward on this development site only at a time when there is an insufficient 
supply of land to ensure a five -year housing land supply, thereby passing the sequential test for flood risk .  
 
32. A master plan should be prepared and submitted to the Council for its approval for this site  approach to this site 
will be taken  to ensure that the development is attractively designed, contributing to environmental quality and health 
and education infrastructure is provided to support growth in this location. The master plan must deliver the following:  
 
a. An urban design framework using a mix of urban design approaches built around the Boulevard urban 
design approach, complemented with t he design of a Major Entry Point to the site, to create an attractive, 
green environment;  
 
b. A landscape strategy for the site that includes:  
i. An appropriate setting for the Grade II Listed Dutch Cottage, and appropriate settings for any 
archaeological  assets of significance identified within this site. This should be informed by detailed 
heritage assessment work, the scope of which should be agreed by the Council;  
i ii.The provision of a strong landscaped buffer to the western boundary;  
ii iii. The p rovision of greenways running through the site connecting the development with existing 
residential areas and with open spaces and green infrastructure nearby, including a link across 
Roscommon Way to the Canvey Wick and West Canvey Nature Reserves for ped estrians, cyclists 
and horse riders to meet daily recreational needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors 
from Habitats sites ; 
iii iv. An approach to wildlife that protects and enhances the nearby SSSI, and makes space for priority 
and prote cted species within the development design and layout, resulting results  in a measurable 
net gain in biodiversity;  
iv v. The provision of public open space within the site consistent with the requirement of policy HS3; 
and 
v vi. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of flooding 
to the site or nearby properties. Any sustainable drainage measures taken should take into account 
the Canvey Island Six Point Plan; and  
vii. A 19m wide protected zone eith er side of the Hill Hall Dyke, in order to accommodate any potential 
enhancements required to the defences along that Dyke over the lifespan of the development.  
 
c. Homes designed to be resistant and resilient to flooding from tidal , fluvial  and surface water sources, and 
with the provision of safe, on -site refuge facilities . Self -contained residential accommodation at ground level 
and bedrooms at ground level are not permitted.  
 
3. Planning applications for development within the allocation area must have regard to the master plan and must 
contribute towards the delivery of those elements of the master plan which are necessary to make the proposal for 
that individual site acceptable in planning terms.  
 
4. Detailed design proposals for the site mus t have regard to the Council’s Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
5. Public transport waiting facilities and services should be improved on both Canvey Road, and Northwick Road in 
order to promote sustainable travel patterns.  
 
6. Homes on this site may no t be occupied until such time as a new access to the site from either Canvey Road and/or 
Northwick Road has been created to serve the site.  
 
MM29  61 Paragraphs 
10.91 – 
10.97  REPLACE THE REASONED JUSTIFICATION FOR POLICY HO25 IN ITS ENTIRETY  
 
10.91 This site is approximately 28 ha in size. The land is currently in use as a caravan park. However, it benefits 
from a resolution to grant outline planning consent for housing development and has capacity in the region of 600 26 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
homes plus a residential institution. A further resolution to grant full planning permission for 118 houses on what is in 
effect Phase 1 is also in place. The eastern boundary of the site adjoins public open space. Since the start of the Plan 
period, 1 April 2018, 90 new ‘park hom es have been built on the site. These are registered for council tax purposes 
as first homes and occupied all year round. These new homes contribute to the overall supply of housing and are not 
double counted in this allocation.  
 
10.92 The western part of the site falls within the Health and Safety Executive consultation zone drawn around the 
nearby Calor Gas terminal. This effectively precludes any new residential development at this part of the site, unless 
the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) advice wer e to change in the life of the Plan.  
10.93 As the site is located on Canvey, it was considered against the sequential test, and as far as possible against 
the exception test as part of the planning application process as well as through the Sequential and Exceptions Test  
to support the Plan. It will however be necessary to demonstrate flood resilience and resistance through the application 
for detailed matters.  
 
10.94 It will also be necessary to demonstrate on -site surface water management when considering  detailed matters 
ensuring that surface water is managed appropriately. This can be achieved through the provision of open space and 
Green Infrastructure.  
 
10.95 The site is adjacent to the coast, and there are opportunities through the design of the development on this site 
to improve the relationship between the existing urban area and the coast. Boulevards and greenways which integrate 
Green Infrastructure should be used within the design of this development to draw people towards the coast. 
Further more the entrances to this site lend themselves to being designed using elements of the Major Entry Point 
urban design approach.  
 
10.96 As people are currently living within caravans on this site, it is unlikely that the replacement of these caravans 
with fewer houses will impact on the capacity of healthcare providers or schools significantly. It is necessary to ensure 
that public transport provision is extended to service this part of Canvey Island to encourage sustainable travel 
patterns.  
 
10.97 The pro posed extension to Roscommon Way runs through the northern part of this site. This road is proposed 
in order to relieve existing east -west routes on Canvey Island, and it is therefore important that land is safeguarded 
to enable the delivery of this route to the benefit of all Canvey residents.  
 
This site is approximately 28 ha in size. At April 2018 this site was in use as a caravan park having been consented 
for such use during the 1950’s through to the 1970’s. At April 2018 this took the form of static c aravans stationed in 
fields across the site. Whilst some of these are traditional holiday lets, a number have fallen into residential use and 
permanently occupied as such. As of April 2018 there were 590 static caravans providing residential 
accommodation on the site according to Council Tax data.  
 
Since the start of the Plan period, 1 April 2018, work has been undertaken under the existing consents for the siting 
of caravans to deliver new park homes for permanent occupation as retirement accommodation for the over 55’s on 
the site. The street plan provided for Council Tax purposes indicates that there will be around 820 park homes 
delivered on this site overall, gradually replacing the existing static caravans and their occupants. At April  2020, 146 
new park homes had already been delivered on this site, with construction underway for further provision at that 
time. This has resulted in the loss of static caravans providing residential accommodation on the site and will 
continue to do so as  further park homes are provided. This site will therefore deliver a net gain of around 230 
homes.     
 
Given the consents that already exist, the principle of this development, and indeed many of the detailed 
requirements normally secured through the Loca l Plan and the subsequent planning consents cannot be addressed 
through this Local Plan.  
However, as the site will benefit from a residential allocation going forward, it is important to ensure that critical 
requirements for this site, if an application f or alternative proposals was brought forward during the plan -period, are 
identified. This will ensure the wellbeing of future residents of the site, the wider population of Canvey Island, and 
also the wellbeing of the natural environment.    
 
A significant  issue for this site is its proximity to the Calor Gas terminal located on the site’s western boundary. Parts 
of the site falls within the Health and Safety Executive consultation zone drawn around this terminal. This would 
normally preclude any new reside ntial development at this part of the site, unless the Health and Safety Executive 
(HSE) advice were to change in the life of the Plan.  
 
Additionally, the Canvey Water Recycling Centre, in the ownership of Anglian Water, is located to the north -west of 
this site. To avoid impact on residential amenity arising from odours emanating from such facilities it is normal for a 
buffer of 400m to be maintained around these facilities. Policy 2 of the Waste Local Plan supports this approach and 
seeks for a Waste Imp act Assessment to be prepared where there is a risk of conflict between a waste facility and 
proposed development to help determine whether the development is appropriate. Such an assessment would 
normally be required for development on this site. Furtherm ore, there are other Anglian Water drainage assets 
within the boundaries of this site. There is an existing rising main (pressurised foul sewer) and the site layout should 
be designed to take this into account. This sewer is protected by easements and shou ld not be built over of located 
in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted. The existing sewers should be 
located on highway or public open space. If this is not possible, a formal application to Anglian Water to divert the 
sewer may be necessary.   
 
As the site is located on Canvey, it would normally be the case that development proposals be considered against 
the sequential test, and the exception test. To comply with the exceptions test buildings would normally need to  
demonstrate that they are flood resilient and resistant. A site level flood risk assessment will be required for any 
development proposed for this site.  
 
In additional to tidal flood risk, there are also issues associated with fluvial flood risk and surf ace water management 
in relation to this site, with the fluvial risk arising from the Marine Parade Delph ditch. Surface water management, 
including the provision of open space, especially close to the ditch, and other Green Infrastructure throughout the 
site is therefore necessary to reduce risk to properties within the site, and to manage water quality, and 
consequently the quality of nearby Habitats sites such as the Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA. The Canvey 
Island Six Point Plan amongst other measur es seeks to implement increased drainage capacity and investment in 
green surface water storage, both of which should be a consideration for the development of this site. It should be 
noted that ditch forms ponds to the north of the site, and the ponds and  associated reed beds are identified as a 
priority habitat in the Biodiversity Assessment 2018.  The provision of homes on this site should therefore avoid 
harm to this wildlife asset.   
 
Any application for housing on this site will be required to contrib ute towards affordable housing and community 
infrastructure provision in line with the requirements of policy, and the needs of infrastructure providers. For clarity 
policy HO4 will apply to the gross number for any permanent homes provided on this site, a s park homes are not 27 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
eligible for vacant building credit as they are not permanent structures.  Other contributions will be determined on a 
case -by-case basis depending on the impact of the proposed development. It should however be expected that 
family ho mes will need to make a full contribution towards early years, childcare and education provision, as the 
current park home development does not generate demand for such services due to its limitations on occupation.   
 
In order to ensure good and sustainab le access to this site, and to support the wider sustainability of Canvey Island, 
there is a need for transport improvements associated with this site, which the Council will take every opportunity to 
secure.  The site is located on an existing bus route. Waiting facilities need to be improved in this location to 
promote take up. This could be supplemented with on -site real time information for residents to promote use of local 
public transport services.  
 
62 Policy HO25  REPLACE POLICY HO25 IN ITS ENTIRETY  
 
1. Land at Thorney Bay Road, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential 
purposes, except for areas shown as the Health and Safety Executive consultation zone, the area reserved for 
the construction of Phase 3 of R oscommon Way, and the area shown as reserved for future flood defences. It 
is expected to deliver up to 510 new homes and a residential care home by 2033.  
 
2. A master plan approach to this site will be taken to ensure that the development is attractively designed, 
contributing to environmental quality, and contributions are made to health and education infrastructure to 
support growth in this location. The master plan must deliver the following:  
 
b. A Boulevard urban design approach, complemented  with the design of Major Entry Points to the site, to 
create an attractive green, coastal environment;  
 
c. Resilience and resistance to flooding from tidal and surface water sources, and the provision of safe, on -
site refuge facilities;  
 
d. Sustainable drainage  measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties;  
 
e. The provision of greenways through the site, linking to the existing network of green infrastructure and the 
coast;  
 
f. The provision of open space, and an increase in open space across the site consistent with the 
requirement of policy HS3;  
 
g. The provision of greenways throughout the site, with links to existing and proposed green infrastructure 
and the coast;  
 
h. Main vehicular a ccess from Thorney Bay Road;  
 
i. A protected line of land for delivery of the Roscommon Way Phase 3;  
 
h. A protected zone alongside the existing sea defences, in order to accommodate any potential future 
enhancements; and  
 
i. No development in the Health and Safety  Executive consultation Zone  
 
3. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
4. Public transport services and facilities will be improved in Thorney Bay Road and Craven Avenue nearby to 
provide opportunities for sustainable travel patterns.  
 
5. The land safeguarded for Roscommon Way within the site, should be provided for the construction of the new 
road and to provide access to the new development.  
 
 
1.Land at Thorney Bay Road, Canvey Islan d, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, 
except for areas shown as the Health and Safety Executive consultation zone and the area shown as reserved for 
future flood defences.  
 
2.This site is being redeveloped for the pr ovision of around 820 park homes in the period to 2033 under existing 
consents for the siting of caravans on this land. This development will secure 230 homes net.  
 
3. Where the Council receives planning applications for residential development on this si te, the Council will seek to 
secure the following:  
 
a. No residential development within the Health and Safety Consultation Zone, for the benefit of and safety 
of future residents;  
 
b. No unacceptable impact on future residents arising from odour, and no residential development located 
so as to act as a determinant to the continuous operation of the Canvey Island Water Recycling Centre. A 
detailed odour assessment based on summer time emission rates should be used to inform an appropriate 
distance to be  maintained by residential development on this site, and should be submitted with relevant 
planning applications;  
 
c. Sufficient space in order to accommodate any potential future enhancements  to the sea defences over 
the lifespan of the development as re quired by Policy CC2;   
 
d. Safeguarded access for the maintenance of foul drainage infrastructure and any other utilities 
infrastructure identified on the site;  
 
e. Homes designed to be resistant and resilient to flooding from tidal and surface water sour ces, with the 
provision of safe, on -site refuge facilities;   
 28 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
f. Sustainable drainage measures implemented across the site to ensure no increase in the risk of flooding 
to the site or nearby properties. Any sustainable drainage measures taken should take into account the 
Canvey Island Six Point Plan;  
 
g. A measurable biodiversity net gain at and around the Marine Parade Delph ditch;  
 
h. A contribution towards affordable housing provision consistent with the requirements of policy HO4;  
 
i. A contribution towards necessary infrastructure provision as determined by infrastructure providers at the 
time of application having regard to the impact of the proposal;  
 
j. Applications for this site must be accompanied by relevant site level flood risk assessments which address 
the tidal, fluvial and surface water flood risks affecting this site; and  
 
k. Provide access for natural greenspace within walking distance to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from  Habitats sites.  
 
MM30  
 63 Paragraph 
10.100  It will also be necessary to demonstrate on -site surface water management when considering detailed applications 
as the Essex County Council Interactive Flood and Water Management Map identifies areas at risk of surface water 
flooding within the site. The Canvey Island Six Point Plan is a multi -agency plan which sets out how surface water 
flood risk on Canvey should be managed. This includes increasing the capacity of the drainage network and investing 
in green surface water storage. On this site, surface water management should This can  be achieved through the 
provision of open space and Green infrastructure that will also provide benefits in terms of recreation, active travel 
and nature conservation, including helping to ensure the integrity of the nearby Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA 
and Ramsar site by assisting in the management of water quality.  and active travel . 
 
63 Paragraph 
10.101  The site is adjacent to the coast, and there are opportunities through the design of the development on this site to 
improve the relationship between the existing urban area and the coast. This site is nearby to Smallgains Marina 
which provides opportunity for water sports. The creek in proximity to this  site is designated as a Sport Opportunity 
Zone through the Thames Vision , and development at this site will need to retain access to the Marina .  
SPLIT PARAGRAPH 10.101 INTO TWO PARAGRAPHS AND START A NEW PARAGRAPH WITH THE TEXT 
BELOW AND RENUMBER SUBSEQU ENT PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER  
 
Given the limited size of the site, its partial containment by the seawall to the north, and its close relationship with the 
existing residential area to the east, west and south, it is not considered appropriate to apply any of the specific urban 
design approaches in this instance. The design and development of the site should follow the context appraisal 
approach, drawing on the analysis of the surrounding built form and constraints, and seeking to integrate any schemes 
into the  existing environment.  
 
63 Paragraph 
10.101  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH 10.101 (AS AMENDED) AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
In considering the layout of development on this site, it should be noted that there is an existing foul sewer in Anglian 
Water’s ownership on the boundary of this site. This sewer is protected by easements and should not be built over or 
located in private gardens where access for maintenance or repair could be restricted. The existing sewer and water 
main should be located in the highway or public open space. If this is not possible a formal application to divert these 
assets may be required.  
 
64 Policy HO26  1.Land at Point Road, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, to deliver 
up to  around  100 new homes by 2033.  
 
2. It is expected that a development brief approach will be taken to this site,  A development brief will be prepared for 
this site and applications must have regard to the development brief . This site will  useing a contextual approach to 
urban design, in order to ensure the development integrates with the existing built form and the coastal environment.  
 
3. In order to ensure that the development is of a high quality and re sponds to local circumstances the development 
must:  
 
a. Make provision for open spaces within the development, linking to existing green infrastructure to meet 
daily recreational needs of new residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites . In addition, 
maintain and the coast,  access to Smallgains Marina for water based recreation;  
 
b. Be resistant and resilient to flooding from tidal and surface water sources, and make provision for safe, on -
site refuge facilities. Self-contained residenti al accommodation at ground level and bedrooms at ground level 
are not permitted ; 
 
c. Provide main vehicular access from Point Road;  
 
d. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the sit e or nearby properties. Any sustainable drainage measures taken should take into account 
the Canvey Island Six Point Plan; and 
 
e. Safeguard suitable access for the maintenance of foul sewerage and mains water infrastructure, and any 
other utilities infras tructure identified on this site; and  
 
e f. Provide sufficient space for  a protected zone alongside of the existing sea defences, in order to 
accommodate  any future potential enhancements to the sea defences over the lifespan of the development 
in accordance with Policy CC2 . 
 
4. Detailed design proposals for the site must have regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 29 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
5. Contribute towards active and sustainable transport infrastructure, facilities and services nearby the site in order to 
encourage modal shift. Specifically, this site must deliver improvements to public Public transport waiting facilities and 
services must be improved  nearby in Point Road to provide opportunities for sustainable travel patterns.  
 
6.  A project level HRA will be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the requirements set out 
in policy SD1.  
 
MM31  65 Paragraph 
10.105  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.105, AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS 
THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
 
There is an existing surface water sewer in Anglian Water’s ownership within the boundary of this site and the site 
layout determined through the detailed application should be designed to take this into account. The existing 
infrastructure is  protected by an easement and should not be built over or located in private gardens where access 
for maintenance or repairs may be restricted. The existing sewer and water main should be located in the highway or 
in public open space. If this is not possi ble a formal application to divert existing assets may be required.  
 
65 Policy HO27  1.Land at Walsingham House, off Lionel Road, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for 
residential purposes, to deliver up to  around 32 new homes by 2033.  
2. It is expected that a planning and  development brief approach will be taken to this site, using a contextual urban 
design approach.  
3. Deliver a landscape strategy for the site that includes:  
a. A high -quality design and layout which complements the existing urban environment and reflects the 
character of adjacent uses;  
b. The provision of a strategic landscaped buffers as necessary, to create a green and attractive character; 
and 
c. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties. Any sustainable drainage measures taken should take into account 
the Canvey Island Six Point Plan; and  
d. Provide access for natural greenspace within  walking distance to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites.  
4.Homes must be designed to be resistant and resilient to flooding from tidal and surface water sources, and with the 
provision of s afe, on -site refuge facilities. Self-contained residential accommodation at ground level and bedrooms at 
ground level are not permitted . 
5. Detailed design proposals for the site must safeguard suitable access for the maintenance of surface water drainage 
and mains water infrastructure, and any other utilities infrastructure identified on site, and  deliver a mix of high quality, 
sustainable homes, having regard to the Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
6. Main vehicular access from Lionel Road.  
MM32  
 66 Paragraph 
10.106  The site is approximately 0.35ha in size and is currently derelict -vacant  following the closure -demolition  of the public 
house and removal of the  associated car park ing. It is located between Winterswyk Avenue and High Street. There is 
an Anglian Water foul water sewer within the eastern part of the site, a pumping station within the south -east corner 
of the site,  residential development on both the eastern and western boundaries of the site , and some commercial 
uses on High Street.  
66 Paragraph 
10.107  The SHLAA 2018 estimates the site has capacity for 40 new residential dwellings. The site has a resolution to grant 
permission for up to 40 dwellings, but as of 15.06.2021  the Section 106 Agreement has not been completed and no 
decision notice issued.  
66 Paragraph 
107 INSERT THE FOLLOWING PARAGRAPHS AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.107 AND RENUMBER PARAGRAPHS 
THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
Planning permission was granted for the development of the northern half of the site with eight detached houses on 
23rd March 2021.  
 
There is an existing foul water sewer in Anglian Water’s ownership within the boundary of this site and the site layout 
determined through the detailed application should be designed to take this into account. The exis ting infrastructure 
is protected by an easement and should not be built over or located in private gardens where access for maintenance 
or repairs may be restricted. The existing sewer should be located in the highway or in public open space. If this is 
not possible a formal application to divert existing assets may be required.  
 
Subject to the appropriate protection and retention of access to the existing foul water sewer crossing the site and the 
mitigation of the impact of the operation of the foul water  pumping station, it is considered that the southern half of the 
allocated site could accommodate around six additional dwellings of a similar form to that provided to the north.  
 
66 Policy HO28  1.Land at the Admiral Jellicoe, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, 
to deliver up to 40  around 14  new homes by 2033.  
 
2. It is expected that a planning and development brief approach will be taken to this site, using a contextual urban 
design approach.  
 
3 2. In order to ensure that the development is of a high quality and responds to local circumstances the development 
must deliver:  
 
a. A high -quality design and layout which complements the existing urban environment , and reflects the 
character of adjacent uses  and provides suitable access for the maintenance of foul water infrastructure;  
 
b. Ve ahicular access from Point Road and/or Winterswyk Avenue; and  
 30 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
c. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented  to ensure no increase in th e risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties . Any sustainable drainage measures taken should take into account 
the Canvey Island Six Point Plan; .  
 
d. Appropriate mitigation of the impact of the operation of the adjoining foul water p umping station on future 
residentsl and . 
 
e. Provide access for natural greenspace within walking distance to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites.  
 
4 3. Homes must be designed to be resistant and resilient to flooding from tidal and surface water sources, and the 
provision of safe, on -site refuge facilities;  
 
5 4.Detailed design proposals for the site must deliver a mix of high quality, sustainable homes, having regard to the 
Council 's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
MM33  66 Paragraph 
10.109  10.109 10.124  The SHLAA 2018  estimates the site has capacity for 10 new residential dwellings. A resolution to grant 
planning consent on this site for a sheltered accommodation scheme comprising 24 apartments was issued in July 
2020.  
 
67 Policy HO29 
Part 1  1. Land south of Haron Close, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, 
to deliver up to 10  around 24  new homes by 2033.  
67 Policy HO29 
Part 2  2. It is expected that a planning and  development brief approach will be taken to this site, using a contextual urban 
design approach.  
67 Policy HO29 
Part 3  Deliver a landscape strategy for the site that includes:  
a. A high-quality design and layout which complements the existing urban environment and reflects the 
character of adjacent uses;  
b. The provision of strategic landscaped buffers is necessary, to create a green and attractive character; and 
c. Sustainable drain age measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties.  Any sustainable drainage measures taken should take into account 
the Canvey Island Six Point Plan; and  
d. Access for natural gree nspace within walking distance needed to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites.  
MM34  67 Paragraph 
10.111  The SHLAA 2018  estimates the site has capacity for 14 new residential dwellings. Full planning consent for a mixed -
use scheme comprising retail units at ground floor and 14 residential apartments above is extant for this site.  
 
67 Policy HO30 
Part 1  1. Land at Haystack car park, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential purposes, 
to deliver  up to  around  14 new homes by 2033.  
67 Policy HO30 
Part 2  2. It is expected that a planning and  development brief approach will be taken to this site, using a contextual urban 
design approach.  
 
68 Policy HO30 
Part 3  In order to ensure that the development is of a high quality and responds to local circumstances the development 
must deliver:  
a. A high -quality design and layout which complements the existing urban environment and reflects the 
character of adjacent uses;  
b. Main vehicular access from Long Road; and 
c. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties.  Any sus tainable drainage measures taken should take into account 
the Canvey Island Six Point Plan; and  
d. Provide access for natural greenspace within walking distance to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habi tats sites.  
MM35  68 Paragraph 
10.113  The SHLAA 2018  estimates the site has capacity for 50 new residential dwellings. Access to the site would be by way 
of the adjoining Kings Park Village using a route set away from the Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA and Ramsar 
site to the north to avoid air quality impacts. It is anticipated that this development will form an extension to Kings Park 
Village.  
 
68 Paragraph 
10.113  INSERT THE FOLLOWING TWO NEW PARAGRAPHS AFTER PARAGRAPH 10.113 AND RENUMBER 
PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
 
As this site is within flood risk zone 3, and adjacent to the flood defences, the outcomes of the SFRA  and the 
Sequential and Exceptions Test 2018  are relevant. Development on this site will need to be designed to be resilient 
and resistant to flood risk and will also need to leave a gap with the existing flood defences to enable those defences 
to be enhanced in line with the Thames Estuary 2100 Plan.  The Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA and Ramsar 
site is located adj acent to the site, and therefore development on this site needs to be supported by a project level 
Habitats Regulations Assessment which shows that the integrity of the site is not harmed by the development. This 
includes, but is not limited to matters of noise disturbance, recreational disturbance, air pollution and water pollution. 
Measures should be taken within the developments design to avoid impacts including directing vehicle movements to 
the south of the site and incorporating sustainable drainage i n accordance with the Canvey Island Six Point Plan. 
Furthermore, this greenfield site is adjacent to Canvey Heights Country Park, consideration will also need to be given 
to securing a biodiversity net gain as part of the development.  
 
The site is adjacent  to a historic landfill site.  It has also been the subject of fly tipping in the past, which was removed 
at the time. Any planning application would need to have regard to the potential for ground and/or water contamination 
and meet the requirements of St rategic Policy NE8, and where necessary, deliver a comprehensive remediation 
strategy prepared in consultation with ECC, as the Waste Disposal Authority.   31 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
 
68 Policy HO31  1. Land to the east of Kings Park Village, Canvey Island, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential 
purposes, to deliver up to around  50 new homes by 2033.  
2. It is expected that a planning and development brief approach will be taken to this site,  A development brief will be 
prepared for this site and applications must have regard to the development brief . This site will  useing a contextual 
urban design approach.  
3. In order to ensure that the development is of a high quality and responds to local circumstances the development 
must deliver:  
a. A high -quality design and layout which complements the existing urban environment and reflects the 
character of adjacent uses;  
b. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties . Any sustainable drainage measures taken should take into account 
the Canvey Island Six Point Plan ; 
c. Sufficient space A protected zone alongside the existing sea defences  in order to accommodate any 
potential future enhancements to the sea defences over the lifespan of the development as required by Policy 
CC2;  
d. An approach to wildlife that results in a measurable  net gain in biodiversity; and 
e. Vehicular access through the existing Kings Park Village . ;and; 
f. Provide access to the a djacent Canvey Heights Country Park to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites.   
4. Homes must be designed to be resistant and resilient to flooding from tidal and surface water sources, and with 
the provision of safe, on -site refuge facilities. Self-contained residential accommodation at ground level and 
bedrooms at ground level are not permitted.  
 
5. Development will be expected to deliver an appropriate comprehensive remediation strategy, in consultation with 
ECC, as the Waste Disposal Authority, to address any outstanding historic contamination issues, and to prevent any 
new contamination pathways arising. Consistent with the NPPF, the responsibility for delivering the remediatio n 
including any ongoing measures will fall to the developer.  
 
5 6. Detailed design proposals for the site must deliver a mix of high quality, sustainable homes, having regard to the 
Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
7. A project level HRA will be  required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the requirements set out 
in policy SD1.  
MM36  69 Paragraph 
10.115  This site falls within Hadleigh town centre and as such the development should be fully integrated into the fabric of 
the town centre, providing an appropriate mix of ground floor commercial opportunities with residential development 
above. This site is located opposite the Grade I Listed St James the Less Church and there is therefore the opportunity 
for the redevelopment of  this site to enhance both the quality of Hadleigh town centre, and also the setting of this 
significant heritage asset. A Heritage Impact Assessment  has been prepared for this site and highlights this 
opportunity. It is also the case that the development site itself is located on the site of former medieval and post 
medieval buildings. Archaeological investigation of this site is therefore recommended in between demolition of the 
existing building and construction of any new development.  that c reate high quality redevelopment in Hadleigh town 
centre.   32 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
69 Policy HO32  
 1. Land at 244 – 258 London Road, Hadleigh, as identified on the Policies Map, is allocated for mixed use residential 
purposes, to deliver up to  around 50 new homes by 2033.  
2 It is expected that a planning and development brief approach will be taken to this site,  A development brief will be 
prepared for this site and applications must have regard to the development brief . This site will  useing a contextual 
urban design approac h.  
3. A planning and  development brief for the site should deliver:  
a. A high -quality design and layout which complements the existing urban environment  and seeks to  
enhance s the setting of the Grade I Listed St James the Less Church and contributes overall to an 
enhancement of  the character of the town centre.  
b. A mixed -use development of residential and commercial uses;  
c. Main vehicular access from Castle Lane;  
d. Enhancements to the public realm within the site and along the A13 frontage ,; including a contribution 
towards active and public transport provision within the vicinity of the site to promote modal shift;  and 
 
e. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties ; and .  
 
f. Provide access for natural greenspace within walking distance to meet daily recreational needs of new 
residents and to divert and deflect visitors from Habitats sites.  
 
4. Detailed design proposals for the site m ust deliver a mix of high quality, sustainable homes, having regard to the 
Council's Residential Design Guidance SPD.  
 
5. In the period between demolition of the existing building and construction of any new development on this site, 
archaeological investi gation of the site must be undertaken, and any findings recorded in accordance with best 
practice. The scope of these investigations must be agreed with the Council.  
 
MM37  
 71 Paragraph 
11.4 The key strengths were identified as: low unemployment; reasonable transport links; above average business 
formation rates and high levels of self -employment indicating entrepreneurial activity; low cost base (premise and 
wages); and resilient manufacturing base less affected by global pressures. The South Essex Grow -on Space Study 
2019  also concludes that Castle Point has a sufficient supply of start -up and grow -on space accommodation for small 
businesses looking to establish and grow in the borough. The need to diversify the employment stock to c ater for 
these types of business was assessed as low.  
 
71 Paragraph 
11.5 The key weaknesses were identified as: lack of modern employment premises; out commuting for work; below 
average skills and workplace wages; low representation in growth and knowledge based sectors; cutbacks in public 
sector employment; no strong sectors with growth potential businesses; limited attraction to inward investment; and 
competition from larger centres nearby. The EDNA identifies the main sectors driving growth in S outh Essex. There 
are a number of businesses and facilities within Castle Point that contribute to these main sectors and are therefore 
important to both the Castle Point and wider South Essex economies.  
 
72 Paragraph 
11.8 INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 11.8 AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
Details of two potential employment sites are set out in the supporting text to policy EC2. Depending on the mix of 
commercial and industrial uses secured on those sites, they have the potential to deliver between 1,260 and 2,500 
additional jobs within the borough over the plan period assuming a mix of B1c/B2 and B8 uses and using the HCA 
Density Guide Third Edition, 2015.  
 
72 Paragraph 
11.9 It is necessary for this plan to protect  both the existing  employment sites in Castle Point  and to bring forward 
the potential employment sites, since the EDNA 2017  also found that  concluded that there is a need for additional  9ha 
of employment land in Castle Po int. The EDNA 2017 was informed by the emerging Local Plan and the proposed 
allocations at Canvey Island which are carried forward from the 1998 Local Plan. By allocating the sites on Canvey 
previously identified in the 1998 Local Plan, there is new employ ment land provision amounting to 20ha.  Whilst this 
exceeds the need identified through the EDNA 2017, it ensures local business needs are  catered for  and sustainable 
access to jobs is secured. It provides a flexible supply of land for commercial purposes t o respond to unidentified 
demands, ensuring that Castle Point provides opportunities for economic investment.  there is an additional need of 1 
hectare of employment land and 6,605 square metres of space to support employment growth of 462 jobs in Castle 
Point. including the re -location of industrial needs from London.     33 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
72 Policy EC1  1. In order to support the wider economy in South Essex, the economy of Castle Point will be enhanced through:  
 
a. The protection of the existing employment land as shown on the policies map for uses principally falling 
within the Classes B2, B8 and E(g)  Use Classes  of the Use Classes Order , as far as possible having regard 
to permitted development rights ; 
 
b. The retention of the port and port related facilities at South Canvey for the  purposes of commercial 
and industrial activity; and  
 
b c. The provision of  at least  an additional 2 04 hectares of land identified for employment development falling 
within the  B Use Classe s B1, B2 and E(g)  of the Use Classes Order.  ; and  
 
c. Support for the provision of at least an additional 1 hectare of land and 6,605 square metres of floorspace 
elsewhere in the borough for employment development falling within the B Use Classes of the Use Classes 
Order.   
 
2. This w ill be achieved by:  
a. Working with partners to deliver improvements to the quality of public space within employment areas in 
Castle Point, including the quality of open spaces, landscaping, roads, drains and communication 
infrastructure, and improvement of access for those travelling by active and sustainable modes;  
 
b. Encouraging the improvement and redevelopment of private land within existing employment areas in order 
to enable business growth and improve the attractiveness of these areas;  
 
c. Mainta ining a flexible employment land supply within established and proposed employment sites identified 
on the Policies Map, to provide or deliver employment floorspace for employment development falling within 
the B Use Classes B2, B8 and E(g)  of the Use Classes Order;  
 
d. Seeking the provision of suitable, flexible floorspace that can be used by office or knowledge -based 
businesses; and  
 
e. Seeking the provision of small business units and specific start -up facilities to support indigenous business 
growth.  
 
3. Applications for uses falling outside Use Classes B 2, B8 or E(g)  of the Use Classes Order will be permitted within 
the employment areas of this plan where they accord with all other relevant policies within this plan, and  the following  
criteria:  
 
a. It can be demonstrated that the use will provide an equivalent or greater  number of jobs compared to an 
employment development falling within Use Classes B of the Use Classes Order use of  on the site; and 
 
b. It can be demonstrated that the ongoing  operation  of existing businesses  nearby  will not be 
adversely  affected, and any amenity impacts on the proposals from those existing businesses can be  suitably 
mitigated;  and  
 
b c. It can be demonstrated that the location of the use within an employment area will not undermine the 
vitality or viability of local town centres or local shopping parades.  
 
MM38  73 Paragraph 
11.13  The South Essex EDNA 2017 identified a need for additional 24 9 hectares of employment land to be made available 
throughout the borough.  
 
74 Paragraph 
11.14  This plan identifies two three  locations where new employment uses are proposed:  
• East of the Manor Trading Estate in Thundersley  
• Extension to Charfleets Industrial Estate  
• South of Northwick Road  
 
74 Paragraphs 
11.15 – 
11.19  East of Manor Trading Estate  
 
Land to the east of Manor Trading Estate has been promoted to the Council for employment purposes and appears 
to be deliverable. It is expected that access to the site will be achieved through the  existing estate, or through the 
redevelopment of some land within the existing estate.  
 
The land was designated as Green Belt in the 1998 Castle Point Adopted Local Plan. The Green Belt Review indicated 
that this site could be removed from the Green Belt  without undermining the purpose of the Green Belt in this location.  
 
The site was identified as a Potential Local Wildlife Site in the Local Wildlife Site Review as the NPPF expects a net 
gain in biodiversity, compensation for the loss of biodiversity from the Local Wildlife Site must be provided.  
 
Land in this area falls within a Critical Drainage Area (CDA) as identified in the Essex County Council Interactive Flood 
Map. It is therefore necessary for any development within this area to i nclude appropriate drainage arrangements that 
do not increase the risk and ideally reduce the risk of flooding to other properties in the area, consistent with criteria 
set out in the NPPF.  
 
This site should be accessed from the Manor Trading Estate only.  Highway improvements may be required in the 
area to support the additional commercial traffic.  
 
74 Paragraph 
11.20  The phase 2 extension to Roscommon Way proposed in the 1998 Local Plan has been delivered,  which provides 
access for the site , has now been completed . There is extant Pplanning  permission has also now been granted,  
consent for a mixed use development on this site, and elements of the scheme have been delivered since 2018. This 34 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
and so  this site is now therefore considered to be reasonably available for employment development and is considered 
to be deliverable.  
 
74 Paragraph 
11.21  The South Essex EDNA  2017  recognises this site  as suitable for meeting Castle Point's  employment needs.  It 
concludes that this site is appropriate for industrial uses falling within use classes B2 and B8. The extant consent for 
this site secures 18,300 sq m for industrial uses on this site. Ancillary to this, the site also makes provision for 7,100 
sq m of commercial development falling within use class E. 
 
74 Paragraph 
11.24  This site was allocated in the 1998 Castle Point Adopted Local Plan . Although it has  not been  developed to date, 
applications and approvals support employment provision on this site  it benefits from detailed extant consent for a 
mixed use development. To this end, the EDNA  2017  recognises this site  as suitable for meeting Castle Point's  
employment needs.  It concludes that this site is appropriate for industrial uses falling within use classes B2 and B8. 
The extant consent for this site secures 14,537 sq m for industrial uses on this site. Ancillary to this, the site also 
makes provision for 9,128 sq m of commercial development falling within use class E and a hotel . 
 
75 Policy EC2  New employment land as shown on the policies map, is proposed at:  
Extension to Manor Trading Estate – 3.7 ha  
Extension to Charfleets Industrial Estate – 10.5 ha  
South of Northwick Road – 9.7 ha  
 
1.With regards to the extension to Manor Trading Estate, the site is an extension to the east of Manor Trading Estate 
will be made available for employment development falling within Use Classes B1b, B1c and B2, of the Use Classes 
Order where it can be demonstrated that:  
 
a. Access suitable for commercial vehicles has been secured for the exte nsion to the site via the adjacent 
industrial estate and that appropriate highways improvements are made to the estate roads and junction to 
accommodate the increased commercial traffic ; 
 
b. Sufficient and suitable provision has been made for the loss of habitats in order to result in an environmental 
net gain ; and  
 
c. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties.  
 
21. The Extension to Charfleets Industrial Es tate will be delivered in accordance with extant consents to supply at 
least 18,300sqm of B Class industrial floorspace, 6,400sqm  of E(g) Class business 
use floorspace,  and other  commercial premises with a floorspace of up to  1,900sqm.   to the south of Charfleets 
Industrial Estate will be made available for employment development falling within Use Classes B1b, B1c and B2 of 
the Use Classes Order, where it can be demonstrated that:  
a. Access suitable for commercial vehicles has been secured for the site via Roscommon Way;  
 
b. Sufficient and suitable compensatory provsion has been made for the loss of wildlife in order to result in a 
net gain in biodiversity;  
c. Development proposals are resilient and resistant to flooding from tidl and surface water sourc es, and 
provide safe, on site refuge facilities in the event that a flood does occur;  
 
d. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties; and  
 
e. Drainage capacity will be improved as necessary to accommodate additional foul water flows.  
 
32. Land to South of Northwick Road, the site will be  delivered in accordance with extant consents to supply at least 
14,537sqm of B Class industrial floorspace, 928sqm of E(g) Class business use floorspace, other  commercial 
premises with a floorspace of up to  2,890sqm, and a hotel.   Made available for employment development falling 
within the B Use Classes of the Use Class Order where it can be demonstrated that:  
 
a. An enterprise centre or similar facility will be delivered on this site, providing accommodation for start -up 
businesses;  
 
b. Development proposals will ensure that there is no adverse harm to the Canvey Wick SSSI, and that any 
biodiversity loss on site  is fully mitigated or compensated for, with the result in an environmental net gain;  
 
c. Development proposals are resilient and resistant to flooding from tidal and surface water sources, and 
provide safe, on site refuge facilities in the event that a fl odd does occur;  
 
d. Sustainable drainage measures will be implemented to ensure no increase in the risk of surface water 
flooding to the site or nearby properties;  
 
e. Drainage capacity will be improved as necessary to accommodate additional foul water flo ws; and  
 
f. Development proposals are designed to reflect the prominent location of the site as the gateway to West 
Canvey.  
 35 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
MM39  77 Policy EC3  1. The Council will prepare a Master Plan for the Canvey Seafront Entertainment area. The Plan will set out a clear 
vision and objectives for the area, translating those into realistic investment plans to provide new entertainment 
facilities, improvements to the public realm and protection of key features such as the beach areas and historic 
assets.  
 
2. Within the allocated seafront entertainment area, as shown on the Policies Map, commercial and leisure  
development proposals  that can be demonstrated to  that support the tourist industry will be permitted, subject to 
compliance with all other relevant policies. Proposals for development falling within Use Classes A3, A4, A5 and D2 
of the Use Classes Order at ground floor level will be supported. Additionally, proposals for development falling 
within Use Class A1 of the Uses Classed Order will b e supported where:  
 
a.The proposed Use Class A1 floorspace is less than 100m2 in size; and  
 
b. The purpose of the Use Class A1 floorspace is to sell comparison goods associated with seaside / tourist 
activities.  
 
3. Where appropriate a project level HRA may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the 
requirements set out in policy SD1 . 
MM40  78 Paragraph 
11.37  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 11.37 AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
The South East Inshore Marine Plan is also relevant in respect of any changes to the port facilities on Canvey Island, 
as consideration needs to be given on how any such changes impact on the marine environment or its use, including 
any conflicts arising with other users . Separate consents from the Marine Management Organisation will be required 
for certain types of activity. Along with the Vision for the Tidal Thames, the South East Inshore Marine Plan seeks to 
increase the use of port facilities in the Thames Estuary, w here appropriate, in order to boost jobs and boost the 
movement of freight by water as a sustainable alternative to road transport. The port facilities on Canvey Island have 
a role to play in this vision.   
 
78 Paragraph 
11.39  Ships access these facilities via the Thames Estuary. There are numerous European designated  Habitats  sites (SPA 
and SAC)  of nature conservation interest  designated in and around the Thames Estuary that may be affected by direct 
and non -direct disturbance from  shipping activ ity. In accordance with the Habitat Directive  Conservation of Habitats 
and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended), it will be necessary for the significant  any adverse  effects on  the integrity  
of these protected sites arising from new port activities, inclu ding shipping access, to be minimised  avoided.   
 
79 Paragraph 
11.42  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 11.42 AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER 
ACCORDINGLY  
 
The policy seeks to address issues arising from both the continuation of the existing operations and future proposals 
for the re -use of the site. For the avoidance of doubt, in the application of Policy EC4, Part 1 should be applied to 
those proposals which concern the continued use of the sites for the purposes for which they were  operated at the 
date of the adoption of the Local Plan and where the hazardous material(s) listed on the hazardous substances 
consent is not changing. At some point in the future however, it is possible that the existing uses may no longer be 
required and  the opportunity to use the sites for a different purpose, not associated with the storage of hazardous 
materials, or to use the sites for the storage of different types of hazardous materials for which hazardous substance 
consent was required and was not extant at the date of the adoption of the Plan, may present themselves. Such 
proposals would be considered under Part 2 of the Policy.  
 
79 Policy EC4  
 1. Existing operations  
 
Applications for development at  wWithin the allocated Port Related Facilities Area shown on the Policies Map, 
applications for development at existing facilities in connection with the existing operations of the site as of the date 
of adoption of this Plan will be permitted, provided that they are compliant with ,  at the existing port facilities at South 
Canvey will be permitted subject to compliance with  Policy NE7 and  the following criteria:  
 
a. There must be no unacceptable change  increase  in the level of hazard or risk posed by the facility as a 
consequence of the prop osals. The advice of the Health and Safety Executive will be sought in relation to this 
matter;  
 
b. The design of the proposed development must not cause significant harm to the landscape, having regard 
to the scale of existing development on the site;  
 
c. Public access to the coastal path adjacent to the site must be retained; and  
 
d. The future operation of the site will not result in adverse impacts on water quality in the Thames Estuary, 
or have a significant adverse effect on protected nature conser vation sites.  Where appropriate a project level 
HRA may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the requirements set out in policy 
SD1.  In addition to this and where appropriate, proposals will be required to deliver a biodiversity net gain; 
and 
 
e. The design of the proposed development will incorporate measures to manage current and future flood 
risk, ensuring development is appropriately resilient and resistant to all sources of flood risk, including careful 
consideration of emerg ency planning procedures and areas of refuge for site users.  
 
2. Proposed operations  
 
Applications for the change of use, a change  in the type  of materials handled, or for redevelopment of the existing 
port facilities at South Canvey will be permitted su bject to compliance with Policy NE7 and the following criteria:  
 
a. Where the proposal includes a change of materials handled, and those materials are classified as 
hazardous , Iit can be demonstrated that the proposal is in the national interest;  
 36 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
b. The level of hazard and risk posed by the site is no greater than existing levels. The advice of the Health 
and Safety Executive will be sought in relation to this matter; . There must be no unacceptable change in the 
level of hazard or risk posed by the f acility as a consequence of the proposals. The advice of the Health and 
Safety Executive will be sought in relation to this matter;  
 
c. The design of the proposed development must not cause significant harm to the landscape, having regard 
to the scale of existing development on the site;  
 
d. Public access to the coastal path adjacent to the site must be retained; and 
 
e. Where appropriate a project level HRA may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as 
per the requirements set out in policy SD1.  In addition to this and where appropriate, proposals will be required 
to deliver a biodiversity net gain; The future operation of the site will not result in adverse impacts  on water 
quality in the Thames Estuary, or have significant adverse ef fects on protected nature conservation sites. ; 
and  
 
f. The design of the proposed development will incorporate measures to manage current and future flood risk, 
ensuring development is appropriately resilient and resistant to all sources of flood risk, in cluding careful 
consideration of emergency planning procedures and areas of refuge for site users.   
 
3. In the event that a proposal in relation to port facilities on Canvey Island is of a sufficient size to be considered a 
Nationally Significant Infrastru cture Project for determination by the Planning Inspectorate  Secretary of State ,  
the Council will consider its response in accordance with the requirements of this policy  Development Plan . 
  
4. Any new development within the consultation zones identified by the Health and Safety Executive around the 
Hazardous Installation sites shall be considered within the context of Policy NE9 of this Plan.  
 
MM41  81 Paragraph 
12.3 The NPPF  is clear that retail and other forms of town centre commercial  developments should be located according 
to a sequential test and out of centre locations should only be considered if suitable sites in the town centre are not 
available, or not expected to become available, within a reasonable period. If a proposal canno t be located within a 
town centre, the impact of locating a proposal outside of a town centre must be assessed against and must not have 
an adverse impact on town centre vitality and viability.  
 
82 Paragraph 
12.13  ADD A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 12.13 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS ACCORDINGLY  
 
In seeking to encourage a broader food and drink offer, it is important that we create a healthy food environment in 
our town centres and local communities. The national Obesity Strategy highlights that eating out can contribute 
towards obesity through the consumption of more calories. Takeaways and promotions in food stores can also add to 
the number of calories consumed. This is significant in Castle Point where obesity levels are higher than the nation al 
average. It is therefore necessary to ensure that the mix of uses, and the way in which buildings and spaces in town 
centres are designed promote active lifestyles and a healthy food environment. Health Impact Assessments are a 
useful tool in ensuring t hat the wellbeing of the community is considered as part of the design process, and will be 
required to ensure that proposals for development selling foodstuffs contribute to the creation of a healthy food 
environment.  
 
83 Policy TC1 
Part 2  2. Within  Development within Use Classes A1 to A5 must be provided within  the Primary Shopping Frontages , listed 
below,  only development proposals falling within Use Classes E and F, and compatible sui generis uses which are 
assessed to have a similar impact on amenity and on town centre vitality as a development in Use Class E will be 
permitted.   The requirements of policy NE7 will be used to determine amenity impact. Active frontages must be 
maintained  at the ground floor of  these premises :  
 
Canvey Town Centre:  
14-64 Furtherwick Road  
68-90 94 Furtherwick Road  
3-59 Furtherwick Road  
Units 1 -16 Knightswick Centre, Furtherwick Road  
Sainsbury, Knightswick Centre  
Hadleigh Town Centre:  
207-253 London Road, Hadleigh  
255-319 London Road, Hadleigh  
2-28 Rectory Road  
1-7 Rectory Road  
South Benfleet Town Centre:  
261-311 High Road  
Tarpots Town Centre:  
109-145 London Road, Benfleet  
120-140 London Road, Benfleet   
 
83 Policy TC1 
Part 4  4. Applications for retail development falling within Use Class E  will normally be permitted in town centres. Outside of 
the town centres new retail development and related uses falling within Use Class E  will be permitted if the following 
criteria can be met:…  
 
83 Policy TC1 
Part 4a  a. A sequential test has been applied, and it has been robustly demonstrated that the proposed development 
cannot reasonably be accommodated within a town centre or local shopping parade, or as a second 
preference within an existing out of centre shopping area or;… 
83 Policy TC1 
Part 4 INSERT A NEW POLICY REQUIREMENT AFTER PART 4  
 
5. Where an application is for a development intended for the sale of foodstuff, or could be used for such purpose, a 
health impact assessment will be required. Where this shows that the development has the potential to impact on 
health outcomes, measures should be included within the proposal to mitigate harm and create a healthy food 
environment.  
 37 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
MM42  85 Policy TC2 
Part 3  
 3. Hadleigh Town Centre will be regenerated with the aim of providing an enhanced retail supply alongside a mix of 
other business, community/cultural, residential and open space uses . Iin order to create a pleasant town centre that 
is attractive to residents, retail businesses, and makes the best use of land , the vision set out  in the Hadleigh Town 
Centre Master Plan will be  taken into account  as material consideration in considering development proposals . 
 
MM43  86 Paragraph 
12.24  ADD A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 12.24 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER  
 
For those reasons set out for policy TC1, a health impact assessment will be required for proposals which involve the 
sale of foodstuffs in local shopping parades. These parades are at the heart of local communities and have the 
potential to contribute to the exposu re of residents to healthy food environments which will impact on their wellbeing.  
87 Policy TC3 
Part 2  2. Proposals  Uses  for uses falling within Use Classes A1, A2, A5 and D1  Class E  of the Use Classes Order will 
normally be permitted at ground floor l evel within local shopping parades, subject to compliance with all other relevant 
policies in this plan.  
 
87 Policy TC3 
Part 3  INSERT A NEW POLICY REQUIREMENT AFTER PART 3  
 
4. Where an application is for a development intended for the sale of foodstuff, or could be used for such purpose, a 
health impact assessment will be required. Where this shows that the development has the potential to impact on 
health outcomes, measures should be included within the proposal to mitigate harm and create a h ealthy food 
environment.  
 
MM44  87 Paragraph 
12.28  The South Essex Retail Study  2017 states that convenience shopping within  Castle Point  currently supports a local 
population. New convenience floorspace in addition to current provision should only be permitted when there is a 
mismatch between population and level of convenience floorspace as a result of new development. However, as set 
out in Policy TC1, new retail development should be focussed in the town centres. The Council acknowledges that 
both t he Stadium Way and Canvey Retail Parks play a crucial role in meeting the retail needs of the Borough. They 
provide employment and support a supply chain network. Some of the premises at Stadium Way are now old and 
many converted from previous commercial u ses and therefore, it is likely that redevelopment will need to take place. 
Where these redevelopments do occur, the Council will seek applications for the sale of foodstuffs to be accompanied 
by health impact assessments in order to ensure the creation of  healthy food environments which support the 
wellbeing of local residents and other users.  
 
88 Policy TC4  1. There are two out of centre shopping areas in Castle Point, as identified on the Policies Map, at:  
Stadium Way, Thundersley; and  
Canvey Retail Park, Northwick Road, Canvey Island  
2. Re -development for uses falling within Use Classes A and D  Classes E  and F of the Use Classes Order,  and 
compatible sui generis uses which are assessed to have a similar impact on amenity and neighbouring devel opments 
as a development in Use Class E, assessed in accordance with policy NE7,   will be permitted within these out of 
centre shopping areas where both sequential and impact assessments have indicated that it is appropriate to do so, 
and all other relevant policies in this plan have been complied with. An impact assessment will be required for 
proposals of 1,500 sqm or greater, consistent with the requirements of policy TC1.  
3. Where an application is for a development intended for the sale of foods tuff, or could be used for such purpose, a 
health impact assessment will be required. Where this shows that the development has the potential to impact on 
health outcomes, measures should be included within the proposal to mitigate harm and create a health y food 
environment.  
MM45  88 Paragraph 
12.31  There are a small number of units that continue to operate as shops within this area.  There is the potential that these 
may be brought forward as restaurants or bars over time.  It would be important for any such development to 
complement the existing range of uses, given the reasonable quality of provision that has been achieved already. In 
bringing forward such proposals, the Council will seek to ensure a healthy food environment and will expect 
applications  to be accompanied by a health impact assessment.  
 
89 Policy TC5  1. South Benfleet Leisure Quarter is identified on the Policies Map and comprises the following properties:  
1-7 (odd numbers) Essex Way  
8-10 (even numbers) Essex Way  
1-27 (odd numbers) High Street, South Benfleet  
24-42 (even numbers) High Street, South Benfleet  
 
2. Within this area, development proposals for uses falling within Use Classes A3 and A4 of the Use Classes Order  
cafes, restaurants and bars  will be supported ., subject to compliance with other relevant policies on design, the historic 
environment, flood risk and residential amenity being fully addressed.  
 
3. Where an application is for a development intended for the sale of foodstuff, or could be used for such pu rpose, a 
health impact assessment will be required. Where this shows that the development has the potential to impact on 
health outcomes, measures should be included within the proposal to mitigate harm and create a healthy food 
environment  
 
MM46  89 Paragraph 
12.35  Hot food takeaways are now a common feature of town centres, high streets, and local centres because they fulfil 
an increasing demand for instant food access and convenience. Traditionally, hot food takeaways ( A5 sui 
generis  use class) differ in purpose from restaurants or cafés ( A3 use class  E(b)), however, some businesses 
classified as restaurants  (A3 use class)  also offer takeaway services… . 
 
INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 12.35 MOVED FROM 12.38. RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS 
THEREAFTER  
 
Whilst local shopping parades are a sustainable location for hot food takeaways because they are close to where 
people live,  in some instances  the number of takeaways in such parades dominates over use class E(a)  shopping 
provision, reducing the  diversity of retail available.  
 
89 Paragraph 
12.37  England has one of the highest rates of obesity in Europe and in the developed world. A Public Health England report 
Adult Obesity (2018)  acknowledges obesity is one of the most widespread threats to health and well -being in the 38 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
country and that there is a link between excess body weight and diseases such as type 2 diabetes, cancer and heart 
disease. This impacts on the cost of health care provision and the ability of health services to supp ort local 
communities.   
 
90 Paragraph 
12.38  Whilst local shopping parades are a sustainable location for hot food takeaways because they are close to where 
people live, there are, in some instances where the number of takeaways in such parades dominates over A1 
shopping provision, reducing the diversity of local retail available.  
 
90 Paragraph 
12.39  Furthermore, hot food takeaways can contribute towards unhealthy lifestyles, which in turn impact on the cost of 
health care provision and the ability of health services to support local communities. The Castle Point and Rochford 
Locality Estates Strategy 2018  classified 27% of adults and 20.4% of children in Castle Point as obese with fewer 
people eating healthily, this puts Castle Point at a hi gher than average level of obesity. Obese children are more likely 
than children of a healthy weight to become an obese adult with associated health problems later in life. Policies  
restricting children’s access to takeaway shops can act to discourage unhe althy eating and seek to stop the rising 
levels of obesity in the borough.   
 
90 Paragraph 
12.40  Therefore, the proliferation of hot food takeaway provision in Castle Point is not only affecting the diversity of retail 
offer in Castle Point, it is also contributing towards poor health amongst the resident population. There is therefore a 
clear basis for seeking to limit further increases in the provision of hot food takeaways in Castle Point . In particular, 
policies restricting children’s access to takeaway shops can, amongst other measures, act to discourage unhealthy 
eating and seek to stop the rising levels of obesity in the borough.  
 
90 Policy TC6 
Part 1  1. In order to ensure that excessive concentrations of  particular types  of food and drink u ses are avoided, 
applications for hot food takeaways falling within  sui generis  U use C class A5 will be supported where the following 
thresholds are not exceeded:   
 
a. Within  a Town Centre s, no more than 10% of shop units comprise hot food takeaways;    
 
91 Policy TC6 
Part 2  2. A Health Impact Assessment of the proposal should be undertaken, and the measures identified should be 
incorporated within the proposal to limit the impact of the proposal on obesity levels within the local community , taking 
into account the proximity to existing schools, colleges and youth centres. New hot food takeaway shops will only be 
permitted when they fall outside 400 metres walking distance of gates of new and existing schools, colleges, and 
youth centres, un less the outlets are within town centres and accord with other policies within this plan  
 
MM47  93 Paragraph 
13.10  The Castle Point and Rochford Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) undertook a Locality Estates Strategy 2018, at 
that time it was  estimated that at least £48.5 million of capital investment will be required in Castle Point and Rochford 
over the next ten years. This would support  will ensure that the infrastructure requirements to facilitate  is in place to 
enable the delivery of moder n and sustainable , integrated care services to the for current and future  population s. This 
may include s the development of  Primary Care Healthcare  Hubs on Canvey Island and in Benfleet, Primary Care 
Spokes and Administrative Hubs.  
 
CREATE NEW PARAGRAPH  
 
All plans for new healthcare facilities and services are subject to appraisal, viability and business case processes. A 
healthcare infrastructure requirement list has been produced to support this plan and has been integrated into the 
Infrastruc ture Delivery Plan (IDP). This list will be subject to iteration, therefore ensuring that requirements are current 
and align to existing and future strategies for the delivery of health and care services within Castle Point. NHS estates 
matters are dealt w ith through the Mid and South Essex STP estates team. A Forum has been established to consider 
the implications of planned growth to make the best use of the existing NHS estate.  Essex County Council (ECC) has 
the role as a public health advisor. The Direc tor of Public Health is the lead advisor for public health and planning 
matters.  
 
RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
 
95 Policy HS1 
Part 1a i  Ensuring access to high quality open spaces including the coast , and opportunities to engage in sport and recreation; 
and 
95 Policy HS1 
Part 1c i  Working with NHS England, the Clinical Commissioning Group, Basildon and Southend University Hospitals  Mid and 
South Essex University Hospitals Group  and other providers of healthcare services in the Bor ough to ensure those 
organisations have the built facilities they need to deliver their service plans; and  
95 Policy HS1 
Part 1d  d. Ensure new development is designed and located to promote good health, and avoid sources of harm to 
health by:  
i. Requiring good quality design in new developments, including design which  incorporates  has regard 
to Sport England’s  ‘aActive dDesign ’ principles; and   
ii. Avoiding development in locations which may cause harm to human health by way of disturbance 
to the  quality of life or pollution having reference to the criteria and requirements of policy NE7.  
96 Policy HS1 
Part 2e  e. To ensure new development is designed to promote good health, Health Impact Assessments should be undertaken 
for all development s involving the sale of foodstuff, and for other developments  of over 50 residential units or 1,000 
sqm of non -residential development. Mitigation against negative health impacts and opportunities of positive health 
impacts should be identified.  Negative health impacts identified in a Health Impact Assessment must be resolved in 
the development or secured through a Section 106 Agreement.  
MM48  96 Paragraph 
13.25  The Castle Point Playing Pitch Strategy  Built Facilities Strategy  (PPS)  Assessment Re port 2018  found that the  
majority  of sports assessed have sufficient facilities in the borough or nearby to support current need, although to 
improve and preserve participation levels most venues are encouraged to enhance or maintain existing facilities. It 
is essential that Castle Point provides a variety of different sporting activities to suit all abilities and ages. 
Furthermore, the Built Facilities Strategy  concludes that key public sports halls and swimming pools are operating 
close to ca pacity and may therefore struggle to accommodate the additional demand generated by growth in this 
plan. There is therefore a need to enhance or provide new facilities to address any growth in demand. The Built 
Facilities Strategy recommends the use of dev eloper contributions calculated using the Sport England Facilities 
Calculator to fund needs arising from growth.  The assessment found that there is a need to provide additional third 
generation turf pitches (3G) in the borough, this will help enhance curr ent participation levels as well as reducing 
strain on current facilities.  
 
96 Paragraph 
13.26  It should be noted that indoor physical recreation is not limited to provision within purpose -built leisure centres and 
gymnasiums. Exercise classes are regularly provided in community halls and school halls across the borough and 39 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
contribute towards the variety of opportunities for residents to take part in physical activity. The Built Facilities 
Strategy  recommends the use of community use agreements to s ecure access for the community to school halls 
and other such places where indoor activities can take place outside operational hours.  
 
97 Policy HS2  
 1. In order to increase participation in physical activity, the Council will seek to secure the following for indoor leisure 
and sports:  
 
a. The retention, and increased access for the public to existing indoor leisure and sports facilities;  
 
b. The use of a wider range of facilities for physical activity;  
 
c. A community hall with capacity for sports  including badminton and short -mat bowls  in the Benfleet, 
Hadleigh and  Thundersley  area.   
 
2. This will be achieved by:  
 
a.  Protecting existing indoor sports provision from re -development for other uses as required by Strategic 
Policy HS6 ; 
 
b. Working with schools and other owners of indoor sport facilities to increase community access to these 
facilities during non -school hours, through the use of community use agreements.   
 
c. Encouraging the use of multi -functional community halls and school halls for the purpose of increasing 
sports participation within local communities  
 
b. Community use agreements will be required where appropriate where a  multi -functional community hall, 
school/college hall or stand -alone indoor sports facility is provided  or enhanced, to increase sports 
participation within local communities and community access to these  facilities ; 
 
dc. Where appropriate, developer contributions will be sought including the provision of land to enable the 
delivery of additional le isure and sport facilities; and 
 
ed. Working with partners and the community to  secure and  deliver suitable facilities  through the use of 
planning conditions and/or planning obligations ;  
 
f. Maximising opportunities to secure investment in the provision o f these facilities.   
 
MM49  98 Paragraph 
13.30  Policy NE1 of this plan sets out requirements for the provision of Green and Blue  Infrastructure in Castle Point. This 
policy seeks to deliver the ambitions of the South Essex  Green Grid Strategy , the South Essex Green and Blue 
Infrastructure Strategy, and the Essex Green Infrastructure Strategy  and the  Greater Thames Marshes Nature 
Improvement Area through  the provision of multi -function green infrastructure projects, which deliver a range of 
benefits including, recreational benefits for local people, including access to coast.  
 
98 Paragraph 
13.33  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 13.33, AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS 
THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
 
With regard to formal outdoor sports facilities, the Castle Point Playing Pitch Strategy (2018) and Castle Point Playing 
Pitch Assessment (2018) identified the need for some additional pitch provision in Castle Point to address both existing 
deficiencies and also the needs arising from growth . It also identified the need to improve the quality of some aspects 
of provision. The assessment specifically found that there is a need to provide additional third generation pitches (3G) 
in the borough, this will help enhance current participation level s as well as reducing strain on current facilities. The 
outcomes of the Playing Pitch Strategy are reflected in the IDP. In order to deliver improvements in provision, the use 
of community use agreements is advocated to secure access to those outdoor sport s facilities located in schools. The 
Council will use Sport England’s Playing Pitch Calculator to secure funding for any new facilities required to support 
growth.  
 
98 Paragraph 
13.34  This plan also provides an opportunity for the Council to aim to increase the amount of open spaces within the Borough 
in order to address current deficiencies in the range and accessibility of open space provision in Castle Point. There 
should be additional provision made for:  
• Outdoor sports pitches and facilities as r ecommended by the Playing Pitch Strategy;  
• Additional parks and gardens, (potentially provided within existing amenity green spaces);  
• Additional natural green space to be provided in Thundersley;  
• Additional children’s play spaces should be provided in sever al locations throughout the Borough; 
and 
• Civic spaces such as civic squares and market places to be secured through the regeneration of 
Hadleigh and Canvey Town Centres.  
99 Policy HS3 
Part 1  1. Public access will be secured to open space in order to support active and healthy communities and to manage 
recreational pressures on areas of nature conservation interest. This will be achieved by working with partners to 
deliver open space and green infrastructure projects in the Borough. This will be supple mented by additional 
provision secured on development sites. The Council will have regard to its residential Design Standards, the Essex 
Design Guide and the Playing Pitch Assessment and Strategy  in assessing the appropriate open space 
requirements within new development.  
99 Policy HS3 
Part 2  2. In order to ensure that there is good access to a variety of open space opportunities within Castle Point, additional 
provision will be sought as set out in the Castle Point Borough Infrastructure Delivery Plan  IDP. Where appropriate 
developers will be expected to contribute toward this provision as set out in the IDP.  This includes:  
 
a. One 3G pitch on Canvey Island and two 3G pitches in the Benfleet, Hadleigh and Thundersley area;  
 
b. Additional parks and gardens throughout the borough;  
 
c. Additional accessible natural green space throughout the borough;  
 40 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
d. Additional Multi Use Games Areas (MUGAs);  
 
e. New and improved ancillary features such as car parking,  changing rooms, storage facilities, and  
flood lighting (where appropriate) and car parking; in appropriate locations where they will not give rise to 
unacceptable impacts on residential amenity ; 
 
f. Additional children's play spaces in West Canvey, East Canvey, Central Thundersley and Daws Heath;  
 
g. Outdoor bowls provision on Canvey;   
 
gh. Improvements to tennis court provision;  
 
hi. Improvements to hard -court provision; and  
 
ij. Improved playing pitch provision, including the creation of additional pitches in less flood prone locations 
and 3G pitches.  
 
100 Policy HS3 
Part 3  3. In order to improve the quality of open spaces in Castle Point, and the ability of residents to be able to enjoy them 
to their fullest potential, the following improvements to the open space network will be sought as part of the open 
space provision on development sites in appropriate locations, and by working with partners:  
 
a. Improved links within and between open spaces;  
 
b. Improved accessibility for all users to open spaces and the coast;  
 
c. Improved facilities within open spaces; and  
 
d. Improved biodiversity within open spaces ; and  . 
 
e. Improvements that deliver climate change mitigation and resilience.  
 
ADD THE FOLLOWING NEW CRITERIA BELOW AFTER PART 3  
 
4. Where appropriate a project level HRA may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the 
requirements set out in policy SD1.  
 
MM50  100 Paragraph 
13.39  For the purpose of this policy, education facilities include, but are not limited to: early years and childcare ( nurseries, 
pre-schools,  children’s centres full day care, pre -schools, child minders, school run early years provision, and ‘wrap 
around care’ – breakfast, after school and holiday clubs ), schools (primary, secondary and sixth form Post 16 
Education ), youn g people with special educational needs and disabilities, colleges, libraries, youth facilities, 
employment and skills measures and other community learning spaces.  
 
103 Policy HS4 
Part 2  2. Where a development proposal,  by virtue of its scale and/or location  either individually or cumulatively with other 
development,  will increase demand for education facilities beyond those available within the local area, new or 
enhanced facilities will be sought through a Section 106 Agreement , as per by pol icy SD2 .  
 
MM51  104 Paragraph 
13.64  The CCG, working with Local Authorities and local stakeholders, addresses Primary Care capacity issues in the area 
as part of the wider Estates Strategy for Mid & South Essex Sustainability & Transformation Partnership (STP) has 
indicated that they will seek to deliver capacity improvements to meet existing and future needs within its area through 
improvements to existing facilities where possible. There may also be a requirement for additional  infrastructure to 
accommodate new models of care as set out within the NHS Long -Term Plan (2019).  New homes will increase 
pressure on existing provision, creating additional demand for healthcare services. As appropriate, new development 
proposals will th erefore be asked for contributions towards the provision of healthcare facilities. The Mid and South 
Essex STP has also indicated development locations where new facilities may be required. These requirements are 
identified in the relevant allocation polic ies and IDP.  
105 Policy HS5 
Title Health and Social Care Provision  Facilities  
105 Policy HS5 
Part 2  2. Where  the cumulative impacts  of residential  a development proposal  within a local area , either individually or 
cumulatively with other development,  will increase demand for  education  healthcare and social care  facilities 
beyond those available  within the local area , development will be required to make 
proportionate  contributions  towards new or enhanced facilities will be sought through a  Section 106 Agreement, as 
per by policy SD2 .  to support capacity improvements to health and social care infrastructure .  Where specified in 
the relevant allocation policy, some development proposals will also be required to make land available for new 
health care facilities.   
 
MM52  106 Paragraph 
13.75  For the purposes of this Policy, community facilities can be found in the Policies Map and are listed in appendix eight, 
this include s education facilities, sports and leisure facilities, libraries, non -residential health and social care facilities, 
cultural facilities, community centres, and places of worship.  
 
106 Policy HS6  
Part 1  
 1. In order to allow communities to meet their  day to day  needs, proposals for new, extensions, alterations or 
redevelopment of existing community facilities,  as shown on the Policies Map and listed at Appendix Eight,  or change 
of use to another facility will be supported where it can be demonstrated that the development will:   
 
107 Policy HS6  
Parts 1e to 1f  e. Provide greater community benefits; and 
 
f. Bring about broader benefits to provide alternative community use, if there is an identified surplus of the 
existing community service ; and . 
 
INSERT A NEW CRITERION AFTER PART 1f OF POLICY HS6  
 
g. Where appropriate a project level HRA may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the 
requirements set out in policy SD1.  
 
107 Policy HS6  
Part 2b  b. The loss will be replaced by equivalent or better provision in terms of quantity and q uality in accordance with the 
requirements of part 1 of this policy. Where appropriate a Section 106 Agreement will be used to secure the 
replacement provision , as per policy SD2 . 
 41 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
MM53  108 Paragraph 
13.81  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 13.81, AND RENUMBER PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER  
 
With regard to sports pitches meanwhile, the Castle Point Playing Pitch Assessment and Strategy (2018) highlighted 
deficits in relation to several types of sports pitches, especially in relation to football. Ther efore, it is imperative that in 
order to meet current and future needs that existing pitches are not lost, except in circumstances where equivalent or 
enhanced provision is secured nearby.  
108 Policy HS7  REORDER AND AMEND POLICY HS7  
 
1.  The locations of existing open spaces, allotment gardens and playing fields  associated with educational uses 
are identified on the Policies Map, and a  schedule of these sites can be found in Appendix Three.   
 
2. 1. Limited minor scale ancillary development o n open spaces, allotment gardens and playing fields associated 
with educational uses will be permitted, where it can be demonstrated that:   
 
a. The development will increase opportunity for public recreational use or improve the recreational quality 
of the  space;   
 
b. The overall use of the space is retained for recreational purposes;   
 
d c. The reduction in  open space will not have an unacceptable impact on the character of the area;   
 
c.d. The development will not impact on the ability of the open space to provide other environmental 
services and benefits, including but not limited to, biodiversity, flood storage and the accommodation of 
future flood defence works; and   
 
d. e. Where appropriate a project level HRA may be required alongside the consi deration of the proposal, 
as per the requirements set out in policy SD1. The loss of the open space will not have a detrimental impact 
on the character of the area.   
 
3 2. Any d  Developments resulting in a loss of  any existing or newly created  publicly available open space; allotment 
garden; or playing field associated with educational uses will only be supported where:   
 
a. An assessment has been undertaken which indicates that the existing facility is surplus to requirements; 
or  
 
b. The loss will be replaced by equivalent or better provision in terms of quantity and quality  in a suitable 
location . Where appropriate, a Section 106 Agreement will be used to secure the replacement provision .; or  
 
c. The development is for alternative sports or recreatio n provision, the benefits of which clearly outweigh 
the loss of the current or former use.   
 
1. 3. The locations of existing open spaces, allotment gardens and playing fields associated with educational uses 
are identified on the Policies Map, and a schedu le of these sites can be found in Appendix Three.   
 
MM54  112 Policy TP1  
Part 3  INSERT AS A NEW PART 3  
 
3. Where appropriate a project level HRA may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the 
requirements set out in policy SD1.   
 
MM55  113 Paragraphs 
14.13 and 
14.14; Table 
14.1 and 
14.2  DELETE PARAGRAPHS 14.13 AND 14.14 AND TABLES 14.1 AND 14.2 AND REPLACE WITH THE FOLLOWING 
PARAGRAPHS. NUMBER PARAGRAPHS AND SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS THEREAFTER  
 
14.13 Due to the physical constraints on the highway network in the Borough, new infrastructure provision to the 
transport network is fundamental to delivering a wider choice of sustainable transport modes. Through the Essex 
Local Transport Plan, and ongoing engagement with the Hig hways Authority and local residents,  a number of 
highways schemes have been identified to provide improvements to the highways network within the Borough.  The 
scheme listed in the table below are at early stages of progression, and do not currently have i dentified funding 
mechanisms in place to support their implementation.  Further details on these schemes is available within the Castle 
Point Infrastructure Delivery Plan .   
 
Table 14.1: Strategic Highways improvements  
 
Project  Location  Reason for improvement  Proposed improvements  
Extension to 
Roscommon 
Way (Phase 3)  Canvey 
Island  East-west movements are currently 
restricted to Somnes Avenue and Long 
Road.  As a result, these routes 
become particularly congested at peak Extension to Roscommon Way from 
Haven Road to Western Esplanade 
to provide an alternative east -west 
route on the island, alleviating 42 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
times, especially Long Road which 
services a large number of side streets.  
There is a need for an increased 
capacity of east -west routes across the 
island.   
 
Roscommon Way is elevated above 
projected flood water depths and 
designed to cope with a 1 in 100 -year 
event.  The majo rity of existing roads 
on Canvey Island are not built with the 
capability to withstand a severe 
flooding event.  
 congestion  on Long Road and 
Somnes Avenue.  
 
The extension to Roscommon Way 
would be elevated above projected 
flood water depths and designed to 
cope with a 1 in 100 -year event. This 
will provide additional capacity for 
emergency evacuation access for the 
island duri ng a severe flooding event.   
 
New access for 
Canvey Island  Canvey 
Island  Access for Canvey Island is from 
Canvey Road and the A130 Canvey 
Way.  Both accesses join the island at 
the B1014 / Canvey Road roundabout 
in the north eastern corner of the 
island.   The limited access for the 
island results in significant congestion 
on these routes at peak times, and 
safety concerns regarding emergency 
access for the island for instance 
where the B1014 / Canvey Road 
roundabout and associated existing 
access points a re inaccessible.   
 
Oikos is a nationally important refined 
petroleum facility located in the south 
eastern corner of the island.  Existing 
limited access from the island, 
particularly in an emergency situation 
where existing access points could be 
comprom ised, is a significant concern 
for the distribution of refined petroleum 
in the UK.  
 
Access to employment opportunities 
west of Canvey Island for residents on 
the island, particularly at the DP World 
London Gateway port in Thurrock, is 
currently poor, requiring residents to 
travel north to the A13 on a looped 15 -
mile journey.    
 Construction of a third access for 
Canvey Island, from Northwick Road, 
crossing Holehaven Creek, to the 
Manorway A1014 on the mainland.  
 
This would provide access for the 
island from an alternative route which 
does not rely on the B1014 / Canvey 
Way roundabout.  This would provide 
alternative emergency access and 
would also open up access to 
employment opportunities to the west 
for Canvey Island residents.    
Improved 
access to  
Canvey Island  Canvey 
Island  Congestion and queueing on access 
routes to Canvey Island, in particular 
on Canvey Way and Somnes Avenue.  • The widening of Somnes Avenue to 
provide two lanes between Waterside 
roundabout and Elsinor Avenue 
roundabout.  
•  
• Provide ’KEEP CLEAR’ marking 
across junction of Long Road / 
Hawkesbury Road.  
•  
• Provide traffic signals at the junction 
of Long Road / Thorney Bay Road.  
•  
• Instigate school travel plans / safer 
journeys to school intervention to 
discourage trips to school by c ar at 
Canvey Junior School, Canvey Island 
Infant School, William Read Primary 
School and Castle View School.   
•  
A127 corridor 
for growth and 
route 
management 
strategy  Northern 
edge of the 
Borough  The A127, which passes along the 
Borough's northern boundar y, is a 
strategic route in South Essex which 
becomes congested during peak 
periods. Congestion is experienced at 
key junctions along its route. Junctions 
which experience problems include the 
Fairglen Interchange and the Rayleigh 
Weir, both located in Cast le Point 
Borough. The capacity of the A127 is 
expected to be exceeded as a result of 
growth across South Essex, including 
key employment growth at Southend 
Airport and in the Basildon Enterprise 
Corridor.  A strategy has been prepared by 
Essex County Council to address 
congestion issues for the A127 
Corridor. This strategy includes 
substantive upgrades to the Fairglen 
Interchange.  
 
Short term Fairglen Interchange 
improvements are proposed for 
construction in 2020, and include:  
• A new road linking the A130 to 
the A1245;  
• Widening of slip roads on the 
Fairglen Roundabout;  43 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
 
 • Additional and longer slip lanes 
off the A127;  
• Traffic lights at Rayleigh Spur 
Roundabout and an additional 
lane; and  
• A new pedestrian and cycle 
bridge on the A127.  
 
Conside ration of future improvements 
to the A127 is being managed by the 
A127 Task Force and its relationship 
to the location of future growth within 
the Borough.  
    
A129 Route 
Improvements  Thundersley  Significant congestion on the A129 
between the A13 / A129 junction and 
the A129 / A127 Rayleigh Weir 
junction.   Essex County Council are currently 
assessing potential improvement 
options on this route.  No specific 
projects have been identified at this 
stage.  
  
Canvey Way / 
A13 slip road  Sadlers Farm 
Roun dabout, 
westbound (in 
Basildon 
Borough)  
 Concern that the slip road from Canvey 
Way to the A13 is too short, creating 
safety concerns and reducing the flow 
of traffic to the A13 from Canvey 
Island.  No proposals identified.  Essex 
County Council are curren tly 
considering improvement options.  
 
 
14.14 In addition to the schemes identified in Table 14.1, Transport  Evidence for the New Local Plan 2019 has 
identifies the need for additional improvements to the  highway network in order to accommodate growth as outlined 
in the table 14.2 below:  
 
Table 14.2: Highway Improvements from Growth  
 
Project  Location  Issue and proposed improvements  
New roundabout on 
the A130  Benfleet, around 900m south 
of the Sadlers Farm junction 
on the A130.  Provide access to site HO9, land west of Benfleet, while 
maintaining traffic flows on the A130.  
  
Dualling of around 
900m of the northern 
section of the A130 
Canvey Way  Benfleet, between the 
proposed new roundabout 
(see above) and the Sadlers 
Farm junction.  To reduce congestion and improve traffic flows on the 
A130.  To provide the opportunity for improved traffic 
management leading to the Sadlers Farm junction.  While 
the project is in Benfleet, it will provide significant benefits 
for vehicles from Canvey Islan d accessing the Sadlers 
Farm junction.  
 
Route improvements 
on the A129  Thundersley, A129 route 
between Rayleigh Weir 
junction and the Victoria 
House Corner junction.  Congestion at all junctions on the A129 and significant 
congestion at the Woodmans Arms junction currently 
occurs.  Congestion levels will be increased by growth 
proposed close to the A129 on sites HO13, HO20, and 
HO21.    
 
Options for improvements include undertaking further work 
with Essex County Council to identify appropriat e solutions 
on the A129 route.  
 
Victoria House 
Corner junction 
improvements  Hadleigh, A13 / A129 
junction  To improve traffic flows as a result of growth proposed in 
the Local Plan.  Mitigation works identified within the 
Transport Evidence Mitigation and Sensitivity report 2019 . 
 
Somnes Avenue / 
Link Road junction 
improvements  Canvey Island, on the B1014  To improve traffic flows as a result of growth proposed in 
the Local Plan.  Mitigation works identified within the 
Transport Evidence Mitigation and Sensitivity report 2019 . 
 
B1014 High Street / 
B1014 Essex Way / 
B1006 High Road 
junction assessment  
 Benfleet, near Benfleet train 
station  To reduce congestion and improve traffic flows as a result 
of growth proposed in the Local Plan.  Mitigation works 
identified within the Transport Evidence Mitigation and 
Sensitivity report 2019 . 
Junction 
improvements at 
Kenneth Road  Benfleet, Kenneth Road / 
A13 junction  To improve traffic flows as a result of growth proposed in 
the Local Plan.  Mitigation works identified within the 
Transport Evidence Mitigation and Sensitivity report 2019 . 
 
New roundabout 
access from Canvey 
Road to site HO23, 
land east of Canvey 
Road  
 Canvey Island, Canvey 
Road  To provide access to site HO23.  44 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
Pegasus crossing on 
Roscommon Way  Canvey Island, Roscommon 
Way To support equestrian uses in the area and provide 
improved access to the West Canvey Marshes RSPB site 
for new and existing local residents.   
 
Additional public 
transport provision  Borough -wide 
 New / extended bus services to accommodate new housing 
development.   
 
 
Due to the physical constraints on the local and strategic highway network in the Borough, new infrastructure 
provision to the transport network is fundamental, including the provision of a wider choice of sustainable and active 
travel modes. Through the Essex Local Transport Plan and ongoing engagement in the preparation of the plan with 
the Highways Authority, site promoters and  local residents, a number of schemes have been identified to provide 
improvements to the transport network by all modes within the Borough. In addition to its Bus Strategy ECC has 
launched the `Safer Greener Healthier’ campaign which seeks to make it as e asy as possible for Essex residents to 
travel more sustainably, especially for shorter journeys by walking, cycling, e -scootering or taking the bus or train for 
longer journeys. Its vision seeks to create a road environment that is safer, especially for sh orter journeys; deliver 
sustainable transport solutions to support the reduction in carbon emissions and deliver long -term greener benefits, 
including long term public health benefits.  
 
The A127 forms part of the Strategic Road network and its importance i n Essex, South Essex and Castle Point is 
set out in the “A127 A Corridor for Growth - an Economic Plan” 2014, through a transport route management 
strategy. The A127 presently experiences challenges regarding capacity and peak hour congestion. There is a n eed 
to manage traffic along the A127 to improve air quality; improve safety and network resilience and provide 
congestion relief. A cross authority A127 Task Force including ECC, South Essex Authorities and the London 
Borough of Havering has been establish ed to co -ordinate transport requirements within the A127 corridor.   
Transport improvements along the A127 Corridor will be made having regard to the A127 A Corridor For Growth:  
An Economic Plan.    
 
A number of transport improvements, including highway alterations and modal shift initiatives, have been identified 
through various studies undertaken during the preparation of the Local Plan. Some of these schemes are outlined in 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), which identifies the infrastruc ture needed to support development, its phasing 
and estimated costs. Within the schemes identified, some have differing funding sources and will come forward in 
different ways including the following:  
• Schemes required as a result of growth in the borough. These highway alterations and modal shift initiatives 
are a direct result of growth and will be funded and delivered through appropriate highway works and 
developer contributions.  
• Schemes that are expected to come forward during the plan period but are no t directly linked to planned 
growth.  Where development increases the need for such improvements the Council will seek a 
proportionate developer contribution from relevant schemes. Additional funding will be sought through other 
sources, as appropriate, in cluding for example relevant Government bodies and funding streams, ECC, the 
South East Local Enterprise Partnership and ASELA.  
• Schemes that are long held aspirations for the Council but the exact nature of the improvements and 
funding for them are presen tly unknown, such as improved access to Canvey Island. This is expressed in 
greater detail in policy TP3.  
 
Where appropriate a project level Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) may be required alongside the 
consideration of any proposal that seeks improvements or alterations to the highway network as per the 
requirements set out in policy SD1.   
 
117 Policy TP2  REPLACE POLICY TP2 IN ITS ENTIRETY WITH THE FOLLOWING TEXT  
 
1. In order to manage congestion on key routes, and at key junctions within the borough and improve the quality 
of town centre environments, the following improvements and alterations to carriageway infrastructure in 
Castle Point will be delivered:  
a. A127 Growth Corridor Strategy;  
b. Highway improvements in Canvey and  Hadleigh Town Centres.  
 
2. In order to manage congestion on key routes, and at key junctions within the borough and improve the quality 
of town centre environments, the following improvements and alterations to carriageway infrastructure in 
Castle Point w ill be delivered through contributions set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and safeguarding 
areas are shown on the policies map:  
a. Extension to Roscommon Way Phase 3;  
 
b. Widening of Somnes Avenue;  
 
c. Route improvements along the A129 Rayleigh Road betwee n the Rayleigh Weir and Victoria House 
Corner junctions;  
 
d. Dualling of the northern section of the A130 Canvey Way in the vicinity of Sadlers Farm; and  
 
e. Minor Junction improvements at both ends of Kenneth Road.  
 
Local Policy TP2  
Improvements and Alterations to Carriageway  Highway  Infrastructure  
 
1. The Council will seek to manage congestion on key routes and improve network resilience through the design 
and delivery of the projects identified within this policy, implementation of active and sustainable transport 
measures, improving the quality of town centre environments, namely Canvey and Hadleigh and other 
improvements identified through the master planning and planning application process.   
 
2. Transport improvements along the A127 Corrid or will be made having regard to the A127 A Corridor For Growth:  
An Economic Plan.   
 
3. To deliver the local plan growth, the following highway and transportation infrastructure improvements will be 
required:  45 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
 
a. New roundabout access from the A130 to site HO9  
 
b. Additional highway capacity including improvements to the northern section of the A130 Canvey Way and 
improvements to A13 slip road  
 
c. Route improvements on the A129 transport corridor including public transport and active travel  
 
d. Victoria  House Corner junction improvements  
 
e. Somnes Avenue / Link Road junction improvements  
 
f. B1014 High Street / B1014 Essex Way / B1006 High Road junction improvements  
 
g. Minor Junction improvements at Kenneth Road especially at the junction with the A13   
 
h. New roundabout access from Canvey Road to site HO23  
 
i. Pegasus crossing on Roscommon Way linking HO23 to West Canvey Marshes  
 
j. Pedestrian and cycle access to Benfleet railway station  
 
k. Provision of new and enhanced public transport services and  infrastructure   
 
4. Where necessary, the Council will secure highway works (S278) and/or financial contributions (S106) to deliver 
highway projects necessary to accommodate the growth arising from this plan.  
 
5. The Council will consider the impact of development proposals on the land needed to deliver the highway projects 
listed within this policy, and where necessary refuse applications for development which would prevent or 
significantly affect the delivery of those highway projects.  
 
6. All proposals should provide active and sustainable transport measures and comply with other relevant policies in 
the plan which secure high environmental quality and compliance with relevant environmental legislation.  
 
7. Any improvements or alterations to  the highway network may require a project level HRA, where appropriate, as 
per the requirements set out in policy SD1.  
 
MM56  117  Policy TP2  INSERT NEW REASONED JUSTIFICATION AND POLICY AFTER POLICY TP2, NUMBER THE BELOW AND 
SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS AS APPROPRIATE  
 
New and Improved Access to Canvey Island  
 
Reasoned Justification  
 
The Council is committed to securing better access to Canvey Island for its 40,000 plus residents. In addition to its 
large resident population, the Island has two top tier Control of Major Accident Hazards (COMAH) sites at ports of 
national importance to fuel supply; is at risk from tidal flooding although substantially defended in this regard; and at 
risk from localised flooding due to its topography. Improved access to Canvey Island would assist in relieving peak 
hour congestion at key access points and improve the resilience of the highway network for the Island’s residents 
and businesses, particularly in the case of an emergency.  
 
Currently, access to and fro m the Island is via two routes. The principal access to and from the Island is via the 
A130 Canvey Way, which is a purpose -built access road that is elevated in parts. It comprises a single lane in each 
direction and converges with the B1014 from South Ben fleet at the Waterside Farm junction. This junction 
experiences congestion and delay at peak hours. The northern extent of Canvey Way is the Sadlers Farm junction 
of the A13 with the A130, which also experiences congestion and delay at peak hours because o f pinch points on 
various arms of the Sadlers Farm junction, including on Canvey Way.  
 
A second route is via the B1014 Canvey Road, which passes by Benfleet Railway station (the nearest station to 
Canvey Island) and through the historic core of South Benfl eet. There are presently no plans to improve highway 
capacity on this route, which whilst being a Priority 1 route, also performs as a local and residential route in places.  
 
On the Island traffic is distributed from the Waterside Farm junction, east -west via two main routes – Somnes 
Avenue and Canvey Road/Long Road. Both routes experience peak time congestion, with delays on Canvey 
Road/Long Road exacerbated due to the number of access and egress points along its route including residential 
side roads, sc hools and other developments. Congestion can impact on the efficiency of public transport services as 
well as private vehicles. There is the potential to promote modal shift through active travel measures by improving 
the attractiveness for cycling in the vicinity, and such locations will continue to be considered in the future for cycle 
corridor upgrades.  
 
Journey time delays are experienced on the A130 Canvey Way, at the Waterside Farm junction, along Somnes 
Avenue and Canvey Road/Long Road. There are als o delays in the morning peak through South Benfleet along the 
B1014 meaning this route does not provide an attractive alternative to traffic seeking to access or leave the island. 
Improvements are necessary to address the delays presently experienced by th e existing population and to provide 
improved highway network resilience.  The Access to Canvey Study (2017) sought to identify potential options to 
improve highway and multimodal access and egress to Canvey Island along with improvements to other traffic 
flows.  
 
In addition, to seeking to improve east -west movements along Somnes Avenue and Canvey Road/Long Road, it is 
an aspiration to bring forward the final section of the extension to Roscommon Way which extends the route from 
Haven Road to Thorney Bay Ro ad. The completion of Roscommon Way would provide alternative routes to Long 
Road and Somnes Avenue during peak congestion, and provide an alternative route for residents and visitors on or 
near the seafront areas to access or egress the island, who at pre sent have little choice but to use Long Road.  
 
The Council is committed to working with key stakeholders in preparing an access to Canvey feasibility study that 
looks at the potential highway and sustainable mode options for improved access to and from the  Island, but also 
within the island to improve traffic flows and sustainable transport on Somnes Avenue and Long Road. To improve 
capacity on these two routes, including capacity for sustainable modes, it is vital that additional capacity on the 
island is provided. Roscommon Way Phase Three could be a key component in this regard.  
 46 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
Due to the location of the Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA and Ramsar site and the Thames Estuary and 
Marshes SPA and Ramsar site in relation to Canvey Island the Habitats Regu lation Assessment process will be 
followed for this policy.  
 
INSERT NEW POLICY TP3 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT POLICIES THEREAFTER  
 
Strategic Policy TP3  
New and Improved Access to Canvey Island  
1. The Council will undertake a feasibility study to identify options for improving access to and from and within 
Canvey Island, including consideration of any wider strategic implications on and off the Island.  
 
2. This will be prepared in collaboration with key partners including ECC, adjoining district an d unitary Council’s, 
Transport East, Government Departments such as the DfT and DLUHC and relevant agencies as well as 
engagement with the local community.  
 
3. The recommendations from the feasibility study will inform the first review of the Local Plan.  
 
4. Options in the feasibility study for improvements to access to Canvey Island will be subject to Habitats 
Regulations Assessment.  
 
MM57  119 Heading – 
Local Policy 
TP3 
Improvement
s to 
Footpaths, 
Bridleways 
and Cycling 
Infrastructure  REPLACE ALL POLICY TP3 REFERENCES WITH THE FOLLOWING HEADING  
 
Local Policy TP43 
 
Improvements to Footpaths, Bridleways and Cycling Active Travel   Infrastructure  
 
118 Paragraph 
14.18  The NPPF  also encourages the pursuit of planning policies which enable and support healthy lifestyles, for example 
the provision of safe and accessible green infrastructure. This includes bridle paths in Castle Point. The South 
Essex Green and Blue Infrastructure Strategy  details how access to the Green and Blue infrastructure su pports the 
wellbeing of residents and communities in South Essex, including Castle Point and sets out how accessibility to 
Green and Blue Infrastructure should be improved.  
 
119 Paragraph 
14.24  The Canvey Town Centre Masterplan 2010  emphasises the potential to enhance cycling access to Canvey Town 
centre through the provision of cycling infrastructure. In addition to these specific projects, Essex County Council  ECC  
has reviewed the cycle network within Castle Point in the Castle Point Borough Cycli ng Action Plan 201 87 to identify 
gaps in the network, the need for route improvements and the need for additional ancillary infrastructure such as cycle 
parking and crossing facilities . A key project to support modal shift, and multi -modal journeys is impr ovements for 
pedestrian and cycle access to and around Benfleet railway station.   
 
119 Paragraph 
14.25  The South Essex Green and Blue Infrastructure Strategy identifies a network of Public Rights of Way across South 
Essex, including Castle Point, which p rovide access to residents to the countryside and open space. These are 
important for wellbeing but were identified as being fragmented in parts and needing improvements. The Council will 
work in conjunction with partners in this strategy particularly in r elation to cross boundary projects. As part of this 
PROW network  Tthere is a network of bridle paths in Castle Point, which supports the recreational pursuit of horse 
riding from numerous stables located in the borough. It is important to recognise the val ue of this network and seek 
improvements where appropriate.  
 
119 Policy TP3 
Part c  c. Improvements to local footpaths, bridleways and cycling networks across Castle Point linking to the Thames Estuary 
Path, and any other appropriate green infrastructure links, addressing gaps in the network and ensuring all routes are 
attractive and well -designed  of a high quality ; 
 
119 Policy TP3 
Part d  d. Provision and enhancement of cycling infrastructure, in accordance with  having regard to the latest Essex County 
Council  ECC  Cycling Strategy and local action plans for delivery , including cycle parking facilities and crossings, at 
public transport nodes, especially Benfleet railway station,  and other appropriate destinations, including town centr es, 
employment areas, schools and other publicly accessible buildings, within Castle Point.  
 
120 Policy TP3 
Part d  ADD THE FOLLOWING NEW CRITERIA BELOW AFTER PART 3  
 
Where appropriate a project level HRA may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the 
requirements set out in policy SD1.  
 
MM58  120 Paragraph 
14.32  INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER PARAGRAPH 14.32, AND RENUMBER ALL PARAGRAPHS 
THEREAFTER ACCORDINGLY  
 
As is the case across the UK, the rail services out of Benfleet railway station are operated under a private contract, 
and the Essex Local Transport Plan does not therefore set out detailed requirements in relation to rail provision. These 
improvements are separately secured via the Franchise A greement. Trenitalia c2c Limited have a franchise to operate 
services on the line between London Fenchurch Street and Southend until 2029. As part of the franchise agreement 
Trenitalia c2c Limited committed to leasing new trains to cope with rising passeng er numbers, and to various upgrades 
around stations and ticketing. Regarding Benfleet railway station, improvements are to be delivered in respect of the 
booking hall, external access and in creating a secure station information area.   
 
121 Policy TP4  Strategic Policy TP 45 
Improvements to Public Transport Infrastructure Services  
 
NUMBER THE FIRST SECTION OF POLICY TP4 PART 1 AND AMEND TEXT.  
 
1. In order to improve journey time reliability for public  transport, and  make services more favourable to residents 
and employees in Castle Point, the following improvements to public transport infrastructure and services will be 
delivered through the  implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Grant funding, Community Infrastructure 
Levy, and as  appro priate in planning terms S106 Agreements will be used to secure this delivery.  , by Section 106 
Agreements  from appropriate development, Community Infrastructure Levy  or grant funding.   …  
 
INSERT PART 2 TO THE POLICY  
 47 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
2. The Council will also work with Trenitalia c2c Limited and other relevant partners to secure the necessary 
improvements to Benfleet railway station and rail services as set out in the Franchise Agreement.  
 
MM59  121 Paragraph 
14.35  The Essex Local Transport Plan  Development Managem ent Policies (2011) set out a clear approach to congestion at 
policy DM15. This requires there to be no detrimental impact upon the existing or proposed highway in  increase to  
congestion terms  as a result of new development . Any detrimental impact is requi red to be remedied through 
appropriate mitigation funded by the developer.  
 
121 Paragraph 
14.36  Essex County Council  ECC  have  has published  established a suite of  dDevelopment mManagement Ppolicies 
(2011), the Highways Technical Manual in the Essex Design Guide (2018) and the Developers’ Guide to 
Infrastructure Contributions (2020) to  which new development is required to have regard to when preparing 
development proposals. Developments above the identified thresholds in the Guide and Management Polic ies, or 
successor documents, are required to prepare a Travel Plan,  Transport Assessment and/or Statement to assess the 
impact of their development in terms of highway safety and capacity for both access to the proposed development 
and the wider highway network. Travel Plans are required to be prepared to encourage modal shift through a 
package of measures to ensure active and sustainable means of travel are available to all new residents or users 
thereby promoting sustainable transport, reducing the need to travel, and encouraging the use of non -car modes.  
which it considers as the Highway Authrity when consulted on planning applications. It is recommended that 
potential applicants for development within Castle Point have regard to these policies when preparing planning 
proposals.  
 
122 Paragraph 
14.37  The Transport Evidence for the New Local Plan 2019 Report demonstrates that the highway  road network in Castle 
Point already experiences congestion on key routes and at key junctions during peak periods. It is therefore 
necessary  essential  that the Council requires developers to identify  considers the likely impacts of development on 
the capacity of  highway infrastructure in terms of capacity and safety  and congestion  when assessing planning 
appli cations to and ensure s that necessary  mitigation measures are provided and funded  minimises these impacts 
as far as is reasonably possible .  
 
122 Policy TP5  
Part 1  
 Strategic Policy TP 56 
Highway Impact  
 
1. Developers  All development will be required to prepare  proposals that are likely to generate amounts of 
movements must be accompanied by  a Transport Assessment or Transport Statement, and a Travel Plan , having 
regard to the guidance on thresholds published by the Highway Authority.   
 
2. The Transport aAssessment / or Sstatement and plan  must demonstrate how the impacts of the development on 
the highway network will be cost effectively  mitigated to limit significant effects on highway and junction capacity and 
safety . 
 
3. Subject to compliance with all other relevant policies, favourable consideration will be given to those  development 
proposals which fully mitigate their impacts on highway and junction capacity and safety . Applications will be 
refused where:  
 
a. A developme nt is not able to fully mitigate its impacts to an acceptable degree ; and  
 
b. A junction or link of highway is expected to exceed its designed capacity as a result ing in  of residual 
cumulative impacts which are assessed to be severe ; or  
 
c. A junction or  link of highway that already exceeds its designated  designed  capacity will see its peak hour 
capacity exceeded still further and as a result the residual cumulative impacts are severe.  
 
4. Where necessary,  In appropriate circumstances , the Council will secure use planning conditions , or highway 
works (s278) and/or financial contributions (s106)  a Section 106  Agreement  to deliver ensure that highway  
mitigation works necessary  and/or Travel Plan requirements are delivered to accommodate the growth arising from 
this plan  accompany the phasing of development.  
 
MM60  123 Paragraph 
14.43  With regard to the need for safe access arrangements to new developments, the Essex Local Transport Plan 
highlights the importance of ensuring that new developments  can be accessed safely by all types of users including 
cars, bicycles and pedestrians in order to prevent road traffic accidents. The Essex Design Guide seeks to encourage 
active design in new developments through a range of measures including  establishing walkable communities, 
connected walking and cycling routes, co -location of community facilities and establishing multi -functional spaces, all 
of which encourage the use of sustainable modes and promote healthier lifestyles.  
 
123 Paragraph 
14.45  Typically, people are more likely to access public transport if it is located within a reasonable proximity of where they 
live and the places they are travelling to. Walking distances in excess of ten five minutes normally deter use. The 
average person can walk up to 800m 400m  in five ten minutes.  
 
123 Policy TP6  Strategic Policy TP 67 
Safe and Sustainable Access  
 
124 Policy TP6 
Part c  c. Access to public transport services within 800m 400m  of the site. Where this is not possible a contribution 
will be sought to improving access to existing public transport services or residential travel packs.  
 
MM61  125 Policy TP7  Strategic Policy TP 78 
Parking Provision  
 
125 Policy TP7  
Part 1  1. Proposals for development will be expected to make provision for safe and secure car parking, parking for people 
with disabilities and parking for bicycles, having regard to the Essex  Vehicle  Parking Standards.  Maximum car parking 
standards will only be applied where there are compelling planning and transport reasons to justify such 
restrictions.  Proposals which make parking provision below these standards should be supported by evidence 
detailing the local circumstances that justify  deviation from the standard.    
 
MM62  126 Policy TP8  Strategic Policy TP 78 
Access for Servicing  
 
MM63  129 Policy CM1  
Part 2  DELETE PART 2 OF THE POLICY  
 
2. When assessing proposals for new development the Council will seek to ensure that adequate provision has 
been made to accommodate new communications infrastructure on site. This must include:   48 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
 
a. The extension of broadband fibre optic cable to the serve the development with "fibre to the door" 
broadband services; or   
 
b. The provision of cabinets in suitable locations to provide superfast broadband connectivity speeds to all 
properties within the new development; and   
 
c. Where appropriate, the provision of telecommunications equipment to ensure 5G mobile phone coverage 
across the site.  
 
MM64  131 Paragraph 
16.10  The Urban Design Characterisation Study 2013 of the Borough identifies the urban areas  it as being dominated by 
residential development, with a mix of detached, semi -detached and terraced houses, chalets and bungalows, 
interspersed with two, three and four storey bl ocks of flats, creating a mixed character across the borough as a 
whole.  
 
132 Paragraph 
16.17  The Castle Point Residential Design Guidance Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) identifies how the 
following policies in this chapter will be implemented. Further guidance on a broad range of design matters can also 
be found in  Tthe Essex Design Guide, which  supports the delivery of high -quality development that meets the needs 
of existing and future communities in Essex. A Quality design Panel has been established, with panellists drawn 
from a range of built environment professions to and provide an independent view on development schemes across 
Essex and how they may be improved. The Council will support reference to the panel in order to  provide a critique 
of development or make recommendations that improve quality.  
 
132 Policy DS1  
 1. Within urban areas  Tthe Council will seek to improve the quality and attractiveness of the environment in Castle 
Point, and its integration with the natural environment, by seeking  expecting buildings and places to be of high 
quality , beautiful and sustainable  design that accentuates positive features of the urban environment and 
contributes positively towards climate change mitigation  sustainability .  
 
2. The Council will seek a co -ordinated comprehensive approach to public realm enhancements for the borough, 
particularly within its town centres and employment areas. Development will need to demonstrate how it will 
contribute to the quality of the publ ic realm.  
 
3. The Council will seek to promote healthy and active lifestyles through design of the built environment. In order to 
achieve this the Council will work with partners to deliver regeneration and public realm improvements in Canvey 
and Hadleigh  Town Centres. and public realm improvements which includes:  
 
a. Street furniture;  
b. Landscaping, including soft landscaping;  
c. Infrastructure and services;  
d. Palette of materials (structures and surfaces); and  
e. Public art  
 
4. All development should to be designed to a high standard, meeting the design objectives set out at Appendix 
One, and fully integrating sustainability requirements. Development proposals must be appropriate to the site and its 
surroundings having regard to:  
 
a. Scale  
b. Density  
c. Massing  
d. Height  
e. Landscape  
f. Layout  
g. Materials  
h. Detailing  
i. Access  
j. Security and crime prevention measures  
k. Flood resilience and drainage  
l. Adjoining land uses  
 
5. The Council will Hhave regard to the Residential Design Guidance SPD and the Essex Design Guide  in its 
consideration of all proposals for residential development.  
 
6. Proposals for development within the Green Belt will be determined against the provisions of Policies GB1, GB2 
and GB3.  
 
MM65  134 Policy DS2  
Part 1  1. Where appropriate development must provide hard and /or soft landscaping, appropriate to and suitable for the 
location and type of development provided . Trees should form a key element of the landscaping of development, 
with existing trees retained wherever possible and new streets should be tree lined. The approach to landscaping 
should be  As set out in a landscaping scheme.  
 
134 Policy DS2  
Part 2b -2c b. Native species, suitable to the location, climatic conditions, and to promoting biodiversity, and be appropriate in 
respect of growth habits; and 
 
c. SuDS if required to form an integral part of the landscaping scheme providing opportunities for a variety of 
habitats, species and biodiversity; and 
 
INSERT NEW CRITERION AFTER PART 2C  
 
d. To contribute towards tackling climate change.  
 
MM66  135 Policy DS3  
 Where advertisement consent is required, such consent will be permitted if the proposal respects the interests of 
public safety and amenity,  and meets  by meeting  the following criteria:   
 
a. The size, design, materials and location of the advertisement respects the scale and character of the 
building, site or area on which it is displayed;   
 
b. The proposals  would not result in proliferation of advertisements;   
 
c. Any illumination  will be considered in relation to  respects the  impact on visual amenity, potential light 
pollution,  road safety,  character of the area and buildings and functional need; and   
 49 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
d. The y do Proposal does  not have an adverse effect on highway safety.   
 
MM67  141 Paragraph 
17.15  Re-alignment of Green Belt boundaries at the following school sites would therefore meet their national and local 
objectives:  
• King John School, Benfleet;  
• The Deanes School, Benfleet;  
• Glenwood School, Benfleet;  
• Kents Hill Infants and Junior School, Benfleet;  
• Holy Family Catholic Primary School, Benfleet;  
• Robert Drake Primary School, Benfleet;  
• Canvey Skills Campus  / Procat , Canvey Island; and  
• Cornelius Vermuyden, Canvey Island .  
 
141 Paragraph 
17.18  As a result of the changes made in this plan, nearly  over 920% of the Green Belt extent identified in the 1998 Castle 
Point Adopted Local Plan is retained. By retaining this extent of Green Belt it will continue to serve its purpose of 
keeping land permanently open and maintaining a clear visual separation between the individual towns within 
Castle Point and within South Essex whilst enabling sustainable development to meet the needs of the community 
to 2033.  
 
142 Paragraph 
17.19  The Green Belt extent, as set out in this plan, is defined on the Policies Map and is over 2, 500400 hectares.  
 
142 Policy GB1  REPLACE GB1 IN ITS ENTIRETY WITH THE FOLLOWING TEXT  
 
1. The Council will continue to protect the permanence and openness of land designated as Green Belt. 
Development within the Green Belt will only be permitted in very special circumstances or if it is not inappropriate 
development.  
 
2. Development that is not inappropriate in the Green Belt, as define d in the National Planning Policy Framework 
will be subject to consideration against policies within this plan.  
 
3. Opportunities that enhance the environmental quality and beneficial use of the Green Belt will be supported by 
the Council, in particular the p rovision of formal and informal green infrastructure to support the quality of life of 
the urban population (provided that it is appropriate development as defined in the National Planning Policy 
Framework).  
 
The Council will determine proposals within the  Green Belt in accordance with all relevant provisions of the National 
Planning Policy Framework and relevant policies within this plan.  
 
The Green Belt boundary is defined on the Policies Map.  
 
MM68  142 - 
153 Paragraphs 
17.21 17.22 -
17.24; 17.32 -
17.38; 17.39 -
17.46; 17.55 -
17.62  REPLACE THE REASONED JUSTIFICATION AND TITLE FOR POLICY GB2 WITH THE FOLLOWING AND 
DELETE THE REASONED JUSTIFICATION FOR POLICIES GB3, GB5, GB6 AND GB8  
 
17.21  The Green Belt Review considered carefully the extent of th e Green Belt  boundary, and the contribution different 
parts of the Green Belt make to its overall function. Therefore, it is likely that development within the defined extent 
of the Green Be lt will cause  harm to the Green Belt either in terms of its openne ss or its function. The Review provides 
advice to decision makers on the potential for a development to impact on openness and landscape character, and 
the likely impact on Green Belt functions.  
 
Extensions and Alterations to, and Replacements of Buildings  in the Green Belt  
 
Policy Context  
 
17.22 The NPPF  states that new buildings are inappropriate in Green Belt. Exceptions to this include:  
 
• Extensions and alterations of buildings provided that they do not result in disproportionate additions over and 
above the size of the original building. (Original building is defined in the NPPF as being a building as it existed 
on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed after 1 July 1948, as it was built originally.)  
 
• Replacement of a building, provided the new building is in the same use and not materially larger than the 
one it replaces.  
 
Reasoned Justification  
 
17.23 Both individually and collectively extensions and alterations to buildings, and the replacement of buildings in 
the Green Belt can have an impac t on the character, appearance and openness of the Green Belt. It is important 
therefore that such development is well designed in respect of the host building, the plot, and its surroundings. This 
is particularly important given the differing patterns of development that are found in the Green Belt in the borough, 
such as built up frontages of development, and more isolated, single plot development.  
 
17.24 Appeal decisions, locally and nationally in relation to development in the Green Belt indicates gener al support 
in cases where the visual impact in terms of design and massing, the reduction in separation, the loss of isolation 
spaces between properties and boundaries, and the change in character of a development, such as replacing a single 
storey, develo pment with a two storey development, were significant. However, developments have been allowed at 
appeal where the harm has been outweighed by other factors such as design considerations, which result in positive 
benefits to the Green Belt, including new p itched roofs on top of existing flat roofs or development contained within 
the existing building footprint.  
 
Change of Use of Buildings and Land in the Green Belt  
 
Policy Context  
 
17.32 The NPPF  states that certain forms of development are not inappropriate in Green Belt, provided they preserve 
its openness and do not conflict with the purpose of including land within it. This includes the re -use of buildings 
provided that the buildings are of permanent and substantial construction and material changes of use of land . 
 50 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
17.33 Some development, may be associated with other appropriate uses of land in the Green Belt such as 
agriculture, forestry, outdoor sport, outdoor recreation, cemeteries, burial grounds and allotments if any buildings 
preserve t he openness of the Green Belt and do not conflict with the purposes of including land within it.  
 
Reasoned Justification  
 
17.34 The  Green Belt Review  identifies much of the Green Belt in Castle Point as being rural in nature. Rural areas 
are typically qui et, with a low development density and low intensity uses.  
 
17.35 The re -use or adaption of existing buildings or land in the Green Belt, particularly in respect of commercial, light 
industrial or recreation uses can aid in reducing the demands for new bui ldings in the Green Belt.  
 
17.36 In order for the re -use of an existing building or land to be compatible with the essential characteristics of the 
Green Belt, which is its openness and permanence, and with the purposes of including it within the Green Belt, such 
a re-use must be of a scale and character appropriate to its Green Belt location, its traffic impact should be acceptable, 
and the building concerned should be of an appropriate structure for the proposed use, in order to avoid substantial  
redevelopment, such as extensions or alterations.  
 
17.37 This can be a problem when the re -use is for residential purposes, where there are pressures to extend and 
alter the property and to provide residential curtilages which can be associated with activ ities and structures which 
can have a harmful effect on the character, appearance and openness of the Green Belt. Furthermore, given the 
tightly drawn Green Belt boundary of the borough, properties, particularly residential, are in immediate proximity of 
the Green Belt. The local planning authority can be placed under pressure to allow extensions of gardens into the 
Green Belt, which if permitted can result in a use of the land, which is not characteristic of the Green Belt, and which 
can lead to a prolifer ation of domestic style structures to the detriment of the openness of the Green Belt.  
 
17.38 Uses which are associated with external storage can also result in harm to the character, appearance and 
openness of the Green Belt. The borough has historically experienced the storage of materials and equipment, as 
well as caravans and boats in its Green Belt, particularly in its more rural and remote locations. This is not a use which 
it would seek to continue or encourage in the future.  
 
Ancillary Buildings and  Structures in the Green Belt  
 
17.39 Many forms of development often have ancillary buildings associated with them. For example it is common for 
houses to have garages, sheds and greenhouses located within the curtilage of the house. Business premises 
mean while may have ancillary storage buildings. In many cases the provision of these buildings is permitted under 
'permitted development rights' and the Council is not able to control their development.  
 
17.40 It is however common for the Council to remove 'pe rmitted development rights' when granting consent for 
developments within the Green Belt. Additionally, some proposals may be for ancillary buildings too large to be exempt 
from requiring planning consent, or for ancillary buildings located on land beyond the curtilage of a house. Therefore, 
it is not uncommon for the Council to receive planning applications for ancillary buildings and structures in the Green 
Belt.  
 
Policy Context  
 
17.41 The NPPF  does not make specific reference to ancillary buildings, however it does list those types of 
development and uses of development that are exceptionally permitted within the Green Belt. Assuming that those 
types and uses of development are permissible, it can be assumed that ancillary buildings which a re normally 
associated with these are permissible subject to ensuring that the openness of the Green Belt is maintained and that 
the Green Belt continues to fulfil its purposes, as set out in the NPPF . 
 
Reasoned Justification  
 
17.42 The provision of build ings and structures described above to serve an acceptable use in the Green Belt, such 
as a stable for the keeping of horses and hay and tack store to serve the stables, or a building to store equipment or 
goods related to a commercial business, can be acc eptable in principle in the Green Belt. However, the open character 
and appearance of the Green Belt can be marred by such buildings and structures, both in respect of their design and 
appearance, and their proliferation.  
 
17.43 The borough's Green Belt is  occupied by a variety of uses and is susceptible to pressures to allow for the 
provision of such buildings and structures. If designed and sited appropriately they can result in forms of development 
which may not be inappropriate in the Green Belt.  
 
17.44 However, there are examples of poorly designed and located ancillary buildings and structures which result in 
harm to the Green Belt. In some parts of the Green Belt a proliferation of caravans and metal storage containers has 
occurred in association  with the storage of hay and tack associated with the stabling of horses and other livestock, as 
well as for example the storage of materials and equipment in association with other recreational or commercial  uses 
in the Green Belt. In many cases there are  multiples of these buildings and structures located at any one site creating 
a massing effect. This is not an occurrence that the local planning authority wishes to see continue or to be 
encouraged.  
 
17.45 Previously policy has not taken account of the si ze of the building/structure in relation to the main building on 
the site or the size of the site itself. The degree to which these buildings/structures are incidental to the main building 
or use is therefore of great importance. A proportionate approach a ddresses this issue. As an example, a large house 
with extensive grounds will require more extensive maintenance. It would therefore be logical that such properties 
may require a larger outbuilding to accommodate gardening equipment, such as a motorised la wn mower and larger 
tools specific to works on trees and hedges.  
 
17.46 As with other forms of permissible development in the Green Belt, ancillary buildings are most appropriately 
considered against criteria, as this best ensures that proportionality, des ign requirements and the impacts of the 
proposal of the Green Belt, its openness and its purpose are considered in the whole.  
 
Enclosure and Boundary Treatment in the Green Belt  
 
Policy Context  
 
17.55 The NPPF  states that the creation of high -quality build ings and places is fundamental to what the planning and 
development process should achieve. Good design is a key aspect of sustainable development and creates better 
places in which to live and work.  
 
17.56 The NPPF  makes clear that planning policies and d ecisions should aim to ensure that developments:  51 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
 
• Add to the overall quality of the area, are visually attractive as a result of good architecture;  
• Establish a strong sense of place, using the arrangements of streets, spaces, and building types;  
• Respond to local character and history, and reflect the identity of local surroundings, and building types;  
• Respond to local character and history, and reflect the identity of local surroundings and materials; and  
• Create places that are safe, inclusive and  accessible environments where crime and disorder, and the fear of 
crime, do not undermine the quality of life or community cohesion and resilience.  
 
17.57 The NPPF  states that the fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping  land 
permanently open, and the essential characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their permanence.  
 
Reasoned Justification  
 
17.58 Clearly identifying the extent of ownership of space around a building defines the boundary between public, 
semi -private and private spaces. This is frequently through the construction of means of enclosure, which are readily 
visible in the public realm.  
 
17.59 Within the Green Belt of Castle Point the various land uses, such as residential, small holdin gs, and commercial 
businesses, have a mix of forms of enclosures, with the properties often set back considerable distances from the 
highway.  
 
17.60 The Urban Design Characterisation Study 2013  identified that many of the commercial/industrial uses, as wel l 
as the small holdings are strongly enclosed by high fencing and palisade fencing, with electronic gates, frequently of 
stark materials. This creates a poor public realm and has resulted in a sense of isolation and remoteness, which can 
lead to the percep tion of not being safe.  
 
17.61 The residential properties in the Green Belt are also heavily enclosed, often by similar forms as discussed 
above, particularly in the case of older properties. There is also high and dense hedging provided in many areas.  
 
17.62 There are also successful means of enclosure in some parts of the Green Belt, which whilst providing the 
necessary demarcation and security measures, are of attractive construction, appropriate to the land use they are 
associated with. Examples include  the provision of ranch style fencing used to enclose land containing livestock, 
including horses. Such methods provide the necessary enclosure of the animals, but at the same time are of an 
appearance commonly associated with agriculture and maintain a de gree of openness. Furthermore, the provision of 
decorative railings can provide the necessary security for businesses or residential properties, at the same time as 
creating an attractive public realm, allowing for natural surveillance to take place, and a  degree of openness to be 
maintained.  
 
 
 
Development in the Green Belt  
 
Inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very 
special circumstances. Substantial weight should be given to any harm to the Green Belt, and very special 
circumstances will not exist unless the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any 
other harm resulting from the proposal is clearly outweighed by other considerations.  
 
The NPPF makes it clear that the construction of new buildings in the Green Belt should be regarded as 
inappropriate development, subject to certain exceptions.  
 
When considering the existence of very special circumstances or if one of the exceptions set out in the NPPF  may 
apply, the Council will need to determine the harm to the Green Belt that may arise from the proposed development.  
 
The Green Belt Review  carefully considered the extent of the Green Belt boundary, the purposes for including land 
within the Green Belt and the contribution different parts of the Green Belt made to its overall purpose. It concluded 
that all parts of the Green Belt in Castle Point contribute to at least one of the purposes of including land within its 
extent, and therefore it is  likely that development in any part of the Green Belt could give rise to harm, either in 
terms of its openness or purpose.  
 
The Review provides advice to decision makers on the potential for development to impact on the openness and 
purpose of the differ ent parts of the Green Belt and may provide a useful starting point when preparing proposals 
and considering the likely impacts of development. It notes that there is scope in the different parts of the Green Belt 
to avoid or reduce harm through the propos ed location, layout, scale and design of development and uses, including 
any landscaping and boundary treatments. These matters will therefore be considered in the determination of 
applications.  
 
In those exceptional instances where development in the Gree n Belt is approved because the benefits of the 
proposals clearly outweighing the harm to the Green Belt or any other harm arising, the Council will consider if 
permitted development rights afforded to the type of development proposed would cause harm to th e Green Belt to 
the extent that the benefits of the development would no longer be outweighed by the harm arising. Where there is 
a clear justification and the tests for conditions or obligations would be passed, the Council may seek to restrict 
permitted developments rights where a development proposal would not otherwise be acceptable in the Green Belt. 
In those instances where there is the potential for the use of permitted development rights to give rise to harm which 
outweighs the benefits of the propo sal, the Council will use a S106 Agreement to remove the relevant permitted 
development rights.  
 
As developments in the Green Belt are exceptional rather than planned for, their full impact could not be assessed 
through the Habitats Regulations Assessment  for this plan. Therefore, proposals for development in the Green Belt 
will need to demonstrate that they will not have an adverse effect on the integrity of the Benfleet and Southend 
Marshes SPA and Ramsar site and the Thames Estuary and Marshes SPA and R amsar site, either alone or in 
combination with other plans or projects as per Policy SD1.  
 
143 - 
154 Policies GB2; 
GB3; GB5; 
GB6; GB8  REPLACE POLICY GB2 AND WITH THE FOLLOWING AND DELETE POLICIES GB3, GB5, GB6 AND GB8.  
 
Strategic Policy GB2  
 
New Development in the Green Belt  
 
Where new buildings or structures are proposed within the Green Belt, inappropriate development will be refused by 
reason of its harm to the Green Belt, except in very special circumstances . Consideration will be given to:  
 52 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
a. The Green Belt of and in the vicinity of the proposal will continue to fulfil its purpose/s;  
 
b. The proposal is designed to integrate well into the landscape in which it is set and to maintain the openness of 
the Green Belt;  
 
c. The proposed development is an e xemplar of high -quality design;  
 
d. Whether the land is previously developed, providing that the new building is within the envelop of the land 
previously developed and not the whole curtilage of the site; and  
 
e. The proposal is consistent with all other relevant policies of this plan.  
 
Strategic Policy GB3  
 
Extensions and Alterations to, and Replacements of Buildings in the Green Belt  
 
1. Proposed extensions and alterations to existing buildings in the Green Belt will be permitted, provided that 
the propo sals do not result in disproportionate additions over and above the size of the original building(s), 
and also subject to fulfilling the following criteria:  
 
a. There is no material impact on the character, appearance or openness of the Green Belt;  
 
b. The individual and cumulative size, scale, form, massing and height is proportionate to that of the original 
building and its plot;  
 
c. The design and siting ensure sufficient space around the building, between neighbouring buildings and 
between boundaries;  
 
d. The design, siting and materials is sympathetic to the existing building and its surroundings; and  
 
e. The design and materials are of high quality.  
 
2. Proposals for replacement buildings in the Green Belt, will be permitted, provided that the new building is in 
the same use and not materially larger than the one it replaces, and subject to fulfilling the following criteria:  
 
a. The building to be replaced has not been abandoned for such a period that the site has developed 
greenfield characteristics;  
 
b. There is no material impact on the character, appearance or openness of the Green Belt;  
 
c. The individual and cumulative size, scale, form, massing and height reflects the original building and its 
plot; 
 
d. The design and siting ensure sufficient space around  the building, between neighbouring buildings and 
between boundaries; and  
 
e. The design, siting and materials is sympathetic to the existing building and its surroundings, unless its re -
siting and design would be less obtrusive in the Green Belt and would improve the appearance of the 
Green Belt.  
 
3. Where the replacement building is approved, a condition may be applied to any permission granted removing 
permitted development rights which might allow for further enlargements to the building, and/or th e provision 
of ancillary buildings within the curtilage of the building, compromising the criteria set out above.  
 
Strategic Policy G B5 
 
Change of Use of Buildings and Land in the Green Belt  
 
1. Proposals for the change of use of buildings or land in the Green Belt will be permitted, subject to fulfilling the 
following criteria:  
 
a. The existing building is of permanent and substantial construction;  
 
b. The building or land is suitable for the proposed use, with limited need for extensions or alterations;  
 
c. There is no material impact on the character, appearance or openness of the Green Belt;  
 
d. It will not result in an intensification of the existing use of the site, by means of the generation of traffic, 
noise, or other forms of disturbance;  
 
e. It will not result in a massing of open storage, parked cars, plant or temporary, ancillary or out 
buildings/structures greater than existing; and  
 
f. The need for the proposed use has been identified.  
 
2. Permitted development rights relating to outbuildings will be removed if a garden has been extended into the 
Green Belt.  
 
Local Policy  GB6  
 
Ancillary Buildings and Structures in the Green Belt  
 
1. The provision of ancillary buildings and structures in the Green Belt will not be permitted, unless it is proven 
to be necessary subject to fulfilling the following criteria:  
 
a. There is no material impact on the character, appearance or openness of the Green Belt;  
 53 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
b. The individual and cumulative size, scale, form, massing and height is proportionate to tha t of the original 
building and its plot;  
 
c. It can be clearly demonstrated that they are incidental to the main building or use of the site;  
 
d. The use of the main building or use of the site has not been left dormant;  
 
e. The design and siting ensure sufficient space around the building, between neighbouring buildings and 
between boundaries;  
 
f. The design, siting and materials are sympathetic to the existing building or use and its surroundings. 
However, it must not repeat poor forms of development;  
 
g. The design and materials are of high quality; and  
 
h. It is restricted to use as ancillary accommodation to the main building or use.  
 
2. The use of caravans, mobile homes or metal storage containers as ancillary buildings in the Green Belt will 
normally be refused . 
 
Strategic Policy GB8  
 
Enclosure and Boundary Treatment in the Green Belt  
 
1. For land in the Green Belt, the means of enclosure or boundary treatment should be informed by the prevailing 
character of the land use, surrounding area, in terms of materials, height and positioning.  
 
2. Any means of enclosure or boundary treatment should not dominate the public realm.  
 
3. Enclosure and boundaries within rural areas should maintain a semi -openness of the Green Belt.  
 
4. In all cases the means of enc losure or boundary treatment must be of high -quality materials, appropriate in 
terms of appearance and ongoing maintenance to the location, full details of which must form part of any 
application.  
 
5. Where more robust means of enclosure or boundary treatm ent is required in exceptional circumstances, its 
visual impact should be minimised by the provision of appropriate landscaping. For landscaping associated with 
residential development, reference should be made to the Residential Design Guidance Supplement ary Planning 
Document (SPD).  
 
 
Strategic Policy GB2  
 
Development in the Green Belt  
 
1. In determining the harm to the Green Belt arising from development or any material change of use, the planning 
authority will give consideration to:  
 
a. The impact of the proposal on the ability of the Green Belt to fulfil its purpose(s);    
 
b. The ability of the proposal to maintain or improve the openness of the Green Belt;  
 
c. The impact of the proposal on the character and appearance of the Green Belt  
 
d. The design of the proposal, which will be expected to be an exemplar of high -quality;    
 
e. Whether the land is previously developed;  
 
f. Whether the proposal will result in an unacceptable intensification of traffic movements, noise or other 
forms of  disturbance; and   
 
2. Where appropriate a project level HRA may be required alongside the consideration of the proposal, as per the 
requirements set out in policy SD1.  
 
3. Where there is a clear justification and the tests for conditions/obligations woul d be passed, the Council may seek 
to restrict permitted development rights where a proposal would not otherwise be acceptable in the Green Belt.  
 
MM69  145 Paragraphs 
17.25 – 
17.31 and 
Policy GB4  DELETE POLICY GB4 AND ITS REASONED JUSTIFICATION IN ITS ENTIRETY AND RENUMBER 
SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS AND POLICIES ACCORDINGLY  
 
Limited Infill and Self Build - Special Policy Areas  
 
Policy Context  
 
17.25 The NPPF  allows for limited infilling infill in the Green Belt in ‘villages.’  Furthermore, limited infill is allowed on 
previously developed land where there is no greater impact on the Green Belt than that arising from the existing or 
previous development.  
 
Reasoned Justification  
 
17.26 Green Belt runs through the central mainland  area of the Borough, from the Hadleigh Marshes in the south to 
the A127 in the north, creating a strategically important physical gap between built up urban areas of the Borough.  
Green Belt in the north east of the Borough also has a strategically import ant role in maintaining Daws Heath as a 
separate and distinct settlement and maintaining a physical gap in the built form between the urban areas of Eastwood 
and Rayleigh outside the Borough, and the settlement of Hadleigh, Daws Heath, and Thundersley.   
 54 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
17.27 These Green Belt areas are predominantly undeveloped and contribute significantly to the local character.  The 
undeveloped areas of the Borough are also important for local flora and fauna and for recreational purposes.   
 
17.28 However, the Benfleet  Road and Vicarage Hill, Bramble Road and Burches Road areas form semi -rural 
locations where limited infilling would not cause increased harm to the Green Belt.  These areas consist of linear 
development, creating an almost continuous developed semi -rural character.  While the Council supports the 
protection of Green Belt in these areas, it is acknowledged that due to the developed character and layout of existing 
buildings, the application of Green Belt policy in these areas is inappropriate and unnecessar ily restrictive.  
  
17.29 While existing development runs alongside the road in these areas, the density of existing development is low, 
and existing houses are set back from the road and include large landscaped gardens. The extent of existing 
development  in these areas do not necessitate a change to the Green Belt boundary, so it is appropriate to outline 
additional policy in order to more appropriately manage development within these particular areas of the Green Belt.   
 
17.30 Existing development withi n these areas is linear, and therefore has a limited impact on Green Belt areas to 
the rear of the properties beyond the roads.  To maintain the openness of the Green Belt in these areas, the Council 
will therefore not support backland development.  Develo pment proposals in these areas should be in the form of 
limited infill, facing existing roads.   
 17.31 The Council will support bespoke and self -build new dwellings in the Special Policy Areas where the proposed 
development responds appropriately to chara cter and layout of existing development.  The Council will also support 
extensions and alterations to existing dwellings in these areas where it can be demonstrated that the proposals will 
not have a significant detrimental impact on the openness of the Gr een Belt.   
 
 
Local Policy GB4  
 
Limited Infill - Special Policy Areas  
 
1. The development of new dwellings within the Bramble Road, Benfleet Road, Vicarage Hill, and Burches Road 
Special Policy Areas (identified on the Policies Map) will be supported where th e proposals:  
 
a. Respect the existing character of the area;  
 
b. Are centrally located on the plot and along existing general building lines;  
 
c. Have plot sizes that should generally confirm with those in the area to avoid higher density development;  
 
d. Front onto existing roads;  
 
e. Maintain the existing layout and form of development in the area;  
 
f. Do not result in the significant loss of existing tree coverage;  
 
g. Do not involve back land development;  
 
h. Provide off street parking; and  
 
i. Demonstrate that the scheme w ill not have a significant detrimental impact on the openness of the Green 
Belt within the area.   
 
2. Extensions and alterations to existing dwellings within the Bramble Road, Benfleet Road, Vicarage Hill, and 
Burches Road Special Policy Areas (identified on the Policies Map) will be supported where the proposals:  
 
a. Respect the existing character of the area;  
 
b. Maintain the existing layout, massing, bulk and form of development in the area;  
 
c. Do not have a detrimental impact on neighbouring residen tial amenity; and  
 
d. Demonstrate that the scheme will not have a significant detrimental impact on the openness of the Green 
Belt within the area.   
 
3. Where the replacement building is approved, a condition may be applied to any permission granted removing  
permitted development rights which might allow for further enlargements to the building, and/or the provision 
of ancillary buildings within the curtilage of the building, compromising the criteria set out above.  
 
 
MM70  153 Policy GB7  
 REPLACE POLICY GB7 IN ITS ENTIRETY WITH THE FOLLOWING TEXT  
 
 
1. The Council will consider proposals favourably which seek to positively enhance the beneficial use of the 
Green Belt, by providing opportunities for positive use of the Green Belt. Where development is proposed 
adjacent to the Green Belt, opportunities will be sought to:  
 
a. improve access;  
 
b. outdoor sport and recreation;  
 
c. landscape enhancements;  
 
d. improvements to visual amenity;  
 55 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
e. improvements to biodiversity;  
 
f. sustainable flood risk management; or  
 
g. improvements to damaged and derelict land.  
 
2. Such proposals must clearly demonstrate that the following criteria have been fulfilled:  
 
a. The Green Belt will continue to fulfil its purposes;  
 
b. There will be no material impact on the character, appearance or openness of the Green Belt;  
 
c. The design, siting and materials of any buildings are sympathetic to the surrounding built form and 
landscape;  
 
d. The proposal is an exemplar of high -quality design and materials;  
 
e. The design and siting o f any buildings ensures sufficient space around the building, between neighbouring 
buildings and between boundaries;  
 
f. It will not result in an unacceptable generation of traffic, noise, or other forms of disturbance; and  
 
g. The proposal is compliant with all  other relevant policies in the plan.  
 
3. The Council will consider favourably the provision of other appropriate forms of development in the Green 
Belt, subject to the fulfilment of the criteria set out above.  
 
 
Strategic Policy GB 73 
 
Positive Uses in the Green Belt  
 
Subject to policy GB2, the Council will seek opportunities to positively enhance the Green Belt for beneficial use. 
Where development is proposed within or adjacent to the Green Belt, consideration will be given to identified 
opportunities to:  
 
a. improve access;  
 
b. improve outdoor sport and recreation provision;  
 
c. enhance the landscape;  
 
d. improve visual amenity;  
 
e. improve biodiversity;  
 
f. facilitate sustainable flood risk management; or  
 
g. improve damaged and d erelict land.  
 
MM71  158 Paragraph 
18.25  In order for the sea defences to be improved on Canvey Island it is necessary for land adjacent to these defences to 
be left free from development as far as possible to provide the space for taller defences with a larger footprint ., 
Accessibility is also essential in delivering such improvements (both for facilitating the construction of new defences 
as well as for the access to maintain and inspect and repair the defences over their lifetime) . The Environment 
Agenc y has advised that a maximum of approximately  19m, as measured from the landward edge of the current sea 
defence structure, should be left free from development for this purpose. This enables the delivery of well -designed 
and landscaped defences that not o nly ensure the future safety of residents but are also attractive and contribute to 
the quality of the environment.   
 
INSERT A NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 18.25 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPGHS  
 
Developers are encouraged to enter into discussions with the Environment Agency at a very early stage when 
formulating development proposals close to or within the safeguarded sea defence area. Flood Risk Activity Permits 
are separate to the planning application process and are required by the Environment Agency for  any activities that 
fall within 16m of a sea defence.  Flood Risk Activity Permits were introduced under the Environmental Permitting 
(England and Wales) (Amendment) (No.2) Regulations in April 2016.  Early discussions with the Environment 
Agency will  avoid the potential for costly development design and layout revisions or to avoid the risk of having a 
flood risk permit application refused by the Environment Agency. The safeguarding provision helps to enable the 
delivery of well -designed and landscaped de fences that not only ensure the future safety of residents but are also 
attractive and contribute to the quality of the environment and will reflect the clear aspiration in NPPF for plans to 
safeguard land that is required, or is likely to be required for current or future flood management.  
 
160 Policy CC2  Local Policy CC2  
 
Tidal Flood Risk Management Area  56 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
 
1. The extent of the Canvey, Hadleigh Marshes and South Benfleet Tidal Flood Risk Management Areas is defined 
on the Policies Map. Within these areas:  
 
a. The Council will support the necessary improvements to the sea defences in the Borough as set out in 
the Thames 2100 Plan.  
 
b. New bungalows and other forms of self -contained residential accommodation at ground level  will be 
refused on Canvey Island unless safe refuge areas can be provided within the development, and favourable 
consideration will be given to the conversion of bungalows to houses, subject to those privacy, amenity and 
urban design considerations set out in the Residential Design  Guidance SPD;  
 
c. The Council will work with partners to maintain and improve nature conservation in the Hadleigh Marshes 
area, with a long -term view of securing appropriate compensatory sites within the Thames Estuary for any 
loss of particular  designated  habitats resulting from climate change; and  
 
d. South Benfleet Playing Fields will be retained as a flood storage area for both tidal flooding and surface 
water management. Opportunities to increase the storage capacity of this area will be secured in the long -
term.  
 
2. The Council will work with partners in the railway industry to identify economically viable solutions to the potential 
risk of flooding of local railway lines in the long -term, to ensure the ongoing provision of servi ces.  
 
3. Within flood zones 2 and 3 new development proposals will be permitted only where they meet the following 
criteria:  
 
a. They pass the sequential test and where appropriate the exception test,  as set out in the National 
Planning Policy Framework;   
 
b. They have been designed to make space for water and reduce the risk of flooding to prospective 
users/residents of the site and to neighbouring properties  do not increase flood risk elsewhere and where 
possible reduce s flood risk overall;  and  
 
c. Th ey are designed to be flood resistant and resilient and provide safe refuge for users/residents above 
predicted flood water depths for a 1 in 1,000 + year climate change flood event. Buildings should also be 
hydrostatically and hydrodynamically resistant t o prevent damage to the structure. In this context resilient 
includes the ability of the development to be brought quickly back into use after a flood event.  
 
4. A buffer up to 19m wide of Lland adjacent to the existing flood defences on Canvey Island, as shown on the 
Policies Map, is safeguarded for future flood defence works and landscaping. The Council will consult with the 
Environment Agency to determine the extent of land required to be kept free from development from applications 
falling into this 19m  wide buffer Only temporary development will be permitted on this land.  Proposals for flood 
defence works within the safeguarded land, where appropriate, should provide information to support a project level 
HRA, as per the requirements set out in policy S D1.  
 
5. Where land safeguarded for future flood defence works falls within a development site, opportunities should be 
taken to integrate future flood defence requirements into the landscaping and open space provision for the site.  
 
MM72  163 Paragraph 
18.45  Sustainable Drainage Systems ( SuDS) are useful in mitigating the impact of flooding. These take a variety of forms, 
some of which are more appropriate in certain locations than others. The predominant soil geology underlying  Castle 
Point is  London Clay, which is impermeable, and is prone to rapid runoff. Site-specific ground investigation should be 
undertaken to determine the local variations in soil permeability before discounting infiltration to discharge surface 
water runoff from the site . If infiltration is not found to be favourable, surface water attenuation using above ground 
features should be used wherever possible.   The use of infiltration systems would not work in most cases; therefore 
the focus should be on the attenuation of surf ace water through the use of These  source control mechanisms These 
can would  restrict the volume and rates of surface water runoff leaving a site. Underground storage tanks are the least 
favourable option and should only be used as a last resort.  
 
164 Paragraph 
18.47  Within larger For any proposed  development schemes such measures can complement site control SuDS techniques. 
Site control SUDs techniques include the provision of balancing ponds, swales, attenuation tanks and other surface 
water attenuati on features. The runoff from properties and sites can be routed through to such provisions and 
subsequently re -used for other purposes such as irrigation or as part of a greywater system. Site control SUDS can 
be integrated into the open spaces within deve lopment and can form part of the multi -functional Green Infrastructure 
network.  
 
164 Policy CC3  
Part 1  1. The Critical Drainage Areas for the borough are defined by Essex County Council ECC as the Lead Local Flood 
Authority.  
 
164 Policy CC3  
Part 2  2. New development proposals within  an area at risk of  Flood Risk Zones for  fluvial flooding, or within an area at risk 
from surface water flooding in a 1 in  100 1,000 -year event, will be considered against the sequential test set out in 
the NPPF.   
164 Policy CC3  
Part 3  3. If the sequential test shows that it is not possible to use an alternative site, the exceptions test will be applied as 
appropriate. Development would be permitted where through the application of the exceptions test, the sustainabilit y 
benefits of the development to the community outweigh the flood risk, and that the development will be safe for its 
lifetime taking into account the vulnerability of its users, and that it will not increase flood risk elsewhere . Built 
development proposa ls on sites where the majority of the land is at risk from non-tidal flooding will not normally be 
permitted unless there is a clear and robust evidence of  wider sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh 
the flood risks .  
 
164 Policy CC3 
Part 4  4. Where a development proposal is located in an area at risk of fluvial or surface water flooding and passes the 
sequential test and, where appropriate, the exception tests, the design and layout of development must be taken to 
avoid built developm ent on those parts of the site most at risk of flooding. This includes those parts of the site that 
form natural or pre -existing flow paths for fluvial flood water or surface water. Easements will be required adjacent to 
designated Main Rivers to allow for  future maintenance.  
 
MM73  166 Paragraph 
18.55  Part L of the Building Regulations details the minimum requirements for energy efficiency in new buildings. The 
Council would encourage developers to consider these requirements as a minimum and strive towar ds Zero Carbon 
buildings as soon as possible. The Association of South Essex Local Authorities aims to make the area carbon zero 
by 2040 and will introduce requirements to achieve this which will be reflected in reviews of this plan. In the meantime, 
there  is an opportunity to limit the energy consumption of a building in the first instance through the way it is designed 
and located.  The orientation of development is also important in influencing the potential to reduce energy 57 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
consumption within the develop ment and maximising the potential energy production from renewable sources. 
Building design can also provide good opportunities to manage solar gain through non -mechanical means for heating 
in the winter and cooling in the summer. Careful orientation and a rrangement of development can provide good 
opportunities for solar gain and daylight penetration. Designing for daylight in the form of appropriately located and 
sized windows, reduces the need for artificial light, and designing for passive solar gain red uces the need for internal 
space heating.  
 
167 Paragraph 
18.60  Water demand calculations in the South Essex WCS 2012  indicate that growth in Castle Point could result in over 1 
mega -litres per day (Ml/d) of additional water being needed to meet demand by 2031. This could be reduced if best 
practice regarding water efficiency is sought from new developments. The South Essex WCS 2012 recommended 
water use of 105 lpppd.  It is however recognised that there may be costs associated with achieving this level of water 
consumption reduction in the short -term.  
 
167 Paragraph 
18.61  In order to achieve the water efficiency needed in South Essex as identified through the South Essex WCS 2012 , the 
Council will apply the optional water efficiency requirements set out in Regulation 36(2)(b) of the Building Regulations 
2010 as amended to new residential developments which will secure consumption levels at 110 lpppd, and also 
encourage , measures such as rainwater harvesting, and greywater recycling sc hemes can to be installed within all 
developments. The equivalent BREEAM credits will be sought for non -residential developments.   
 
168 Policy CC4  1. All new development should seek to  must  minimise its impact on climate change arising from energy 
consu mption by  the environment by incorporating the following principles : 
  
a. Utilising design, siting and layout to maximise  opportunities for solar gain and daylight penetration, and 
reduce energy consumption ; and Incorporate measures for achieving high levels of energy efficiency, and 
the use of decentralised energy sources.   
 
b. Integrating measures to achieve high levels of energy efficiency and where feasible and viable, 
decentralised energy generation, to meet as a minimum, the energy efficiency requ irements of the Building 
Regulations. Demonstrating how its design, siting and layout has maximised the opportunities for solar gain, 
daylight penetration and the use of decentralised energy sources  
 
2. The design of all new development should incorporate measures for achieving high levels of energy efficiency, 
and the use of decentralised energy sources. Development is expected to demonstrate how its design, siting and 
layout has maximised the opportunities for solar gain, daylight penetration and the use of decentralised energy 
sources.  
 
3. As a minimum non -residential development should achieve at least 50% of the credits available for reduction in 
CO2 emissions under the relevant BREEAM very good scheme or its equivalent for the development proposed.   
 
4 2. The design of all new development should incorporate measures for achieving high levels of water efficiency. 
As a minimum:  
 
a. Residential development should meet the optional water efficiency requirements set out in part G2 and 
Regulation 36(2)(b) of the Building Regulations, currently 110litres/person/day;  
 
 a.b. Non -residential development should achieve at least 50% of the credits available for water 
consumption under the relevant BREEAM very good scheme or its equivalent for the development 
proposed: and  
 
b 3. Space should be made available within the site to enable segregated waste storage for that waste arising from 
the proposed use of the development.  
 
5. The materials, including aggregates, used in the construction of all new buildings shou ld be sustainable in terms 
of the energy that has been expended in their production, and the energy that is required to transport them to the 
location of the development.  
 
64. The waste resulting from the construction of all new buildings should be manage d in a way that maximises the 
re-use and recycling of materials, including aggregates, onsite where possible.  
 
7 5. Sustainability measures installed, and sustainable materials, must be consistent with the overall architectural 
approach of the development . Their design and siting should be an integral part of the development and must not 
result in prominent, dominant, alien or incongruous features which detract from the visual appearance of the 
development or its surroundings.  
MM74  170 Paragraph 
19.1 Green infrastructure is a strategically planned and delivered network of green spaces and other environmental 
features. It should be designed and managed as a multi -functional resource capable of delivering a wide range of 
environmental and quality of life  benefits for local communities. Green Infrastructure, urban and rural, includes playing 
fields, allotments, woodlands, heathlands, marshlands, wetlands, coastlines, public parks and gardens. Within and 
alongside green infrastructure within Castle Point ar e bodies of water which form blue infrastructure. This blue 
infrastructure is a fundamental part of the natural environment in Castle Point with the undeveloped coast providing a 
key point of interaction between the terrestrial and marine environment for p eople and for wildlife.   
 
171 Paragraph 
19.9 The South Essex Green Grid Strategy  sets out a Green Infrastructure Plan for the sub -region. Strategic elements of 
the plan are already in place including the restoration of West Canvey Marshes (as part of South Essex Marshlands) 
and the creation of a nature reserve at Canvey Wick SSSI. These projects will contribute positively to the vision of the 
NIA. More recently, a South Essex Green and Blue Infrastructure Strategy  has been developed for the area which 
looks to the future in terms of Green and Blue infrastructure planning. This includes looking to take forward further 
proposals to create an Estuary Park, enhancing and better linking up wildlife habitats across the South Essex area, 
and creating more oppo rtunities for access and recreation for communities in South Essex. This provides a framework 
for further enhancements to the Green and Blue Infrastructure in South Essex and in Castle Point. Such an approach 
to planning for Green and Blue Infrastructure i s advocated by the published Essex Green Infrastructure Strategy .  
 
171 Paragraph 
19.10  The South Essex Green Grid Strategy 2005 , and more recently the  South Essex Green and Blue Infrastructure 
Strategy , identifies the significant green infrastructure assets in the borough including the coastline and coastal 
features along the Thames Estuary; marshland at West Canvey; Hadleigh Castle and Hadleigh Country Park; and 
woodlands and ancient landscape areas within Daws Heath Nature Reserves. Th e Thames Gateway Historic 
Environment Characterisation Study 2007  identifies significant areas of historic value within the borough around the 
marshlands, Hadleigh Castle and Daws Heath.  
 58 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
172 Paragraph 
19.14  The Greater Thames Marshes Nature Improvement Area extends across the southern part of Castle Point. Within this 
area, the Council will work with partners to deliver projects which contribute positively to the vision for the Nature 
Improvement Area. Elsewhere in Castle Point, the Council will work wit h partners to deliver projects which extend the 
network of Green Infrastructure and create new habitats, providing links for wildlife and people to the Nature 
Improvement Area. It will encourage the management and enhancement of existing habitats and the c reation of new 
ones to assist with species migration and to provide ways to adapt and mitigate from climate change, such as shading 
during higher temperatures . These actions are consistent with the recommendations set out in the South Essex Green 
and Blue Infrastructure Strategy , and the Essex Green infrastructure Strategy.  
 
170 
and 
172 Heading – 
Strategic 
Policy NE1 
Green 
Infrastructure 
and the 
Undeveloped 
Coast  Green and Blue  Infrastructure and the Undeveloped Coast  
 
172 Policy NE1  1. Development which results in the creation, restoration, enhancement, expansion and improved connections 
between green and blue  infrastructure features will be encouraged.  The provision of green infrastructure that offers 
multiple benefits to the environme nt and local communities will be supported. Through development proposals the 
Council will seek to secure:  
a. The preservation and enhancement of green and blue  infrastructure, ecological assets, areas of nature 
conservation and valued landscapes;  
b. A measurable  net increase in biodiversity, with a focus on priority habitats and priority species;  
c. Management of and a reduction in pollution to air, water and soil through an increased provision of green 
infrastructure;  
d. Opportunities  for local food production; and  
e. Recreational benefits for local people, including access to coast.  
2. Proposals which will result in the loss, degradation, fragmentation and / or isolation of existing green and blue  
infrastructure will not be supported , unless it can be demonstrated through the provision of new or enhanced green 
and blue infrastructure in other areas of the Borough, that there will be no overall adverse impact in the provision of 
green and blue  infrastructure in the area. Where appropri ate a project level HRA may be required alongside the 
consideration of the proposal, as per the requirements set out in policy SD1.   
MM75  172 Policy NE2  
 Local Policy NE2  
 
Protection of  Mm27l Landscapes  
 
1. Development which will have an impact on the  the Daws Heath, Hadleigh Castle and Marshes, and Canvey 
Marshes historic natural landscapes (as identified on the Policies Map) will be supported where the proposals:  
 
a. Protect and  Eenhance the character and  quality of the landscape and its heritage or ecological assets 
having regard to the level of protection set out in policies HE1 and NE5 respectively for different 
designations, and the provisions of the NPPF . 
 
b. Seek to provide greater public access to and  enjoyment of the landscape and its features , where 
appropriate .  
 
c. Do not detrimentally impact the undeveloped character and visual quality of the landscape, heritage and 
ecological assets.  
 
dc. Mitigate any residual harm to the quality of the landscape through the provision of landscapi ng, which 
should comprise native species and must be sufficiently mature to integrate effectively into the environment 
and provide effective mitigation.  
 
MM76  176 Paragraphs 
19.35 – 
19.37  The South Canvey Green Lung  Wildlife Corridor   
Policy Context  
The NPPF states that planning policies should protect and enhance valued landscapes and  biodiversity and 
establish coherent ecological networks . When determining planning applications local planning authorities should 
refuse permission if signific ant harm to biodiversity resulting from a development cannot be avoided (through 
locating on an alternative site with less harmful impacts) adequately mitigated, or, as a last resort, compensated for.  
Reasoned Justification  
The Council has identified a 5 1ha area of green infrastructure (identified on the Policies Map) which provides an 
undeveloped landscape and  ecological corridor across the south of Canvey Island. The area links two Local Wildlife 
Sites and a Potential Local Wildlife Site  that are design ated within the Green Lung Wildlife Corridor , namely 
Thorneycreek Fleet (CPT35) to the east , and Brick House Farm Marsh (CPT38) and extension to Brick House Farm 
(PLoWS 15)  to the west as shown on the Policies Map  in the Local Wildlife Site Register 2019 . Consequently, there 
is only 7 hectares of Green Lung Wildlife Corridor  which is unconstrained.  
The Green Lung Wildlife Corridor  acts as a n landscape and  ecological corridor across the south of Canvey Island. It 
links the two designated Local Wildlife Sit es and has the potential to enhance habitat creation given the limits to 
development and public access in the area. Located within the Greater Thames Marshes Nature Improvement Area, 
this site has the potential to contribute towards improved ecology on far mland and the creation of lowland meadows. 
The Wildlife Corridor  Green Lung  also acts a buffer between existing residential development to the north and the 
hazardous installations to the south.  59 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
176 Policy NE3  Local Policy NE3  
The South Canvey Green Lung  Wildlife Corridor  
1. The Council will not support development within the Wildlife Corridor  Green Lung  (identified on the Policies Map) 
which will adversely affect its openness,  ecological and landscape  value, and the ability of the area to provide a 
strategically important ecological corridor.  
2. Proposals which support the creation of new habitats, having regard to the targets for the Nature Improvement 
Area, will be supported.  
MM77  177 Paragraph 
19.40  Local Wildlife Sites (LoWS), are locally designated sites recognised as comprising priority habitats or being home to 
priority species. There are were  41 LoWSs in the Borough, which were assessed through the Castle Point Local 
Wildlife Site Register 2019 . Within this list site CPT44 Poors Lane ha s not been endorsed through the Essex Local 
Wildlife Partnership, therefore at this stage can not be designated as a LoWS, as a consequence 40 LoWS can be 
found on the Policies Map.  
177 Paragraph 
19.42  Additionally, there are 5 Potential Local Wildlife Sites (PLoWS) have been identified through the Local Wildlife Site 
Register 2019  within the Borough , which . These  are sites that are  identified as having the potential to meet the LoWS 
selection criteria in the future through improvement to the qu ality of the habitats on site. Site CPT44 Poors Lane in 
addition to three other sites (extension to Kents Hill Wood; extension to Coombe Wood; extension to Brickhouse 
Farm) that were identified as forming extensions to existing LoWS but have not been endor sed through the Essex 
Local Wildlife Partnership, will be added to the list of PLoWS, equating to 9 PLoWS in the borough. Once the Essex 
Local Wildlife Partnership has recommenced these sites will be put forward to be designated as LoWS.   
177 Policy NE4  
Part 3  3. Development proposals which would result in harm to either a Local Wildlife Site or a potential Local Wildlife Site 
will not normally be permitted unless it can be demonstrated that every reasonable effort has been taken to minimise 
the harm arising through avoidance. Any harm arising must be fully mitigated, or compensated, resulting in a 
measurable net gain in biodiversity. the need for the development outweighs the harm to biodiversity.   
MM78  178 Paragraph 
19.45  The NPPF states potential and designated SPAs, Special Areas of Consideration (SACs) and Ramsar sites should 
be given the highest level of protection. Where a proposal affects a SPA, SAC, or Ramsar site a Habitats Regulation 
Assessment will be required in accordanc e with the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as 
amended). Additionally, planning permission should be refused for developments which  result ing in in the loss of 
irreplaceable wildlife habitats or landscapes such as Ancient Woodlands due to their irreplaceable features , unless 
there are wholly exceptional reasons and a suitable compensation strategy exists. Where a proposal affects an 
SPA, SAC or Ramsar site, a Habitat Regulation Assessment may be required in accordance with the Conserva tion 
of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010.   
 
178 Paragraph 
19.48  Habitats sites include  Natura 2000 sites namely Ramsar,  (SPA and SAC sites ) and Ramsar sites which the NPPF 
states should be afforded similar protection.  Are situated within the Borough and include t The Benfleet and 
Southend Marshes SPA and Ramsar is the only Habitats site that is situated within the borough's boundary however 
Castle Point is also located within the Zone of Influence  The Borough is also within close distance  of other 
internationally  designated sites and these cover the majority of the Essex coastline. Land at Holehaven Creek which 
is functionally linked to the Thames Estuary and Marshes SPA and Ramsar site may also be affected by 
development within Ca stle Point borough. These sites are designated for their intertidal hHabitats and/or the 
presence of internationally important numbers of  rare and migratory bird species, and therefore  consideration must 
also be given to the impact that development within the borough  may have indirectly  on these fragile ecosystems as 
harm to these sites must be avoided as required by the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017, as 
amended.  The Habitat s Regulations Assessment prepared to support the Local Plan  identified a potential for 
population growth arising in the borough, in combination with that arising elsewhere in Essex, to have a cumulative 
impact on Natura 2000  an adverse effect on integrity of Habitats  sites through increased recreational pressure. 
Whilst on -site green infrastructure provision can offset some of this pressure and impacts from the development 
alone , the coast will nonetheless be a draw to visitors as it provides an environment which cannot be replicated 
elsewhere. There is therefore a need for residential development in the Bborough to contribute towards the Essex 
Coast Recreation al disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (RAMS) to ensure these recreational pressures 
from development  are appropriately avoided or mitigated in combi nation with other plans and projects . 
 
178 Paragraph 
19.49  Following consultation with Natural England, an Essex -wide Coast  Recreational disturbance Avoidance and 
Mitigation Strategy (RAMS) and Supplementary Planning Document  is being  has been prepared and adopted  to 
include all coastal Eurpoean [designated] Habitats Ssites. The strategy will identify where recreational disturbance is 
happening and the main recreational uses causing the disturbance  identifies a Zone of Influence (ZOI) around eac h 
Habitats site where recreational disturbance is likely to result from residential development, mitigation is required 
from these developments to avoid adverse effect on the integrity of the relevant Habitats sites from recreational 
uses.  New residential development that is likely to affect the adverse  integrity of the European Habitats  Ssites will 
be required to contribute towards the implementation of the mitigation. At this stage, it is considered that d  
Development allocations  in this location  ZOI will be is required to pay for the implementation of mitigation measures 
to protect the interest features of European designated Habitats  sites along the Essex Coast which include the 
Benfleet and Southend Marshes Special Protection Area and Ramsar Site, the C rouch and Roach Estuaries Special 
Protection Area and Ramsar site,  and Site of Special Scientific Interest, and  the Essex Estuaries Special Area of 
Conservation, the Blackwater Estuary, the Foulness Estuary  and Thames Estuary and Marshes SPA and Ramsar 
site. The appropriate mechanisms will be identified in the Essex Coast RAMS. Applicants who do not contribute to 
the Essex Coast RAMS will be required to undertake their own visitor surveys to inform the Council’s HRA and 
implement the necessary mea sures in perpetuity  to avoid adverse effects on the integrity of the relevant Habitats 
sites from recreational uses.   
 60 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
279 Policy NE5  AMEND PART 1 OF POLICY NE5 AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT CRITERIA ACCORDINGLY  
Strategic Policy NE5  
Determining Applications affecting  Ecologically Sensitive and Designated Sites  
1. The Council will support proposals which can demonstrate a measurable  net gain in biodiversity.   
2. Proposals which have the potential are likely to  cause adverse ly impact  effects on the integrity of  (either individually 
or in combination with other developments)  European , and internationally designated sites, must satisfy the 
requirements of the Habitats Regulations, determining site specific impacts and avoiding or mitigat ing against impacts 
where identified. Where appropriate, contributions from development will be secured towards mitigation measures 
identified in the Essex Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy to mitigate any recreational 
disturbance impacts in compliance with the Habitat Regulations.  
 
3. Proposals likely to have an adverse effect on a  and locally designated sites including Ramsar sites, Special 
Protection Areas, Special Areas of Conservation, Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSS I) (either individually or in 
combination with other developments), will not be permitted unless, on an exceptional basis, the benefits of the 
development clearly outweigh both the adverse impacts on the features of the site and any adverse impact on the 
wider network of SSSIs.   
 
4. Proposals likely to have an adverse effect on irreplaceable Habitats such as , Ancient Woodlands Local Nature 
Reserves  and Special Roadside Verges , will not be supported unless there are wholly exceptional reasons and  an 
appropri ate avoidance, on -site management and on -site mitigation strategy is submitted to and approved by the 
Council. Any loss must be compensated.  
 
5. Proposals which may result in adverse impacts to biodiversity, protected species, priority species and/or prior ity 
habitats, will only be supported if they can meet the following requirements:  
a. The application must demonstrate that impacts to biodiversity cannot be avoided through the location of 
development on an alternative site with less harmful impacts;  
b. Wh ere an alternative site is not available, the development proposal should seek to avoid adverse impact 
to biodiversity by virtue of the design and layout of the development. The Council must be satisfied that all 
reasonable opportunities to avoid impact to  biodiversity have been taken;  
c. Where it has not been possible to avoid all impacts to biodiversity, as required by a) and b), the development 
proposal should seek to apply management and mitigation techniques which retain and enhance biodiversity 
on sit e. The Council must be satisfied that all reasonable opportunities to secure on -site management and 
mitigation have been taken;  
d. Where it is likely that impacts to a protected species, or Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) species is not fully 
addressed thro ugh a), b) and c), species relocation within the site, or to a site nearby will be required to 
address the remaining impacts to that species. The Council must be satisfied that the relocation site will 
provide a long -term suitable habitat for the species i n question. A management plan must be put in place to 
manage the relocation site as a suitable habitat for a period of at least 20 years; then  
 
a. As a last resort, if the impacts to biodiversity in terms of both quantity and quality have not been fully addressed 
through a), b), c) and d), off -site compensation which would result in a net gain in biodiversity will be required. 
A compensation site must be identified which has the potential to be broadly equivalent to that habitat being 
lost, and a manageme nt plan prepared. Arrangements must be put in place to deliver that plan over a period 
of at least 20 years.  
 
6.Proposals affecting ecologically sensitive sites and designated sites should be accompanied by an ecological 
assessment which should conform wit h guidance set out by the Chartered Institute of Ecology and Environmental 
Management (CIEEM) or an equivalent standard. Where insufficient information is provided, the Council will take a 
precautionary approach to the protection of ecological assets.  
4. Contributions from relevant developments will be secured towards mitigation measures identified in the Essex 
Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (RAMS).  
 
MM79  183 Paragraph 
19.64  The Environment Agency's Thames River Basin Management Plan  identifies that the lower Thames Estuary is of a 
moderate quality in terms of its ecological status and is failing to achieve a good chemical status. The plan seeks to 
raise both of these to `good’ by 2027, to meet the requirements of the Water Framework Directive . The Water 
Framework Directive aims to secure no further deterioration of waterbodies and aims to ensure that the status of 
waterbodies is improved. Whilst the Thames Estuary is the main waterbody in Castle Point to which this appl ies, it 
also applies to all other main rivers in the borough also.   
 
183 Paragraph 
19.65  The South Essex Water  Cycle Study 201 21 identifies that new development in South  Essex is likely to impact on 
water quality. However, the Study concludes that with improvements such as through the delivery of the Asset 
Management Plans of the water supply company and the drainage undertakers, and through the use of Sustainable 
Drainage  there is the capacity to accommodate growth in  the borough without exceeding the qualitative and 
quantitative capacity of the Water Recycling Centres.  Measures will  It is recommended that the Council seek s to 
ensure water efficiency is achieved, and Sustainable Drainage Systems (S uDS) measures are incorporated into new 
development proposals , where necessary and viable,  in order to minimise impa cts on the drainage infrastructure, as 
required by the Thames  River Basin Management Plan.  
 
SPLIT TO CREATE NEW PARAGRAPH AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS ACCORDINGLY  
 61 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
The South Essex Water Cycle Study 201 21 recommends that improvements in water  efficiency levels which reduce 
consumption levels to at most 105 litres per person per day ( lpppd ) should be achieved in new development . The 
application of the optional water efficiency standar d in part G of the Building Regulations will help to improve water 
efficiency to close to this level. This is a requirement of policy CC4.   
 
SPLIT TO CREATE NEW PARAGRAPH AND RENUMBER SUBSEQUENT PARAGRAPHS ACCORDINGLY  
 
The Essex County Council  ECC Sustainable Drainage Systems Design Guide  Guidance 2016  provides guidance on 
the appropriate use of SuDS in the borough . The Canvey Island Six Point Plan specifies the approach to be taken on 
Canvey Island in particular to managing surface water flood risk , and consequently any impact on water quality arising 
from surface water flows.  It is especially important for Castle Point that the Six Point Plan is implemented through the 
Asset Management Plans of drainage undertakers, and that the impact of developme nt on water quality is managed 
to ensure there is no harm to the integrity of the nearby Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA and Ramsar site or the 
Thames Estuary and Marshes SPA and Ramsar site.   
 
184 Policy NE7  1. Development proposals should be designed to manage and reduce pollution through energy and water efficient 
design, the installation of sustainable drainage systems, and the delivery or enhancement of green and blue  
infrastructure.  
 
2. Development proposals should be located , and designed and constructed  in such a manner as to not cause a 
significant adverse effect upon the environment, the health of new and existing residents or surrounding residential 
amenity by reason of pollution to land, air or water, or as a result of any for m of disturbance including, but not limited 
to, noise, light, odour, heat, dust and vibrations.  
 
3. Development proposals adjacent to, or in the vicinity of,  existing businesses or community facilities  will need to 
demonstrate that the ongoing use of the  existing businesses or community facilities  would not be prejudiced by the 
proposed development, and that the impact of the continuing operation of the existing businesses or community 
facilities on the amenity of occupiers of the new development can be sa tisfactorily mitigated through the development 
proposals.   
 
4. All major development proposals must be accompanied by a Construction Environment Management Plan prepared 
with regard to pollution prevention guidance. These plans  shall include  details of the  proposed mitigation measures 
that will be implemented to prevent undue noise and disturbance to adjoining occupiers and Habitat sites and the 
entry of pollutants into the environment by all potential pathways including, but not limited to  watercourses (in cluding 
when dry). Where necessary,  seasonal working  may be required  to avoid any adverse effects on the integrity of 
Habitats sites.  
 
3.5. Where necessary, the Council will seek to manage and mitigate the effects of pollution and/or disturbance arising 
from development, (including during site clearance and construction) by means of appropriate planning conditions. 
Exceptionally, a Section 106 Agreement may be used to secure measures to control pollution and/or disturbance 
necessary to make the im pacts of development acceptable . 
MM80  186 Paragraph 
19.79  INSERT NEW PARAGRAPH AFTER 19.79  
 
In terms of roles and responsibilities Anglian Water are responsible for the water discharge consents and the quality 
of water that is discharged from the WRCs, any exceedances of the standards required would be a matter for Anglian 
Water. Developers pay Anglian Water a connection fee which should be used by Anglian Water to ensure that any 
necessary improvements are made to the local system to ensure that t here is sufficient capacity in the local drainage 
network and in the local WRC, as appropriate. Allocated residential sites within this Plan have been assessed by 
Anglian Water, as identified within the Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2020, and improvements c an be made to 
accommodate the new development through the payment of appropriate connection fees. Any additional development 
that comes forward will need to be tested by Anglian Water to ensure that there is capacity within the WRCs and 
appropriate mitigat ion will be required where relevant.    
 
187 Policy NE10  1. All new development should demonstrate that adequate foul water treatment and drainage already exists or can 
be provided in time to serve the development. This must include confirmation that there is adequate quantitative and 
qualitative capacity at the Water Recycling Centre which would serve the development. Where either the 
quantitative or qualitative capacity of the Water Recycling Centre would be exceeded, or would other wise have an 
adverse effect on the water quality of the nearby Benfleet and Southend Marshes SPA and Ramsar site and 
Thames Estuary and Marshes SPA and Ramsar site thereby affecting their integrity, either alone or in combination 
with other plans and proje cts, the proposal will be refused.  
 
1 2. Within these areas t  The following types of development must incorporate sustainable drainage systems that 
prevent surface water entering the foul/combined drainage network:  
 
a. All new developments on greenfield la nd;  
 
b. All new developments on land currently in use as residential garden; and  
 
c. All developments comprising the redevelopment of previously developed land.  
 
2.Any development occurring beyond the extent of these areas may only connect to the foul drainage network, and 
must manage surface water entirely on -site through the installation of sustainable drainage systems.  
 
3. In order to ensure that the provision of sustainable drainage systems also achieve nature conservation and 
climate change o bjectives, regard should be had to policies NE1 and CC3 in their design.  
MM81  188 Paragraph 
20.9 20.9 All designated heritage assets within the Borough are listed within Appendix Five. At 2019, none of the 
designated historic assets in Castle Point Borough are included on the Historic England Heritage at Risk Register. 
The Council will monitor this situation throughout the plan period, and if necessary, work with the owners of assets if 
they are found to fall onto the Register. However, at this  time no such action is required.  A schedule of non -designated 
locally significant heritage assets can also be found in Appendix Five.   
 62 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
189 Policy HE1  1.The Council will seek  to conserve and enhance heritage assets in the Borough.  New dDevelopment  proposals 
affecting a heritage asset  (either designated or non -designated ) will be expected to conserve, and where appropriate 
enhance, the setting of the heritage asset, taking into account the contribution which the  asset,  setting  makes to th e 
character and appearance of the surrounding area and the original function of the asset.    
 
2. When assessing applications for development, there will be a presumption in favour of the  preservation 
conservation , and  where appropriate  enhancement , of designated  all heritage assets and their setting. The Council 
will encourage applicants to put heritage assets to viable and appropriate use, to secure their 
future  protection  conservation  and enhancement.   
 
3. Development proposals affect ing a ny heritage asset should demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of  its 
significance. This should include an understanding of the contribution made to that significance by the current setting 
so that it is clear to decision makers how a change would  impact on heritage significance.  of the importance of the 
heritage asset, and potential the impacts of the development on the setting of the asset . In assessing the impact of a 
development proposal on a heritage asset or its setting, the Council will cons ider:  
 
a. The level of any harm or loss;  
 
b. The significance of the asset;  
 
c. The sustainability, economic and conservation benefits of the assets; and  
 
d. The contribution the assets makes to local character and distinctiveness.  
 
4. Development proposals which  have a significant detrimental impact on  would cause substantial harm to, or total 
loss of the significance of,  a designated  heritage asset will be dealt with in accordance with national policy set out 
in the NPPF.  refused unless it can be demonstrated that the public benefits of the development are substantial and 
would clearly outweigh the harm to the significance of the heritage asset,  
 
5.Development proposals which result in the loss of a heritage asset will be r efused unless it can be demonstrated 
that: 
 
a.The nature of the heritage asset prevents any reasonable use of the site;  
 
b.No viable use of the heritage asset can be identified through appropriate marketing of the site that will 
enable its conservation;  
 
d.The loss of the asset is outweighed by the benefits the development proposals.  
 
5. The effect of a development proposal s on the significance of a non -designated heritage asset should be 
considered in determining the appropriateness of rele vant planning applications. Consideration will be given to 
scale of any harm or loss, against the significance of the heritage asset.  
 
6. Planning permission will be granted for development affecting archaeological sites  providing it protects, enhances 
and preserves sites of archaeological interest and  their settings.  Where there is a non -designated heritage asset of 
archaeological interest which is demonstrably of equivalent significance to scheduled monuments, it will be considered 
in accorda nce with the requirements for designated assets as set out in part 4 of this policy. In other cases where 
archaeological heritage assets are known or have the potential to be present,  Development proposals should assess 
sites in consultation with the  Histo ric Environment Record and should have taken into  the Council will expect a desk -
based assessment and as necessary a field evaluation to have been undertaken and will take into  account the 
archaeological importance  of those any remains, the need for the d evelopment, the likely extent of any harm, and  the 
likelihood of the proposal successfully preserving the archaeological interest of  the site in determining any application 
for development . 
MM82  
 190 Monitoring 
Framework 
Objective 1   
Balancing the 
population by 
making provision for 
the needs of older 
people and young 
people.  Housing mix includes homes suitable for 
older people:  
• Bungalows  
• Specialist 
accommodation  
• Homes built to part 
M4(2) of the Building 
Regulations  
 
Number of starter sized  
homes provided (1 -2 beds)   At least 10% of supply  
 
 
At least 50 starter sized  
homes per annum (25% of  
supply)  
Number of additional  
bed spaces provided in  
residential/nursing homes.  At least 90 300 additional bed  
spaces  63 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
Housing size mix aligns with the need 
identified in most recent SHMA . 
Ensuring housing mix in accordance 
with Policy HO3.  Sites of between 0.5 and 4ha should 
comprise at least 35% 1 or 2 bedroom 
homes for general needs; and sites over 
4ha should comprise at least 25% 1 or 2 
bedroom homes for general needs. At 
2020, that requirement is:  
1 Bedroom – 6% 
2 Bedrooms – 22% 
3 Bedrooms – 43% 
4 Bedrooms + - 29% 
 
 
190 Monitoring 
Framework 
Objective 2   
Make provision for 
additional  
homes, including 
affordable  
housing.  Net number of new homes  
provided.  
 In accordance with the Housing Trajectory 
and the 5 - Year Housing Land Supply. 
equating to at least 342 291 per annum on 
average through the first eight years of  out 
the plan period and 430 per annum for the 
remainder of the plan period . 
 
191 Monitoring 
Framework 
Objective 4   
Reduce the number 
of people 
commuting out of 
Castle Point for 
work.  Area of additional employment  
(B1 E(g),  B2 and B8) floorspace  
provided.  More than 10,000 sqm  
 
192 Monitoring 
Framework 
Objective 7  ADD A NEW MONITORING INDICATOR  
 
Improved air quality  Number of monitoring points  
across the borough where NO 2 levels 
exceed statutory maximum limits (40 
ugm-3). Zero 
Number of monitoring points adjacent 
to the Benfleet and Southend Marshes 
Special Protection Area where NO 2 
levels have increased from base year 
2021.  Zero 
 
192 Monitoring 
Framework 
Objective 7  ADD A NEW MONITORING INDICATOR  
 
To maintain and 
enhance the 
Borough’s cultural 
heritage assets and 
areas, assets of 
historical and 
archaeological 
importance and 
their settings  Designated Heritage Assets on 
Historic England’s Heritage at Risk 
Register  Zero 
 
MM83  198 Appendix 3  
Table 3.1  DELETE RUNNYMEDE PADDOCKS FROM THIS TABLE  
Runneymede 
Paddocks  Kiln Road, Thundersley  Cedar Hall  Amenity 
greenspace  
 
 
 
MM84  207 Appendix 4  
Table 4.1  DELTE CPT44 POORS LANE FROM TABLE  
 
 
 
CPT44 Poors Lane  HC1 Ancient Woodland Sites  
HC2 Lowland Mixed Deciduous 
Woodland on Non -ancient Sites  Lowland Mixed Deciduous Woodland  
 
 
207 Appendix 4  
Table 4.2  INSERT THE FOLLOWING POTENTIAL LOCAL WILDLIFE SITES  
 
PLoWS 13 Extension to Kents Hill 
Wood  HC2 Lowland Mixed Deciduous 
Woodland on Non -ancient Sites  
PLoWS 14 Extension to Coombe 
Wood  HC1 Ancient Woodland Sites  
HC2 Lowland Mixed Deciduous 
Woodland on Non -ancient Sites  
PLoWS 15 Extension to Brick 
House Farm Marsh  HC20 Coastal Grazing Marsh  
SC1 Vascular Plants  
PLoWS 16 Poors Lane  HC1 Ancient Woodland Sites  
HC2 Lowland Mixed Deciduous 
Woodland on Non-ancient Sites  
 
MM85  208 Appendix 5 
Table 5.3  ADD A NEW LISTED BUILDING  
 
Benfleet  
There are 1920 Listed Buildings located in Benfleet  
 
Table 5.1  Benfleet Listed Buildings  
Tombstone of Sir Charles Nicholson 
and family, High Street  II 09-11-2021  
 
209 Appendix 5 
Table 5.3  ADD A NEW LISTED BUILDING  
 
Hadleigh  64 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
There are six five Listed Buildings in Hadleigh….  
 
Table 5.3 Hadleigh Listed Buildings  
 
Hadleigh War Memorial, Memorial 
Recreation Ground, London Road  II 15-06-2020  
 
MM86  214 Appendix 6 
Glossary  INSERT DEFINITION OF ACTIVE AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
- Active and Sustainable 
Travel Infrastructure  Such infrastructure includes, but is not limited to, walking and cycling 
routes, and bridleways to promote health and wellbeing of 
communities, cycle storage, bus stops, bus lanes, shelters, seating, 
real time bus information, and electric vehicle charging points.  
 
216 Appendix 6 
Glossary  INSERT DEFINITION OF DEVELOPMENT BRIEF AFTER DEVELOPMENT  
 
- Development Brief  A development brief is a document that is prepared in advance of a 
planning application and sets out the vision, constraints, opportunities 
and considerations for the site such as access, biodiversity and 
infrastructure. Within this Plan development briefs are required for 
certain residential allocations but are usually for residential 
development schemes of 10 -60 units.  
 
 
216 Appendix 6 
Glossary  INSERT RELEVANT ABBREVIATION AND DEFINITION OF ESSEX COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
ECC  Essex County 
Council  Castle Point Borough is a two -tier authority area, with ECC providing a 
range of services and infrastructure such as (but not limited to)  
highways and transportation, education and social services, and 
surface water management  at a county -wide level.  
 
217 Appendix 6 
Glossary  INSERT RELEVANT ABBREVIATION AND DEFINITION OF INFRASTRUCTURE DELIVERY PLAN AFTER 
INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
IDP Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan  This document sets out the infrastructure requirements for the 
borough, including but not limited to highways, healthcare, education 
and open space. It includes timescales, costs and how it will be 
delivered.  
 
217 Appendix 6 
Glossary  INSERT DEFINITION OF A MASTER PLAN AFTER MARINE CONSERVATION ZONE  
 
- Master Plan  A master plan is a document that is prepared in advance of a planning 
application and sets out the vision, constraints, opportunities and 
considerations for the site such as access, biodiversity and 
infrastructure. Preparation of a master plan should include  engagement 
with the community, stakeholders and the Council. Master plans are 
usually required for residential development schemes of 60+ units. In 
some instances the Council may adopt a master plan as a 
Supplementary Planning Document depending on the sc ale and 
complexity of the particular site.  
 
 
219 Appendix 6 
Glossary  INSERT RELEVANT ABBREVIATION AND DEFINITION OF POTENTIAL LOCAL WILDLIFE SITE AFTER 
POLICIES MAP  
 
PLoWS  Potential Local 
Wildlife Site  These are areas of land with potential for wildlife value. Potential Local 
Wildlife Sites have the potential to support both locally and nationally 
threatened wildlife, and sites may contain habitats and species that are 
priorities under the Essex or UK Biodiversity Action Plans that sets out 
strategies for the conservation of much of our most vulnerable 
wildlife.  Potential Local Wildlife Sites may be endorsed through the 
plan period by the Essex Local Wildlife Site Partnership, when this 
occurs these sites will be designated as Local Wildlife Sites . 
 
 
220 Appendix 6 
Glossary  UPDATE LATEST USE CLASSES  
 
- Use Classes 
Order  The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 puts uses 
of land and buildings into various categories. Planning permission is 
not needed for changes of use within the same use class.  
The A use classes consist of:  
A1 - shops and retail outlets  
A2 - financial and professional services  
A3 - restaurants and cafes  
A4 - drinking establishments  
A5 - hot food and takeaway  
The B use classes consist of:  
B1 - business  
B2 - general industrial  
B8 - storage or distribution:  
The C use classes consist of: C1 – hotels  
C2 - residential institutions  
C2A - secure residential institution  
C3 - dwellinghouses  
C4 - houses in multiple occupation  
The D use classes cons ist of:  
D1 - non-residential institutions  
D2 - assembly and leisure  
The E use classes consist of : 
E(a) Display or retail sale of goods, other than hot food  
E(b) Sale of food and drink for consumption (mostly) on the premises  65 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
E(c) Provision of:  
• E(c)(i)  Financial services,  
• E(c)(ii)  Professional services (other than health or 
medical services), or  
• E(c)(iii)  Other appropriate services in a commercial, 
business or service locality  
E(d) Indoor sport, recreation or fitness (not involving motorised 
vehicles or firearms or use as a swimming pool or skating rink,)  
E(e) Provision of medical or health services (except the use of 
premises attached to the residence of the consultant or practitioner)  
E(f) Creche, day nursery or day centre (not including a r esidential use)  
E(g) Uses which can be carried out in a residential area without 
detriment to its amenity:  
• E(g)(i)  Offices to carry out any operational or 
administrative functions,  
• E(g)(ii)  Research and development of products or 
processes  
• E(g)(iii)  Industrial processes  
The F use classes consist of:  
F1 Learning and non -residential institutions – Use (not including 
residential use) defined in 7 parts:  
• F1(a)  Provision of education  
• F1(b)  Display of works of art (otherwise than for sale 
or hire)  
• F1(c)  Museums  
• F1(d)  Public libraries or public reading rooms  
• F1(e)  Public halls or exhibition halls  
• F1(f)  Public worship or religious instruction (or in 
connection with such use)  
• F1(g)  Law courts  
F2 Local community – Use as defined in 4 parts:  
• F2(a)  Shops  (mostly) selling essential goods, including 
food, where the shop’s premises do not exceed 280 square 
metres and there is no other such facility within 1000 metres  
• F2(b)  Halls or meeting places for the principal use of 
the local community  
• F2(c)  Areas or pl aces for outdoor sport or recreation 
(not involving motorised vehicles or firearms)  
• F2(d)  Indoor or outdoor swimming pools or skating 
rinks  
Sui Generis  
Certain uses do not fall within any use class and are considered 'sui 
generis'.  
 
 
MM87  222 Appendix 7  AMEND APPENDIX 7 TITLE  
 
Appendix Seven: Policy Changes From the Castle Point Local Plan 1998 (Saved Policies 2007) Superseded 
Policies  
 
222 Table 7.1  INSERT THE BELOW TEXT ABOVE TABLE 7.1  
 
Policies in this plan will replace  in their entirety  the 2007 saved  policies  from the Castle Point Borough Local 
Plan adopted  in 1998.  
222 Appendix 7   
Saved policies 2007  Relevant policies in the new Local Plan  
Green Belt  
GB2 – Re-use of buildings in the Green Belt  GB3, GB5, GB6  GB2  
GB4 – Rebuilding of existing dwellings in the 
Green Belt  GB3, GB5, GB6  GB2  
GB5 – Extensions to dwellings  GB3 GB2  
GB6 – Garden extensions  Not included  
GB7 – Agricultural dwellings  GB6 GB2  
Environment and conservation  
EC2 - Design  DS1 
EC3 – Residential amenity  NE7 
EC4 - Pollution  NE1, NE7  
EC5 – Crime prevention  DS1 
EC7 – Natural and semi -natural features in urban 
areas  HS1, HS7, NE1, NE2, NE6  
EC8 – The green lung  NE3 
EC9 – Development affecting commercial 
farmland  Not included  
EC10 – Protection of high quality agricultural land  Not included  
EC13 – Protection of wildlife and their habitats  NE1, NE3,  NE4, NE5  
EC14 – Creation of new wildlife habitats  NE1, NE3, NE5  
EC15 – Control of permitted development in 
sensitive areas  NE5 
EC16 – Protection of landscape  NE2, NE6  66 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
EC17 – Special landscape area  NE2 
EC18 – Permitted development in the special 
landscape area  NE2, NE6  
EC19 – Ancient landscapes  NE2, NE6  
EC20 – Landscape improvement area  Not included  
EC21 – Woodland management and tree 
preservation orders  HS7, HS3 , NE6  
EC22 – Retention of trees, woodland and 
hedgerows  NE6 
EC23 – Tree and shrub planting  DS2 
EC25 – Principles of control  HE1, HS7, NE5  
EC26 – Design and development  HE1 
EC27 – Planning applications  Not included  
EC28 – Restrictions on permitted development  HE1 
EC29 – Control of demolition  HE1 
EC30 – Shopfront design  DS4 
EC31 - Advertisements  DS3 
EC32 – Protection from demolition  HE1 
EC33 – Alterations to listed buildings  Not included HE1  
EC34 – Setting of listed buildings  Appendix 5  
EC35 – Re-use of listed buildings  HE1 
EC36 – Grant aid  Not included  
EC37 – Local list of buildings  Appendix 6  
EC38 – Archaeological sites and monuments  HE1, Appendix 5  
EC39 – Seafront entertainment area  EC3 
Housing  
H2 – Residential land  HO1 
H3 – New development sites  HO30 (Remaining  Ssites no longer relevant ) 
H4 – Safeguarding of land for long term housing 
needs  Sites no longer relevant  
H5 – Safeguarding of land for long term housing 
needs  Sites no longer relevant  
H6 – Safeguarding of land for long term housing 
needs  Sites no longer relevant  
H7 – Affordable housing  HO4 
H9 – New housing densities  HO1, DS1  
H10 – Mix of development  HO3 
H11 – Accessible and wheelchair housing  Not included  DS1  
H12 – Piecemeal development  Not included  
H13 – Location of development  HO1, HO9 -HO32  
H14 – Living over the shop  HO1, TC2  
H16 – Winter gardens  Not included  
H17 – Housing development – design and layout  DS1, chapter 10 
Employment  
ED1 – Provision of land to the south of Northwick 
Road  EC2 
ED2 – Long term employment needs  EC2 
ED3 – Protection of employment areas  EC1 
ED5 – Piecemeal development  Not included  
ED6 – Parking and servicing  TP7,  TP8, TP9  
ED7 – Environmental improvements  DS1, CC1, NE5  
ED9 – Hazardous installations  NE9 
Shopping  
S1 – Location of retail development  TC1, TC3, TC5, TC6, TC7  
S2 – Shopping facilities at Rayleigh Weir  TC4 
S3 – Primary shopping frontages  TC1 
S4 – Non-retail development  TC1, TC2  
S5 – Parking and servicing  TP7,  TP8, TP9  
S7 – Environmental improvements  DS1, TC2  
S9 – Local shopping parades  TC3 
S10 – Supermarket and retail warehouse 
development  TC4 
S12 – Design, siting and illumination of 
advertisements  DS3 
S13 – Proliferation of advertisements  DS3 
S14 – Advertisements and public safety  DS3 67 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
S15 – Hoardings and poster panels  DS3 
Transport  
T1 – Strategic highway network  TP1, TP2  
T2 – Intensification of access use  TP4 
T5 – New link road access to employment land  Not included  
T6 – Access to employment land  EC2 
T7 – Unmade roads  Not included  
T8 – Car parking standards  TP87 
T10 - Cycleways  TP1, TP 43, TP54, TP76  
T11 – Cycleway construction  TP1, TP 43, TP54, TP76 
T12 – Bus services  TP1, TP 54 
T15 – Water -borne freight  Not included  
Recreation  
RE2 – Golf courses  HS3 
RE4 – Provision of children’s play space and 
parks  HS3 
RE5 – Public open space  HS7 
RE6 - Allotments  HS7 
RE7 – Romsey Road allotments  HS7 
RE8 – Hadleigh Castle Country Park  Not included  
RE9 – Informal recreation in the countryside  Not included  
RE10 – Water recreation  Not included  
RE12 – Public rights of way  HS3, TP 43 
RE14 – Planning agreements and recreational 
development  HO1, SD2  
Community facilities  
CF1 – Social and physical infrastructure and new 
developments  Infrastructure Delivery Programme (IDP)  
CF2 – Education facilities  HS4 
CF4 – Workplace nurseries  Not included  
CF6 – Places of worship and community centres  HS6 
CF7 – Health facilities  HS5 
CF8 – Non-residential health care  HS5 
CF9 – Access and non -domestic development  Not included  
CF12 – Powerlines and cables  CM1  
CF13 – Phasing of development  Chapter 9 and 10  
CF14 – Surface water disposal  CC3 
CF15 – Water supply  CC4 
CF16 - Telecommunications  CM1  
CF17 – Waste recycling  CC4, TP 98 
 
MM88  225 Appendix 7  INSERT A NEW APPENDIX AFTER APPENDIX 7 SETTING OUT A SCHEDULE OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES  
 
Appendix Eight: Community Facilities  
 
The Table below lists the community facilities as identified on the Policies Map. These community facilities are subject 
to Policy HS6.  
 
Table 8.1: List of Community Facilities  
Community facility  Address  Type of community facility  
Glenwood School  Rushbottom Lane, Thundersley  Education  
Montgomerie primary 
School  Rushbottom Lane, Thundersley  Education  
Woodham Ley Primary 
School  Rushbottom Lane, Thundersley  Education  
St Georges Church  Rushbottom Lane, Thundersley  Religious establishment  
 
St Georges Medical 
Practice  Rushbottom Lane, Thundersley  Healthcare  
Hesten Day Centre  Off Church Road, Thunderlsey  Community centre  
The Robert Drake Primary 
School  Off Church Road, Thunderlsey  Education  
Great Tarpots Library  London Road, Thundersley  Library  
Thundersley Methodist 
Church  Kennington Avenue, Thudnderlsey  Religious establishment  
 
Kingdom Hall of Jevoah’s 
Witnesses  Selbourne Road, Thundersley  Religious establishment  
 
St Peters Church  Off Church Road, Thunderlsey  Religious establishment  
 
St Peters Pre -School  Off Church Road, Thunderlsey  Education  
Kingston Primary School  Off Church Road, Thunderlsey  Education  
Thundersley Primary 
School  Dark Lane, Thundersley  Education  
Little Footprints Nursery  Dark Lane, Thundersley  Education  68 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
Hart Road Surgery  Off Hart Road, Thundersley  Healthcare  
Cedar Hall School  Off Hart Road, Thundersley  Education  
Thundersley 
Congregational Church  Kenneth Road/ London Road, 
Thundersley  Religious establishment  
SEEVIC (USP) College  Kiln Road, Thundersley  Education  
Castle Point Borough Concil  Kiln Road, Thundersley  Community centre  
Runnymede Leisure Centre  Off Kiln Road, Thundersley  Sport and recreation  
Runnymede Pre School  Off Kiln Road, Thundersley  Education  
Runnymede Hall  Off Kiln Road, Thundersley  Community Hall  
The Deanes School  Off Daws Heath Road, Thundersley  Education  
The Enchanted Wood Pre 
School  Off Daws Heath Road, Thundersley  Education  
The Deanes Sports Centre  Off Daws Heath Road, Thundersley  Sport and recreation  
Rayleigh Weir Fire Station  Rayleigh Road / Stadium Way, 
Thundersley  Emergency Services  
Rayleigh Ambulance 
Station  Claydons Lane, Thundersley  Emergency Services  
Daws Heath Social Hall  Off Daws Heath Road, Daws Heath  Commu nity Hall  
Daws Heath Evangelical 
Church  Off Daws Heath Road, Daws Heath  Religious establishment  
St Michael and All Angels 
Church  St Michael’s Road, Daws Heath  Religious establishment  
St Michael’s Church Hall  St Michael’s Road, Daws Heath  Community Hall  
Virgin Active  Rayleigh Road, Thundersley  Sport and recreation  
Westwood Academy  Beresford Close, Hadleigh  Education  
The Hollies Surgery  Rectory Road / Softwater Lane, 
Hadleigh  Healthcare  
Hadleigh URC Church  Off Church Road, Hadleigh  Religious establishment  
 
Hadleigh Infants and 
Nursery School  Off Bilton Road, Hadleigh  Education  
St Barnabas Church  Woodfield Road, Hadleigh  Religious establishment  
St James the Less  London Road / High Street, Hadleigh  Religious establishment  
The Salvation Army  London Road, Hadleigh  Religious establishment  
St Thomas More Church 
Hall High Street, Hadliegh  Community Hall  
Hadleigh Methodist Church  Chapel Lane, Hadleigh  Religious establishment  
TGH Evangelical Church  Kiln Road, Thundersley  Religious establishment  
The King John School  Shipwrights Drive / Benfleet Road, 
Thundersley  Education  
Holy Family Church 
Benfleet  High Road, South Benfleet  Religious establishment  
Jotmans Hall Primary 
School  High Road, South Benfleet  Education  
The Appleton School  Croft Road, South Benfleet  Education  
Holy Family Catholic 
Primary School  Kents Hill Road, South Benfleet  Education  
Kents Hill Infants and Junior 
School  Kents Hill Road, South Benfleet  Education  
St Mary’s Church Hall  High Road, South Benfleet  Community Hall  
South Benfleet Primary 
School  Off Richmond Avenue, South Benfleet  Education  
Richmond Pre -School CIC  High Road, South Benfleet  Education  
Richmond Hall  Off Richmond Avenue, South Benfleet  Community Hall  
Benfleet Theatre School  Off Richmond Avenue, South Benfleet  Sport and recreation  
Benfleet Baptist Church  Kents Hill Road / Constitution Hill, 
South Benfleet  Religious establishment  
Benfleet Surgery  Constitution Hill, South Benfleet  Healthcare  
South Benfleet Library  Constitution Hill / High Road, South 
Benfleet  Library  
Oasis Christian Fellowship  High Road, South Benfleet  Religious establishment  
Benfleet Methodist Church  High Road, South Benfleet  Religious establishment  
Church of St Mary the 
Virgin, South Benfleet  High Road, South Benfleet  Religious establishment  
Wesley Pre School  Hall Farm Road, South Benfleet  Education  
Essex Way Surgery  Essex Way, South Benfleet  Healthcare  
Waterside Farm Leisure 
Centre  Off Somnes Avenue, Canvey Isla nd Sport and recreation  
The Cornelius Vermuyden 
School  Off Dinant Avenue, Canvey Island  Education  
Northwick Park Primary and 
Nursery Academy  Off Third Avenue, Canvey Island  Education  
Third Avenue Healthcare 
Centre  Third Avenue, Canvey Island  Healthcare  
Canvey Island Heritage 
Centre and Museum  Canvey Road, Canvey Island  Sport and recreation  
St Katherine’s Church of 
England Primary School  Off Hilton Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Winter Gardens Academy  Link Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Winter gardens Baptist 
Church  Hilton Road, Canvey Island  Religious establishment  
Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s 
Witnesses  Off Meppel Avenue, Canvey Island  Religious establishment  
Jewish Congregation of 
Canvey Island  Off Meppel Avenue, Canvey Islan d Religious establishment  
South Essex College - 
PROCAT  Off Meppel Avenue / Somnes Avenue, 
Canvey Island  Education  
Canvey Village Surgery  Long Road, Canvey Island  Healthcare  
The Surgery  Hawkesbury Road, Canvey Island  Healthcare  
Canvey Junior School  Off Long Road, Canvey Island  Education  69 
 Ref Page  Policy/  
Paragraph  Main Modification  
Hawkesbury Pre -School  Off Long Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Canvey Island Infant School  Off Long Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Our Lady of Canvey and 
The English Martyrs R C 
Church  Long Road, Canvey Island  Religious establishment  
St Nicholas Anglican 
Church  Long Road, Canvey Island  Religious establishment  
 
William Read Primary 
School and Nursery  Long Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Canvey Island Police 
Station  Long Road, Canvey Island  Emergency Services  
Canvey Island Fire Station  Long Road, Canvey Island  Emergency Services  
Little Tewkes Pre -School  Dovervelt Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Methodist Church  Waarden Road, Canvey Island  Religious establishment  
Little Nippers Pre School  Waarden Road, Canvey Island  Education  
St Joseph’s Catholic 
Primary School  Vaagen Road, Canvey Island  Education  
The Paddocks Community 
Centre  Off Long Road, Canvey Island  Community Hall  
Central Canvey Primary 
Care Centre  Off Long Road, Canvey Island  Heathcare  
Castle View School  Furtherwick Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Willow Pre School 
Playgroup  Blackthorne Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Canvey Island Youth 
Project  Poplar Road, Canvey Island  Community centre  
Canvey Island Library  Elder Tree Road, Canvey Island  Library  
Canvey Island War 
Memorial Hall  High Street, Canvey Island  Community Hall  
Canvey Island Baptist 
Church  High Street, Canvey Island  Religious establishment  
The Salvation Army  Mitchells Avenue, Canvey Island  Religious establishment  
Smallgains Hall  Off Creek Road,  Canvey Island  Community Hall  
Lubbins Park Primary 
School and Nursery  Off May Avenu, Canvey Island  Education  
Saint Annes Church  Off St Annes Road, Canvey Island  Religious establishment  
Leigh Beck Junior School  Off Point Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Leigh Beck Infant and 
Nursery Academy  Off Point Road, Canvey Island  Education  
Thundersley Clinic  Kenneth Road, Thundersley  Healthcare  
Benfleet Clinic  High Road, South Benf leet Healthcare  
Hadleigh Junior School  Church Road / The Avenue, Hadleigh  Education  
Hadleigh Clinic  London Road, Hadleigh  Healthcare  
Sandscastles Nursery  London Road, Hadleigh  Education  
Georgie Porgie Ltd  London Road, Hadleigh  Education  
Queen Bee’s Day Nursery 
and Pre School  London Road, Thundersley  Education  
Thundersley Christian 
Spiritualist Church  London Road, Thundersley  Religious establishment  
Canvey Island Transport 
Museum  Point Road, Canvey Island  Sport and recreation  
Canvey Island Rugby Union 
Football Club  Dovervelt Road, Canvey Island  Sports and Community  
 
 
 
 
 