• Well-being • Community • Economy • Heritage •  Grow
th • Sustainable • Connect • Environment
The Cherwell Local Plan 2011 – 2031
Part 1 Adopted 20 July 2015  
(incorporating Policy Bicester 13 re-adopted on 19 December 2016)
July 2015Explanatory Note 
 
On 19 December 2016, Policy Bicester 13: Gavray Drive was re-adopted by Cherwell District 
Council. The re-adopted policy is identical to that originally adopted by the Council on 20 
July 2015, other than the deletion of the words, 'That part of the site within the Conservation 
Target Area should be kept free from built development' from the third bullet point of the 
policy's key site specific design and place shaping principles. 
 
Re-adoption of Policy Bicester 13 followed a Court Order dated 19 February 2016 which 
included the following requirements: 
 
“1. Policy Bicester 13 adopted by the [Council] on 20th July 2015 be treated as not adopted 
and remitted to the [Secretary of State]; 
 
2. The [Secretary of State] appoint a planning inspector who recommends adoption of Policy 
Bicester 13 subject to a modification that deletes from the policy the words “That part of the 
site within the Conservation Target Area should be kept free from built development”; 
 
3. The [Council] adopt Policy Bicester 13 subject to the modification recommended by the 
planning inspector appointed by the [Secretary of State]…” 
 
On 18 May 2016 an addendum to the Local Plan Inspector's report was received. The 
addendum stated,  “Following the Order of the High Court of Justice No. CO/4622/2015, 
dated 19 February 2016, I recommend that, in relation to Policy Bicester 13 – Gavray Drive, 
Main Modification No. 91, page 130, the first sentence of the third bullet point under “Key 
Site Specific Design and Place Shaping Principles” which states – “That part of the site 
within the Conservation Target Area should be kept free of built development.” be deleted in 
the interests of soundness, clarity and to facilitate implementation of the policy and allocation 
in the plan.” 
 
The Inspector stated “…I conclude that with the amendment to the schedule of main 
modifications recommended in this addendum report relating to Policy Bicester 13 the 
Cherwell Local Plan satisfies the requirements of Section 20(5) of the 2004 Act and meets 
the criteria for soundness in the National Planning Policy Framework.” 
 
The Court Order and addendum to the Inspector's Report were considered by the Council on 
19 December 2016. The amendment to Policy Bicester 13 has been incorporated in this re-
published version of the Local Plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photographs from Cherwell District Council, site promoters and Adrian Colwell  Foreword
This is the Local Plan for Cherwell District. A plan with a clear purpose.
This is a plan which looks to the future and sets out our proposals to support the local
economy and our communities over the next few decades.
This is also an exciting and ambitious plan to help maintain our high standard of living whilst
at the same time promoting Cherwell District as a place to work and live.
Itisaplanwithambitionandaspiration.Fromhelpinglocalcompaniestoexpand,supporting
neweducationandjobsinvestment,andpursuinghightechnologyinnovationandinvestment;
tocreatingdynamictowncentres,promotingtourismandseekingimprovedconnectionson
rail and road. It is a plan born in recession, but which makes provision for a successful
prosperous future.
It is a plan that also seeks to provide opportunities in those few areas of social disadvantage
that exist in the District; one that sets out to improve the quality of life for all.
It is a plan which seeks to ensure that growth is targeted in the most sustainable locations.
OurstrategyistofocushousinggrowthonBicesterandBanbury,tomaximisetheinvestment
opportunitiesinourtowns,andtoensurethatthelevelofdevelopmentatourvillagesrespects
the character and beauty of our rural areas while meeting local needs.
This is a plan which recognises the need for limits to housing growth while enabling growth
in locations where integration with existing communities is possible.
We will ensure that what we approve for development, whether commercial premises or
housing, is of the highest design and building standards.
This is a plan which demonstrates a respect for the past and which seeks to preserve and
enhance what makes Cherwell District special; our dynamic market towns, the 60
Conservation Areas, our beautiful villages and wonderful landscape.
This is a balanced plan, a plan which provides a firm foundation for our future prosperity.
Councillor Barry Wood
Leader of the Council
1 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Foreword
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 2Foreword
List of Policies and Tables 5
Executive Summary 9
Introduction to the Local Plan 17
Section A - Strategy for
Development in Cherwell 27
Section B - Policies for
Development in Cherwell 37
B.1 Theme One: Policies for
Developing a Sustainable Local
Economy 37
B.2 Theme Two: Policies for
Building Sustainable
Communites 57
B.3 Theme Three: Policies for
Ensuring Sustainable
Development 83
Section C - Policies for Cherwell's
Places 127
C.1 Introduction 127
C.2 Bicester 129
C.3 Banbury 175
C.4 Kidlington 235
C.5 Our Villages and Rural
Areas 241
Section D - The Infrastructure
Delivery Plan 263
SectionE-MonitoringandDelivery
of the Local Plan 269
Appendices
Appendix 1 Background to
Cherwell's Places 279
Appendix 2 Links between Policies
and Objectives 285Appendix 3 Evidence Base 291
Appendix 4 Glossary 297
Appendix 5 Maps 303
5.1 Cherwell District Policies
Map 307
5.2 Key Policies Map: Bicester 311
5.3 Key Policies Map: Banbury 315
5.4 Key Policies Map:
Kidlington 319
Bicester Inset Maps 323
Banbury Inset Maps 335
Kidlington Inset Maps 353
Our Village and Rural Areas Inset
Maps 357
Thematic Maps 359
Appendix 6 Monitoring
Framework 369
Appendix 7 List of Replaced and
Retained Saved Policies 387
Appendix8 InfrastructureDelivery
Plan (IDP) 397
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Contents
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Contents
List of Policies and Tables
Policies
Policy PSD1: Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development - 36
Policy SLE 1: Employment Development - 45
Policy SLE 2: Securing Dynamic Town Centres - 49
Policy SLE 3: Supporting Tourism Growth - 52
Policy SLE 4: Improved Transport and Connections - 55
Policy SLE 5: High Speed Rail 2 -London to Birmingham - 56
Policy BSC 1: District Wide Housing Distribution - 61
PolicyBSC2:TheEffectiveandEfficientUseofLand-BrownfieldlandandHousingDensity
- 62
Policy BSC 3: Affordable Housing - 64
Policy BSC 4: Housing Mix - 67
Policy BSC 5: Area Renewal - 68
Policy BSC 6: Travelling Communities - 69
Policy BSC 7: Meeting Education Needs - 71
Policy BSC 8: Securing Health and Well-Being - 72
Policy BSC 9: Public Services and Utilities - 74
Policy BSC 10: Open Space, Outdoor Sport and Recreation Provision - 75
Policy BSC 11: Local Standards of Provision -Outdoor Recreation - 80
Policy BSC12: Indoor Sport, Recreation and Community Facilities - 82
Policy ESD 1: Mitigating and Adapting to Climate Change - 85
Policy ESD 2: Energy Hierarchy and Allowable Solutions - 87
Policy ESD 3: Sustainable Construction - 88
5 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1List of Policies and Tables
Policy ESD 4: Decentralised Energy Systems - 91
Policy ESD 5: Renewable Energy - 93
Policy ESD 6: Sustainable Flood Risk Management - 95
Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) - 98
Policy ESD 8: Water Resources - 100
Policy ESD 9: Protection of the Oxford Meadows SAC - 103
Policy ESD 10: Protection and Enhancement of Biodiversity and the Natural Environment
- 106
Policy ESD 11: Conservation Target Areas - 108
Policy ESD 12: Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) - 109
Policy ESD 13: Local Landscape Protection and Enhancement - 111
Policy ESD 14: Oxford Green Belt - 114
Policy ESD 15: The Character of the Built and Historic Environment - 117
Policy ESD 16: The Oxford Canal - 122
Policy ESD 17: Green Infrastructure - 124
Policy Bicester 1: North West Bicester Eco-Town - 139
Policy Bicester 2: Graven Hill - 145
Policy Bicester 3: South West Bicester Phase 2 - 150
Policy Bicester 4: Bicester Business Park - 153
Policy Bicester 5: Strengthening Bicester Town Centre - 156
Policy Bicester 6: Bure Place Town Centre Redevelopment Phase 2 - 157
Policy Bicester 7: Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport and Recreation - 159
Policy Bicester 8: RAF Bicester - 160
Policy Bicester 9: Burial Site Provision in Bicester - 161
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 6List of Policies and Tables
Policy Bicester 10: Bicester Gateway - 162
Policy Bicester 11: Employment Land at North East Bicester - 165
Policy Bicester 12: South East Bicester - 167
Policy Bicester 13: Gavray Drive (re-adopted) - 171
Policy Banbury 1: Banbury Canalside - 181
Policy Banbury 2: Hardwick Farm, Southam Road (East and West) - 186
Policy Banbury 3: West of Bretch Hill - 189
Policy Banbury 4: Bankside Phase 2 - 193
Policy Banbury 5: North of Hanwell Fields - 196
Policy Banbury 6: Employment Land West of M40 - 200
Policy Banbury 7: Strengthening Banbury Town Centre - 204
Policy Banbury 8: Bolton Road Development Area - 206
Policy Banbury 9: Spiceball Development Area - 208
Policy Banbury 10: Bretch Hill Regeneration Area - 211
Policy Banbury 11: Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport and Recreation - 215
Policy Banbury 12: Land for the Relocation of Banbury United FC - 216
Policy Banbury 13: Burial Site Provision in Banbury - 217
Policy Banbury 14: Cherwell Country Park - 218
Policy Banbury 15: Employment Land North East of Junction 11 - 218
Policy Banbury 16: South of Salt Way - West - 222
Policy Banbury 17: South of Salt Way - East - 225
Policy Banbury 18: Land at Drayton Lodge Farm - 228
Policy Banbury 19: Land at Higham Way - 231
Policy Kidlington 1: Accommodating High Value Employment Needs - 236
7 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1List of Policies and Tables
Policy Kidlington 2: Strengthening Kidlington Village Centre - 237
Policy Villages 1: Village Categorisation - 243
Policy Villages 2: Distributing Growth Across the Rural Areas - 247
Policy Villages 3: Rural Exception Sites - 249
Policy Villages 4: Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport and Recreation - 250
Policy Villages 5: Former RAF Upper Heyford - 254
Policy INF 1: Infrastructure - 261
Tables
Table 1 Strategic Employment Sites - 11
Table 2 Proposed Strategic Town Centre Allocations - 11
Table 3 Overall Distribution in the Local Plan - 12
Table 4 Proposed Strategic Housing Allocations - 13
Table 5 Affordable Housing Policy as set out in Policy BSC3 - 15
Table 6 Supporting Strategic Policies - 15
Table 7 Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor Recreation - 76
Table 8 Qualitative Standards of Provision - 78
Table 9 Local Standards of Provision - Indoor Recreation - 81
Table 10 Local Quality Standards - 82
Table 11 Rural Sub Areas: Open Space - 250
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 8List of Policies and Tables
Executive Summary
i.This Local Plan is an important document
forCherwellDistrict. Uponadoptionitwill
set out broadly how the District will grow
and change in the period up to 2031. The
LocalPlanmustsetoutthelongtermspatial
vision for the District and contain policies
to help deliver that vision.
ii.This Executive Summary seeks to give an
overview of the main policies in the Local
Plan. It is important that the Plan is
considered as a whole. There are three
themes which link together; the economy
we look to secure, the communities we
build, and ensuring that the development
requiredissustainable. It isalsocrucialthat
the Plan’s policies are read in detail to
understand the strategy that the Council is
putting forward.
iii.The Plan has been prepared following a
detailed examination of the needs and
challengesfacingourtowns,villagesandrural
areas. It provides a proactive, positive set
of policies to help our places thrive, to
deliver essential and longer term
infrastructureandachievedevelopmentthat
willimprovethequalityoflifeintheDistrict.
It has a clear focus on addressing the
difficultiesofeconomicrecessionandbuilding
on Cherwell’s strengths to achieve positive
outcomes for both urban and rural areas.iv.We are seeking to achieve sustainable
economic growth. We wish to draw in
investmenttailoredtothecurrentandfuture
needsoftheDistrictandtoCherwell’ssocial
and economic position in Oxfordshire and
the south-east Midlands. We are aiming to
create jobs; to significantly boost housing
supply in targeted, sustainable locations; to
mitigate and adapt to climate change; to
securesustainabledesign;andtoachievenet
gains in biodiversity.
Structure of the Local Plan
v.TheLocalPlanisstructuredsothatitsets
out our priorities and policies clearly and
separately for the whole of Cherwell, for
Bicester,BanburyandKidlington,andforour
rural areas. It has five sections:
Section A – ‘Strategy for Development
inCherwell’considersCherwellDistrict
as a whole. It includes a vision for the
District, a spatial strategy and a series
of key objectives.
Section B – ‘Policies for Development
in Cherwell’ sets out planning policies
grouped around three themes:
theme One: Developing a
Sustainable Local Economy
theme Two: Building Sustainable
Communities
theme Three: Ensuring Sustainable
Development.
Section C – ‘Policies for Cherwell's
Places’ looks at different places within
the District: Bicester, Banbury,
Kidlington and our villages and rural
areas. Foreachareaitoutlineshowthe
three themes will be delivered and
9 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Executive Summary
proposes strategic development sites
for housing, employment and open
space.
Section D (and Appendix 8) – ‘The
InfrastructureDeliveryPlan’showswhat
newinfrastructureandkeyfacilitiesthe
Local Plan will secure.
SectionE–‘MonitoringandDeliveryof
the Local Plan’ sets out how delivery of
the three policy themes, the objectives
and strategic development sites of the
Local Plan will be monitored and
reviewed.
Vision, Strategy and Objectives
vi.Underpinning the Local Plan is a vision
and a spatial strategy for Cherwell District.
Ourspatialstrategyforhowwemanagethe
growth of the District can be summarised
as:
Focusing the bulk of the proposed
growth in and around Bicester and
Banbury.
Limiting growth in our rural areas and
directing it towards larger and more
sustainable villages.
Aiming to strictly control development
in open countryside.
vii.Therearethenfifteenstrategicobjectives
(seeSectionA‘StrategyforDevelopmentin
Cherwell’)andthepolicieswhichfollowseek
to meet these objectives.The Policies in the Local Plan
viii.The Local Plan contains a large number
of policies that will be important in shaping
the future development of the District. A
few of the key policies are set out in this
section.
Developing a Sustainable Local
Economy
ix.Securing the economic future of the
District is the main priority of this Plan.
x.This is a Development Plan that has been
developed in a recession. The Plan
recognises the challenges for achieving
growth and employment generating
development and the impact on local
business. TheLocalPlanwillbeanimportant
tool in assisting growth and in ensuring that
the District is resilient and can weather the
current storm.
xi.TheLocalPlanseekstoensurethatthere
is a supply of employment land to meet the
needs of the District for the plan period.
Policy SLE 1: ‘Employment Development’
(Section B ‘Policies for Development in
Cherwell’) seeks, as a general principle, to
protect existing employment land and
buildings. The Local Plan identifies nine
strategic employment areas to meet
employment needs over the plan period.
These are:
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 10Executive Summary
Table 1: Strategic Employment Sites
Section Policy no. Employment
Area (gross)
(ha)Site
Bicester
C.2 'Bicester' Bicester 1 10 North West Bicester
Eco-Town
C.2 'Bicester' Bicester 2 26 Graven Hill
C.2 'Bicester' Bicester 4 29.5 Bicester Business Park
C.2 'Bicester' Bicester 10 18 Bicester Gateway
C.2 'Bicester' Bicester 11 15 Employment Land at North
East Bicester
C.2 'Bicester' Bicester 12 40 South East Bicester
Banbury
C.3 'Banbury' Banbury 6 35 Employment Land West of
M40
C.3 'Banbury' Banbury 15 13 Employment Land North East
of Junction 11
Rural Areas
C.5 'Our Villages and
Rural Areas'Villages 5 Approx 120,000
sq.metresFormer RAF Upper Heyford
Dynamic Town Centres
xii.TheLocalPlanseekstodirectretailand
othertowncentreappropriatedevelopment
to the two town centres in the District(‘Policy SLE 2: Securing Dynamic Town
Centres’). It also seeks to strengthen
KidlingtonVillageCentre. ThePlansetsthe
boundariesforthecentres(‘PoliciesBicester
5,Banbury7,Kidlington2)andidentifiesthe
followingstrategicallocationsinBicesterand
Banbury:
Table 2: Proposed Strategic Town Centre Allocations
Section Policy
no.Area
(ha)Proposed Use Site
Bicester
11 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Executive Summary
Section Policy
no.Area
(ha)Proposed Use Site
C.2
'Bicester'Bicester
64
(Phase
1 & 2)Shopping, leisure Bure Place Town Centre
Redevelopment Phase 2
Banbury
C.3
'Banbury'Banbury
82 Retail/residential/mix Bolton Road Development Area
C.3
'Banbury'Banbury
95 RefurbishedArtsCentre,new
library, public spaces, car
parking, retail/mixSpiceball Development Area
xiii.The Plan also has proposals for
supporting tourism, improving transport
connections and addressing the challenge of
High Speed Rail.
BuildingSustainableCommunities
xiv.ThePlanseekstoboostsignificantlythe
supply of housing and meet the objectively
assessed need for Cherwell identified in the
Oxfordshire Strategic Housing Market
Assessment (SHMA) 2014 – some 1,140
dwellings per annum or a total of 22,800
from 2011 to 2031. Policy BSC 1 provides
for 22,840 homes over the Plan period and
sets the overall distribution of development
across the District. Over the Plan period
10,129homesaretobeprovidedatBicester,
some 7,319 homes at Banbury and 5,392
homes in the rural areas including
Kidlington. A further 2,707 homes are
allocated at the North West Bicester
Eco-Town(Bicester1)butarenotpresently
expected to be delivered until after 2031.xv.Between 2011 and 2014, 1,106 homes
were completed in Cherwell including 365
at Bicester, 213 at Banbury and 528
elsewhere. Thisleaves21,734oftheplanned
housing requirement yet to provide.
xvi.The Local Plan’s housing strategy seeks
to support the economic growth of the
towns, meet housing needs across the
Districtandfurthersupportthedevelopment
of the approved, new settlement at Former
RAF Upper Heyford. Growth at Bicester is
aimedatsupportingbusinessinvestmentand
improvingtherangeofservicesandfacilities.
It also responds to the under-delivery of
housing at Bicester in recent years.
xvii.The Plan includes a housing trajectory
(within Section E) showing when new and
approved strategic sites are expected to be
delivered and setting out allowances for
non-strategic sites and small ‘windfall’ sites
of less than 10 dwellings. The table below
summarises the overall distribution of
housing.
Table 3: Overall Distribution of Housing in the Local Plan
2014-2031 2011-2031
9,764 10,129 Bicester
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 12Executive Summary
7,106 7,319 Banbury
4,864 5,392 Rest of Cherwell
21,734 22,840 Total
Locations for Community
Growth:
Bicester and Banbury
xviii.Section C ‘Policies for Cherwell's
Places’ of the Local Plan identifies the key
strategic housing sites that will need to be
developedtomeethousingneedsinaddition
tothosealreadyapproved. ThePlanincludes
strategic sites of 100 or more dwellings. It
doesnotspecificallyidentifyallsitesfornew
housing for the period up to 2031.
Non-strategicsiteswillbeidentifiedthroughthe Local Plan Part 2, through the
preparation of Neighbourhood Plans and
through the determination of applications
for planning permission.
xix.The strategic sites include an extensive
eco-towndevelopment,there-development
of defence land, the bringing forward of
smaller and larger scale greenfield urban
extensions and town centre regeneration
proposals.
xx.The Table below identifies the strategic
sites included in the Plan. Additional
approved sites are shown in the Housing
Trajectory in Section E.
Table 4: Proposed Strategic Housing Allocations
Policy no. Total Number of
Homes 2014-2031Site
Bicester
Bicester 13,293(1) North West Bicester (Eco-Town)
Bicester 2 2,100 Graven Hill
Bicester 3 726 South West Bicester Phase 2
Bicester 12 1,500 South East Bicester
Bicester 13 300 Gavray Drive
Banbury
Banbury 1 700 Canalside
Banbury 2 600 Southam Road
Banbury 3 400 West of Bretch Hill
13 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Executive Summary
Policy no. Total Number of
Homes 2014-2031Site
Banbury 4 600 Bankside Phase 2
Banbury 5 544 North of Hanwell Fields
Banbury 8 200 Bolton Road
Banbury 16 150 South of Salt Way - West
Banbury 17 1,345 South of Salt Way - East
Banbury 18 250 Drayton Lodge Farm
Banbury 19 150 Higham Way
(1)The total allocation for North West Bicester eco-development is 6,000. It is expected that
3,293 homes could be delivered by 2031.
The Villages and Rural Areas
xxi.FormerRAFUpperHeyfordisproposed
asastrategicsiteforanewsettlementinthe
rural areas. Elsewhere in the rural areas
(including Kidlington) a substantial amount
ofhousinghasbeencompletedorapproved
in recent years. However, some further
development is required to help meet
housingneedsidentifiedinthe2014Strategic
HousingMarketAssessment(SHMA)andto
assistthevitalityofCherwell’smanyvillages.
xxii.Policy Villages 1 identifies the most
sustainable villages (Category A) and their
'satellite' villages where minor development
within built-up limits will, in principle, be
supported (typically a site of less than 10
dwellings). Development within less
sustainable villages (Category C) will be
restricted to infilling and conversions. The
Housing Trajectory in Section E provides a
small site ‘windfall’ allowance for such
proposals.xxiii.PolicyVillages2providesforafurther
750 homes to be provided at the Category
A villages. This will principally involve the
identificationofsitesof10ormoredwellings
withinoroutsidethebuilt-uplimitsofthose
villages. This is in addition to sites already
approvedacrossthe ruralareasasshownin
the Housing Trajectory. Sites will be
identified in the Local Plan Part 2, through
thepreparationofNeighbourhoodPlansand
through the determination of applications
for planning permission. The policy is
supported by the latest Strategic Housing
Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA).
Affordable Housing
xxiv.Affordable housing is housing for
affordablerent/socialrentor‘intermediate’
housing such as shared ownership. ‘Policy
BSC 3: Affordable Housing’ (Section B
‘PoliciesforDevelopmentinCherwell’)sets
out the approach for meeting affordable
housing requirements. It provides
percentage requirements for different parts
of the District and minimum thresholds at
which affordable housing will be required.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 14Executive Summary
Table 5: Affordable Housing Policy as set out in Policy BSC3
Qualifying Threshold Requirement
11 homes 30% Banbury and Bicester
11 homes 35% Kidlington
11 homes 35% Rural Areas
xxv.In meeting the need for affordable
housing in rural areas, the Local Plan
supportsthe useof’ruralexceptionsites’in
appropriatecases. Thesearesitesspecifically
identified for affordable housing in rural
communities and which would not normally
be permitted for housing. The Council's
approach is set out in Policy Villages 3 in
Section C.Ensuring Sustainable
Development
xxvi.TheLocalPlancontainsawidenumber
ofotherstrategicpoliciesthatwillhelpbuild
sustainable communities and ensure
sustainable development. Some examples
include:-
Table 6: Supporting Strategic Policies
Section Policies Subject
B.3 'Theme Three: Policies for Ensuring
Sustainable Development'ESD 1 - ESD 7 Climate Change, Energy,
Sustainable Construction and
Flooding
B.3 'Theme Three: Policies for Ensuring
Sustainable Development'ESD 8 - ESD 13 Water Resources, Ecology and
Biodiversity, Landscape
B.3 'Theme Three: Policies for Ensuring
Sustainable Development'ESD 14 Green Belt
B.3 'Theme Three: Policies for Ensuring
Sustainable Development'ESD 15 The Built and Historic
Environment
B.3 'Theme Three: Policies for Ensuring
Sustainable Development'ESD 17 Green Infrastructure
B.2 'Theme Two: Policies for Building
Sustainable Communities'BSC 2 Effective and Efficient Use of
Land
B.2 'Theme Two: Policies for Building
Sustainable Communities'BSC 4 The Mix of Housing
B.2 'Theme Two: Policies for Building
Sustainable Communities'BSC 6 Travelling Communities
15 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Executive Summary
Section Policies Subject
B.2 'Theme Two: Policies for Building
Sustainable Communities'BSC 7 Meeting Education Needs
B.2 'Theme Two: Policies for Building
Sustainable Communities'BSC 10 - BSC 12 Providing Sport, Recreation and
Community Facilities
C.2 'Bicester', C.3 'Banbury' Bicester 9,
Banbury 13Meeting the Needs for
Cemeteries in Bicester and
Banbury
Ensuring Delivery
xxvii.TheLocalPlanneedstobeviableand
deliverable and create the context for
development management decisions to be
taken in a positive way, for high quality
development to be achieved on the ground
and for enabling applications for sustainable
developmenttobeapprovedwherepossible.
xxviii.TheInfrastructureDeliveryPlan(IDP)
provides confidence that critical
infrastructurecanbeprovided,thatthePlan’s
developmentstrategyisdeliverable,andthat
the necessary social, physical and green
infrastructurecanbesecuredtosupportthe
planned development. The Local Plan
includes provision for a range of key
infrastructure such as schools, strategic
highway improvements, and ‘green’
infrastructure. The IDP identifies costs
attributable to the proposed levels of
growth, requirements of each type of
growth, and consider how and when
infrastructure should be provided having
regard to the phasing of development and
possible funding opportunities.
xxix.The Plan also includes a monitoring
framework (Section E ‘Monitoring and
Delivery of the Local Plan’) to ensure that
Local Plan policies are being implemented
and are achieving their aims.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 16Executive Summary
Introduction to the Local Plan
1.1This is the Local Plan for the Cherwell
District.
1.2The Local Plan is the key document
which will guide the changing use of land in
theDistrictanddefinethepurposetowhich
it is put in the future. It has three central
themes:
theme One: Policies for Developing a
Sustainable Local Economy
theme Two: Policies for Building
Sustainable Communities
theme Three: Policies for Ensuring
Sustainable Development.
1.3ThePlansetsoutthevisionandstrategy
forthedevelopmentofCherwellthroughto
2031. It sets out why, where and how
Cherwell will grow over the next 16 years.
1.4It is a ‘place shaping’ document which
defines where growth will occur and how
our District will evolve, but which tightly
focuses growth on our most sustainable
locations.1.5It is a document that seeks to respond
to a series of challenges which the District
faces and to lock the key agencies into
partnership for delivery over a long period
of time.
1.6The District faces some critical
challenges over the next two decades
including:
remaining economically competitive
ensuring housing growth only takes
place in appropriate locations
avoiding sprawl and ensuring growth
avoids adverse environmental impacts
ensuring the changing needs of the
population are properly planned for
reducing the high cost of energy use
ensuring that infrastructure needs are
met.
1.7The Local Plan is not just a response to
demand, but a powerful tool to meet those
challenges,toshapegrowthinaplannedway
and so ensure a set of substantial gains over
thelongtermforthebenefitoftheresidents
of the District.
1.8Byidentifyingkeydevelopmentareasfor
growth and change over the short, medium
and long term, the Plan shows to residents
andbusinessthelevelandrateofgrowthand
change likely in these areas over time. This
will give business and residents certainty
about the shape of their communities in the
future.
1.9The Plan centres on Bicester and
Banbury as the most sustainable locations
for growth. It is a plan which seeks to
17 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Introduction to the Local Plan
strengthen the role of the towns as the
centre of the local economy, set within a
rural hinterland.
1.10Maintaining and growing a successful
economy requires growth as an inevitable
outcome and brings with it many benefits,
suchasanincreasedlabourforce,economic
development, increased investment,
community development and infrastructure
improvements.
1.11Growth is a continuous process; an
outcome of natural population increase
(births and people living longer), patterns of
migration,economicdriversandthechanging
needs of our community. District growth
requires an effective strategy for its
management, making the most of benefits
andminimisingpotentialnegativeoutcomes.
1.12OurLocalPlanseekstosecuregrowth
that is ‘balanced’ and ‘targeted’; growth that
improves our places and the wider
environment. In doing so, the Plan is clear
on what we will support and what we will
not.
1.13ThePlanispolicydriven,withanumber
of transformational steps proposed to
secure:
a productive, high value economy
an excellent transport system
inclusive communities
one community, not separate ones
quality urban, rural and natural
environments
good quality design and masterplanning
for new business and residential
developments
clearlimitsto growthforboth Banbury
and Bicester.
1.14The Plan contains two sets of policies:
policies for development, which apply
across the entire District (Section B
‘PoliciesforDevelopmentinCherwell’)
policies for places, which focus
development on a number of strategic
locations (Section C ‘Policies for
Cherwell's Places’).
The Role of the Local Plan
1.15The Local Plan is the document which
sets the long term strategic ‘spatial vision’
for a local authority area. It contains the
strategic spatial framework and policies to
help deliver that vision.
1.16TheLocalPlanwaspreviouslyreferred
to as the ‘Core Strategy’, the central
document of a ‘Local Development
Framework’ containing other local planning
policy documents and guidance.
1.17New legislation (Localism Act 2011)
and regulations enable Councils to
reintroduce the term ‘Local Plan’ and have
changedsomeoftheplan-makingprocedures
includingtheintroductionof‘Neighbourhood
Planning’. A new ‘National Planning Policy
Framework’(NPPF)hasalsobeenproduced
sweepingawayover1,000pagesofguidance
and allowing more scope for local
interpretation of national policy. On the 6
March2014theDepartmentofCommunities
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 18Introduction to the Local Plan
and Local Government (DCLG) launched
the National Planning Practice Guidance
(NPPG) web-based resource.
1.18The Cherwell Local Plan takes into
accountthesechanges.ItisatrulyLocalPlan
whichensuresthattheNPPF’sprioritiesare
met but in a way that meets Cherwell’s
needs and challenges.
1.19The Local Plan provides strategic
planningpoliciesandprincipleswhichsupport
the wider economic priorities for
Oxfordshire and the South East Midlands
while also providing a foundation for local
neighbourhoods to subsequently become
involved in planning and shaping for their
own areas should they so wish.
The Planning Context for the
Local Plan
1.20Although Cherwell District Council is
theplanningauthorityforCherwellDistrict,
there is a framework of European and
national legislation, national planning policy
andguidancewithinwhichwemustoperate.
The Local Plan is heavily influenced by this
context.
1.21Until 25 March 2013, the Local Plan
was required to conform with a Regional
Spatial Strategy (RSS) – the now revoked
South East Plan. The RSS set a broad
framework of policies for the whole South
East region and, like the Local Plan, was
prepared based on evidence, assessment of
issues and options, public involvement and
independent examination. Significantly, it
identified how much new housing should be
provided within each authority from 2006
to 2026. All Local Plans or Development
PlanDocumentswithintheSouthEastregion
wererequiredtoconformtotheRSSatthe
time of their preparation.1.22The South East Plan was therefore
central to preparing the Local Plan up until
the point of revocation. Conforming with
the South East Plan’s housing requirements
was a key feature of both the Draft Core
Strategy2010 and the ProposedSubmission
LocalPlan2012andtheemergingSouthEast
Plan was important in shaping the Council’s
Options for Growth in 2008.
1.23MorerecentlyitistheNPPF(published
March 2012) and the NPPG (March 2014)
thathaveguidedcompletionofthePlan. The
NPPF includes a presumption in favour of
sustainable development, an emphasis on
assessing needs locally, on working jointly
with other authorities and on achieving
economic growth. The Plan has been
informed by the NPPF’s twelve ‘Core
Planning Principles’ including that planning
be “…genuinely plan-led, empowering local
peopletoshapetheirsurroundings,withsuccinct
local and neighbourhood plans setting out a
positive vision for the future of the area… ”.
1.24The influence of the NPPF and the
revocationoftheSouthEastPlancanbeseen
in the Plan’s clearer focus on delivering
economic growth, in its more place specific
objectives, in the identification of more
strategic housing and employment sites to
meet growth needs, and in the shaping of
policies for a positive approach to
development while protecting important
local assets.
1.25The priority for growth is at Bicester
wherethereremainsaneedtomaximisethe
benefits accruing from its location, including
forhighvalueandknowledge-basedbusiness;
theGreenBeltnorthofOxfordneedstobe
maintained; Banbury is a primary regional
centre with an important role as a market
town supporting its wider hinterland; and,
there is a need to meet the local needs of
our rural communities for small scale
affordable housing, business and service
19 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Introduction to the Local Plan
development having regard to the changes
to the rural economy and the need to
maintain services.
1.26This Local Plan covers the period 1
April 2011 to 31 March 2031. This is to
ensure that at least 15 years of housing
supply can be provided post-adoption, as
required by the National Planning Policy
Framework, to provide flexibility in phasing
the delivery of strategic development sites
and to allow a longer period for
infrastructure planning.
1.27Any future review of the Plan will
require the cooperation of all authorities in
Oxfordshire to meet the County’s total
housingneedarisingfromtheneedassessed
inthe2014SHMA. Thiswillincludecatering
for the housing needs of Oxford City. A
strategic Green Belt boundaries review is
one of a number of options to consider in
meetingtheCounty’soverallhousingneeds.
All local authorities in Oxfordshire are
working jointly to take forward the
conclusions of the new Oxfordshire SHMA
andtheoutcomeofthisjointworkmaylead
to a strategic Green Belt review.
The Structure of the Local Plan
1.28ThisLocalPlanisstructuredasfollows:
SectionA‘Strategy forDevelopment in
Cherwell’:
1.29This section considers the District as
a whole and sets the context for the rest of
the document. It includes the following:
avisionandspatialstrategyforCherwell
District up to 2031
a series of key objectives which will set
out how this vision and strategy are to
be realised.SectionB‘Policies forDevelopment in
Cherwell’:
1.30Thissectiondetailsaseriesofplanning
policies which stem from the objectives
describedinSectionAgroupedunderthree
themes:
developingaSustainableLocalEconomy
building Sustainable Communities
ensuring Sustainable Development.
SectionC‘PoliciesforCherwell's Places’:
1.31This section looks in detail at different
parts of the District and sets out objectives
and policies for these areas. It includes
allocationsofsitesthattheCouncilconsiders
to be of strategic importance to delivering
our overall development strategy for the
District. This section includes:
C.1 Introduction
C.2 Bicester
C.3 Banbury
C.4 Kidlington
C.5 Our Villages and Rural Areas.
SectionD‘TheInfrastructure DeliveryPlan’:
1.32This section considers how the Local
Plan will be delivered. It shows the key
infrastructurethatwillbeneededtosupport
our communities over the next few years
and how we can ensure that the
infrastructure needed to support new
development will be properly provided.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 20Introduction to the Local Plan
SectionE‘Monitoring andDelivery ofthe
LocalPlan’:
1.33We need to make sure that we have
proper systems in place to measure our
success in achieving the objectives we have
set in the Local Plan. This section shows
how we propose to monitor this.
How the Local Plan has been
Prepared
1.34Producing our Local Plan has involved
various stages of preparation and
consultation, beginning in 2005. A number
of documents have been produced, and
these, together with other technical and
background reports, have been referenced
in Appendix 3 ‘Evidence Base’.
1.35The emerging strategic issues for the
Local Plan to focus on, and the options
regarding how to tackle them, were
presented in an Issues and Options Paper
publishedforconsultationbetweenFebruary
and April 2006.
1.36Consultees listed in the Council’s
Statement of Community Involvement, and
other respondents to preliminary Plan
correspondence, were invited to comment
onthe document.Representationsreceived
duringthisconsultationcanbeviewedonline.
1.37We supplemented this early
consultation with regular workshops held
with Parish Councils, other expert
organisations, and agents/developers. The
regular workshops with Parish Councils
introduced Parishes to the Local Plan, and
providedaforumtoexplorepotentialpolicy
approaches(initiallyfocusingonvillagepolicy
andthesettlementhierarchy,andthenissues
suchasemploymentandtourism,affordable
housing, design, and village boundaries).
Stakeholder workshops were also
undertaken to inform the SustainabilityAppraisal – to ‘test’ certain options, making
use of the local knowledge of experts and
organisations in environmental, social and
economicfields. Workshopswerealsoheld
specifically on the ‘Directions of Growth’ –
identifying the locations for development.
Separate workshops were held for Parish
Councils, ‘experts’ and agents/developers.
1.38The evidence gained through these
consultation exercises was intended to
inform the next ‘Preferred Options’ stage.
However the Regulations guiding the
production of the Plans were amended in
June 2008 and a specific‘PreferredOptions’
stage was removed.
1.39ThenewRegulationsandaccompanying
guidance instead focused on more
continuous consultation and evidence
gathering throughout the generation and
consideration of options, to ensure that
optionspursuedintheLocalPlanarecapable
ofbeingdelivered. TheLocalPlanshouldbe
based on evaluation of the 'reasonable
alternatives' and should be the most
appropriate plan when considered against
these alternatives. The new guidance
emphasised the collection of a robust
evidence base, which should be relevant to
local characteristics and as up to date as
practical.
1.40Recognising the need for a thorough
evidence base, and the importance of up to
date stakeholder involvement, in Autumn
2008 we undertook further consultation on
what at that time was termed the ‘Core
Strategy’andpotential‘OptionsforGrowth’
for the District (consulting on broad areas
around Banbury and Bicester that we
considered to be ‘reasonable alternatives’
forgrowth,suitableforfurtherinvestigation).
1.41After this ‘Options for Growth’
consultation, the focus turned to gathering
further evidence on a range of issues. We
21 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Introduction to the Local Plan
commissionedanumberofin-depthtechnical
studies to provide the evidence needed to
ensure the Local Plan is ‘justified’.
1.42InApril2008,twolocationsinCherwell
were shortlisted for consideration as
eco-towns – a site near
Weston-on-the-Green (known as ‘Weston
Otmoor’) and North West Bicester. In July
2009 we received confirmation that North
West Bicester had been identified as a
potential eco-town location, with around
5,000 new homes to be provided over the
lifetime of that development.
1.43The timescale for the Local Plan has
also been influenced by the preparation and
adoption(in2009)ofthenowrevokedSouth
East Plan.
1.44In February 2010 we published the
Draft Core Strategy and consulted upon it.
The results of that consultation were used
to further develop the Local Plan.
1.45Following the election of a new
Government in May 2010 major reform to
thePlanningsystemwasintroduced,including
the Localism Act (2011), the revocation of
the RSS, and the introduction of simpler
planning guidance through the National
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) which
places a greater emphasis on securing
sustainable growth. This plan responds to
these reforms.
1.46The Council consulted upon the
Proposed Submission Local Plan in August
2012, Proposed Changes to the Proposed
Submission Local Plan in March 2013 and
proposedmodificationsinAugust2014. The
responsesreceivedhaveinformedtheLocal
Plan at all stages.Sustainability Appraisal
1.47SustainabilityAppraisal(SA)isrequired
to be undertaken in the preparation of all
Development Plan Documents. An SA
reportwasproducedforpublicconsultation
to accompany the Local Plan. The purpose
of SA is to ensure that the Local Plan
proposes sustainable development. It has
informed the objectives and policies of the
Local Plan.
The Local Plan and the
SustainableCommunityStrategy
1.48The Local Plan is not the only
document that considers the issues facing
communities in Cherwell District into the
future. The ‘Cherwell Sustainable
Community Strategy’ (SCS) has also been
prepared as the top level guiding document
for the Cherwell area. The SCS sets an
overall strategic direction and long-term
(until 2030) vision for the economic, social
andenvironmentalwell-beingofthearea. It
will influence future policies and plans and it
will be used to influence future funding.
1.49There are important differences
between the Local Plan and the SCS.
1.50Unlike the Local Plan, the SCS is not
prepared by the District Council but by the
Cherwell Local Strategic Partnership of
which the Council is a member.
1.51The SCS considers a wide range of
issuesofimportancetothecommunity,many
of which are not related to land-use
planning. Itthereforehasawiderscopethan
the Local Plan. But while the processes of
preparing the two documents are different,
public engagement is central to both.
1.52Wehavesoughttoensurethatthetwo
documents are complementary. The SCS
recognisesthegrowthanddevelopmentthat
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 22Introduction to the Local Plan
will take place in the District and considers
the implications of this for Cherwell's
communities. The Local Plan seeks to
address the wider needs and aspirations of
communities as expressed in the SCS.
1.53The Cherwell Local Strategic
Partnership published the draft SCS in July
2009, and carried out a public consultation
on this document until October 2009. In
November 2009, the Council adopted a
revised SCS "Our District, Our Future".
1.54The Council has sought to ensure that
there is a strong link between the two
documents, which can be seen in several
ways:
Boththeproposedspatialvisionforthe
Local Plan and its objectives draw from
those prepared for the SCS.
The level of growth and development
that is anticipated in the District is fully
reflected in the SCS, in particular
throughthe"FutureChallenges"section
of that document.
Thefourkey"ambitions"withintheSCS
reflect the challenges posed by this
growth. Within each of these are
containedobjectives,manyofwhichare
reflected in the policies of the Local
Plan.
Duty to Cooperate
1.55The Council has a legal ‘Duty to
Co-operate’ with other local planning
authorities and other prescribed bodies
when it undertakes certain activities,
including the preparation of Development
Plan Documents, activities that can
reasonablybeconsideredtopreparetheway
for such preparation and activities that
supportsuchpreparationsofarastheyrelateto a strategic matter. The reason is to
maximise the effectiveness of those
activities. TheCouncilisrequired"toengage
constructively, actively and on an on-going
basis" in respect of the activities that are
subject to the Duty.
1.56The NPPF makes clear that the Duty
particularlyrelatestothestrategicpriorities
of Local Plans:
the homes and jobs needed in the area
theprovisionofretail,leisureandother
commercial development
the provision of infrastructure for
transport, telecommunications, waste
management,watersupply,wastewater,
flood risk and coastal change
management, and the provision of
minerals and energy (including heat)
the provision of health, security,
community and cultural infrastructure
and other local facilities
climate change mitigation and
adaptation, conservation and
enhancementofthenaturalandhistoric
environment, including landscape.
1.57Local planning authorities should:
tork collaboratively with other bodies
toensurethatstrategicprioritiesacross
local boundaries are properly
co-ordinated and clearly reflected in
individual Local Plans
undertake joint working on areas of
commoninterestforthemutualbenefit
of neighbouring authorities
23 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Introduction to the Local Plan
work together to meet development
requirements which cannot wholly be
met within their own areas
consider producing joint planning
policies on strategic matters and
informal strategies such as joint
infrastructure and investment plans
take account of different geographic
areas, including travel-to-work areas,
and ensure cooperation between
County and District authorities on
relevant issues
work collaboratively to enable delivery
of sustainable economic growth in
consultation with Local Enterprise
Partnerships and Local Nature
Partnerships
workcollaborativelywithprivatesector
bodies, utility and infrastructure
providers.
1.58On-goingandconstructiveengagement
with neighbouring authorities and relevant
organisations has taken place since work on
the Local Plan began. The Council benefits
from possessing a series of very well
developed, interlocking relationships with
neighbouring Councils and a particularly
closeengagementwithOxfordshireCounty
Council and South Northamptonshire
District Council. Through the various
forums, regular debate and coordination
takes place on strategic planning, growth
strategies, transport and economic
development issues facing the sub-region,
County, and District, and in relation to its
neighbours.
1.59As the gateway to the Midlands,
Cherwell looks beyond the County of
Oxfordshire and has forged deep positive
links with its neighbouring Councils ofStratford-on-Avon,AylesburyValeandSouth
Northamptonshire. The application of the
Duty to Cooperate is leading to significant
policy changes and agreements that are
helping to locate the Cherwell Local Plan
within its wider sub-regional context. This
includescommitmentstomanagethegrowth
impacts on the A41 with Aylesbury Vale
District Council, cooperation on
opportunities for securing coordinated
investment in the High Performance
Engineering Sector with Stratford-on-Avon
Councilandaddressingcongestionchallenges
on Junction 10 on the M40 with South
Northamptonshire District Council. It also
includes working with Oxfordshire County
Council and Oxford City Council on the
development of the Oxford Transport
Strategy including improved connections to
the A40 and A44 with West Oxfordshire
Council and consideration of how best to
address congestion and Air Quality on the
A34 with South Oxfordshire and Vale of
White Horse Councils.
1.60The 'Duty to Cooperate Topic Paper’
supports the Local Plan. Key areas of
cooperation include:
involvement in both the Oxfordshire
Local Enterprise Partnership and the
South East Midlands Local Enterprise
Partnership
jointworkingandcollaborationthrough
the Oxfordshire Spatial Planning and
Infrastructure Partnership (SPIP)
supported by the Oxfordshire Planning
Policy Officers group (OPPO)
involvement of the Local Strategic
PartnershipindevelopingtheLocalPlan
development and maintenance of a
county Local Investment Plan
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 24Introduction to the Local Plan
joint working and on-going liaison with
Oxfordshire County Council on Local
Plan issues and place-shaping
joint working on Bicester and Banbury
Masterplans, Kidlington Framework
Masterplan, Gypsies and Traveller
housing needs, flood risk and transport
Parish and Town Council involvement
in developing the Local Plan vision and
aims
close working with the Defence
Infrastructure Organisation
liaison with adjoining authorities and
service providers
liaison with Bicester Vision and
Chambers of Commerce
involvement in the Oxfordshire Green
InfrastructureStrategyproducedbythe
Oxfordshire Local Nature Partnership.
1.61Suchcooperationhashelpedshapethe
LocalPlan,forexampleinunderstandingthe
growth needs of Bicester, the opportunities
associated with strategic investment in the
railways,theneedforregenerationincentral
Banbury, strategic highway issues, the
re-alignmentofthenationallogisticneedsof
themilitary,andtheenvironmentalpriorities
for the future.
1.62TheCouncilwillcontinuetoworkwith
neighbouring authorities and others on
planning issues which cross administrative
boundaries.OtherPolicyLinksandAdditional
Local Policy Guidance
1.63The Local Plan draws on a number of
other documents including:
theCouncil’sownstrategiessuchasthe
Economic Development Strategy,
HousingStrategyandConservationand
Urban Design Strategy
specific evidence and studies
commissioned for the preparation of
the Local Plan
anevolvingInfrastructureDeliveryPlan.
1.64Togetherwiththestrategy,policiesand
guidance for strategic development areas in
the Local Plan there will be other
non-strategic policy and comprehensive
guidance on the development that will be
permitted in the District, what it should
contain, how it should be designed, the
matters that will need to be addressed and
where it may be located.
1.65The additional policy and guidance will
include:
A Local Plan Part 2 that consists of
development management policies as
wellasidentifyingsmaller(non-strategic)
sites in the urban and rural areas and
providing linkages to Neighbourhood
Planning.
Bolton Road Development Area SPD
Banbury Canalside Development Area
SPD
Sustainable Buildings in Cherwell SPD
Bicester Masterplan SPD
25 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Introduction to the Local Plan
Banbury Masterplan SPD
Kidlington Masterplan SPD
Developer Contributions SPD
North West Bicester SPD.
What Does the Plan Do?
1.66The detail of the Cherwell Local Plan
is set out in the following sections. In
summary, it:
setsoutclearambitionsfortheDistrict
and the two towns in particular
providescertaintyforcommunitiesand
developers as to what will /can be
developed and where
focuses growth at Bicester and to a
lesser extent at Banbury
seeks to strengthen Kidlington’s
economic role
proposes sustainable levels of growth
at the villages and has regard to the
need to protect the character of our
rural areas
ensures that the main focus of the plan
is strengthening the local economy, job
creation, inward investment and
company growth, as well as building
cohesive communities
createsamajorplatformtohelpdeliver
economic development in a recession
strengthens the town centres at the
heart of the District
secures infrastructure such as new rail
and road investment
avoids the coalescence of towns and
villages
takes permissions and what has been
constructed into account
emphasises high environmental
standards and design quality
protects, enhances and realises the
potential of the Oxford Canal
promotes area renewal and
regeneration in Banbury
supportsinnovationsuchasCommunity
Self Build
addresses planning reforms.
1.67We consider this to be a deliverable
plan and one that will secure a sustainable
economy for Cherwell over the next two
decades.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 26Introduction to the Local Plan
Section A - Strategy for
Development in Cherwell
A.1A key role for the Local Plan is to set
out the strategy for how Cherwell District
will develop over the period to 2031. This
strategy needs to be a “spatial strategy” –
settingouthowmuchtheDistrictwillgrow,
broadly where this growth will take place
and how the growth will be delivered.
A.2Underpinningthisstrategyisavisionfor
our District. We need to understand what
we want Cherwell District to be like in
2031. Whatvaluesandprincipleswillshape
our planning decisions?A.3This vision should be distinctive to our
local area, and it must be realistic and
achievable. Importantly, it should relate to
other vision statements made by Cherwell
District Council and others. Local people
need to be confident that the various public
bodies responsible for planning the future
growthoftheDistricthavethesameoverall
vision for Cherwell District.
Cherwell in 2031
A.4The purpose of a vision statement is to
set out an image of the future that we are
seeking to create. What type of place do
we want Cherwell District to be in 2031?
What values and principles should underpin
our Local Plan?
A.5In identifying these issues, we have
reviewed national, regional and local
strategies, policies, and priorities; we have
examined information which helps us
understand the 'health' of Cherwell's
economy, its communities and its
environment and which highlights its
opportunities and constraints; and we have
commissioned or produced new evidence
on key topic areas such as flood risk,
affordable housing and transport.
A.6Indefiningourvisionstatement,weare
mindful that other vision statements have
already been prepared by other bodies and
bytheCouncilinearlierdocuments,andour
statement must draw on these as
appropriate. These include:
the vision for Oxfordshire 2030,
prepared by the Oxfordshire
Partnership
the vision for Cherwell District
containedintheSustainableCommunity
Strategy and prepared by the Cherwell
Local Strategic Partnership
27 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
the draft vision for the LDF contained
in the Issues & Options paper in 2006
thedraftvisionfortheCoreStrategyin
February 2010
the draft vision for the Proposed
Submission Local Plan August 2012 and
Proposed Changes to the Proposed
Submission Local Plan March 2013
Oxfordshire Strategic Economic Plan
SouthEastMidlandsStrategicEconomic
Plan.
A.7In the light of these, our vision for
Cherwell District is as follows:
Our Vision for Cherwell District
A.8By 2031, Cherwell District will be an
areawhereallresidentsenjoyagoodquality
of life. It will be more prosperous than it is
today. Those who live and work here will
be happier, healthier and feel safer.
A.9For this to happen:
Wewilldevelopasustainableeconomy
that is vibrant and diverse with good
transportlinksandsoundinfrastructure,
supported by excellent educational
facilities. Our economy will grow to
provide more diverse employment for
our increasing population and reduce
the need for our residents to travel
outside the District for work.
We will maintain and improve the
vitalityofourtowncentresasaccessible
economic, cultural and social hubs,
offering improved leisure and shopping
facilities as well as a diverse and vibrant
evening economy.
We will support a stronger, sustainable
ruraleconomythatismorediverseand
notreliantentirelyonagriculture. Our
villages will be 'lived in' as well as 'slept
in'.
We will improve road, rail and public
transport links and provide increased
access to services and facilities to cater
for the needs of the District. In
particular, we will focus on measures
aimed at managing road congestion,
improving public transport and
improving access to town centres and
other shops and services.
We will build sustainable communities
byfacingthechallengesofagrowingand
an ageing population and ensuring that
thesettlementsofBanbury,Bicesterand
Kidlington, along with the rural areas
offer a high quality of life and meet the
needs of all sections of the population.
We will ensure that Cherwell can offer
its communities a range and choice of
good quality, market and affordable
housing.
We will ensure that by careful and
timely investment in our social and
physical infrastructure, people have
convenient access to health, education,
open space, sport and recreational
activities when they need it. We will
seek to address inequalities in health,
andaimtomaximisewell-being. Poverty
and social exclusion will be reduced.
We will cherish protect and enhance
our distinctive natural and built
environment and our rich historic
heritage. Cherwellwillmaintainitsrural
character where its landscapes, its vast
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 28Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
range of natural and built heritage and
its market towns define its
distinctiveness.
We will protect our natural resources,
embracing environmental technologies
andadaptingourbehaviourtomeetthe
global challenge of climate change. We
will promote the use of alternative
energy sources where appropriate and
reduce the impact of development on
the natural environment, including
seeking to minimise flood risk.
TheSpatialStrategyforCherwell
District
A.10Implementing the vision for Cherwell
District to 2031 will be through a spatial
strategywhichenablesustomakedecisions
about the direction and nature of
development.
A.11Our spatial strategy for Cherwell
District is as follows:
Most of the growth in the District will
be directed to locations within or
immediately adjoining the main towns
of Banbury and Bicester.
Bicester will continue to grow as
the main location for development
within the District within the
context of wider drivers for
growth.
Banbury will continue to grow,
albeit to a lesser extent than
Bicester, in accordance with its
statusasamarkettownwitharural
hinterland.
Away from the two towns, the major
single location for growth will be at the
formerRAFUpperHeyfordbasewhich
will deliver 2,361 homes.
Kidlington’scentrewillbestrengthened
anditsimportanteconomicrolewillbe
widened. Economic development will
be supported close to the airport and
nearbyatBegbrokeSciencePark. There
will be no strategic housing growth at
Kidlington but other housing
opportunities will be provided.
Growth across the rest of the District
willbemuchmorelimitedandwillfocus
on meeting local community and
business needs. It will be directed
towardsthelargerandmoresustainable
villages within the district which offer a
wider range of services and are well
connected to major urban areas,
particularly by public transport.
Development in the open countryside
will be strictly controlled. In the south
of the District, the Green Belt will be
maintained, though a small scale local
review of the Green Belt will be
conducted to accommodate identified
employmentneedsatKidlington. Inthe
northwestoftheDistrict,thesmallarea
lying within the Cotswolds Area of
OutstandingNaturalBeautywillsimilarly
be protected.
Getting There - Our Strategic
Objectives
A.12To achieve the vision we have set out
toaddressthekeyissuesthatCherwellfaces,
we have established a set of objectives for
ourthemesof developinga sustainablelocal
economy, building sustainable communities
andensuringsustainabledevelopment. These
objectives steer our policy making for the
29 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
Districtasawhole. Thesehavebeenformed
through discussions with partners such as
Oxfordshire County Council.
Challenges and Objectives for
Developing a Sustainable Local
Economy
A.13Cherwell is a relatively prosperous
area with some areas of deprivation. It has
highlevelsofemployment,highdependence
on manufacturing, a relatively low skills and
education base, and workplace earnings
below the regional level. There remains a
lack of diversity in the local economy.
Between 1998 and 2008 the level of
employment in manufacturing fell by 4% as
growth in other sectors occurred,
particularly in distribution, hotels and
restaurants. High employment rates were
maintained through this change but the
recent economic downturn has been
challenging.
A.14Cherwell'skeychallengestoachieving
a sustainable local economy are:
the'knowledgeeconomy'needstogrow
new employment sites are needed to
meet modern business needs
there is a need to make more efficient
use of existing employment areas by
prioritising the use of existing sites
improving our urban centres and
existingemploymentareastoretainand
attract business
thereisaneedtoadapttothechanging
rural economy and to provide more
employment opportunities and
potentiallysuitableemploymentsitesin
rural areas
relatively large numbers of people in
Cherwell are without qualifications and
basic skills; the level of education and
training needs to improve
pockets of multiple deprivation in the
District
the average weekly wage is lower than
the South East average
the claimant count rose, particularly in
Banbury, in 2009 as a result of the
economic downtown. In 2012 it was
about twice the level it was in 2008
insufficient diversity in the local
economy
overdependenceonadecliningnumber
of manufacturing jobs
the need to respond to a growing and
ageing population.
A.15The central theme of our Economic
Development Strategy (2011-2016) is the
creation of ‘economic resilience’ by
combiningtheresourcesoftheprivate,social
and public sector partners. The strategy
seeks to continuously develop our local
economytoensureitremainsinternationally
competitive, to enable the creation of jobs
and prosperity now and for the future and
to create a more diverse economy. It
highlights the unique opportunity arising
through the Bicester eco-town project and
recognises that the development of ‘green’
infrastructure,skillsandtechnologywillallow
Bicester and the wider District to become
more attractive for innovative business
investmentandthecreationof‘highervalue’
employment opportunities.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 30Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
A.16Leadership on developing a ‘Low
Carbon’ economy will involve the
development of ‘green technologies’ and
‘green knowledge’ around existing and new
employers, sectors and clusters. The
strategy seeks to support industry in
developing alternative energy sources and
maximising the opportunities within
engineering and construction to develop
practical solutions to mitigate the impact of
climatechangeandsecurecompetitive,green
business practice. This includes increasing
the capacity to design, build or upgrade
existing infrastructure so that it does not
contribute to climate change. It also means
protecting the environment and enhancing
bio-diversity which will help business
investment and visitors.
A.17The Sustainable Community Strategy
emphasises the need to develop a diverse
and resilient industrial base and an
appropriatelyskilledworkforce. Ithighlights
the importance of supporting people in
gainingtheskillsandflexibilitytoaccesslocal
jobs and of attracting new businesses into
the area which, in turn, will encourage our
younger population to stay or return.
Our Strategic Objectives for
Developing a Sustainable Local
Economy
SO 1To facilitate economic growth and
employment and a more diverse local
economywithanemphasisonattractingand
developing higher technology industries.
SO 2To support the diversification of
Cherwell's rural economy.
SO 3To help disadvantaged areas, support
an increase in skills and innovation, improve
the built environment and make Cherwell
more attractive to business by supporting
regeneration.SO 4To maintain and enhance the vitality,
viability, distinctiveness and safety of
Cherwell's urban centres.
SO 5To encourage sustainable tourism.
Challenges and Objectives for
BuildingSustainableCommunities
A.18The Sustainable Community Strategy
(SCS) states that communities within
Cherwell are generally harmonious and
healthy. Peoplelikewheretheyliveandhave
a strong allegiance to their town or village
butarenotnecessarilyattachedtoCherwell
as a whole. However, it emphasises that
rapid population growth and development
has diluted local identity and a sense of
belonging.
A.19The SCS highlights that support may
particularly be needed by young people,
older people, young families, people moving
into the area from outside the UK and
marginalised communities, for example
people with disabilities or from black and
minority ethnic backgrounds. It also points
out that villages are being challenged by an
erosion of the younger population, local
employment and services. Housing is
identified as a big concern for Cherwell,
particularlytheshortageofsocial/affordable
housing. Concernsarealsohighlightedabout
secondary education, rural isolation and
anti-social behaviour, especially in town
centres.
A.20Some of Cherwell's key economic
issues are also wider community issues: the
need to address multiple deprivation;
relatively large numbers of people without
qualifications and basic skills, and the need
to respond to a growing and ageing
population.
A.21Cherwell's other key challenges to
building sustainable communities are:
31 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
theneedtomakemarkethousingmore
affordable - Cherwell is the most
affordable District for housing in
Oxfordshire,butin2009medianhouse
prices were still over 78 times median
earnings
theneedtoprovidemorefamilyhousing
for newly forming households in rural
areas
the Council has been successful in the
prevention of homelessness but it
remains important to ensure an
adequate supply of new housing for
vulnerable households
the need to meet the requirements of
a relatively young population,
particularly those aged 0 to 15 in urban
areas
meeting the needs of an ageing
populationandthosewithspecialneeds
child well-being in Cherwell which is
well below the other rural districts in
Oxfordshire
rates of claimants of health-related
benefits in Cherwell are above the
average for Oxfordshire but below the
South East average with the exception
ofAttendanceAllowancewhichisabove
the county and regional average.
the need to improve educational
attainment
the level of adult obesity is above the
levels in other Oxfordshire districts
the percentage of Cherwell residents
participating in sport and active
recreation is below other rural
Oxfordshiredistrictsbutaboveregional
and national averages
theneedtoconsidertheimplicationsof
low population growth (and potential
depopulation) in Kidlington
the need to protect and enhance the
identityofCherwell'stownsandvillages,
to maintain or create a sense of
belonging and improve social cohesion
ensuring that the needs of a diverse
Cherwell population are met, for
example Cherwell has a relatively large
Indian and Pakistani population
compared to other rural districts in
Oxfordshire
alackofaffordablehousingandtheneed
to increase the proportion of the
housing stock that comprises social
housing.
A.22The community priorities of the
Sustainable Community Strategy include
creating safe, strong and vibrant
communities, reducing inequality and
addressing deprivation and adapting to an
ageing population. It aims for thriving
communities where everyone, regardless of
their personal circumstances, feels safe in
their homes and welcome in their
neighbourhoods, where older people are
abletoliveindependentlyandwhereyounger
people have skills, opportunities and high
aspirations.
Our Strategic Objectives for
BuildingSustainableCommunities
SO 6To accommodate new development
so that it maintains or enhances the local
identity of Cherwell's settlements and the
functions they perform.
SO 7To meet the housing needs of all
sections of Cherwell's communities,
particularly the need to house an ageing
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 32Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
population and to meet the identified needs
of Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling
Showpeople, in a way that creates
sustainable,inclusiveandmixedcommunities.
SO8Toimprovetheaffordabilityofhousing
inCherwellandtoprovidesocialrentedand
intermediate housing to meet identified
needswhilstensuringtheviabilityofhousing
development and a reliable supply of new
homes.
SO 9To improve the availability of housing
to newly forming households in rural areas.
SO10Toprovidesufficientaccessible,good
quality services, facilities and infrastructure
including green infrastructure, to meet
health, education, transport, open space,
sport, recreation, cultural, social and other
community needs, reducing social exclusion
andpoverty,addressinginequalitiesinhealth,
and maximising well-being.
Challenges and Objectives for
Ensuring Sustainable
Development
A.23Like many areas in the South East,
Cherwell has seen rapid post-war
development. In terms of population,
Banbury is over twice the size it was in
1951. Bicester is seven times the size. The
constructionoftheM40motorwaythrough
the District in the early 1990s had an
enormousimpactontheeconomicattraction
of Cherwell and on relieving traffic
congestion, but has also brought negative
changeintermsoftheamountoftrafficthat
travels through the District and with regard
to the impact on the landscape and on air
quality.
A.24A relatively high level of growth is
expected to continue in Cherwell which
places pressure on Cherwell's natural
resources, on maintaining the quality of itsbuiltandnaturalenvironment,onmaintaining
and enhancing its biodiversity, and on
ensuring that Cherwell is an attractive place
to live and work. Climate change and the
needtomanageresourcessuchaswaterand
waste more responsibly compound these
long-standing existing environmental
challenges and are creating new issues such
as the need to reduce carbon dioxide
emissions.
A.25Cherwell's key challenges to ensuring
sustainable development are:
There is a need to maximise the
opportunitiestosignificantlycutcarbon
emissions. Althoughcomparedtoother
'significant rural' districts, Cherwell has
lower domestic carbon dioxide
emissions per person, it has higher
overall emissions per person due to
more emissions from industrial and
commercial activity.
A need to consider the effects of
development on air quality, including in
relation to Air Quality Management
Areas (AQMAs) in Cherwell, and how
development proposals can contribute
towards improvements.
A need to ensure that contamination is
addressed effectively on sites through
re-development.
There is a need to maximise
opportunities for the use of renewable
energy, efficient buildings and for using
resources such as energy and water
more efficiently.
There is a need to reduce dependence
on travel by car and to manage traffic
congestion - between 1981 and 2001
the number of cars in Cherwell
increased by over 34,700 (97%), over
doublethegrowthinhouseholds(46%);
33 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
residents in our rural areas are
particularlydependentontheircarsand
congestion hotspots include Junction 9
of the M40, on the A34, in the centres
of Banbury, Bicester and Kidlington at
peak times and in villageswith schools.
CommutersinCherwelltravelrelatively
long distances to work.
Maximise the opportunity to shift
dependencefromthecartosustainable
modes of transport.
Cherwell is ranked very poorly on a
national measure of geographical
accessibility of services.
WaterresourcesinCherwellarelimited
andneedswillcontinuetobemetfrom
outside the Cherwell catchment area.
Cherwell'srivershavebeenconsistently
assessed as poorer in chemical quality
than rivers in other districts in
Oxfordshire.
There is a need for a leap forward in
sustainable design and construction in
Cherwell.
There is a need to improve the quality
ofourbuiltupenvironmentsandurban
areas, to ensure that new development
maintains or increases their
distinctiveness and to improve the
functioning of our towns and villages.
Cherwell's biodiversity needs to be
protected and enhanced and measures
need to be taken to ensureit is capable
ofadaptingtoachangingclimate.There
is need to support the management of
existingwoodlandsandwildlifesitesand
to identify new wildlife sites. The
reduction in nesting and roosting sites
is a particular concern.
A need to cherish, preserve and
enhanceourdistinctivenaturalandbuilt
environment and our rich historic
heritage including listed buildings and
conservation areas. There is a need to
improve the built up environments of
our urban areas, to ensure that new
development maintains or increases
distinctiveness and improves the
functioning of our town and villages.
Cherwell households have the lowest
accesstonaturalgreenspaceacrossthe
whole of the South East; 72% of
householdsmeetnoneoftheAccessible
GreenSpacerequirements-areflection
ofthelownumberofcountryparksand
areas of common land in the District.
A.26Cherwell'sEnvironmentalStrategyfor
a Changing Climate (2008) highlights the
commonneedtoimproveenergyefficiency,
reduce carbon emissions, encourage the
take-upoflowcarbonandrenewableenergy
technologies, and reduce the need to travel
andprovidegoodaccesstopublicandother
sustainablemodesoftransport. Itnotesthe
need to conserve water, to minimise flood
risk, and to be resilient to the impacts of
climate change.
A.27Minimising pollution, protecting and
enhancing wildlife habitats, conserving
cultural heritage and natural resources and
minimising waste and maximising recycling
are also highlighted as priority areas. These
aims reflect the environmental objectives of
the Sustainable Community Strategy.
Our Strategic Objectives for
Ensuring Sustainable
Development
SO 11To incorporate the principles of
sustainable development in mitigating and
adaptingtoclimatechangeimpactsincluding
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 34Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
increasing local resource efficiency
(particularly water efficiency), minimising
carbon emissions, promoting decentralised
andrenewableorlowcarbonenergywhere
appropriate and ensuring that the risk of
flooding is not increased.
SO 12To focus development in Cherwell's
sustainable locations, making efficient and
effective use of land, conserving and
enhancingthecountrysideandlandscapeand
the setting of its towns and villages.
SO 13To reduce the dependency on the
private car as a mode of travel, increase the
attractionofandopportunitiesfortravelling
by public transport, cycle and on foot, and
to ensure high standards of accessibility to
services for people with impaired mobility.
SO 14 To create more sustainable
communitiesbyprovidinghighquality,locally
distinctive and well designed environments
which increase the attractiveness of
Cherwell's towns and villages as places to
live and work and which contribute to the
well-being of residents.
SO 15To protect and enhance the historic
andnaturalenvironmentandCherwell'score
assets, including protecting and enhancing
cultural heritage assets and archaeology,
maximising opportunities for improving
biodiversityandminimisingpollutioninurban
and rural areas.
Presumption in Favour of
Sustainable Development
A.28The principles of 'sustainable
development' are central to the planning
system. The NPPF (paragraphs 11-16) sets
out what is meant by the 'presumption infavour of sustainable development' and
recommends that Policies in the Local Plan
should follow this presumption.
A.29The Framework recognises that
sustainabledevelopmentisaboutchangefor
the better. It is about positive growth,
making economic, environmental and social
progressforthisandfuturegenerations. To
achievesustainabledevelopment,economic,
social and environmental gains should be
soughtjointly. Theyaremutuallydependent.
A.30InlinewithGovernmentpolicyadvice,
theCouncilhasadoptedapositiveapproach
in seeking to meet the objectively assessed
development needs of the District. The
policies in the Local Plan provide a clear
framework to guide development that
creates positive, sustainable growth,
therefore following the presumption in
favour of sustainable development, enabling
proposals that accord with the Plan
objectives to be approved without delay.
This policy is therefore at the heart of
decision making when assessing planning
applications.
A.31TheremaybeinstanceswherethePlan
is silent or in future years, policies become
out of date. To enable the Council to
continue to take a sustainably positive
approach to decision making, the applicant
will need to assistby submittingevidenceto
demonstrate how the benefits of the
proposal outweigh any adverse impacts.
A.32The challenge here is to reconcile the
need to deliver sufficient jobs and homes,
supported by appropriate infrastructure to
meet Cherwell’s needs, whilst conserving
thenaturalandbuiltenvironment,minimising
the need to travel and addressing climate
change.
35 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
Policy PSD 1: Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development
When considering development proposals the Council will take a proactive
approach to reflect the presumption in favour of sustainable development
containedintheNationalPlanningPolicyFramework. TheCouncilwillalways
work proactively with applicants to jointly find solutions which mean that
proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development
thatimprovestheeconomic,socialandenvironmentalconditionsinthearea.
PlanningapplicationsthataccordwiththepoliciesinthisLocalPlan(orother
partofthestatutoryDevelopmentPlan)willbeapprovedwithoutdelayunless
material considerations indicate otherwise.
Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant policies
areoutofdateatthetimeofmakingthedecisionthentheCouncilwillgrant
permission unless material considerations indicate otherwise – taking into
account whether:
any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and
demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies
in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as a whole; or
specific policies in the Framework indicate that development should be
restricted.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 36Section A - Strategy for Development in Cherwell
Section B - Policies for
Development in Cherwell
B.1 Theme One: Policies for
Developing a Sustainable Local
Economy
Introduction
B.1This Plan aims to support sustainable
economic growth in the District. Creating
a broad ranging, diverse and resilient
economy is also a key ambition of the
Cherwell Sustainable Community Strategy.
B.2Increasingtheeconomiccompetitiveness
of Cherwell District is fundamental to
providing employment opportunities to
reduce the level of out commuting as well
as reducing traffic congestion in the District
and in neighbouring Districts and so shifting
to a more locally self sufficient, sustainableeconomy. As the cost of travel continues
toincrease,makingcommutinglessviable,it
will be important to provide employment
opportunities within the District. A broad
balance will also need to be maintained
between labour supply and jobs.
B.3However, improving Cherwell's
economic future requires more than
providing land and infrastructure. It also
requires consideration of how we manage
and reduce the environmental impact of
proposed development and to ensure it is
of sufficient quality and in keeping with the
landscapeandexistingurbancharacterofthe
District.
B.4Protecting the role and function of our
existingtowncentresandemploymentareas,
as well as enhancing our natural and built
environment, will enable Cherwell to
become as business-friendly as possible in
support of jobs and prosperity. Improving
our town centres will also encourage
tourism.
B.5By working with our private sector
partners we will take advantage of the
locationaladvantagestheDistrictenjoys,the
high economic activity level, the skills
availableandtheclustersofspecialistactivity
such as advanced engineering. We will
support jobs-led economic growth and
commercial investment that helps move the
District towards a globally-competitive,
lower carbon/green economy.
B.6As Bicester lies at the heart of the
Oxford – Cambridge technology corridor,
and as Banbury has a strong manufacturing
base and close links to the Motorsport
sector, we are looking to strengthen the
District’s profile with Performance
Engineering and will support investment
made in the District in premises for new
technology innovation.
37 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.7Wewillencourageinvestmentinhi-tech
industries at new sites in Bicester and
supportscienceandinnovationatKidlington
tocreateacriticalmassofhightechresearch
investment in this part of the District. This
will enable the resources of Oxford
University’s Begbroke Science Park to
connectwithlocalbusinesses,strengthening
technology transfer to both nurture
enterprise and draw investment into the
District.
B.8We will support limited new
employment development in the rural areas
to help strengthen the rural economy and
increase employment opportunities
throughout the District.
B.9Our Economic Development Strategy
(2011–2016) identified the following:
levelsofemploymentarerelativelyhigh
but not everybody is benefiting
we have increasingly relied upon public
sector jobs which are set to reduce in
number
theskillbaseoftheDistrictneedstobe
widened
there remain pockets of deprivation
within our overall prosperity
we have a diverse economy but often
with ‘lower value’ activitysimilarto the
south Midlands
manufacturing is a particular strength
but is often lower skilled locally
theknowledgeeconomyisgrowing,but
not quickly enough.B.10Unemployment has increased in
Cherwell, particularly in Banbury, since the
start of the recession and employment in
Cherwellgrewmoreslowlythanthenational
average in the same time period.
B.11Eventhoughunemploymentisnothigh
comparedtootherpartsofthecountry,this
needs to be addressed and is a focus of this
Plan.
B.12Cherwell has experienced lower
growth than some surrounding areas
including locations such as Milton Keynes
andWarwick. Thismaybeduetoashortage
in skills in some areas. However nationally,
in terms of competitiveness, it is ranked 62
out of 379 local authorities. Overall the
levelsofeconomicactivityarehigh,with82%
of the working age population economically
active.
B.1341% of employment in the District is
located in Banbury, 20% in Bicester, 14% in
Kidlingtonand25%intheruralareas. Upper
Heyford is a former RAF base which has
consent for over 1,000 dwellings (including
the existing homes) but which also has just
under 1,000 jobs already located within the
existingbuildingswithmoretocomeaspart
of the site's redevelopment. As such it is
one of the larger employment locations
within Cherwell and provides a good range
of jobs and premises from engineering and
scientific activities to specialist storage
activities.
B.14The population in Cherwell is highly
skilled, however the levels of educational
attainment are low in some areas. It will be
important to ensure that the population is
sufficiently skilled to attract companies and
investment to Cherwell. We will support
proposalstostrengthentheskillsbaseofthe
local economy through new facilities aiming
to strengthen training and skills within the
District. The planned investment in
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 38Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
education (e.g. the University Technology
College at Bicester) and skills will drive
business growth, enhance the economy and
improve our quality of life in the long term.
Projects such as Brighter Futures and the
Bretch Hill Regeneration Area identified in
this Plan (Policy Banbury 10) will assist in
improving skills. There will also need to be:
promotion of local training providers, an
improvement of the relationships between
companies and schools, colleges and the
Universities and continuation of initiatives
such as the Council’s ‘Job Club’. Existing
partnershipssuchasBicesterVisionandthe
M40Investmentpartnershipshouldcontinue
to make this their priority.
B.15Cherwell has excellent transport links
with the M40 and a number of railway lines
runningthroughtheDistrict,someofwhich
have recently been upgraded or are the
subject of planned investment. Bus services
are also good in most areas of the District.
B.16Cherwell has a high proportion of
employment in industrial sectors, logistics
and retail and these contribute towards the
local economy; but in order to be globally
competitive and create a lower carbon
economy more jobs are needed in the
knowledge based sector. Wages are also
relatively low in Cherwell and despite living
costs being lower than many places in the
South East, this means that there is less
disposable income available for spending in
the local area. An increase in jobs in the
knowledge based sector will help improve
this. Jobs in manufacturing are also at
greatest risk from overseas competition
where operating costs are much lower.
B.17Homeworking is increasing in the
District but is slightly lower than the South
Eastaverage. Superfastbroadbandprovision
willbesoughtasastandarditemwithinnew
housing and commercial development to
support home working and new enterprisethroughout the District, including in rural
communities. Wewillsupportdevelopment
proposals to enable working from home
where appropriate. We will work with
suppliers to encourage the provision of
superfast broadband across the District.
Homeandflexibleworkingreducestheneed
to travel, reducing travel impacts and
congestion.
B.18As with many similar areas, the age
profile of Cherwell is projected to continue
tobecomeolder. Thisisatrendthatshould
be recognised as it may lead to a lack of
labour supply. However a large proportion
of the population is aged between 60 and
70. With the changes in retirement age, a
reduction in pensions and the current
economicclimateitislikelythatasignificant
proportion of people will continue to work
into their late 60’s and 70’s. This group will
need to be taken into account as a labour
resource and it will be important that life
long learning is provided so this group has
the skills required to support the economic
vision in this Plan.
B.19Increasing labour supply could be
achievedbyallocatingsignificantlymoreland
for housing but this is likely to have
significant and unacceptable environmental
effects. Building the right type of housing,
suchasfamilyhousing,tomaintainaworking
age population will however will be
important.
B.20Banbury is the most self contained
settlement in Cherwell but there are over
3,000 more people leaving the District for
workeachdaythanenteringit. TheCouncil
willattemptto‘reclaim’out-commutersand
provide jobs for local people by providing
opportunities in a wider range of
employment sectors.
39 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.21ToassistinachievinggrowthCherwell
has to increase ‘capital in use’ and ‘total
factor productivity’ collectively known as
labour productivity. This means developing
andgrowingitseconomybyimprovingskills
toenableanincreaseinproductivejobswith
higher wages.
B.22The provision of a sufficient number
andvarietyofavailableemploymentsitesand
the formation of planning policies which
allow employment generating development
to come forward in sustainable locations is
critical to enabling existing companies to
grow and to provide for new company
formation. Employment sites are also
needed in order to respond to inward
investment including the planned
electrificationoftherailway,newroutesand
stations in the District.
B.23The Council belongs to two Local
Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) (which are
formedbylocalgovernmentandbusinesses)
whichwillbeimportantforsecuringfunding
and in the implementation of projects. In
the Budget of 2011 the government
announceditwouldcreateEnterpriseZones
across the country which provide for tax
incentives for businesses and ‘relaxed’
planningregulations. EnterpriseZoneshave
been awarded to, and are being driven by,
Local Enterprise Partnerships. There are
currentlynoEnterpriseZonesintheDistrict
but the Plan provides sufficient employment
land and flexible policies to allow business
to grow.
B.24The NPPF (2012) promotes the role
ofplanninginachievingsustainableeconomic
growth, in building a strong, responsive and
competitive economy, and by ensuring that
sufficient land of the right type, and in the
right places, is available to allow growth and
innovation.B.25In 2006 the Council prepared an
EmploymentLandReview(ELR). Thisstudy
sought to assess the quantity, quality and
viability of employment land across the
District. It assessed employment land that
was at that time currently available and the
needforfurtheremploymentlandwithinthe
District over the period of the Local Plan.
B.26The ELR concluded that the District
had a stock of premises and land that
provides a broad range of choice for
investors. It recommended that some 89
hectares of available employment land be
protected to provide a continuity of supply
of sites.
B.27The forecasting and scenario exercise
in the 2012 ELR shows a net additional
demandforbetween52.6and87.2hectares
of employment land across Cherwell to
2026, with the medium growth scenario
(seenasthemostlikelytooccur)predicting
anetadditionaldemandofapproximately70
ha. Extendingthisto2031resultsindemand
for approximately 85 hectares.
B.28A further analysis of the economy of
theDistrictandthechangesitisexperiencing
wasconductedin2012(CherwellEconomic
Analysis Study) and updated in 2014 in an
addendum. Table 33 of the Oxfordshire
SHMA sets out a projected growth in jobs
of 1,155 per annum and 1,142 homes per
annumunderthe‘plannedeconomicgrowth’
forecast. Table 34 shows a total of 23,091
jobs generated under this scenario. The
SHMAEconomicForecastingreportonpage
40 considers the proportion of total jobs
generated(includingindirectjobs)thatwould
require B use class employment land. It is
estimated that only 12,700 jobs will be
located on B Use class land in Cherwell
(table 6.2). The Submission Local Plan
(January 2014) identified land for
approximately 15,000 jobs and the
consultants show at paragraph 6.6 of the
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 40Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
SHMA Economic Forecasting Report that
the forecast growth in the Economic
ForecastingReportcouldbeaccommodated
on land identified for development in
Cherwell’s Local Plan (January 2014). The
addendum takes into account the new
housingnumbersforCherwellsetoutinthe
Oxfordshire SHMA, on which this Plan is
based,andthe'committedeconomicgrowth
scenario' they relate to. It also reflects any
othersignificantchangesthathaveoccurred
since publication of the 2012 report and
informs a consistent broad alignment of
policies on jobs and housing for the Local
Plan including in relation to sub-areas. The
2014 Economic Analysis Study addendum
identifies a need for just over 100 hectares
of employment land to 2031.
B.29A number of the strategic objectives
of this Local Plan focus on supporting the
local economy and fostering economic
growth. These include objectives to:
facilitate economic growth and a more
diverse economy with an emphasis on
attracting higher technology industries
supportthediversificationofCherwell’s
rural economy
help disadvantaged areas, improve the
quality of the built environment and
make Cherwell more attractive to
business by supporting regeneration
improve the local skills base.
B.30Thesupportforbusinessandeconomic
developmentthattheLocalPlanhasadopted
is based on a strategic direction that gives
focus to our efforts. We are looking to
secure:
business-friendly and well-functioning
towns
aneco-innovationhubalongtheOxford
– Cambridge technology corridor
internationally connected and export
driven economic growth
investment in people to grow skills and
the local workforce
vibrant, creative and attractive market
towns
family housing
measurestoreclaimcommuterswhere
possible
measures to increase labour
productivity.
B.31In terms of the type of employment
development the District wants to attract
and we will concentrate on:
advanced manufacturing/high
performance engineering
the Green Economy
innovation, research and development
retailing
consumer services.
B.32We will support the logistics sector,
recognisingthejobsitprovidesandthegood
transport links that attracts this sector.
However a high quality design will be
expected. The significant amount of house
buildingplannedfortheDistrictwillalsolead
to potential construction jobs (including in
associated sectors) for local people.
41 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.33Significant employment growth at
Bicester will be encouraged and we will:
encourage green technology and the
knowledge based sectors, exploiting its
position in the Oxford/Cambridge
Corridor
exploit its transport connections
utilise the Ex-MoD land and facilitate
the establishment of a modern logistics
hub for the MoD
maintain and increase the motorsport
industry and other performance
engineering
createnewopportunitiesforadditional
retail,leisureandculturalactivitiesinan
extended town centre
encourage retailers and visitors to
Bicester Town Centre
continue to promote and expand
Bicester Village where complementary
to improving the town centre
encourage high tech companies
encourage higher value distribution
companies
improve its utilities infrastructure
improve its sustainability and self
sufficiency.
B.34There will be moderate employment
growth at Banbury and we will:
buildonitsmanufacturingbaseensuring
‘high end’ manufacturing is encouraged
exploit its transport connections
maintain and increase the motorsport
industry and other performance
engineering
maintain its sustainability and self
sufficiency
expand the retail heart of the town
encouragethe tourismindustryaround
the canal and historic town centre
encourage green technology and the
knowledge based sectors
encourage high tech companies
encourage higher value distribution
companies
support its strong food production
sector.
B.35There will be small scale employment
growth at Kidlington and we will:
exploit its position in the
Oxford/Cambridge Corridor
allow for appropriate growth plans at
Begbroke Science Park and in the
vicinity of Langford Lane Industrial
EstatefollowingasmallscaleGreenBelt
review
connect with the Oxford economy
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 42Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
createnewopportunitiesforadditional
retail,leisureandculturalactivities,and
environmental improvements, in an
extended Village Centre
secure the growth potential from the
presence of London-Oxford Airport.
B.36Employment growth in the rural areas
will be limited and will involve:
farm diversification schemes
small scale, appropriate employment
sites
sustainable growth in tourism including
recreation based tourism
improvement of existing employment
sites and reuse of existing buildings and
brownfieldsites(reflectingtheirhistoric
or cultural significance where
appropriate)
support for working from home.
B.37More detail is provided in Section C
‘Policies for Cherwell's Places’.
Policy SLE 1: Employment
Development
B.38TheCouncilwill,asageneralprinciple,
continue to protect existing employment
land and buildings for employment (B class)
uses. The Council will support existing
businesses and will seek to ensure their
operational activity is not compromised
wherever possible. Inevitably, over the
period of the Local Plan, businesses will
relocate or close, leaving land and premises
available for re-use or re-development.
B.39Whereexistingemploymentsiteshave
goodtransportlinksforcommercialvehicles
and the proposeduse of these sites accords
with the Local Plan we will encourage new
developmentheretoensuretheefficientuse
of land on these sites and in our towns,
avoiding the need to use valuable
countryside. This will not always meet the
needs of some companies so new sites will
be required.
B.40We will create new employment sites
forcommerceandengineering/manufacturing
to meet the needs of existing and new
companies. We will also actively promote
those sites for inward investment.
B.41Topromotegrowthwehaveallocated
an increase in the amount of employment
land in the District. This is focused more at
Bicester in order to match the growth in
housingandmakethetownmoresustainable.
B.42A flexible approach to employment
development is set out in this Plan with a
number of our strategic sites allocated for a
mix of uses and many allowing for different
types of employment. Employment
development will be supported in a number
oflocationsaslongasitmeetscertainpolicy
criteria. In all cases very careful
consideration should be given to locating
employment and housing in close proximity
and unacceptable adverse effects on the
43 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
amenity of residential properties will not be
permitted. Live/work units will be
encouraged in locations such as Banbury
Canalside.
B.43ThisLocalPlanidentifiesstrategicsites
foremploymentuseinBanburyandBicester
(see‘PolicyBicester1:NorthWestBicester’,
‘Policy Bicester 2: Graven Hill’, ‘Policy
Bicester 4: Bicester Business Park’, ‘Policy
Bicester 10: Bicester Gateway’, ‘Policy
Bicester11:EmploymentLandatNorthEast
Bicester’, ‘Policy Bicester 12: South East
Bicester’, ‘Policy Banbury 6: Employment
Land West of the M40’ and ‘Policy Banbury
15:EmploymentLandNorthEastofJunction
11’). A number of these sites have recent
planning permissions and are under
construction. The former RAF Upper
Heyford site will also provide for
employmentuses. Thesitesidentifiedinthe
Employment Trajectory in the Local Plan
cover 200 hectares (gross) and result in
approximately 20,500 jobs generated on B
Useclassland. Theremaybeaslightchange
in jobs on sites due to site constraints such
as flood risk and differing B use class mixes,
which will be determined at the master
planning stage. Further jobs will be
generated generally through other means
suchretailandhomeworking. Policiesseek
different types of employment units to
ensure a range of employment uses are
provided. Land is allocated taking account
ofeconomicevidencebase,matchinggrowth
inhousingandtocaterforcompanydemand,
particularly for logistics. The Council’s
assessment of and strategies for housing,
employment and other uses are integrated,
andtakefull accountofrelevantmarketand
economic signals.
B.44To ensure employment is located in
sustainablelocations,toavoidproblemssuch
as traffic on rural roads and commuting,
employment development in the rural areas
will be limited. This accords with theCouncil’s strategy for focusing new housing
development at Banbury and Bicester,
ensuring housing and employment are
located in the same place.
B.45The new strategic employment sites
set out in Section C ‘Policies for Cherwell's
Places’ have been allocated because they:
are, or will be accessibleto the existing
and proposed labour supply
have good access, or can be made to
have good access, by public transport
havegoodaccessandtransportlinksfor
commercial vehicles
have the least effect on the natural
environment.
B.46The new allocated employment sites
in Banbury and Bicester along with existing
employment sites are considered to ensure
a sufficient employment land supply.
B.47The Local Plan Part 2 will consider
where further, smaller, allocations need to
be made in the urban and rural areas to
support the delivery of a flexible supply of
employment land. Where new small sites
are proposed we will consider the most
appropriate use class for the location.
Opportunities for developing small 'hubs' of
activitytomeetlocalneedswillbeexplored.
New employment uses will be supported
whereappropriateinresidentialareas,where
they are proposed on existing employment
sites. Employment development will be
focused at the more sustainable villages.
These villages are also considered to be the
most appropriate for any further
employment development.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 44Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.48Policy SLE 1 applies to B use class
employment development. The provision
or the loss of jobs in general terms will be a
material consideration for determining
proposals for any use classes. The policy
applies to sites which have planning
permission for employment uses. Whereanyallocatedorcommittedemploymentsites
in the District remain undeveloped in the
long term and there is no reasonable
prospect of the site being used for that
purpose other uses will be considered.
PolicySLE2willapplyforproposalsformain
town centre uses.
Policy SLE 1: Employment Development
EmploymentdevelopmentonnewsitesallocatedinthisPlanwillbethetype
of employment development specified within each site policy in Section C
‘PoliciesforCherwell'sPlaces’. Othertypesofemploymentdevelopment(B
Useclass)willbeconsideredinconjunctionwiththeuse(s)setoutifitmakes
the site viable.
In cases where planning permission is required existing employment sites
shouldberetainedforemploymentuseunlessthefollowingcriteriaaremet:
the applicant can demonstrate that an employment use should not be
retained, including showing the site has been marketed and has been
vacant in the long term.
the applicant can demonstrate that there are valid reasons why the use
ofthesitefortheexistingoranotheremploymentuseisnoteconomically
viable.
theapplicantcandemonstratethattheproposalwouldnothavetheeffect
of limiting the amount of land available for employment.
Regard will be had to whether the location and nature of the present
employment activity has an unacceptable adverse impact upon adjacent
residential uses.
Regard will be had to whether the applicant can demonstrate that there are
other planning objectives that would outweigh the value of retaining the site
in an employment use.
Employmentdevelopmentwillbefocusedonexistingemploymentsites. On
existing operational or vacant employment sites at Banbury, Bicester,
Kidlington and in the rural areas employment development, including
intensification,willbepermittedsubjecttocompliancewithotherpoliciesin
the Plan and other material considerations. New dwellings will not be
permitted within employment sites except where this is in accordance with
specific site proposals set out in this Local Plan.
45 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
EmploymentproposalsatBanbury,BicesterandKidlingtonwillbesupported
if they meet the following criteria:
Arewithinthebuiltuplimitsofthesettlementunlessonanallocatedsite
TheywillbeoutsideoftheGreenBelt,unlessveryspecialcircumstances
can be demonstrated
Make efficient use of previously-developed land wherever possible
Makeefficientuseofexistingandunderusedsitesandpremisesincreasing
the intensity of use on sites
Havegoodaccess,orcanbemadetohavegoodaccess,bypublictransport
and other sustainable modes
Meet high design standards, using sustainable construction, are of an
appropriate scale and respect the character of its surroundings
Do not have an adverse effect on surrounding land uses, residents and
the historic and natural environment.
Unless exceptional circumstances are demonstrated, employment
development in the rural areas should be located within or on the edge of
those villages in Category A (see Policy Villages 1).
New employment proposals within rural areas on non-allocated sites will be
supported if they meet the following criteria:
TheywillbeoutsideoftheGreenBelt,unlessveryspecialcircumstances
can be demonstrated.
Sufficient justification is provided to demonstrate why the development
should be located in the rural area on a non-allocated site.
They will be designed to very high standards using sustainable
construction, and be of an appropriate scale and respect the character
of villages and the surroundings.
They will be small scale unless it can be demonstrated that there will be
nosignificantadverseimpactsonthecharacterofavillageorsurrounding
environment.
The proposal and any associated employment activities can be carried
outwithoutunduedetrimenttoresidentialamenity,thehighwaynetwork,
village character and its setting, the appearance and character of the
landscape and the environment generally including on any designated
buildings or features (or on any non-designated buildings or features of
local importance).
The proposal will not give rise to excessive or inappropriate traffic and
willwhereverpossiblecontributetothegeneralaimofreducingtheneed
to travel by private car.
There are no suitable available plots or premises within existing nearby
employment sites in the rural areas.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 46Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
The Local Plan has an urban focus. With the potential for increased travel
by private car by workers and other environmental impacts, justification for
employment development on new sites in the rural areas will need to be
provided. This should include an applicant demonstrating a need for and
benefits of employment in the particular location proposed and explaining
why the proposed development should not be located at the towns, close to
the proposed labour supply.
Monitoring and review will be undertaken regularly.
Extensions to existing employment sites will be considered in the Local Plan
Part 2.
Policy SLE 2: Securing Dynamic
Town Centres
B.49WearelookingtoensurethatBicester
and Banbury have a strengthened role in
achievingeconomicgrowth,asadestination
for visitors, and in serving their rural
hinterlands.
B.50Wearedeterminedtosecuredynamic
town centres as the focus for commercial,
retailandculturalactivityattheheartofour
District. The renewal and strengthening of
the town centres is critical if the towns are
to expand, with the creation of new retail,
commercial and other employment
generation(suchasleisure)thatreducestheoveralllevelofout-commutingandmaintains
their role as the focal points of the District
economyandtheirhistoricroleastheheart
of the community.
B.51We envisage town centres that are:
easy and pleasant to walk around
attractive for shopping and going out
easy to do business in
have housing for all ages
served by efficient public transport.
B.52Theincreasingrationalisationofpublic
assets(libraries,civiccentres&publicaccess
points),isanopportunitytoensuremultiple
use of public sector buildings and so
strengthen their role as a draw to secure
additional footfall into the town centres.
B.53In 2010 the Council commissioned an
updatetoits2006PPS6RetailStudy. In2012
a further study was commissioned which
examines the capacity for comparison and
convenienceretailfloorspaceintheDistrict.
The study identified a need for comparison
47 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
and convenience floorspace in the District
to2031. ThetowncentresofbothBanbury
and Bicester will therefore need to grow.
Sites have been identified in Banbury to
accommodategrowth. Newretailwillform
part of proposals for Bolton Road
Development Area, Canalside and Spiceball
Development Area and in Bicester towards
theimprovedBicesterVillageRailwayStation
and through an expanded Bicester Village,
which will be integrated more fully into the
town (‘Policy Banbury 7: Strengthening
Banbury Town Centre’ and ‘Policy Bicester
5: Strengthening Bicester Town Centre’).
B.54Wewillsupportbusinessesaffectedby
theredevelopmentofstrategicdevelopment
areas by assisting their relocation and
ensuring alternative land is available locally
elsewhere.
B.55New retail development will continue
to be focused in our town centres and all
new development will also be required to
bebuilttohighdesignandbuildingstandards.
B.56Town centre uses are considered to
be the ‘Main Town Centre Uses’ defined by
the NPPF including: retail, leisure, offices,
arts, tourism, cultural and community uses.
We will support the role that new
restaurants and cafes have in the economy,
of both towns in drawing people into the
town centre. We will aim to attract new
smallbusinessesandtostrengthenthedraw
of the town at the centre of its local
hinterland. We will support uses which
supporttheeveningeconomyinappropriate
locations.
B.57The urban centres within the District
offer an important focus for shopping,
commerce and the provision of leisure and
other services to meet the needs of local
peopleandvisitors. Themaincentresinthe
DistrictarethetowncentresofBanburyandBicesterandthevillagecentreofKidlington.
There is also other significant shopping
floorspace in the following locations:
Banbury Cross Retail Park
various other edge of centre &
out-of-centre large stores including a
number of major food stores
at various local centres within Banbury
and Bicester.
B.58In addition to the more traditional
retail parks, food stores and local centres,
Bicester Village Outlet centre shopping
centreisrecognisedasprovidingaspecialist
role which complements the town centre.
As the District’s most visited tourist
destination, Bicester Village serves both
national and international catchments and
makes a significant contribution to the local
economy. The Council supports the
expansionofBicesterVillage,tocomplement,
and help to improve connectivity with, the
existing town centre.
B.59As well as serving the population of
their immediate communities and more
widely within Cherwell District, the retail
centres serve a wider population and draw
trade from towns such as Southam,
Daventry, Towcester, Buckingham, Witney,
Chipping Norton and Shipston-on-Stour.
B.60Each of the main urban centres within
the District is unique and faces different
challenges and opportunities. More
information,and specific policies for each of
the centres, is included within Section C
(PoliciesBicester5,Banbury7andKidlington
2). A number of general comments can,
however, be made:
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 48Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
BothBanburyandBicestertowncentres
lie at the heart of towns which have
grown significantly in recent years and,
which through the period of this Local
Plan, will continue to do so.
Banbury has seen significant retail
growth since the mid 1990s with the
expansionof the CastleQuayShopping
Centre and this has helped to meet its
immediate shopping needs. There are
opportunities to expand its retail role.
Bicester town centre has seen less
growth. However,there-development
of the Bure Place car park has begun to
provide a substantial increase in
shopping within the town centre (see
PolicyBicester6). Awayfromthetown
centre, the Bicester Village Outlet
Shopping Centre was opened in 1995
and extended in 2000 and 2008.
Bicester Avenue opened in 2007.
Further developments in the town
centrewillneedtoensurethatthetown
remains accessible by all forms of
transport for residents and visitors.
Further growth at Bicester Village will
also ensure its role as a major nationaland international retail draw continues
withalltheemploymentgainthisbrings
to the town. It must, however, be
integrated into an improved town
centre.
PartsofbothBanburyandBicestertown
centres lie within conservation areas
which protect their historic core.
Maintaining the quality of these areas is
importantandanydevelopmentinthese
areaswillneedtopreserveandenhance
thecharacteroftheseareasandhistoric
environment.
Kidlingtoncentreisconsiderablysmaller
than the two town centres, however it
plays an important role in serving the
local population. Additional shopping
floorspace was opened in the centre in
2004 and there is capacity for further
floorspace in the period up to 2031.
B.61The Council is committed to
supporting its town centres and to
maintaining and enhancing their vitality and
viability and their associated infrastructure
to create vibrant retail environments.
Policy SLE 2: Securing Dynamic Town Centres
Retailand other ‘Main Town Centre Uses’ will be directed towards the town
centres of Banbury and Bicester and the village centre of Kidlington in
accordancewithPoliciesBicester5,Banbury7andKidlington2. TheCouncil
will apply the sequential test as set out in the NPPF as follows:
Proposals for retail and other Main Town Centre Uses not in these town
centres should be in ‘edge of centre’ locations. Only if suitable sites are
not available in edge of centre locations should out of centre sites be
considered.
Whenconsideringedgeofcentreandoutofcentreproposals,preference
willbegiventoaccessiblesitesthatarewellconnectedtothetowncentre.
49 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
The Council will consider if the proposals satisfy the sequential test and if
they are likely to have a significant adverse impact on one or more of the
factors in the NPPF.
All proposals should comply with Policy SLE 4.
Animpactassessmentwillalsoberequiredinaccordancewithrequirements
in the NPPF. The Council will require an impact assessment if the proposal
isover2000sq.metres(gross)inBanbury,1500sq.metres(gross)inBicester
and 350 sq. metres (gross) elsewhere.
Evidence in the Council’s Retail Study will also be considered in determining
applicationsifinformationisnotprovidedbytheapplicantwhichisconsidered
to supersede this evidence.
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15.
TheCouncilwillsupporttheprovisionofnewlocalcentrescontainingasmall
number of shops of a limited size within the strategic housing allocations on
strategic sites set out in this Local Plan.
PolicySLE3:SupportingTourism
Growth
B.62Given the growing role that tourism
has to play in the local economy,
developments in this sector will be
supported, especially new attractions and
new hotels at the two towns to reinforce
their central role as places to visit and stay.
Wewillsupportnewtourismprovisionthat
can demonstrate direct benefit for the local
‘visitor’ economy and which will sustain the
rural economy.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 50Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.63We will support an increase in high
qualityaccommodationavailableinourtowns
tomeettheneedsofvisitorsandtoendthe
current under provision. Valuable
expenditure associated with overnight stays
ispotentiallybeinglost,meaningthattourism
hasscopetoplayasignificantwealth-creating
role for the District.
B.64Tourismcanhelpsupportlocalservices
andfacilities,provideemployment,promote
regeneration and help preserve the natural
andhistoricenvironment. Itcanincludeday
visits by local people through to visits from
overseas. Tourism is a vital component in
the make-up of the national economy.
Currentlytourismisworthover£300million
in Cherwell District and makes a significant
contribution towards the development of a
sustainablelocaleconomy. 1.2millionpeople
live within a 30 minute drive time of the
District boundary.
B.65Atourismstudywascompletedforthe
DistrictinAugust2008inordertoassistthe
Council in gaining a broad understanding of
tourist activity and trends in Cherwell
District and nearby. It highlighted that
tourism was not as great a part of the local
economy as for some locations, but that
initiativestofurtherencouragetourismcould
be considered. The following observations
and issues were identified:
the District will not attract the level of
tourists who visit surrounding
destinations but should make the most
of its proximity to these destinations
and its good transport links
the 58km of Oxford Canal in Cherwell
is a resource that is not used to its full
potentialandaccessshouldbeimproved
to promote green and sustainable
leisure opportunities – using the
towpath for walking and cycling as well
as the water for boating
business tourism is important to
Cherwell’s economy
Cherwell's villages are attractive and
distinctive and many have places of
interest
Banbury's historic town centre is
somewhere to visit and also to stay if
visitingpopulardestinationsnearbysuch
as Oxford or Stratford. It also acts as
oneofthemainretaildestinationsinthe
area
Bicester Village is the District's most
visited tourist destination
that Former RAF Bicester and Former
RAFUpperHeyfordrepresentpotential
new tourism developments
the opportunityfor a Cold WarVisitor
Centre at Former RAF Upper Heyford
there are mixed trends in terms of the
occupancy of tourist accommodation
whichisoftenbelowaveragebuthotels
are also turning away guests on other
occasions
a large new hotel was completed in
Banbury,neartheM40,in2008. Anew
hotel has been built near Bicester and
further such investment is planned.
Demand for hotel and other overnight
accommodation continues.
B.66Otherpoliciesinothersectionsofthis
LocalPlanwillcontributetowardsaddressing
these issues and encouraging sustainable
tourism development; for example by:
the regeneration of Banbury Canalside
(‘Policy Banbury 1: Banbury Canalside’)
51 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
the development of the Spiceball
Development Area in Banbury (‘Policy
Banbury 9: Spiceball Development
Area’)
maintaining village services and facilities
the preservation and enhancement of
thehistoricenvironmentinbothtowns
and villages.B.67TheLocalPlanPart2willalsosupport
tourismbyincludingpolicesencouragingnew
accommodationandtheallocationofsmaller
sites for tourism related development.
B.68There are other factors which are
beyond the scope of the Local Plan which
are important to drawing visitors to
Cherwell’s towns, villages and countryside.
TheCouncil,workingwithpartners,already
undertakes marketing, but to increase the
number of visitors to Cherwell and to
compete nationally, this will need to be
maintained and enhanced.
Policy SLE 3: Supporting Tourism Growth
The Council will support proposals for new or improved tourist facilities in
sustainable locations, where they accord with other policies in the plan, to
increase overnight stays and visitor numbers within the District.
PolicySLE4:ImprovedTransport
and Connections
B.69TheDistricthasexcellentroadandrail
links. New investment has substantially
reduced the travel time from Banbury and
BicestertocentralLondonandBirmingham,
withregularhighqualitytrainservicesviathe
Chiltern line. New investment is due in the
Plan period to open up frequent rail links
betweenOxford,MiltonKeynesandBedford
reinforcing the role of Bicester. The M40
corridorprovideslinkstothewidernational
motorwaynetworkandraillinkshelpsecure
a central location for rail based freight
movement.
B.70The Local Plan promotes a series of
proposalstosupportamodalshiftawayfrom
an over reliance on the car to less energy
intensive forms of transport. The strategy
proposes more sustainable locations for
housing and employment growth, whilst
recognising the importance of the car in a
rural District. The strategy seeks to avoid
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 52Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
increasing the function of the towns as
dormitory centres by strengthening their
employment base and transport connection
to those sites.
B.71Over the life of the Local Plan public
transport will continue to improve and
become more demand responsive. The
partners to the plan anticipate that support
will be provided for the extension of real
time timetable information across the
network, across the whole District.
B.72New development in the District will
be required to provide financial and/or
in-kind contributions to mitigate the
transportimpactsofdevelopment. Thiswill
support delivery of the infrastructure and
services needed to facilitate travel by
sustainable modes, whilst also enabling
improvements to be made to the local and
strategic road and rail networks.
B.73Over the life of the plan there will be
investment in the highway network as well
as contributions from development to
strengthen the road infrastructure of the
plan area. This will include the South West
Bicester Perimeter Road (Vendee Drive,
already completed) and new highway
improvements, including a potential relief
roadonthesoutheastandsouthofBicester,
works to the A34 south from Bicester and
improvements to junctions 9 and 10 of the
M40,ofwhichJunction9isprogrammedfor
early delivery. There will also be
improvementstotheWindsorStreet/Upper
Cherwell Street Corridor in Banbury to
Hennef Way junctions and to the Bridge
Street/ Cherwell Street junction. The
potential for a link road on the eastern side
of the M40, to mitigate the impact of traffic
ontheapproachtoJunction11alongHennef
Way will also be explored with the County
Council and Highways England. Cherwell is
workingwithAylesburyValeDistrictCouncilto ensure the impacts of growth at Bicester
andAylesburyontheA41arefullyaddressed
and appropriate mitigation considered.
B.74Phase 1 Improvements to Junction 9
of the M40 motorway are complete and
Phase 2 is being progressed with the
DepartmentforTransport,HighwaysEngland
and Oxfordshire County Council. The
proposals to improve the rail link between
Bicester and Oxford are also supported as
it will promote more sustainable modes of
transportandreducecongestionontheA34
andM40trunkroads. Theseimprovements
will enable additional development capacity
to be provided within the two towns.
B.75TheOxfordshireLocalTransportPlan
provides the strategic framework for
transport in the County. It aims to support
the local economy and the growth and
competitiveness of the county; to make it
easiertogetaroundthecountyandimprove
accesstojobsandservicesforallbyoffering
real choice; to reduce the impact of
transportontheenvironmentandhelptackle
climatechange;andtopromotehealthy,safe
and sustainable travel. Our strategy for
managing growth across the District is to
locate development in sustainable locations
and identify appropriate and deliverable
measurestomeetthetransportneedsofthe
District.
B.76Integrated Transport and Land Use
Studies for Banbury, Bicester and the
Cherwell Rural Areas were completed on
behalf of Oxfordshire County Council and
CherwellDistrictCouncilandhaveinformed
the Local Plan. More recent Movement
Strategies have been produced for Bicester
and Banbury to support the preparation of
Banbury and Bicester Masterplans. The
Movement Strategies propose sustainable
movement and access strategies.
53 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.77Infrastructurewillneedtobeprovided
which allows for more walking, cycling, the
use of public transport and integration
between modes. Cycling and walking in the
two towns is a means to secure an effective
integration between the established areas
and new areas of development.
Consideration will be given to the
implementation of walking and cycling
improvementswhichconnecttoemployment
areas, the town centre and key services and
thatlinkurbanrouteswiththerightsofway
network. Wewillalsoseekimprovedpublic
access to the River Cherwell valley in
support of our policies to increase tourism
and public well-being.
B.78New rail investment provides the
opportunity to both strengthen the role of
the two towns and their locations as places
to live and work. The new East - West rail
project will strengthen the location of
Bicester through a vastly improved
connection and service links to Oxford,
MiltonKeynesandBedford. Railinvestment,
includingelectrification,reinforcesthecritical
role that rail has to play as the centrepiece
of wider town centre regeneration in
Banbury associated with Canalside
redevelopment (Policy Banbury 1); and in
Bicester, associated with the town centre
and through to Bicester Village from an
upgraded Bicester Village Station. Due to
theimplementationofstrategicdevelopment
proposals in the Plan including East West
Rail, the new station at Water Eaton and a
growth in employment opportunities at
Kidlington and Bicester the Council would
expect demand for an increased role for
London-Oxford airport. The Council will
work with London-Oxford Airport
operators,theCountyCouncilandtheCivil
Aviation authority and other stakeholders
to consider any proposals.B.79We will support expansions to the
existing railway stations at Banbury and
Bicester and in the villages to provide
improved access to the wider rail network.
Proposals should accord with other policies
in the Plan.
B.80AtBicester,theGravenHillsite('Policy
Bicester 2: Graven Hill') has the major
potential to capitalise on the Network Rail
FreightRouteUtilisationStrategy(2007)for
upgradingthenationalfreightnetwork. This
will assist removing freight travelling north
fromSouthamptonontheA34,pastOxford
and onto the M40 and A43, with
consequentialgainsfortheenvironmentwith
reduced emissions.
B.81This development will confirm
Bicester’s location as a Rail Freight
Interchange (RFI) and a distribution hub
withintheregionaleconomy,whichwillhelp
consolidate its economic growth.
B.82A skilled workforce is available at
Bicester, one of the locational factors
necessaryfortheRFItooperatesuccessfully,
as stressed in the Strategic Rail Freight
InterchangePolicyGuide(DfT2011). Recent
studies from Cranfield and GVA Grimley
show that logistics employment output is
30-40% greater than manufacturing. In
addition, the range of jobs engaged in
logistics has widened to include a higher
proportion of elementary and process
operatives skill levels employed compared
with the manufacturing sector, and this
proportion has been rising. Cranfield and
GVA Grimley also revealed that wage levels
are between 10 & 17% higher in the
distribution sector than the manufacturing
sector. At a time when UK manufacturing
has declined, High Performance Engineering
and Defence continue to grow, as does
logistics. Bicester has a unique opportunity
from the presence of all three sectors.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 54Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy SLE 4: Improved Transport and Connections
TheCouncilwillsupporttheimplementationoftheproposalsintheMovement
StrategiesandtheLocalTransportPlantodeliverkeyconnections,tosupport
modal shift and to support more sustainable locations for employment and
housing growth.
We will support key transport proposals including:
Transport Improvements at Banbury, Bicester and at the Former RAF
UpperHeyfordinaccordancewiththeCountyCouncil’sLocalTransport
Plan and Movement Strategies
ProjectsassociatedwithEast-WestrailincludingnewstationsatBicester
Town and Water Eaton
Rail freight associated development at Graven Hill, Bicester
Improvements to M40 junctions.
ConsultationonoptionsfornewlinkandreliefroadsatBicesterandBanbury
will be undertaken through the Local Transport Plan (LTP) review process.
Routes identified following strategic options appraisal work for LTP4 will be
confirmedbytheCountyCouncilandwillbeincorporatedinLocalPlanPart
2.
New development in the District will be required to provide financial and/or
in-kind contributions to mitigate the transport impacts of development.
All development where reasonable to do so, should facilitate the use of
sustainable modes of transport to make the fullest possible use of public
transport, walking and cycling. Encouragement will be given to solutions
whichsupportreductionsingreenhousegasemissionsandreducecongestion.
Developmentwhich is not suitablefor the roads that serve the development
and which have a severe traffic impact will not be supported.
Policy SLE 5: High Speed Rail 2 -
London to Birmingham
B.83In December 2010 the Government
announced a preferred route option for the
proposed High Speed Rail link betweenLondon and Birmingham, known as High
Speed 2 (HS2). The preferred route passes
throughCherwellDistrict,throughFringford
ward to the north of Bicester and stands to
haveanimpactontheenvironmentandlocal
communities in that area.
55 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy SLE 5: High Speed Rail 2 - London to Birmingham
The design and construction of the High Speed 2 Rail Link must minimise
adverseimpactsontheenvironment,thelocaleconomyandlocalcommunities
and maximise any benefits that arise from the proposal.
The implementation of HS2 will also be expected to:
Deliverhighqualitydesigntoprotectcommunitiesandtheenvironment
from noise and visual intrusion
Manage the construction to minimise the impact on communities and
the environment
Adopt sustainable procurement and construction methods
Minimiseadversesocialandeconomicimpacts,bymaintainingaccessibility
and avoiding the severance of communities and agricultural holdings
Ensure that community and other benefits are fully realised.
HS2isanationalinfrastructureproject. Thelineoftherailwayandassociated
works will be established and authorised by the way of primary legislation,
requiring a Hybrid Bill to be introduced to Parliament which, if passed, will
becomeanActofParliament. CherwellDistrictCouncilwillworkwithHigh
Speed 2 Ltd, with the aim of influencing the design and construction of the
route through Oxfordshire. Recognising that the decision to authorise the
railway and associated works will sit with Parliament, the Council’s
involvementwillbefocusedonseekingthebestoutcomefortheenvironment,
local communities and businesses affected by the proposed railway scheme.
The Council will work with HS2 Ltd to:
Develop a route-wide planning regime to be included within the Hybrid
Bill, which supports the Council’s aspirations for a well designed,
sustainably constructed railway.
Support work necessary to ensure a robust Environmental Impact
Assessmentiscarriedouttodeterminesignificantenvironmentaleffects
of the railway in Cherwell District.
SupportthedevelopmentandimplementationofaCodeofConstruction
Practice to address the construction impacts of the scheme
Achieve its sustainability objectives.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 56Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.2 Theme Two: Policies for
Building Sustainable Communites
Introduction
B.84In order to build sustainable
communities, we will seek to provide an
appropriatemixofhousingwithinCherwell,
including housing to address the
requirements of a growing and ageing
population.
B.85Wewillrequireamixofhousingtypes,
size and tenures, built to high design
standards. Wewillalsoaimtosecuremixed
tenure as well as enabling new forms of
housing such as community self-build and
other imaginative solutions to housing need
in the District to ensure new development
results in balanced, mixed communities that
havetakenthehousingneedsoftheDistrict
fully into account.
B.86We wish to ensure that new
development fully integrates with existing
settlementstoforgeonecommunity,rather
than separate communities (see ‘Policy ESD
15: The Character of the Built and Historic
Environment’). We will also require
investment in a range of community
infrastructure including education, health,
leisure facilities and public open spaceappropriate to the scale of proposed
developments (see Section D 'The
Infrastructure Delivery Plan').
B.87Cherwell's countryside, landscape and
green spaces are important natural
resources. They form the setting of our
towns and villages, contribute to their
identity and the well-being of Cherwell's
communities, and provide recreation
opportunities. The countryside’s intrinsic
character and beauty is important to the
quality of life in Cherwell and remains an
economicallyimportantagriculturalresource.
B.88Byfocusingdevelopmentinandaround
the towns of Bicester and Banbury we aim
toensurethatthehousinggrowthwhichthe
District needs only takes place in the
locationsthataremostsustainableandmost
capable of absorbing this new growth (see
Section C ‘Policies for Cherwell's Places’).
We support town centre locations for
housingtocreatelivelycentresthatarelived
in and generate added footfall to support
retail and commercial activities.
B.89We aim to avoid development in
inappropriatelocationsandcoalescencewith
neighbouring settlements.
B.90New housing needs to be provided in
such a way that it minimises environmental
impact,includingthroughtheeliminationand
control of pollution and the effective and
efficient use of natural resources. It needs
to be planned in a way that helps to reduce
carbon emissions, reflects the functions of
our settlements and protects or enhances
theidentityofourtownsandvillagesandthe
sense of belonging of our residents (see
SectionB.3'PoliciesforEnsuringSustainable
Development’).
B.91Whereappropriatewewillencourage
area renewal to invest in the physical
infrastructure, community facilities and to
57 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
improve the quality of the current housing
stock, helping to secure better educational
attainment, health and well-being and
improved employment opportunities (see
‘Policy BSC 5: Area Renewal’).
B.92In seeking to build sustainable
communitiestheCouncilwillsupportTown
and Parish Councils and relevant
Neighbourhood Forums in developing
Neighbourhood Plans.Policy BSC 1: District Wide
Housing Distribution
B.93The National Planning Policy
Framework seeks to boost significantly the
supply of housing and deliver a wide choice
of high quality homes. It requires the
Council to plan for at least 15 years of
housingdelivery,tomeetthefull,objectively
assessed needs for market and affordable
housing, and to maintain a five year supply
of deliverable sites with a buffer to ensure
choice and competition in the market for
land.
B.94The Council is committed to meeting
housing needs and accelerating delivery.
Cherwell’s housing needs are identified in
the Oxfordshire Strategic Housing Market
Assessment (SHMA) 2014. The SHMA
identifies a need for 1,140 dwellings per
annum equating to 22,800 dwellings from
2011 to 2031. The SHMA analysis includes
an assessment of housing need based on
demographic trends having regard to pastshortfalls in housing delivery to 2011,
consideration of ‘committed economic
growth’, modelling of the level of housing
provision that might be required to meet
affordableneedinfullandwiderevidenceof
marketsignals. Paragraph9.58oftheSHMA
states “For Cherwell District the evidence
indicatesaneedfor1,142dwellingsperannum
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 58Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
(2011-2031)tosupporttheStrategicEconomic
Plan. This is based on supporting Committed
Economic Growth... ”
B.95CherwellDistrictCouncilwillcontinue
toworkunderthe‘DutytoCo-operate’with
all other Oxfordshire Local Authorities on
an on-going basis to address the objectively
assessed need for housing across the
Oxfordshire Housing Market Area and to
meetjointcommitmentssuchastheOxford
andOxfordshireCityDeal(2014). Asafirst
step Cherwell District Council has sought
to accommodate the housing need for
CherwellDistrictinfullintheCherwellLocal
Plan. Cherwell District Council recognises
that Oxford may not be able to
accommodate the whole of its new housing
requirementforthe2011-2031periodwithin
its administrative boundary. The urban
capacity of Oxford is as yet unconfirmed.
Cherwell District Council will continue to
work jointly and proactively with the
Oxfordshire local authorities and through
theOxfordshireGrowthBoardtoassessall
reasonable spatial options, including the
release of brownfield land, the potential for
a new settlement and a full strategic review
oftheboundariesoftheOxfordGreenBelt.
These issues are not for Cherwell to
consider in isolation. These options will
need to be undertaken in accordance with
national policy, national guidance, the
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)
regulations, and the Habitats Regulations
Assessment (HRA) to establish how and
where any unmet need might best be
accommodated within the Oxfordshire
Housing Market Area. Joint work will need
to comprehensively consider how spatial
options could be supported by necessary
infrastructure to ensure an integrated
approachtothedeliveryofhousing,jobsand
services. Full public consultation will be
central to a ‘sound’ process and outcome.
If this joint work reveals that Cherwell and
otherDistrictsneedtomeetadditionalneedfor Oxford, this will trigger a partial review
of the Local Plan, to be completed within
two years of adoption, and taking the form
of the preparation of a separate
Development Plan Document for that part
of the unmet need to be accommodated in
the Cherwell District. The Council will
engage in joint working on supporting
technical work such as countywide
Sustainability Appraisal as required to
support the identification of a sustainable
approach to meeting agreed, unmet needs.
B.96The Council is committed to meeting
theDistrict’sobjectivelyassessedneedsand,
asdescribedabove,toworkingwithpartner
authorities (including the Oxfordshire
GrowthBoard)todeterminehowanyother
unmet needs arising from the SHMA can be
sustainably accommodated within the
Oxfordshire Housing Market Area. The
housing strategy of this Local Plan seeks to
deliver growth in accordance with the
NPPF’s Core Planning Principles including:
Providingapositivevisionforthefuture
of Cherwell: a strategic growth and
investment approach to the towns; an
enlargedsettlementinthecentreofthe
District, further development at the
villages to sustain them.
Proactively driving and supporting
sustainable economic development by
meeting the SHMA’s Committed
Economic Growth scenario.
Seekingtosecurehighqualitydesignand
a good standard of amenity by
developing new neighbourhoods and
achieving regeneration and
redevelopment of key sites.
Takingaccountofthedifferentrolesand
character of Cherwell’s places by
promoting the vitality of Bicester,
BanburyandKidlingtonandtheirability
59 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
to serve their hinterlands, protecting
the Oxford Green Belt and
concentrating development in
sustainable rural locations to protect
theintrinsiccharacterandbeautyofthe
countrysideandtosupportthrivingrural
communities.
Encouraging the effective re-use of
existing land and buildings and bring
forwardsitesthatcontainlandoflesser
environmental value such as at Graven
Hill(Bicester2),Canalside(Banbury1),
Bolton Road Development Area
(Banbury8),HighamWay(Banbury19)
and at the Former RAF Upper Heyford
(Villages 5).
Promoting strategic, mixed use
developmentsconservingheritageassets
in a manner appropriate to their
significance such as those of national
importance at Former RAF Upper
Heyford, actively encouraging wildlife
potential such as at South East Bicester
(Bicester12)andGavrayDrive(Bicester
13), and making the fullest possible use
of public transport, walking and cycling
and supporting community well-being
such as at the North West Bicester
Eco-Town (Bicester 1).
B.97In total, the Plan provides for five
strategic development sites at Bicester in
addition to the on-going construction of an
urban extension at South West Bicester
(Kingsmere) and a committed site atTalisman Road. It provides for 10 strategic
development sites at Banbury, also in
addition to an on-going urban extension at
Bankside and committed sites at West of
WarwickRoadandSouthamRoad. ThePlan
makes allowances for non-strategic urban
and rural sites in sustainable locations and
includes realistic and reliable windfall
allowances for (previously developed) sites
of less than 10 dwellings. Development at
villages will be considered against Policy
Villages 1: Village Categorisation, Policy
Villages 2: Distributing Growth Across the
Rural Areas and Policy Villages 3: Rural
Exception Sites.
B.98ThePlansupportstheobjectivesofthe
Council’s Housing Strategy 2012-2017 to
increasethesupplyofhomesandtoimprove
access to housing. It provides for new
affordable homes for those in most housing
need and seeks to ensure the opportunities
forhomeownershiparewidened. The Plan
aimstoextendchoice,toprovidehighquality
homes and development, and to secure a
mix of house types, size and tenure that
meets housing need. This includes meeting
the requirements of an ageing population
through the provision of extra care,
supported and sheltered housing and
providing new forms of access such as
community self-build or self-finish housing.
B.99Overallhousingdeliveryfrom2011to
2031 will be as set out in the policy below.
Further delivery will be seen at the North
WestBicestersite(PolicyBicester1)beyond
2031 but the Plan does not preclude earlier
or faster delivery.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 60Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy BSC 1: District Wide Housing Distribution
CherwellDistrictwilldeliverawidechoiceofhighqualityhomesbyproviding
for 22,840 additional dwellings between 1 April 2011 and 31 March 2031.
1,106 completions were recorded between 2011 and 2014 leaving 21,734
homes to be provided between 2014 and 2031. Housing will be delivered in
accordance with the requirements set out below:
Totals Rest of
DistrictBanbury Bicester
1,106 528 213 365 Completions
6,040 1,760 2,346 1,934 Permissions (10+)
14,420 2,350 4,344 7,726 Allocations
1,274 754 416 104 Windfalls (<10)
22,840 5,392 7,319 10,129 Totals
Policy BSC2: The Effective and
EfficientUseofLand–Brownfield
Land and Housing Density
B.100Managing the use of previously
developed land is important in maintaining
theappearanceofourtownsandvillagesand
tothewell-beingofourcommunities. Itcan
also provide opportunities for enhancing
biodiversity. This means ensuring that land
and buildings earmarked for development
are not underused and that we make the
most of vacant and derelict land and
buildings.
B.101The Plan seeks to secure the
redevelopment of a number of major
previously developed sites comprising
BanburyCanalside(PolicyBanbury1),Bolton
Road and Spiceball in Banbury town centre
(Policies Banbury 8 & 9), Higham Way near
the railway station in Banbury (PolicyBanbury 19), the MOD site at Graven Hill,
Bicester (Policy Bicester 2), a Phase 2 to
Bicestertowncentreredevelopment(Policy
Bicester 6) and the former RAF Upper
Heyfordairbase(PolicyVillages5). Theplan
also includes a windfall allowance for small
previously developed sites. Therefore,
although the Plan allocates large areas of
greenfield land to meet the District’s
development needs, the Council will strive
to ensure that these important ‘brownfield’
schemes are delivered.
B.102It is also important to make efficient
use of land. In general, new housing should
be provided at a net density of at least 30
dwellingsperhectare. However,thedensity
of housing development will be expected to
reflect the character and appearance of
individual localities and development
principles that are appropriate to the
individual circumstances of sites.
61 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.103In considering development on
smaller sites, the effective use of previously
developedlandwithinurbanareas,andwithin
those villages identified by the Local Plan asbeingsuitableplacesforadditionalresidential
development (Policy Villages 1), will
particularly be encouraged provided that it
is not of high environmental value.
Policy BSC 2: The Effective and Efficient Use of Land - Brownfield Land and
Housing Density
Housing development in Cherwell will be expected to make effective and
efficient use of land. The Council will encourage the re-use of previously
developed land in sustainable locations. New housing should be provided on
net developable areas at a density of at least 30 dwellings per hectare unless
there are justifiable planning reasons for lower density development.
Policy BSC3: Affordable Housing
B.104Cherwell has a high level of need for
affordable housing which is defined by the
Government in the NPPF as comprising
social rented, affordable rented and
‘intermediate’ housing (such as shared
ownership) provided to eligible households
whose needs are not met by the market.
B.105The Oxfordshire Strategic Housing
Market Assessment (SHMA) 2014 has
identifiedanetneedof407affordablehomes
per year. This is calculated by taking into
account the backlog need, need from newlyforming households, existing households
fallingintoneedandthesupplyofaffordable
housing. TheSHMApointsoutthatitsneeds
modelisbasedonevidenceatapointintime
and does not, for example, take account of
the role which the Private Rented Sector
plays in meeting the needs of households
which require affordable housing. The
Council’sprevious‘StrategicHousingMarket
Assessment Review and Update 2012’
concluded that the net housing need based
on the ability to afford private rents is 186
homes per year or 831 homes per year
based on the ability to buy an entry level
property. Byapplyingasocial/affordablerent
split based on affordability, the overall need
was identified as being in the region of 300
homes per year. Assessing need is complex
andthelevelofneedwillfluctuate.However,
the need to provide affordable housing at
viable levels is clear.
B.106The Council’s Housing Strategy
2012-17 takes into account Government
policyontheprovisionofaffordablehousing
and the Homes and Community Agency’s
currentfundingregime. Theadditionalvalue
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 62Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
inthestockofaffordablehousingcanbeused
by Registered Providers to secure finance
for further investment in new housing.
B.107The Housing Strategy seeks to
increase the supply of, and access to,
affordable rented housing. It sets a target of
delivering 750 affordable homes in total
between 2012 and 2017 which include new
homes, the acquisition of market homes by
Registered Providers and bringing empty
homes back into use. The Housing Strategy
highlights the importance of developing
sustainable communities.
B.108The Housing Strategy recognises the
need for affordable homes, and aims to
ensure that Cherwell is well-placed to
maximiseinvestmentbyRegisteredProviders
and to respond to opportunities as they
arise. A Delivery Plan will be prepared to
implement the strategy, which seeks to
maximisetheresourcesavailabletosupport
delivery, to maintain a close dialogue with
Registered Providers, and to be innovative
in the way affordable housing is provided.
B.109Securing new affordable housing on
site as part of larger developments is the
most significant way in which homes can be
provided. Policy BSC3 therefore seeks to
achievethissothatthesupplyofnewhomes
reflects the high level of need.
B.110Housing proposals will need to
provideaffordablehousingwheretheymeet
thequalifyingthresholds. Wherethenumber
of dwellings proposed falls below the
relevant threshold, or the number of
dwellings is not specified, the Council will
consider whether or not sites reasonably
have capacity to provide the number of
dwellingsthatwouldtriggertherequirement
toprovideaffordablehousing. Thepurpose
of this is to ensure that the policy
requirement is not being avoided through
inappropriateplanning such as ineffective orinefficient use of land or a mix of dwellings
that does not reflect other housing policies
or local needs.
B.111AnAffordableHousingViabilityStudy
has been produced to assess the levels of
affordable housing that could reasonably be
required from new housing developments.
In general, the higher land values in rural
areas and at Kidlington allow for higher
affordablehousingrequirementspersitethan
at Banbury and Bicester where land values
are lower.
B.112The Affordable Housing Viability
Studydemonstratesthatingeneralaffordable
housingcanbedeliveredinCherwellwithout
social housing grant or other grants. The
Homes and Communities Agency expects
thataffordablehousingrequirementswillbe
met without social housing grant and this
assumption underpins this policy.
B.113Where scheme viability is a concern,
consideration of the potential availability of
grantorothergrant,andnegotiationsonthe
mix, type and tenure of housing will take
placeusingan‘open-book’economicviability
assessment. Unless otherwise agreed it will
use the Council’s residual value based,
appraisal model.
B.114The starting point for the mix of
affordable housing to be secured will be
Local Plan ‘Policy BSC 4: Housing Mix’, the
Council’sHousingRegisterandlocalhousing
need surveys. Credible information from
RegisteredProvidersanddeveloperswillalso
be considered.
B.115Discussions as to whether it would
be appropriate to include a ‘cascade’
mechanism in legal agreements, potentially
enabling the secured form and/or quantum
of affordable housing to be varied, will only
be entered into with the benefit of an
63 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
‘open-book’ economic viability assessment
and having regard to the risks to delivery in
each case.
B.116Financial contributions made under
Policy BSC 3 will be secured by legal
agreement for the provision of affordable
housing.
B.117The Council will support proposals
for community self-build or self-finish
affordable housing particularly where it will
result in suitable empty properties being
brought into residential use.
B.118The Council has established a
community self-build housing programme
known as ‘Build!®' and has financial
commitment (subject to contract) from theHomes and Community Agency (HCA) for
new build and for the refurbishment of
empty homes. It is a member of a
Government-Industry Self-Build Working
Group and has contributed to a National
ActionPlantodevelopcommunityself-build.
B.119The Council’s Housing Strategy
2012-17 includes a target of delivering the
first180communityself-buildhomesthrough
its‘Build!’®programmeby31March2015.
The Council is also in the process of
establishingaDistrict-wideCommunityLand
Trust which will help create the conditions
for, and facilitate, community-led housing
more generally. Affordable housing will be
expected to reach the HCA standards
identified in the Draft Planning Obligations
SPD.
Policy BSC 3: Affordable Housing
AtBanburyandBicester,allproposeddevelopmentsthatinclude11ormore
dwellings(gross),orwhichwouldbeprovidedonsitessuitablefor11ormore
dwellings (gross), will be expected to provide at least 30% of new housing as
affordable homes on site.
At Kidlington and elsewhere, all proposed developments that include 11 or
more dwellings (gross), or which would be provided on sites suitable for 11
or more dwellings (gross), will be expected to provide at least 35% of new
housing as affordable homes on site.
Where this policy would result in a requirement that part of an affordable
home should be provided, a financial contribution of equivalent value will be
requiredforthatpartonly. Otherwise,financialcontributionsinlieuofon-site
provision will only be acceptable in exceptional circumstances.
Allqualifyingdevelopmentswillbeexpectedtoprovide70%oftheaffordable
housing as affordable/social rented dwellings and 30% as other forms of
intermediate affordable homes. Social rented housing will be particularly
supportedintheformofextracareorothersupportedhousing. Itisexpected
that these requirements will be met without the use of social housing grant
or other grant.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 64Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Should the promoters of development consider that individual proposals
wouldbeunviablewiththeaboverequirements,‘open-book’financialanalysis
of proposed developments will be expected so that an in house economic
viability assessment can be undertaken. Where it is agreed that an external
economic viability assessment is required, the cost shall be met by the
promoter.
Where development is demonstrated to be unviable with the above
requirements, further negotiations will take place. These negotiations will
includeconsiderationof:themixandtypeofhousing,thesplitbetweensocial
rentedandintermediatehousing,theavailabilityofsocialhousinggrant/funding
and the percentage of affordable housing to be provided.
The Council will require active consideration of proposals for community
self-buildorself-finishhousinginparticularwhereitistoahighdesignstandard
and will result in suitable empty properties being brought into residential
use. Self-build and Self-finish should contribute towards meeting the need
for affordable housing.
Affordable Housing will also be delivered through Policy Villages 3: Rural
Exception Sites.
Policy BSC4: Housing Mix
B.120The Local Plan aims not only to
increasesupply of housingbut to encourage
a mix that can help improve the functioning
ofthehousingmarketsystem,makeitmore
fluid, and enable households to more easily
find and move to housing which they can
afford and which better suits their
circumstances.
B.121There is need to provide a mix of
housing in Cherwell that reflects the needs
of an ageing population, a growth in smaller
households and which meets the
requirementsforfamilyhousing. Themixof
housingneedstoenablemovementthrough
themarketfromonehousetypetoanother
65 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
as the needs of households change. This
movement frees up housing which might
otherwise be unavailable.
B.122The Oxfordshire Strategic Housing
Market Assessment(SHMA 2014) provides
conclusionsonastrategicmixofhousingforOxfordshire over the next 20 years. The
SHMA analyses the types and sizes of
accommodation occupied by different ages
of residents, projected changes in the
populationandestimatesoffutureneedand
demand for different sizes of homes. The
SHMA’s conclusions are shown below:
SHMA Table 67: Conclusions regarding Mix of Homes, HMA Level
4-bed 3-bed 2-bed 1-bed
25% 45% 25% 5% Market
5-10% 30-35% 30-35% 25-30% Affordable
15% 40% 30% 15% All Dwellings
B.123The SHMA does advise, however,
that at an individual local authority level,
there is a greater need for 3-bed properties
in Cherwell and that the overall mix
identified is focused more towards smaller
propertiesthantheexistingmixofhomesin
Oxfordshire.
B.124The SHMA also advises that in
applyingpoliciesforhousingmixtoindividual
development sites, regard should be had to
"…the nature of the development site and
character of the area, and to the up-to-date
evidenceofneedaswellastheexistingmixand
turnover of properties at the local level"
(paragraph 7.40).
B.125The need for housing for those with
care needs is also significant. ‘Extra care’
housing in particular will be important in
meeting the housing needs of an older
population across all tenures. Extra care
housing comprises self-contained
accommodation for older and disabled
people which enables independent living by
providingarangeofsupportfacilitiesonthe
premises and 24-hour care services. It can
help people live longer in their own homes
either securely alone or with partners orfriends. Itmeetsaneedbetweentraditional
sheltered housing and residential care and
can be purpose-built or adapted
accommodation. People have their own
front doors but also have the opportunity
to benefit from communal facilities. Extra
care can also contribute in achieving more
social cohesion by providing an opportunity
for community living and a better mix of
housing within residential areas.
B.126TheNPPFrecognisesthatakeydriver
of change in the housing market over the
next 20 years will be the growth in the
population of elderly people. Evidence
produced for the Council’s former Housing
Strategy for Older People (2010-2015)
identifiedarequirementforanadditional788
units from 2010 to 2026 to meet extra care
and ‘enhanced sheltered’ needs. Extra care
remains an important housing option in the
District Housing Strategy 2012-2017. The
SHMA also highlights that an ageing
populationandhigherlevelsofdisabilityand
health problems amongst older people will
mean an increasing demand for specialist
housing.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 66Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.127An assessment of the development
viability of extra care housing (2011)
concluded that the inclusion of extra care
housing within mixed tenure schemes will
not significantly impact on the viability anddeliverability of housing. Consultation with
providerssuggeststhatschemeswillneedto
comprise at least 45 dwellings to make the
provision of support and care facilities
operationally viable.
Policy BSC 4: Housing Mix
New residential development will be expected to provide a mix of homes to
meet current and expected future requirements in the interests of meeting
housing need and creating socially mixed and inclusive communities.
The mix of housing will be negotiated having regard to the Council’s most
up-to-dateevidenceonhousingneedandavailableevidencefromdevelopers
on local market conditions.
Housingsitesofatleast400dwellingswillbeexpectedtoprovideaminimum
of 45 self-containedextra care dwellingsas part of the overall mix. Should it
beagreedwiththeCouncilthatextracarehousingwouldnotbedesirablein
a particular location, an equivalent amount of alternative specialist housing
(use class C3) for older people will be required.
Elsewhere, opportunities for the provision of extra care, specialist housing
forolderand/ordisabledpeopleandthosewithmentalhealthneedsandother
supported housing for those with specific living needs will be encouraged in
suitablelocationsclosetoservicesandfacilities. Allproposalswillbeexpected
to provide affordable housing in accordance with Policy BSC 3: Affordable
Housing.
Policy BSC 5: Area Renewal
B.128Helping to create opportunity for all
and positively renew and regenerate areas
with challenging social conditions in parts of
the District is important to the delivery of
the objectives of the Local Plan.
B.129The ‘Brighter Futures in Banbury’
initiative brings together key agencies to
addressissuesofdeprivationinthetownand
67 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
a number of projects are being pursued
targeting western Banbury, together with
Grimsbury in eastern Banbury.
B.130Area renewal is one way to help
improveparticularwards,withdevelopment
proposals that would help to address some
of the issues. Regeneration measures to be
supported include housing investment and
new retail, community facilities and other
investmentfromamulti-agencypartnership.
Measures will be taken to provide local
employment opportunities and the local
recruitment of labour. Area renewal will
help improve the community fabric of the
area, help improve social opportunities and
improve health and well-being and
educational attainment.B.131Measures will include new housing
and associated facilities and improvements
to the built environment. They will also
include the provision of opportunities for
contributions and linkages to long-term
community based projects and schemes
designed to specifically help community
development.
B.132Planning permission will be granted
for small scale redevelopment/renewal
proposalsthatwouldresultinimprovements
to the existing housing stock, retail and
community facilities and services, and local
employment. Opportunities for
redevelopment in the defined area that
would contribute to area renewal will be
sought.
Policy BSC 5: Area Renewal
We will support area renewal proposals that direct investment to improve
thephysicalandcommunityfabricoftheDistricttoimprovesocialoutcomes,
improve health and well-being, educational attainment and employment
outcomes.
Policy BSC 6: Travelling
Communities
B.133NationalPlanningPolicyforTraveller
Sites (March 2012) requires Local Planning
Authoritiestoassesstheneedfornewsites,
to develop fair and effective strategies to
meet need and to plan for sites over a
reasonable timescale.
B.134TheGovernmentisaimingtoincrease
the number of traveller sites in appropriate
locationswithplanningpermissiontoaddress
underprovisionandmaintainanappropriate
level of supply. It wishes to enable the
provision of suitable accommodation fromwhichtravellerscanaccesseducation,health,
welfare and employment infrastructure
having regard to the need to protect local
amenityandthelocalenvironment. Itadvises
thattravellersites(temporaryorpermanent)
in the Green Belt should be considered to
be inappropriate development.
B.135The Council is required to set pitch
targets for gypsies and travellers, and plot
targets for travelling showpeople, which
addressthelikelypermanentandtransitsite
accommodationneedsoftravellers,working
collaboratively with neighbouring local
planningauthorities. Itisrequiredtoidentify
and update annually a five year supply of
deliverable traveller sites and to identify a
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 68Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
supplyofspecific,developablesitesorbroad
locationsforgrowth,foryearssixtotenand,
where possible, for years eleven to fifteen.
B.136Cherwell presently (31 March 2014)
has eight private gypsy and traveller sites
providing 77 household 'pitches' (including
16 pitches approved but not yet
constructed). A Gypsy and Traveller
Housing Needs Assessment (January 2013)
commissionedwithtwoadjoiningauthorities
concluded that the District needed to
provide a further 15 pitches from 2012 to
2027 including five pitches from 2012 to
2017. Rolling the period forward to 2031
provides a net requirement of 19 pitches
from 2012 to 2031 (excluding the 16
approved pitches which would need to be
provided).
B.137Cherwellalsohas(at31March2014)
four Travelling Showpeople sites providing
14 household 'plots'. A Needs Assessment
for Travelling Showpeople (2008) produced
for all Oxfordshire Councils concluded that
Cherwell had a need for a further 12 plots
by 2018 in addition to the 14 existing;
thereby producing a total of 26 plots. Untilsuch time that a further review of need is
undertaken,a3%compoundgrowthratehas
been applied to household formation which
increasesthetotalnumberofplotsrequired
by 2031 to 38 - an increase of 24 plots.
B.138Policy BSC 6 provides a sequential
and criteria based approach for identifying
suitable locations for new traveller sites
whetherthroughsiteallocationsintheLocal
Plan Part 2 or in the determination of
planning applications.
B.139The policy seeks to secure sites that
will provide suitable living environments in
locations that are as sustainable as is
reasonably possible. It will be important to
identify sites that will enable access to
services, facilities and potential sources of
employment, which will promote inclusive
communities but which will not be out of
scale with or dominate nearby settled
communities. Siteidentificationwillneedto
include the re-provision of pitches from a
site in Banbury which is likely to be
redevelopedaspartoftheBanburyCanalside
proposals (see ‘Policy Banbury 1: Banbury
Canalside’).
Policy BSC 6: Travelling Communities
Cherwell District will provide 19 (net) additional pitches to meet the needs
of Gypsies and Travellers from 2012 to 2031. It will also provide 24 (net)
additional plots for Travelling Showpeople from 2012 to 2031.
Tomeettheserequirements,andinordertoprovideandmaintainafiveyear
supply of deliverable sites, allocations will be made in Local Plan Part 2 and
planning permissions will be granted for suitable sites.
Locations outside of the CotswoldsArea of OutstandingNatural Beauty and
theGreenBeltwillbeconsidered. Inidentifyingsuitablesiteswithreasonable
accessibility to services and facilities the following sequential approach will
be applied:
69 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
1.within 3km road distance of the built-up limits of Banbury, Bicester or a
Category A village
2.within 3km road distance of a Category B village and within reasonable
walking distance of a regular bus service to Banbury or Bicester or to a
Category A village.
Other locations will only be considered in exceptional circumstances.
The following criteria will also be considered in assessing the suitability of
sites:
a) access to GP and other health services
b) access to schools
c) avoiding areas at risk of flooding
d) access to the highway network
e) the potential for noise and other disturbance
f) the potential for harm to the historic and natural environment
g) the ability to provide a satisfactory living environment
h) the need to make efficient and effective use of land
i) deliverability, including whether utilities can be provided
j) the existing level of local provision
k) the availability of alternatives to applicants.
Policy BSC 7: Meeting Education
Needs
B.140The provision of primary and
secondary education, along with early years
and lifelong learning will be needed
throughout the District to accommodate
population growth. The demand for
pre-school facilities is likely to increase due
to changes in lifestyles and work patterns.
B.141We will support the growth plans of
schoolsacrosstheDistrictandrecognisethe
important role that viable schools have to
play in maintaining the quality of life of
communitiesacrosstheDistrict.Oxfordshire
County Council as the Local Education
Authority is usually responsible for the
provision of new schools and school places.
It has a statutory duty to ensure that there
are enough school places. The DistrictCouncil will work with the County Council
and others to provide nursery, primary and
secondary schools; further and higher
education facilities; community learning
facilities; special schools; free schools and
othereducationalfacilities. Thiswillinclude
for the strategic site allocations in the Local
Plan. New schools will be provided where
required, for example at North West
Bicester (Policy Bicester 1) and South East
Bicester(PolicyBicester12).Wewillensure
sufficient primary and secondary school
provision across the District to
accommodateCherwell’spopulationgrowth.
This may include seeking the provision of
new schools, contributions towards these
facilitiesorcontributionstowardsexpanding
existing facilities. The County Council has
identified the potential need for a new
secondary school at Banbury with the
location yet to be determined. A Planning
Obligations Draft Supplementary Planning
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 70Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Document (SPD) has been prepared. Upon
completion it will provide further details on
how developer contributions for education
facilities will be sought.
B.142The District has historically had a
relativelyloweducationandskillsbase. We
willencouragedevelopmentthatwilldiversify
and develop the skills base of the District
into the future.
B.143We will support the University
TechnologyCollegeproposalorothersimilar
proposals for Bicester as an opportunity to
strengthen the education and skills base of
the town.B.144We will seek to ensure that the
design of these schools is flexible enough to
accommodate the changing needs of their
users and the communities they serve and
future changes to the demographic profile
of the District. Where appropriate the use
ofschoolandcollegebuildingsandlandafter
hourswillbeencouragedtosupportlearning
amongthewidercommunityandmaybeable
tocontributetowardsrecreationprovision.
New school buildings should be located in
sustainable locations on the edge or within
the built up limits of settlements. New
schools in the Green Belt and open
countryside will be resisted. Policy ESD15
will apply.
Policy BSC 7: Meeting Education Needs
The Council will work with partners to ensure the provision of pre-school,
school, community learning and other facilities which provide for education
and the development of skills. New schools buildings should be located in
sustainable locations. The co-location of other services and facilities with
schools should be considered to create community hubs.
PolicyBSC8:SecuringHealthand
Well-Being
B.145Planning decisions can have an effect
on travel to work, schools, noise and air
quality, access to services, climate change
andsocialnetworkswhichcanallcontribute
to health and well-being. The local
environment has a fundamental impact on
thehealthandwell-beingoflocalpeople. By
providing facilities such as local open space
this allows for activities such as walking and
cycling, promoting healthy lifestyles. The
Council will work with the local community
toprovidesafeandaccessibleenvironments
andtoidentifytheneedforandprovidelocal
facilities.B.146The Council will continue to work
closely with the healthcare providers,
partners and the NHS across its delivery
bodies to:
ensure the provision of additional and
reconfigured health and social care
facilities
identify the anticipated primary care
needs of local communities
identify the capacity needs of local
communities
meet the healthcare requirements of
local communities.
71 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.147As part of the changes to the NHS
broughtaboutbytheHealthandSocialCare
Act 2012, Primary Care Trusts (PCTs) and
Strategic Health Authorities (SHAs) ceased
to exist on 31 March 2013. Their
responsibilities were taken over by Clinical
Commissioning Groups and the NHS Trust
Development Authority. A Health &
Wellbeing Board has been set up for
Oxfordshirewhichisapartnershipbetween
Oxfordshire County Council, the NHS and
the people of Oxfordshire designed to
ensurethatweallworktogethertoimprove
health and wellbeing.
B.148The Board’s vision for Oxfordshire
for 2016 is:
more children and young people will
lead healthy, safe lives and will be given
the opportunity to develop the skills,
confidenceandopportunitiestheyneed
to achieve their full potential
more adults will have the support they
need to live their lives as healthily,
successfully,independentlyandsafelyas
possible, with good timely access to
health and social care services
everyone will be given the opportunity
tovoicetheiropinionsandexperiences
to ensure that services meet their
individual needs
the best possible services will be
providedwithintheresourceswehave,
giving excellent value for the public.
B.149There is a need for more GP
provision in Bicester. New buildings should
be located in sustainable locations on the
edge or within the built up limits of
settlements. New buildings in the Green
Belt and open countryside will be resisted.
Policy ESD 15 will apply.
Policy BSC 8: Securing Health and Well-Being
The Council will support the provision of health facilities in sustainable
locations which contribute towards health and well-being including the
replacement of the Bicester Community Hospital.
PolicyBSC9:PublicServicesand
Utilities
B.150Waste management and disposal is
the responsibility of Oxfordshire County
Council and the District Council will
continue to consider the emerging Minerals
and Waste Development Framework in the
preparation of the Local Plan.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 72Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.151AnewlibraryisproposedforBanbury
as part of the Spiceball Development Area
(PolicyBanbury9). InBicesteranewlibrary
is proposed as part of the town centre
redevelopment (‘Policy Bicester 5:
StrengtheningBicesterTownCentre’). The
new improved library services will be
provided by Oxfordshire County Council.
B.152ThepreparationoftheLocalPlanhas
highlighted the need for additional burial
grounds to be provided in some locations.
A new burial site for Bicester is being
investigated(‘PolicyBicester9:BurialSitein
Bicester’). In other cases the need for
additional burial site provision will be more
appropriately addressed through the Local
Plan Part 2 and/or by way of planning
application.
B.153The Planning Obligations Draft SPD
provides more details on the provision of
public services as part of new development
including emergency services (police, fire &
ambulance) and places of worship.B.154Preliminary enquiries with utility
companies have taken place with a view to
identifying the infrastructure requirements
andconstraintstofuturedevelopmentinthe
District. Gas,electricityandheatsupplyand
investment in electricity infrastructure is
provided by the private sector and the
Councilwillcontinuetoworkwithsuppliers
and distributors to provide the necessary
services to strategic sites. Developers will
need to take account of the location of
existingservicesandwillneedtocontribute
financiallytotheirrelocationondevelopment
sites.
B.155Thames Water, Anglian Water and
SevernTrentWaterprovidethemajorityof
the water supply and waste services in the
District. Water services business plans are
based on 5 year schedules and the scale of
investment is substantial. Timelines vary on
projects and the Council will work with the
water companies to plan the delivery of
specific projects.
B.156Telecommunications infrastructure
will be provided as part of the strategic
allocations, for example it is a requirement
of the Eco-towns PPS that homes should be
provided with connection to Superfast
Broadband. Asaresultoftheinvestmentby
the Department for Culture, Media and
Sports(DCMS),OxfordshireCountyCouncil
and Cherwell District Council full District
wide coverage will have been secured by
2017 to support increased business and
residential use, supporting increased home
working, new business formation and new
service provision.
73 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy BSC 9: Public Services and Utilities
The Council will support proposals which involve new or improvements to
public services/utilities if they are required to enable the successful delivery
of sites and where they accord with other relevant policies in the Plan. All
new developments will be expected to include provision for connection to
Superfast Broadband.
Policy BSC 10: Open Space,
Outdoor Sport and Recreation
Provision
B.157TheSustainableCommunityStrategy,
“Our district, our future” 2010, seeks to
ensure that social infrastructure grows at
the same rate as our communities and that
existing deficiencies in provision are
addressed, and these aims are reflected in
theobjectivesofthisplan. Theresponsibility
for provision of open space and recreation
facilities in the District is shared between
the County, District, Town and Parish
Councils, private sports clubs and
associations, and meeting the plan's
objectives will therefore require effective
partnership working.
B.158The District's PPG17 Open Space
Sport and Recreational Facilities Needs
Assessment, Audit and Strategy 2006 and
the subsequent Green Spaces and Playing
Pitch Strategies 2008 (see Appendix 3
Evidence Base) highlighted the need to
protect all sites identified in the audit to
ensure an adequate supply of open space
provision.
B.159Development proposals that would
result in the loss of sites will be assessed in
accordance with guidance in the NPPF and
NPPG, and will not be permitted unless the
proposal would not result in the loss of an
open space of importance to the character
or amenity of the surrounding area, an
assessment has been undertaken which
demonstrates that the site is surplus to
requirements including consideration of all
functions that open space can perform, or
the Council is satisfied that a suitable
alternative site of at least equivalent
community benefit in terms of quantity and
quality is to be provided within an agreed
timeperiod. SportEnglandwillbeconsulted
on proposals affecting playing fields.
Consideration will be given to the need to
designate Local Green Spaces (green areas
of particular importance to the local
community)inaccordancewithadviceinthe
NPPF and NPPG, through the preparation
of the Local Plan Part 2.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 74Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.160Alternative uses are only likely to be
permitted in exceptional circumstances
bearing in mind that all of the analysis areas
as defined in the PPG17 assessment have
deficiencies in at least two types of open
space provision. A partial update of the
assessment in 2011 indicated deficiencies of
oneormoretypesofprovision. Inaddition,
apparent "surpluses" in provision often
compensate for shortfalls in other types of
provision locally, and some larger areas of
green space serve wider than local needs
with usage catchments beyond the ward
boundaries in which they are located.
B.161The PPG17 Assessment and
subsequent Green Spaces and Playing Pitch
Strategiesestablishedthecurrentandfuture
deficiencies in open space and recreation
provision together with recommendations
astohowdeficienciesshouldbemet. These
comprise a combination of improving or
enhancing existing provision, using existing
openspaceofonetypeofprovisiontomeet
deficiencies in another type of provision, or
through new provision. These assessments
and strategies were undertaken before the
distribution of development over anextended plan period had been established
and further work will be undertaken in
conjunction with the Bicester and Banbury
Masterplans, the Kidlington Framework
Masterplan and the Local Plan Part 2 to
updatefutureneedsanddefinenewprovision
for open space. More detail on open space
is set out under Section C ‘Policies for
Cherwell's Places’ and in Section D ‘The
Infrastructure Delivery Plan’. The quality
standards as set out in the strategies,
together with information contained in the
PPG17studyonthequalityandvalueofopen
space sites, will be used as a guide in
considering enhancements to existing
provision. Theidentificationofsitesfornew
provision,otherthanthoseidentifiedonthe
Policies Map (see Appendix 5: Maps) and
relatedtothestrategicsitesidentifiedinthe
Local Plan, will be included in the Local Plan
Part 2.
B.162Proposals for new development will
be expected to contribute to open space,
sportandrecreationprovisioninaccordance
with Policies BSC 10, BSC 11 and BSC12
below.
Policy BSC 10: Open Space, Outdoor Sport and Recreation Provision
The Council will encourage partnership working to ensure that sufficient
quantity and quality of, and convenient access to open space, sport and
recreation provision is secured through the following measures:
Protecting existing sites
Addressing existing deficiencies in provision through qualitative
enhancementofexistingprovision,improvingaccesstoexistingfacilities
or securing new provision, and
Ensuring that proposals for new development contribute to open space,
sport and recreation provision commensurate to the need generated by
the proposals.
75 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
In determining the nature of new or improved provision the Council will be
guided by the evidence base and consult with town and parish councils,
togetherwithpotentialusersofthegreenspacewhereverpossible,toensure
that provision meets local needs.
Should the promoters of development consider that individual proposals
wouldbeunviablewiththeaboverequirements,‘open-book’financialanalysis
of proposed developments will be expected so that an in house economic
viability assessment can be undertaken. Where it is agreed that an external
economic viability assessment is required, the cost shall be met by the
promoter.
PolicyBSC11:LocalStandardsof
Provision- Outdoor Recreation
B.163The PPG17 Assessment set out
recommended standards of open space
provision. These were updated as part of
the Green Spaces and Playing Pitch Strategy
and a further partial update has been
undertaken since the Draft Core Strategy
(2010), with the findings being reflected in
thepolicybelow. Thestrategiessetoutlocal
standards for each typology of open space,but in recognition of the multi-functional
natureofmanyareasofopenspace,andthe
needforflexibilityindeterminingtheprecise
composition of provision in new
development, combined quantitative
standardsofprovisionwererecommended.
Shouldtheadditionalanalysisworkreferred
to in paragraph B.161 above result in
amendments to the open space standards,
the standards will be updated in the Local
PlanPart2andtheDeveloperContributions
SPD.
Table 7: Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor Recreation
Threshold
for on-site
provisionMinimum size of
provisionAccessibility
standardQuantitative
standardType of provision
10 urban
dwellings200 sq m 5 minute walk
(amenity open
space) (400m)2.4 ha per
1000 urban
dwellersGeneral green space
(parks and
gardens/natural
semi-natural/amenity
green space)6rural/urban
edge
dwellings15 minute walk
other (1200m)2.74 ha per
1000
rural/urban
edge dwellers
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 76Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Threshold
for on-site
provisionMinimum size of
provisionAccessibility
standardQuantitative
standardType of provision
10 dwellings
(for a LAP)LAP- 100 sq m
activity zone; 400 sq
m including buffer5 minutes walk
(400m) except
for NEAPs 15 m
walk (1200m)0.78 ha per
1000 peoplePlayspace(combining
provisionforyounger
and older children
including MUGAs) 50 dwellings
(for a LEAP
and LAP)LEAP- 400 sq m
activity zone; 3600
sqmincludingbuffer
100
dwellingsfor
a NEAP and
LEAPs/LAPs.NEAP- 1000 sq m
activity zone; 8500
sqmincludingbuffer
NB In some cases a
combined all-age
area of play will be
preferable to
provision of
LAPs/LEAPs/NEAPs.
65 dwellings 0.12 ha Football, rugby,
cricket: 10
minute walk1.13 ha per
1000 peopleOutdoor sports
provision(combining
tennis courts,
(800m) urban bowling greens, golf
areas, 10 minute
traveltime(8km)
rural areascourses and playing
pitches) (to be
accompanied by
changing facilities
where appropriate) Tenniscourts:15
minute walk
(1200m) urban
areas, 15 minute
travel time
(12km) rural
areas
Bowling greens,
golf courses: 15
minute travel
time (12km)
77 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Threshold
for on-site
provisionMinimum size of
provisionAccessibility
standardQuantitative
standardType of provision
Hockey: 20
minute travel
time.
275
dwellings0.2 ha 10 minute walk
(800m)0.37 ha per
1000 peopleAllotments
Note: See Glossary for terms: MUGAs, LAPs, LEAPs and NEAPs
Table 8: Qualitative Standards of Provision
A welcoming, clean, well maintained site that is free from vandalism and
graffiti and provides a range of facilities for all users, with a good variety ofParks and
Gardens
well kept flowers, trees and shrubs and ancillary facilities that will enhance
the user’s visit and feeling of safety. The site should reflect local traditions
and allow for the viewing of public art.
Apubliclyaccessible,spacious,cleanandlitterfreesitewithclearpathways
and natural features that encourage wildlife conservation and biodiversity.Natural /
Semi-natural
green space Sites should be maintained to protect nature conservation interest, with
interpretive signage and safety features where appropriate.
Acleanandwell-maintainedgreenspacesitewithwellkeptgrassandvaried
vegetation and large enough to accommodate informal play. Sites shouldAmenity green
space
have appropriate ancillary facilities (benches, litter bins) and landscaping in
the right places, providing a spacious outlook and overall enhancing the
appearance of the local environment.
A site providing a suitable mix of well-maintained formal equipment and an
enriched play environment to encourage informal play and recreation byPlay provision
children and young people. A safe and secure location with good accessto
the site that includes ancillary facilities such as teen shelters and seating.
Safe and secure locations with good access to sites that include ancillary
facilities such as teen shelters and seating.MUGAs
Courts should: Tennis courts
be free from dog fouling, vandalism, graffiti and litter
have level, well-drained and good quality surfaces
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 78Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
have good quality ancillary facilities
have maintenance and management that ensures safety and effective
usage.
Greens should: Bowling greens
be free from dog fouling, vandalism, graffiti and litter.
have level, well-drained and good quality surfaces
have good quality ancillary facilities
have maintenance and management that ensures safety and effective
usage
Courses should: Golf courses
be free from dog fouling, vandalism, graffiti and litter.
have level, well-drained and good quality surfaces
have good quality ancillary facilities
have maintenance and management that ensures safety and effective
usage
A clean, well kept secure site that encourages sustainable communities,
biodiversity and healthy living with appropriate ancillary facilities to meet
local needs, clearly marked pathways to and within the site.Allotments
A well maintained, clean and safe site with the provision of seating areas,
clear footpaths and car parking either on the site or nearby. The site willChurchyards /
cemeteries
encouragebiodiversitybyprovidingvariedvegetationandaimtobeanoasis
for quiet contemplation.
Clean, well maintained safe and secure routes with clear, level and well
drained paths, which are provided by the protection and reinforcement ofGreen corridors
existingvegetation. Thegreencorridorshouldprovidelinkstomajoropen
spaces, urban areas and community accommodation such as seating and
toilets where appropriate.
Aclean,safe,litterandgraffitifreecommunitysitewhichencouragesasense
of place where local distinctiveness and traditions can be celebrated. TheCivic spaces
civic space will provide public art and ancillaryfacilities, where appropriate,
to accommodate a wide range of uses.
B.164The minimum size of provision and
thresholdsforon-siteprovisionareintended
toactasaguidetodevelopers,howeverthe
compositionofprovisionwilldependonthe
details of the proposal and its location. For
example, combined play area schemes to
cover all age groups may be preferable toprovisionofLAPs,LEAPsandNEAPsinsome
cases. Similarly,thesmallestsizesitewhere
on-siteprovisionforoutdoorsportsislikely
to be possible is 65 dwellings as this would
generate a requirement sufficient for two
tennis courts; however this will not be
appropriate for all sites of that size. In
79 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
addition, open space intended to maintain
character or improve connectivity between
sites needs to be large enough to be
functional, irrespective of the standards.
B.165 Detailed guidance on the
implementation of this policy is set out in
the Planning Obligations Draft SPD. The
general principles underlying the policy are
that all new dwellings should contribute
towards the provision of open space. For
larger developments (10 dwellings or more
in urban areas and 6 dwellings or more in
rural areas), provision should be made on
siteunlessthisisnotpossibleorappropriate.
B.166For smaller developments where
on-siteprovisionisnotachievable,afinancial
contributionwillbesoughtfromdevelopers
towards the improvement of provision
elsewhere, where appropriate schemes canbe identified within the defined catchment.
The identification of schemes for which
financial contributions will be sought will be
defined in the Developer Contributions
SPD. In some cases catchment areas will
relate to wards, in some to villages and in
others to clusters of villages, having regard
toaccessibilitystandardsoutlinedaboveand
the likelihood of development coming
forward at a rate sufficient to provide the
identified schemes.
B.167The nature of the development
including the size and type of each dwelling
and their anticipated occupancy rate will be
taken into account in determining the
contribution required. It may also be
appropriate to seek green space provision,
oracontributiontowardssuchprovision,in
conjunction with other forms of
development.
Policy BSC 11: Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor Recreation
Development proposals will be required to contribute to the provision of
open space, sport and recreation, together with secure arrangements for its
management and maintenance. The amount, type and form of open space
will be determined having regard to the nature and size of development
proposed and the community needs likely to be generated by it. Provision
should usually be made on site in accordance with the minimum standards
of provision set out in ‘Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor Recreation’.
Where this is not possible or appropriate, a financial contribution towards
suitable new provision or enhancement of existing facilities off site will be
sought, secured through a legal agreement.
North West Bicester eco-development proposals for open space will be
consideredagainsttherequirementsof‘PolicyBicester1:NorthWestBicester
Eco-Town’.
Should the promoters of development consider that individual proposals
wouldbeunviablewiththeaboverequirements,open-bookfinancialanalysis
of proposed developments will be expected so that an in-house economic
viability assessment can be undertaken. Where it is agreed that an external
viability assessment is required, the cost shall be met by the promoter.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 80Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy BSC 12: Indoor Sport,
Recreation and Community
Facilities
B.168The PPG17 Indoor Sports and
Recreational Facilities Assessment (2006)
indicated an under-supply of sports hall and
swimming pool provision in the District but
concluded that the sports centre
modernisation programme would address
these deficiencies.
B.169Intermsoffutureneedsto2026,the
assessment indicated that the projected
shortfall in swimming pool and sports hall
provision could be met through sports
centre modernisation combined with dual
useagreementstoallowpublicuseofschool
facilities out of school hours. The use ofvillage/communityhallsforsportingfacilities
was also highlighted and a survey of village
and community halls is currently being
undertaken to assess the adequacy of
provision. The PPG17 assessment only
covered the period to 2026 and in view of
theextendedplanperiodandincreasedlevel
of growth associated with it, a review of
indoor sport, recreation and community
facilitiesprovisionisbeingundertaken. Initial
indicationsarethattherewillbeadeficiency
in sports hall provision by 2031 with unmet
demandbeingparticularlynoticeablearound
Bicester. Therewillbesomeunmetdemand
in swimming pool provision by 2031, with a
capacity issue at existing facilities and
deterioration in attractiveness at the older
facilitiesthroughaging. Unmetdemandcould
be addressed by the provision of new
facilitiesorincreasingthecapacityandquality
ofexistingfacilities. Furtherlocationspecific
informationisincludedinSectionC‘Policies
for Cherwell's Places’. The findings will be
used to determine whether additional
facilities are needed and inform the
application of Policy BSC12.
B.170Should the additional analysis work
referred to in paragraph B169 above result
in amendments to the indoor sports
standards, the standards will be updated in
the Local Plan Part 2 and the Developer
Contributions SPD. The local standards of
provisiondevelopedbythePPG17studyare
set out below:
Table 9: Local Standards of Provision - Indoor Recreation
LocalQuantityStandardper1000Population Facility Type
0.315 badminton courts Sports Hall
9.31m2swimming water areaSwimming Pool
0.059 courts Squash Courts
5.28 stations Health and Fitness
81 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
LocalQuantityStandardper1000Population Facility Type
0.045 rinks Indoor Bowls
0.046 pitches STPs
0.0012 8 lane facility Athletics Tracks
Table 10: Local Quality Standards
All new build and refurbishment schemes to be designed in
accordance with Sport England Guidance Notes, which provideDesign and technical
standard
detailed technical advice and standards for the design and
development of sports facilities.
All leisure providers to follow industry best practice principles in
relation to a) Facilities operation, b) Customer relations, c)staffingFacility operation and
management standard
and d) Service and development review. The detail of internal
systems,policiesandpracticesunderpinningimplementationofthese
principles will correlate directly to the scale of facility, varying
according to the position of the facility within the levels of the
established hierarchy.
15 minutes travel time. Accessibility standard
B.171Additionalguidanceonhowthepolicy
and the above standards will be applied is
contained in the Planning Obligations Draft
SPD. Development proposals will beexpected to contribute towards provision
commensuratewiththeneedsgeneratedby
the development.
Policy BSC 12: Indoor Sport, Recreation and Community Facilities
The Council will encourage the provision of community facilities to enhance
the sustainability of communities, and encourage partnership working to
ensure that built sports provision is maintained in accordance with local
standards of provision by the following means:
Protecting and enhancing the quality of existing facilities
Improving access to existing facilities
Ensuring that development proposals contribute towards the provision
of new or improved facilities where the development would generate a
needforsport,recreationandcommunityfacilitieswhichcannotbemet
by existing provision.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 82Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.3 Theme Three: Policies for
Ensuring Sustainable Development
Introduction
B.172To maintain as well as maximise the
qualityoflivinginCherwellDistrictweneed
to value our environment and find ways to
reduce our impact upon it. This includes
taking steps to progressively reduce our
reliance on meeting our energy needs from
fossil sources.
B.173Criticaltoachievingprogresstowards
a lower carbon economy is the provision of
qualityemploymentintheDistrictandpublic
transport options for rail and bus to reduce
the need to travel by private car, hence the
importance of Theme One: Securing a
Sustainable Local Economy. But we also
needtomanagedevelopmenttoensurethat
thequalityofourenvironmentisvaluedand
sustained.B.174The Local Plan will help to ensure
thatgrowthanddevelopmentdoesnottake
place at the expense of the very features
whichmakeCherwellunique. Forexample,
coalescence between the areas for strategic
development and neighbouring villages.
B.175 This Theme sets out how
developmentimpactistobemanagedbythe
need to respect the local environment, the
need to meet rising building standards and
the need to maintain a high quality natural
and built environment.
B.176This Theme also includes provision
forprotectingimportantheritageassetssuch
as the Oxford Canal and for ensuring that
whatisbuiltwhetherhousingorcommercial
development is to the highest quality of
design possible.
Policy ESD 1: Mitigating and
Adapting to Climate Change
B.177The 2009 UK Climate Projections
(UKCP09) set out some key projections of
climate change across the UK over the 21st
Century. Projected changes by the 2080s,
based on a 50% probability level, include:
increases in summer mean
temperatures, particularly in southern
England where increases of 3.9 degrees
are projected
decreasesinsummerprecipitation,again
particularly in southern England where
decreases of 23% are projected
increases in winter precipitation in
southern England of 22%.
83 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.178Changes as small as a 2°C global
temperature rise will have serious impacts:
rising sea levels
extreme events such as droughts and
heavy rainfall, leading to disruption to
natural and man-made habitats
communitiesacrosstheUKmaystruggle
to cope with the effects of warmer
summers and wetter winters.
B.179A Local Climate Impacts Profile
(LCLIP) has been undertaken to better
understand the impact of extreme weatherin Cherwell and on the Council itself. The
LCLIP reviewed extreme weather events
experienced over a five year period (2003 –
2008), finding that within Cherwell flooding
was by far the most significant event, with
significant flooding occurring 6 times in a 5
year period, 2 of the events being serious
andwidespread(2003and2007). Heatwaves
were found to have been infrequent in that
5 years period, but if they were to recur on
the scale of 2003 this would have significant
impacts on health, biodiversity and
infrastructure(includingdamagetobuildings
by tree and drought related subsidence,
roads, drainage systems and business
closures).
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 84Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.180There is increasing recognition that
reducing carbon emissions is important in
reducing and adapting to the impacts of
climate change. The Climate Change Act
2008 has an objective of an 80% reduction
(from a 1990 baseline) in carbon dioxide
emissionsby2050. Thiscanbeachievedby,
forexample,reducingdependenceonprivate
cars and locating new development in
sustainable, accessible, locations, increasing
energyefficiency,orbyincreasingtheuseof
renewable or low carbon energy sources.
Itisparticularlyimportanttoreducecarbon
emissions from dwellings and business
through increasing energy efficiency.
Similarly it is important to ensure that we
adapt to the inevitable changes to future
climate. This applies to the built
development,itslocation,design,layoutand
proposed land uses, as well as the natural
environment, by seeking to reduce
exacerbated habitat fragmentation by
increasing landscape permeability and
connectivity (see 'Policy ESD 10: Protection
and Enhancement of Biodiversity and the
Natural Environment', 'Policy ESD15 Built
and Historic Environment' and 'Policy ESD
17: Green Infrastructure').
B.181Mitigatingandadaptingtotheimpacts
of climate change are an important priority
forthe Districtandhavebeen recognisedin
the following:
the Cherwell Sustainable Community
Strategy ‘Our District Our Future’
the Council’s Low Carbon
Environmental Strategy
theCouncil’ssigningoftheNottingham
Declaration
Eco Bicester: seeking to deliver
sustainablebuildingstandardsacrossthe
town.
B.182Consequently this Local Plan and its
strategicobjectivesarefocusedondelivering
sustainable development. Specifically,
Strategic Objective 10 (see Section Strategy
for Development in Cherwell) relates to
climatechangemitigationandadaptation(to
reduce the intensity of climate change and
to adapt to its effects) and this will be
achieved through policies ESD 1 - 7.
B.183The most sustainable locations for
growth in the District are considered to be
Banbury, Bicester and the larger villages as
identified in Policies Villages 1 and Villages 2
asthesesettlementshavearangeofservices
and facilities, reducing the need to travel by
car. Well designed and connected schemes
which promote pedestrian movement can
also assist in meeting this objective. (see
'Policy ESD 15 The Character of the Built
andHistoricEnvironment').TheCouncilwill
develop a sustainability checklist to aid the
assessment of the sustainability of
development proposals, which will be
included in the Sustainable Buildings in
Cherwell SPD.
Policy ESD 1: Mitigating and Adapting to Climate Change
Measures will be taken to mitigate the impact of development within the
District on climate change. At a strategic level, this will include:
Distributing growth to the most sustainable locations as defined in this
Local Plan
85 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Deliveringdevelopmentthatseekstoreducetheneedtotravelandwhich
encouragessustainabletraveloptionsincludingwalking,cyclingandpublic
transport to reduce dependence on private cars
Designing developments to reduce carbon emissions and use resources
more efficiently, including water (see Policy ESD 3 Sustainable
Construction)
Promoting the use of decentralisedand renewableor low carbon energy
whereappropriate(seePoliciesESD4DecentralisedEnergySystemsand
ESD 5 Renewable Energy).
The incorporation of suitable adaptation measures in new development to
ensure that development is more resilient to climate change impacts will
include consideration of the following:
Taking into account the known physical and environmental constraints
when identifying locations for development
Demonstrationofdesignapproachesthatareresilienttoclimatechange
impacts including the use of passive solar design for heating and cooling
Minimising the risk of flooding and making use of sustainable drainage
methods, and
Reducing the effects of development on the microclimate (through the
provisionofgreeninfrastructureincludingopenspaceandwater,planting,
and green roofs).
Adaptation through design approaches will be considered in more locally
specificdetailintheSustainableBuildingsinCherwellSupplementaryPlanning
Document (SPD).
Policy ESD 2: Energy Hierarchy
and Allowable Solutions
B.184Whilst we need to promote
renewable energy where appropriate (see
'Policy ESD 3: Sustainable Construction'), it
would be counter-productive to encourage
generation of renewable energy if energy is
being wasted by inefficiency. As such Policy
ESD 2 expresses our support for an 'energy
hierarchy'.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 86Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.185AnEnergyStatementwillberequired
for proposals for major residential
developments (over 10 dwellings), and all
non-residentialdevelopmenttodemonstrate
howtheenergyhierarchyhasbeenapplied.
TheEnergyStatementcanformastandalone
document or be part of the Design and
AccessStatement.TheCouncilwillproduce
a template for use in preparing energy
statements.
B.186Carbon emissions reductions can be
achieved through a range of “allowable
solutions”; measures which secure carbon
savingsoffsite. Thesehaveyettobedefined
by the government but could potentially
include investment in off site low and zero
carbon technologies. The concept isrelativelynewandisseenasawaytoenable
developments to become carbon neutral
where it is not possible to deal with all
carbonemissionsthroughonsitemeasures.
It will not always be cost effective or
technically feasible to meet the zero carbon
standard through on site measures and the
government is therefore proposing that the
zero carbon standard could be achieved by
mitigating the remaining emissions off-site
through the use of allowable solutions. The
Council will support the implementation of
thenationalapproachtoallowablesolutions
once defined and any additional
implementation guidance required at a local
level will be set out in the Local Plan Part 2
and the Sustainable Buildings in Cherwell
SPD’.
Policy ESD 2: Energy Hierarchy and Allowable Solutions
Inseekingtoachievecarbonemissionsreductions,wewillpromotean'energy
hierarchy' as follows:
Reducing energy use, in particular by the use of sustainable design and
construction measures
Supplying energy efficiently and giving priority to decentralised energy
supply
Making use of renewable energy
Making use of allowable solutions.
B.187Thedetailedapplicationoftheenergy
hierarchy in assessing proposals will be
explained in the Sustainable Buildings in
Cherwell SPD.
B.188Policies on each element of the
energyhierarchyaresetoutinorderbelow.Policy ESD 3: Sustainable
Construction
B.189Policy ESD 3 sets out the Council’s
approach to implementing the first step of
the energy hierarchy in Policy ESD 2
specifically,itsencouragementfortheuseof
sustainable design and construction
measures.
87 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.190 The delivery of sustainable
development is a fundamental theme of the
Local Plan and the Council places a high
priority on the achievement of sustainable
construction.
B.191TheexpectationsinPolicyESD3will
be applied flexibly. The onus will be on the
developer to demonstrate (with robustevidence) why the requirements cannot be
met, for example where the application of
the policy would conflict with other policy
objectives, or where it can be satisfactorily
shown that implementing the standards
would not be feasible or financially viable,
undermining delivery of the development.
Negotiations will take place to ensure that
sustainableconstructionisachievedasfaras
possible and we encourage discussion with
the Council in the early stages of any
development proposal. This policy will be
subject to monitoring and review to ensure
the standards and guidance remain
appropriate and relevant. Any new national
standards will need to be reflected in
revisions to the local policy.
B.192Sustainable design and construction
issues will be considered and illustrated in
morelocaldetailintheSustainableBuildings
in Cherwell SPD.
Policy ESD 3: Sustainable Construction
All new residential development will be expected to incorporate sustainable
design and construction technology to achieve zero carbon development
through a combination of fabric energy efficiency, carbon compliance and
allowable solutions in line with Government policy.
Cherwell District is in an area of water stress and as such the Council will
seekahigherlevelofwaterefficiencythanrequiredintheBuildingRegulations,
with developments achieving a limit of 110 litres/person/day.
All new non-residential development will be expected to meet at least
BREEAM‘VeryGood’withimmediateeffect,subjecttoreviewovertheplan
period to ensure the target remains relevant. The demonstration of the
achievement of this standard should be set out in the Energy Statement.
The strategic site allocations identified in this Local Plan are expected to
provide contributions to carbon emissions reductions and to wider
sustainability.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 88Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
All development proposals will be encouraged to reflect high quality design
and high environmental standards, demonstrating sustainable construction
methods including but not limited to:
Minimising both energy demands and energy loss
Maximising passive solar lighting and natural ventilation
Maximising resource efficiency
Incorporating the use of recycled and energy efficient materials
Incorporating the use of locally sourced building materials
Reducing waste and pollution and making adequate provision for the
recycling of waste
Making use of sustainable drainage methods
Reducing the impact on the external environment and maximising
opportunitiesforcoolingandshading(bytheprovisionofopenspaceand
water, planting, and green roofs, for example); and
Making use of the embodied energy within buildings wherever possible
and re-using materials where proposals involve demolition or
redevelopment.
Should the promoters of development consider that individual proposals
wouldbeunviablewiththeaboverequirements,‘open-book’financialanalysis
ofproposeddevelopmentswillbeexpectedsothatanindependenteconomic
viabilityassessmentcanbeundertaken. Whereitisagreedthataneconomic
viability assessment is required, the cost shall be met by the promoter.
Policy ESD 4: Decentralised
Energy Systems
B.193This policy sets out the Council’s
support for decentralised energy systems,
the second step of the energy hierarchy in
'Policy ESD 2: Energy Hierarchy'.
89 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.194The national Heat Strategy aims to
ensure there is affordable, secure and low
carbon heating in a nation where 70% of all
heat currently comes from natural gas, a
fossil fuel. Nearly half the energy we use in
the UK is used for heating of one sort or
anotherand52%ofnaturalgasconsumedin
theUKin2011wasusedtoprovideheatfor
buildingsandindustry(HeatStrategy,DECC,
2013). Our 'Renewable Energy and
Sustainable Construction Study' (see
Appendix 3: Evidence Base) found that
District Heating and Combined Heat and
Power (CHP) will have an important role in
deliveringlowcarbonandrenewablepower
and heat in the District. The Heat Strategy
and the CarbonPlan (2011) both emphasise
theurgentnationalneedtodecarboniseour
heat supply in order to meet commitmentstoreducecarbonemissions(ClimateChange
Act 2008). The Local Plan seeks to tackle
this by increasingthermal efficiency through
better insulation of buildings ('Policy ESD 3:
Sustainable Construction') and through
Policy, ESD 4, by encouraging efficient heat
delivery systems.
B.195Briefly, District Heating involves the
distribution of heat (for space heating and
hot water) from a decentralised energy
centre connected to local customers via a
private heat distribution network, meaning
that systems can be more efficient, avoiding
losses over larger transmission and
distributionnetworks. CHPsystemsinvolve
theutilisationof'waste'heatproducedwhen
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 90Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
fuel is burnt to generate electricity.
Trigeneration, supplying chilled water for
cooling, is also possible).
B.196ThefuelsourceinbothDHandCHP
systems can be either non renewable or
renewable (renewable heat installations will
of course contribute to meeting national
renewable energy targets). In the UK most
DH networks are linked to a gas fired CHP
system or use waste heat generated from
industrial processes. Some parts of rural
Cherwell are without mains gas (‘off-gas
areas’)andherebiomasspoweredDH/CHP
couldbeappropriate.TheRenewableEnergy
and Low Carbon Map at Appendix 5 'Thematic Maps' shows the broad potential
fordecentralisedheatsupplyin the District,
illustratinganypotentialwasteheatsources,
theexistingDH/CHPschemesintheDistrict
that could be extended, the off-gas areas in
the District, and the typical major users of
heat that could anchor a district heating
system. This map should be used in
combination with the DECC’s mapping of
areasofhighheatdemanddensitytoinform
more detailed feasibility assessments of the
potentialforDH/CHPinnewdevelopments
in Cherwell. The Council will produce
guidanceandatemplateforuseinpreparing
feasibility assessments.
Policy ESD 4: Decentralised Energy Systems
The use of decentralised energy systems, providing either heating (District
Heating(DH))orheatingandpower(CombinedHeatandPower(CHP))will
be encouraged in all new developments.
A feasibility assessment for DH/CHP, including consideration of biomass
fuelled CHP, will be required for:
All residential developments for 100 dwellings or more
All residential developments in off-gas areas for 50 dwellings or more
Allapplicationsfornon-domesticdevelopmentsabove1000m2floorspace.
The feasibility assessment should be informed by the renewable energy map
at Appendix 5 ‘Maps’ and the national mapping of heat demand densities
undertakenbytheDepartmentforEnergyandClimateChange(DECC)(see
Appendix 3: Evidence Base ).
Wherefeasibilityassessmentsdemonstratethatdecentralisedenergysystems
are deliverable and viable, such systems will be required as part of the
development unless an alternative solution would deliver the same or
increased benefit.
91 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy ESD 5: Renewable Energy
B.197This policy sets out the Council’s
support for renewable energy where
appropriate, the third step in the energy
hierarchyof'PolicyESD2:EnergyHierarchy',
in order to contribute to national carbon
emissions reductions and renewable energy
generationtargets. TheCouncilwillproduce
guidanceandatemplateforuseinpreparing
feasibility assessments. Planning applications
forrenewableandlowcarbonenergywillbe
considered against Policy ESD 5 in addition
to current government advice in the NPPF
and NPPG.
B.198Mapping of spatial opportunities for
renewable energy has been undertaken in
The Cherwell Renewable Energy and
Sustainable Construction Study (see
Appendix 3: Evidence Base) which sets out
thepotentialfordifferenttypesofrenewable
energydevelopmentintheDistrictandmaps
the broad spatial opportunities for
renewables. We have not allocated specific
spatial opportunities for large scale
renewableenergyinthisLocalPlan,primarily
because very few opportunities have been
identified and even these are subject toconstraints which require detailed
investigation.Wehavehowevermappedthe
broad potential for District heating
opportunities in Cherwell (see 'Policy ESD
4: Decentralised Energy Systems').
B.199Based on local evidence available at
the current time (see Appendix 3: Evidence
Base) opportunities for large scale wind
generation are considered to be limited and
uncertain, although there is potential for
scattered single turbines or small clusters.
Policy ESD5 will apply to all proposals for
wind turbine development including
monitoring masts. In line with the UK
Renewable Energy Strategy, the community
ownership of wind power and other
renewable energy schemes is encouraged
within Cherwell.
B.200Impacts on residential amenity are
particularly pertinent in relation to wind
turbines and wind farm development. To
minimise adverse impacts on residential
amenity, the Council will apply minimum
separation distances between turbines and
dwellings. Further guidance on separation
distancesissetoutintheCouncil’s“Planning
GuidanceontheResidentialAmenityImpacts
of Wind Turbines Development”document
(2011).
B.201There is increasing interest in the
development of large scale solar PV arrays
in Cherwell. The issues of local significance
setoutbelowwillberelevantconsiderations
in the determination of such proposals as
wellastheneedtoprotecttheDistrict’shigh
quality agricultural land (Grades 1 and 2).
B.202Policyinrelationtorenewableenergy
generation in the Cotswolds Area of
Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) is set
out in the Cotswolds AONB Management
Plan, produced by the Cotswolds
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 92Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
ConservationBoard,whichhasbeenadopted
by this council as supplementary planning
guidance.
Policy ESD 5: Renewable Energy
The Council supports renewable and low carbon energy provision wherever
any adverse impacts can be addressed satisfactorily. The potential local
environmental, economic and community benefits of renewable energy
schemeswillbeamaterialconsiderationindeterminingplanningapplications.
Planning applications involving renewable energy development will be
encouragedprovidedthatthereisnounacceptableadverseimpact,including
cumulative impact, on the following issues, which are considered to be of
particular local significance in Cherwell:
Landscapeandbiodiversityincludingdesignations,protectedhabitatsand
species, and Conservation Target Areas
Visual impacts on local landscapes
Thehistoricenvironmentincludingdesignatedandnondesignatedassets
and their settings
The Green Belt, particularly visual impacts on openness
Aviation activities
Highways and access issues, and
Residential amenity.
A feasibility assessment of the potential for significant on site renewable
energy provision (above any provision required to meet national building
standards) will be required for:
All residential developments for 100 dwellings or more
All residential developments in off-gas areas for 50 dwellings or more
Allapplicationsfornon-domesticdevelopmentsabove1000m2floorspace.
Where feasibility assessments demonstrate that on site renewable energy
provision is deliverable and viable, this will be required as part of the
development unless an alternative solution would deliver the same or
increased benefit. This may include consideration of ‘allowable solutions’ as
Government Policy evolves.
93 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy ESD 6: Sustainable Flood
Risk Management
B.203The risk of flooding from rivers and
watercoursesacrosstheDistrictishigh,with
large extensive floodplains a feature of our
rural landscape. The District falls within
three major river catchments. The River
Cherwell forms part of the larger Thames
catchment, which comprises about 80% of
theDistrict'stotalareacoveringmuchofthe
urbanandruraldevelopmentintheDistrict.
During flood conditions the River Cherwell
alsolargelyco-joinswiththeadjacentOxford
Canal. The Great Ouse catchment covers
approximately15%oftheDistrict'stotalarea
and the Warwickshire Avon catchment
approximately5%. Groundwaterandsewer
flooding have also occurred at various
locationsintheDistrict. Floodingeventsare
detailed in the Council's Level 1 Strategic
Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) and further
informationisalsoprovidedintheCouncil's
Local Climate Impacts Profile (LCLIP) (See
Appendix 3: Evidence Base).
B.204Properties at risk of flooding are
dispersed across the District but there are
clusters of properties at risk in Banbury and
Kidlington (more than 100 properties in
total). The SFRA also highlights that some
rural settlements are potentially affected by
fluvial flooding.
B.205Construction work commenced in
February2011onaFloodAlleviationScheme
for Banburyto protectthe town centre and
surrounding businesses from flooding and
the scheme is now complete. The project
was funded by the Environment Agency
supportedbyCherwellDistrictCounciland
contributions from local landowners.
B.206The Flood and Water Management
Act 2010 assigns local authorities with a
responsibility for managing flood risk. In
Cherwell District, Oxfordshire County
Council is the Lead Local Flood Authority
(LLFA), with the District Council having an
important supporting role to play as a Risk
Management Authority. The probability of
flooding can be reduced through the
managementofland,riversystemsandflood
defences, and the impact reduced through
influencing the type of development located
in flood risk areas. The following policy will
be used to manage and reduce flood risk in
the District.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 94Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy ESD 6: Sustainable Flood Risk Management
The Council will manage and reduce flood risk in the District through using
a sequential approach to development; locating vulnerable developments in
areas at lower risk of flooding. Development proposals will be assessed
according to the sequential approach and where necessary the exceptions
test as set out in the NPPF and NPPG. Development will only be permitted
in areas of flood risk when there are no reasonably available sites in areas of
lowerfloodriskandthebenefitsofthedevelopmentoutweightherisksfrom
flooding.
In addition to safeguarding floodplains from development, opportunities will
be sought to restore natural river flows and floodplains, increasing their
amenity and biodiversity value. Building over or culverting of watercourses
should be avoided and the removal of existing culverts will be encouraged.
Existing flood defences will be protected from damaging development and
where development is considered appropriate in areas protected by such
defencesitmustallowforthemaintenanceandmanagementofthedefences
and be designed to be resilient to flooding.
Sitespecificfloodriskassessmentswillberequiredtoaccompanydevelopment
proposals in the following situations:
All development proposals located in flood zones 2 or 3
Development proposals of 1 hectare or more located in flood zone 1
Developmentsiteslocatedinanareaknowntohaveexperiencedflooding
problems
Development sites located within 9m of any watercourses.
Floodriskassessmentsshouldassessallsourcesoffloodriskanddemonstrate
that:
There will be no increase in surface water discharge rates or volumes
during storm events up to and including the 1 in 100 year storm event
with an allowance for climate change (the design storm event)
Developments will not flood from surface water up to and including the
designstormeventoranysurfacewaterfloodingbeyondthe1in30year
storm event, up to and including the design storm event will be safely
contained on site.
Development should be safe and remain operational (where necessary) and
proposalsshoulddemonstratethatsurfacewaterwillbemanagedeffectively
on site and that the development will not increase flood risk elsewhere,
including sewer flooding.
95 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.207Theabovepolicyreflectsgovernment
planning guidance on sustainable flood risk
managementsetoutintheNPPFandNPPG.
Thesuitabilityofdevelopmentproposalswill
be assessed according to the sequential
approach and where necessary the
exceptions test as set out in the NPPF and
NPPG. Defended areas should be
sequentially tested as though the defences
are not there. Applications will also be
assessed against the Environment Agency’s
standing advice on flood risk.
B.208The Council's Level 1 SFRA (see
Appendix 3: Evidence Base) provides the
framework for applying the sequential and
exception tests in the District. The SFRA
identifiesandmapstheriskoffloodingacross
the District based on a range of data and
takingintoaccountpredictedclimatechange
impacts,andisausefulsourceofinformation
in undertaking site specific flood risk
assessmentsparticularlyinrelationtospecific
locationsacrosstheDistrict. TheSFRAalso
highlights the biodiversity opportunities
associated with the use of sustainable flood
riskmanagementtechniques,forexamplein
enhancing or creating priority habitats such
as grazing marsh, wet grassland, wetlands
and aquatic habitats (particularly so in the
ConservationTargetAreas-see'PolicyESD
11: Conservation Target Areas').
B.209Level2SFRAshavealsobeencarried
out to assess the level of flood risk for
strategic site allocations in more detail (see
Appendix 3: Evidence Base). The
assessments provide site specific guidance
for flood risk assessments, policy
recommendations and Sustainable Drainage
Systems (SuDS) guidance. The findings of
the assessments will be taken into account
in the final determination of planning
applications at the strategic sites.B.210Site specific Flood Risk Assessments
(FRAs) will be required in accordance with
the NPPF and NPPG. The FRA should
identify and assess the risks of all forms of
flooding to and from the development and
demonstrate how these flood risks will be
managed,takingclimatechangeintoaccount.
Fluvial flood events up to and including the
1 in 100 year event with an allowance for
climate change should be considered. For
major developments in Flood Zone 1, the
FRAshouldidentifyopportunitiestoreduce
the probability and consequences of
flooding. The FRA should also include
investigation of the use of sustainable
drainage systems (see 'Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems' (SuDS)).
B.211Briefly, there are 3 levels of FRA, as
follows:
Level 1 - Screening: identify if a
development site has flood risk issues
Level2-Scoping:qualitativeassessment
to determine how flood sources affect
the site and options available for
mitigation
Level 3 - Details: where the quality
and/or quantity of information is
insufficient to enable a robust
assessment of the flood risks, further
investigationwillberequiredpotentially
involving hydraulic modelling.
B.212AnFRAdoesnotneedtogothrough
every stage (i.e. if it is known that detailed
modellingwillberequired,justaLevel3FRA
can be carried out). The Council’s SFRA
makes the following recommendations for
FRAs undertaken in particular locations
across the District, as follows:
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 96Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Site Specific FRA Requirement Location
Where a site is in close proximity of the Oxford Canal, the Level 3
FRA should include breach analysis.Wherever applicable
Flood defended areas will require a FRA to include assessment of risk
from catastrophic failure of defences.Wherever applicable
A detailed level 3 FRA is required for development within the River
Cherwell Floodplain to include flood compensation.Banbury
Groundwater risk to be highlighted at Crouch Hill.
A level 2 FRA using existing data can be applied. North East Biceser
A level 3 FRA including hydraulic modelling will be required in the
vicinities of these watercourses.South East Bicester
Where EA modelled data is available a level 2 FRA can be completed
usingexistingmodelledfloodlevels.WherenodataisavailableaLevel
3 FRA including hydraulic modelling may be required for sites in close
proximity to the Rowell Brook or the River Cherwell.Kidlington
A level 2 FRA to include detailed assessment of groundwater flood
risk should be included at all sites.
There are village specific recommendations contained in the SFRA Rural Areas
B.213Additional recommendations are
included in the Level 2 SFRAs for the
proposed strategic site allocations.
B.214We will work actively with the
Environment Agency, the Local Lead Flood
Authority, other operating authorities and
stakeholderstoensurethatbestuseismade
oftheirexpertiseandsothatspatialplanning
supports existing flood risk management
policies and plans, River Basin Management
Plans and emergency planning.Policy ESD 7: Sustainable
Drainage Systems (SuDS)
B.215Policy ESD 7 sets out the Council's
approach to Sustainable Drainage Systems
(SuDS). Potentialfloodingandpollutionrisks
from surface water can be reduced by
reducing the volume and rate of water
entering the sewerage system and
watercourses. Managing drainage more
sustainably in this way can ensure that
developments are better adapted to the
predicted impacts of climate change in the
South East, which include more intense
rainfallevents. PolicyESD7issupportedby
theFloodandWaterManagementAct2010
97 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
which presumes that SuDS will be used for
all new developments and redevelopments
in order to prevent surface water run-off
from increasing flood risk, and sets out that
national standards be published to address
SuDS design, construction, operation and
maintenance issues at a national level.
B.216SuDS seek to manage surface water
as close to its source as possible, mimicking
surface water flows arising from the site
prior to the proposed development.
Typicallythisapproachinvolvesamoveaway
from piped systems to softer engineering
solutions. SuDS are considered to be
suitable for use in association with
developments across the District. Where
site specific Flood Risk Assessments are
required to be submitted to accompany
developmentproposalstheseshouldbeused
to investigate how SuDS can be used on
particular sites and to design appropriate
systems.
B.217In considering SuDS solutions, the
need to protect ground water quality must
be taken into account, especially where
infiltrationtechniquesareproposed. Where
possible, multiple benefits including for
recreation and wildlife should be delivered.
Proposalsmustincludeanagreementonthe
future management, maintenance and
replacement of the drainage structures.
B.218Allrelevantorganisationsshouldmeet
at an early stage to agree on the most
appropriate drainage system for theparticulardevelopment. Theseorganisations
mayincludetheLocalAuthority,theSewage
Undertaker,OxfordshireCountyCouncilas
the LLFA and Highways Authority, and the
Environment Agency. Highways SuDS will
be adopted by OxfordshireCounty Council
butmustbelocatedonthemostappropriate
land, requiring consideration of the need to
provide access for maintenance purposes,
and topographical factors. Non-highway
SuDS draining two properties or more will
be adopted by the Local Lead Flood
Authority (LLFA) after Schedule 3 of the
2010 Act comes into force.
B.219Advice on SuDS and their various
techniquesisprovidedintheCouncil'sLevel
1 SFRA (August 2008). All areas of the
District are suitable for SuDS in one form
or another but the SFRA contains maps of a
rangeofgeologicalandgroundconditiondata
which can be used to identify the general
permeability of the underlying ground
conditions(bedrock,superficialdepositsand
soil)andthevulnerabilityofthegroundwater
resources (aquifers), to determine which
SuDS system might be suitable. However
the SFRA's mapping of SuDS opportunity
does not provide a detailed and definitive
investigation at site specific level, and so
further assessment may be required to
further investigate SuDS opportunities on
individual sites. The Level 2 SFRAs contain
additional guidance relating to the use of
SuDS on the proposed strategic site
allocations.
Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)
Alldevelopmentwillberequiredtousesustainabledrainagesystems(SuDS)
for the management of surface water run-off.
Where site specific Flood Risk Assessments are required in association with
development proposals, they should be used to determine how SuDS can be
used on particular sites and to design appropriate systems.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 98Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
InconsideringSuDSsolutions,theneedtoprotectgroundwaterqualitymust
betakenintoaccount,especiallywhereinfiltrationtechniquesareproposed.
Wherepossible,SuDS shouldseekto reducefloodrisk,reducepollutionand
provide landscape and wildlife benefits. SuDS will require the approval of
OxfordshireCountyCouncilasLLFAandSuDSApprovalBody,andproposals
must include an agreement on the future management, maintenance and
replacement of the SuDS features.
Our Core Assets
Policy ESD 8: Water Resources
B.220Inconsideringdevelopmentproposals,
the Council will use Policy ESD 8 together
with'PolicyESD3:SustainableConstruction',
'Policy ESD 6: Sustainable Flood Risk
Management' and 'Policy ESD 7: Sustainable
Drainage Systems' (SuDS) to reduce the
impact of development on the water
environment,maintainwaterquality,ensure
adequate water resources and promote
sustainabilityinwateruse. Thiswillassistin
contributing to the objectives of the Water
FrameworkDirectivewhichseekstoprotect
andenhancethequalityofwaterbodies,andindicatesthatdevelopmentshouldnotresult
in any deterioration in the status of surface
water bodies. Some development can
remediate contaminated land which may be
havinganadverseimpactoncontrolledwater
and human health. These policies together
with Policy ESD 8 are also intended to help
deliver the actions contained in the Thames
RiverBasinManagementPlan. Theseactions
highlight the importance of development
proposalscontributingtoanimprovedwater
environment,throughtheuseofsustainable
designandconstructiontechniquesforwater
efficiency,waterqualityandsustainableflood
management, and the incorporation of
appropriate green infrastructure and
biodiversity improvements.
99 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.221Research carried out by the
Environment Agency and set out in the
Catchment Abstraction Management
Strategies (CAMs) shows that Cherwell
District lies within an area of serious water
stress and the Upper Cherwell area
(including Banbury) has been over
abstracted. Policy ESD 8 will be used toensure that new development is located in
areas where adequate water supply can be
provided from existing and potential water
supplyinfrastructure. Inaddition'PolicyESD
1:MitigatingandAdaptingtoClimateChange'
and'PolicyESD3:SustainableConstruction'
will ensure new development incorporates
waterefficiencymeasures,reducingdemand.
Policy ESD 8: Water Resources
The Council will seek to maintain water quality, ensure adequate water
resources and promote sustainability in water use.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 100Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Water quality will be maintained and enhanced by avoiding adverse effects
of development on the water environment. Development proposals which
would adversely affect the water quality of surface or underground water
bodies, including rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs, as a result of directly
attributable factors, will not be permitted.
Development will only be permitted where adequate water resources exist,
or can be provided without detriment to existing uses. Where appropriate,
phasing of development will be used to enable the relevant water
infrastructure to be put in place in advance of development commencing.
Protection and Enhancement of
Biodiversity and the Natural
Environment
B.222Conserving biodiversity is an
important element of sustainable
development. Government guidance in the
NPPF and NPPG indicates that in delivering
sustainable development local authorities
should enhance as well as protect
biodiversity and natural habitats. It is also
recognised that the distribution of habitats
and species will be affected by climate
change. This reinforces the importance of
consideringclimatechangeimpactsinseeking
toavoidhabitatfragmentation. Followingan
initiative in the Natural Environment White
Paper 2011, a Local Nature Partnership for
Oxfordshire('WildOxfordshire')wassetup
with the aim of encouraging all sectors to
considerthenaturalenvironmentindecision
making and recognise the wider social and
economic benefits biodiversity brings. The
Council will have regard to the views of
'Wild Oxfordshire' in ensuring sustainable
development.
B.223CherwellDistrictcontainsmanyareas
of high ecological value including sites of
international and national importance, as
outlined below. While the District is
predominantlyrural,itsurbancentres,parks
andopenspacesarejustasmuchpartofthelocal environment and provide important
habitats for wildlife. The policies to protect
and enhance the natural environment and
biodiversity in urban and rural areas are set
out below.
B.224Cherwell contains one site of
European importance; part of Oxford
Meadows Special Area of Conservation
(SAC) located in the south west corner of
the District (indicated on the Cherwell
District Policies Map (Appendix 5: Maps).
TheSACreceivesstatutoryprotectionunder
theHabitatsDirective(Directive92/42/EEC),
transposed into national legislation in the
Conservation of Habitats and Species
Regulations2010(theHabitatsRegulations).
B.225Theproposalsinthisdocumenthave
been informed by Habitats Regulations
Assessmentsundertakeninaccordancewith
Regulation 21 of the Habitats Regulations.
An HRA was carried out to determine
whether the proposals in the Core Strategy
Options for Growth paper (2008) were
likely, either alone or in combination with
otherplansandprojects,tohaveasignificant
effect upon European sites An HRA of the
Draft Core Strategy (February 2010) was
alsoundertaken. Copiesofbothassessments
are available on the Council's website (see
Appendix 3: Evidence Base).
101 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.226 Appropriate measures as
recommended by the HRA have been
incorporatedtoavoidorminimisetheeffect
oftheplanproposalsontheSACinrelation
to water quality, natural groundwater flow,
air quality and recreational use. A revised
HRA was undertaken (2012) to accompany
the Proposed Submission Local Plan to
ensurethattheplanproposalswillnotresult
in adverse effects on the SAC. Addendums
to the HRA were published to accompany
the focused consultation on proposed
changes to the Plan in March 2013 and the
SubmissionLocalPlaninOctober2013which
confirmed that there would be no likely
significant effects on any Natura 2000 Sites
as a result of the proposals within the Plan.
AHRA(Stage1Screening)re-affirmingthese
conclusions accompanied the proposed
modifications to the Plan.
B.227Paragraph B.95 indicates that if
Oxfordisunabletoaccommodatethewhole
of its new housing requirement for the
2011-2031 period within its administrative
boundary,theCouncilwillcontinuetowork
jointly with the other Oxfordshire local
authorities to assess all reasonable spatial
options of how any unmet need could be
met. The consideration of all reasonable
optionswouldincludeundertakingaHabitats
Regulations Assessment to assess the alone
and in combination effects on sites of
European importance.
B.228However, as the proposals in the
Local Plan are strategic by nature, any more
detailed proposals that are identified in the
Local Plan Part 2 will also be subject to a
Habitats Regulations Assessment to
determine if they are likely to have a
significant impact. Similarly, if a proposed
development submitted as a planning
application could have a likely significant
effect on Oxford Meadows SAC then
consideration and assessment would need
to be undertaken (see 'Policy ESD 9:Protection of the Oxford Meadows SAC'
and 'Policy ESD 10: Protection and
EnhancementofBiodiversityandtheNatural
Environment').
B.229One of the recommendationsarising
from the HRA was the need to ensure
groundwater flows and water quality at the
SACarenotaffectedbydevelopment.Policy
ESD 9 will be used to ensure that this is the
case.
Policy ESD 9: Protection of the
Oxford Meadows SAC
B.230TheOxfordMeadowsSAChasbeen
designated for European protection due to
the lowland hay meadow habitats it
supports. The site includes vegetation
communities that are considered to be
potentially unique in the world (due to the
influence of long-term grazing and
hay-cutting). The site has been traditionally
managedforseveralcenturiesandsoexhibits
goodconservationofstructureandfunction.
It is also designated as a European site as it
supports creeping marshwort - one of only
twoknownsitesintheUKthatsupportthis
plant species. The River Thames flows
through the centre of the site and the
hydrological regime makes an important
contribution to the integrity of the site in
supporting these habitats and species.
B.231The HRA identified two potential
significant impacts relating to water and
water quality:
TheSACreceivesgroundwatersupplies
from the River Cherwell and the River
Thames (and their catchments).
Alteration to adjacent rivers or
obstruction of natural groundwater
flows may alter the flooding regime of
the SAC and lead to a degradation of
the internationally important habitats
and biodiversity that it supports.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 102Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
However the current groundwater
recharge could be maintained using
Sustainable DrainageSystems,including
porous surfacing, which maintain
infiltration of groundwater without
exacerbating flood risk (see Policy ESD
7).
If new development is situated next to
watercourses that flow into the River
Thames upstream of the SAC, it is
possible that there could be a decrease
inwaterqualityflowingthroughtheSAC
during the construction and the
operation of development. This couldpotentiallyalterorpreventthenutrient
enrichment of the habitats and species
that the SAC supports, leading to
degradation or loss.
B.232Policy ESD 9 aims to prevent any
obstruction of groundwater flows and to
preserve water quality, in order to maintain
thestabilityofthehydrologicalregimewithin
the SAC and therefore its integrity as a site
of international importance. The policy will
be applied to development proposals likely
to impact on groundwater flows or
watercourses that flow into the River
Thames upstream of the SAC.
Policy ESD 9: Protection of the Oxford Meadows SAC
Developers will be required to demonstrate that:
During construction of the development there will be no adverse effects
on the water quality or quantity of any adjacent or nearby watercourse
During operation of the development any run-off of water into adjacent
orsurroundingwatercourseswillmeetEnvironmentalQualityStandards
(andwherenecessaryoilinterceptors,silttrapsandSustainableDrainage
Systems will be included)
New developmentwill not significantlyalter groundwater flows and that
the hydrological regime of the Oxford Meadows SAC is maintained in
terms of water quantity and quality
Run-off rates of surface water from the development will be maintained
at greenfield rates.
Policy ESD 10: Protection and
EnhancementofBiodiversityand
the Natural Environment
B.233Developmentproposalslikelytoaffect
a site of international ecological importance
will need to be accompanied by a thorough
Habitats Regulations Assessment of the
potentialeffectsofthedevelopmentonthat
site of international importance, to enablethe Council to determine whether the
development would result in significant
adverse effects on the integrity of the site.
Any development that is unable to
demonstrate that it would not have a
significant adverse effect upon the integrity
of a European site, having taken account of
proposedmitigation,willberefused. Thisis
in accordance with the precautionary
principleenshrinedintheHabitatsDirective.
103 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Where there are imperative reasons of
over-riding public interest and the Council
is unable to conclude no adverse effect on
the integrity of the SAC, the authority willnotify the Secretary of State to allow the
applicationtobecalledinfordetermination.
In these situations compensatory measures
to protect the site must be put in place.
B.234Sitesofnationalimportancecomprise
SitesofSpecialScientificInterest(SSSIs)and
NationalNatureReserves.CherwellDistrict
has 18 SSSIs but does not contain any
National Nature Reserves.
B.235Sites of regional/local importance
compriseLocalGeologicalSites(LGSs),Local
Nature Reserves (LNRs), non-statutory
nature reserves and other sites of
importancefornatureconservationincludingLocalWildlifeSites(LWSs-formerlyknown
asCountyWildlifeSites),ancientwoodland,
aged or veteran trees and UK Biodiversity
ActionPlan(BAP)PriorityHabitats(habitats
ofprincipalimportancefortheconservation
ofbiodiversityunderSection41oftheNERC
Act). Cherwell contains 13 LGSs, 3 LNRs,
83 Local Wildlife sites (completely or partly
within the District), 16 proposed LWSs and
8 proposed LWS extensions (as of August
2013). The sites are indicated on the
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 104Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
biodiversitymapatAppendix5:Maps,butit
mustbeacknowledgedthatthenumberand
locationofsiteschangesovertimeassurveys
and re-surveys take place. A living list of
Local Wildlife Sites and associated maps are
available at http://www.tverc.org . Sites of
regional/local importance also include the
habitats of those species of principal
importance for biodiversity (as identified in
Section 41 of the NERC Act).
B.236It is not just designated sites that are
of importance to the biodiversity resource
oftheDistrict. Areasadjacenttodesignated
sites can be of value as they can form part
oftheoverallecologicalunitandmayprovide
important linkages. Also landscape features
suchashedgerows,woods,trees,riversand
riverbanks, ponds and floodplains can be of
importance both in urban and rural areas,
and often form wildlife corridors and
stepping stones. Similarly it is not just
greenfield sites that can be of value;
previously developed land can also make an
importantcontributiontobiodiversity. Some
development can remediate contaminated
land which may be having an adverse impact
onecology. Itisimportantthatanyfeatures
of value are identified early in the planning
process so that adequate measures can be
taken to secure their protection.
Developerswill be expectedtoincorporate
and enhance such features within a site
wherever possible and adequate measures
should be taken to protect them from
damage during construction. Networks of
habitatswillbeprotectedfromdevelopment
and where possible strengthened by it.B.237Relevant habitat and species surveys
and associated reports will be required to
accompany planning applications which may
affect a site of known biodiversity value or
the biodiversity/natural environment of the
local area. A biodiversity survey and report
will also be required where it is likely that
previously unrecorded biodiversity interest
may be present which could be affected by
the development. Alldevelopmentsaround
Bicester will require surveys carried out for
the brown hairstreak butterfly. Surveys
should include consideration of the site's
value as a wildlife corridor and the
contribution it makes to ecological
networks. In addition to identifying
biodiversityimpacts,biodiversitysurveysand
reports should identify opportunities to
deliver biodiversity enhancements.
B.238Thereareanumberoffeatureswhich
can be incorporated into developments to
encouragebiodiversityincludinggreenroofs
and walls, SUDs, using native and locally
characteristicspeciesinlandscapingschemes,
using landscaping to link up existing areas
supportingbiodiversityandincludingfeatures
such as bird and bat boxes. The Council is
compiling further guidance on the
incorporation of features to encourage
biodiversity which will form part of the
Sustainable Buildings in Cherwell SPD.
B.239Consideration will be given to the
introduction of a tariff based approach to
securing biodiversity improvement through
development. Further information on the
use of planning obligations to secure
contributions from development towards
biodiversity will be contained in the final
Developer Contributions SPD.
105 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy ESD 10: Protection and Enhancement of Biodiversity and the Natural
Environment
Protectionandenhancementofbiodiversityandthenaturalenvironmentwill
be achieved by the following:
In considering proposals for development, a net gain in biodiversity will
be sought by protecting, managing, enhancing and extending existing
resources, and by creating new resources
The protection of trees will be encouraged, with an aim to increase the
number of trees in the District
The reuse of soils will be sought
If significant harm resulting from a development cannot be avoided
(through locating on an alternative site with less harmful impacts),
adequately mitigated, or as a last resort, compensated for, then
development will not be permitted.
Development which would result in damage to or loss of a site of
internationalvaluewillbesubjecttotheHabitatsRegulationsAssessment
process and will not be permitted unless it can be demonstrated that
there will be no likely significant effects on the international site or that
effects can be mitigated
Development which would result in damage to or loss of a site of
biodiversity or geological value of national importance will not be
permitted unless the benefits of the development clearly outweigh the
harm it would cause to the site and the wider national network of SSSIs,
and the loss can be mitigated to achieve a net gain in
biodiversity/geodiversity
Development which would result in damage to or loss of a site of
biodiversity or geological value of regional or local importance including
habitats of species of principal importance for biodiversity will not be
permitted unless the benefits of the development clearly outweigh the
harm it would cause to the site, and the loss can be mitigated to achieve
a net gain in biodiversity/geodiversity
Development proposals will be expected to incorporate features to
encourage biodiversity, and retain and where possible enhance existing
features of nature conservation value within the site. Existing ecological
networks should be identified and maintained to avoid habitat
fragmentation, and ecological corridors should form an essential
component of green infrastructure provision in association with new
development to ensure habitat connectivity
Relevant habitat and species surveys and associated reports will be
required to accompany planning applications which may affect a site,
habitat or species of known or potential ecological value
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 106Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Air quality assessments will also be required for development proposals
thatwouldbelikelytohaveasignificantlyadverseimpactonbiodiversity
by generating an increase in air pollution
Planning conditions/obligations will be used to secure net gains in
biodiversity by helping to deliver Biodiversity Action Plan targets and/or
meetingtheaimsofConservationTargetAreas.Developmentsforwhich
these are the principal aims will be viewed favourably
A monitoring and management plan will be required for biodiversity
features on site to ensure their long term suitable management.
Policy ESD 11: Conservation
Target Areas
B.240Conservation Target Areas in
Oxfordshire have been mapped by the
Thames Valley Environmental Records
Centre (TVERC) in consultation with local
authorities and nature conservation
organisations in Oxfordshire. The Target
Areashave been identified to focuswork to
restore biodiversity at a landscape scale
through the maintenance, restoration and
creation of UK BAP priority habitats, and
this is their principle aim. They therefore
have a major role to play in achieving
Strategic Objective 15 (Section A: Strategy
for Development in Cherwell). Addressing
habitat fragmentation through the linking of
sites to form strategic ecological networks
can help species adapt to the impact of
climate change, and therefore Conservation
Target Areas can also contribute to the
achievement of Strategic Objective 11.
Conservation Target Areas represent the
areas of greatest opportunity for strategic
biodiversityimprovementintheDistrictand
as such development will be expected to
contribute to the achievement of the aims
of the target areas through avoiding habitat
fragmentation and enhancing biodiversity.B.241Ten Conservation Target Areas lie
wholly or partly within Cherwell District.
The boundaries of the Conservation Target
Areas are indicated on the Policies Map
(Appendix 5: Maps).
B.242General targets for maintenance,
restoration and creation of habitats have
been set for each area, to be achieved
throughacombinationofbiodiversityproject
workundertakenbyarangeoforganisations,
agri-environment schemes and biodiversity
enhancements secured in association with
development. These targets are in the
processofbeingmademorespecificinterms
of the amount of each habitat type to be
secured within each Conservation Target
Area (see Wild Oxfordshire's website
http://wildoxfordshire.org.uk/
biodiversityconservation-target-areas ).
Habitat improvement within each area will
contributetowardsachievingCountytargets,
which in turn will contribute towards
regionalbiodiversitytargetsidentifiedbythe
South East England Biodiversity Forum. A
lead partner has been appointed for several
of the Conservation Target Areas to
co-ordinate action.
B.243Biodiversity enhancements sought in
association with development could include
the restoration or maintenance of habitats
through appropriate management, new
habitat creation to link fragmented habitats,
or a financial contribution towards
107 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
biodiversity initiatives in the Conservation
Target Area. Biodiversity enhancement
within the Conservation Target Areas will
be considered through the review of the
current Planning Obligations Draft SPD and
the fundingofinfrastructurethroughCIL or
othertariffsystem. Biodiversityoffsettingisbeing explored at national level through a
number of pilot projects, as a way of
compensating for biodiversity loss in an
effective way. If this initiative proves
successful the approach could be used to
secure strategic biodiversity improvement.
Policy ESD 11: Conservation Target Areas
WheredevelopmentisproposedwithinoradjacenttoaConservationTarget
Areabiodiversitysurveysandareportwillberequiredtoidentifyconstraints
and opportunitiesfor biodiversityenhancement. Developmentwhich would
prevent the aims of a Conservation Target Area being achieved will not be
permitted. Wherethereispotentialfordevelopment,thedesignandlayout
ofthedevelopment,planningconditionsorobligationswillbeusedtosecure
biodiversityenhancementtohelpachievetheaimsoftheConservationTarget
Area.
PolicyESD12:CotswoldsAreaof
Outstanding Natural Beauty
(AONB)
B.244Cherwell contains one area of
national landscape importance - the
Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural
Beauty (AONBs). National designations
including AONBs are to be prioritised for
landscape protection as set out in national
planning guidance, with the NPPF indicating
that great weight should be given to
conserving landscape and scenic beauty in
those areas.
B.245OnlyasmallpartofCherwellDistrict,
around the village of Epwell, is included in
the Cotswolds AONB, as shown on the
Policies Map (Appendix 5: Maps). The area
of AONB straddles the boundary of Sibford
and Wroxton wards.B.246Proposals for development in the
AONBshouldbesmall-scaleandsustainably
located and designed. Proposals which
supporttheeconomiesandsocialwell-being
oftheAONBanditscommunities,including
affordable housing schemes, will be
encouraged provided they do not conflict
with the aim of conserving and enhancing
natural beauty.
B.247The Cotswolds AONB Management
Plan was prepared by the Cotswold
ConservationBoardandwasadoptedbythe
Council for use as supplementaryguidance.
The Management Plan was updated and
adopted by the Board in March 2013. The
mainprinciplesarethat developmentwithin
the AONB will:
be compatible with the distinctive
character of the location as described
by the relevant landscape character
assessment, strategy and guidelines
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 108Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
incorporate designs and landscaping
consistent with the above, respecting
thelocalsettlementpatternandbuilding
style
be designed to respect local building
styles and materials
incorporate appropriate sustainability
elements and designs
haveregardtotheimpactontranquillity,
including dark skies
nothaveanadverseimpactonthelocal
community amenities and services and
access to these
protect, or where possible enhance,
landscape and biodiversity
be in accordance with a more
sustainable pattern of development,
reducing dependence on car travel.
Policy ESD 12: Cotswold Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)
HighprioritywillbegiventotheprotectionandenhancementoftheCotswolds
AONB and the Council will seek to protect the AONB and its setting from
potentiallydamagingandinappropriatedevelopment.TheCotswoldsAONB
ManagementPlanwillbeusedassupplementaryguidanceindecisionmaking
relevant to the AONB.
Development proposals within the AONB will only be permitted if they are
smallscale,sustainablylocatedanddesigned,andwouldnotconflictwiththe
aim of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the area.
Policy ESD 13: Local Landscape
Protection and Enhancement
B.248The Cherwell Local Plan 1996
identified Areas of High Landscape Value -
land of particular environmental quality -
where the Council would seek to conserve
and enhance the environment. This Local
Plan adopts a character-based approach to
seek to conserve and enhance the
countryside and landscape character of the
whole District, and so Areas of High
Landscape Value are not proposed to be
retained. Policy ESD 13 therefore seeks to
conserve and enhance the distinctive and
highly valued local character of the entire
District. The Council will use the CPRE’sTranquillity Map of Oxfordshire available at
http://www.cpre.org.uk asaguideinassessing
areasoftranquillity.Furtherguidancewillbe
contained within the Local Plan Part 2.
Examples of landscape types
109 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.249 Opportunities for landscape
enhancement can also be provided by land
in the Council's ownership, and on other
land by agreement.
B.250The relationship between the
District's towns and the adjoining
countryside and the avoidance of an abrupt
transition from built development to open
farmland requires special attention to the
landscaping of existing and proposed
development. This interface is important in
determining the relationship between the
urban areas and on the character of the
countryside. Where new development will
extend the built up limits of the towns the
Council will seek a masterplan and
well-designed approach to the urban edge.
This could incorporate the enhancement of
existinghedgerowsandwoodlandsandnew
areas of woodland planting and hedgerows
to be incorporated as part of the
development, to ensure the satisfactory
transitionbetweentownandcountry. These
considerationscanequallybeappliedwhere
extensions to villages are required.
Landscape mitigation for the proposed
strategicsiteswillbenegotiatedonasiteby
site basis.
B.251In order to understand the local
landscapecharacterofCherwellaLandscape
Assessment was undertaken in 1995. The
findingsofthisassessmentinformedtheNon
StatutoryCherwellLocalPlanpolicyandthe
CountrysideDesignSummarySupplementary
Planning Guidance. These documents
identified four distinct character areas - the
'Cherwell Valley', 'Ironstone Downs',
'PloughleyLimestonePlateau'and'ClayVale
of Otmoor'. The guidance states how
development can complement the most
important aspects of the character of that
part of the District. More recently the
Oxfordshire Wildlife and Landscape Study(OWLS) looked in detail at the landscape
types across the District as well as the
biodiversityresource. Itidentifiesthe'forces
for change' in a particular location and
includes landscape/biodiversity strategies
which set guidelines for how developments
cancontributetowardslandscapecharacter.
Furtherlandscapeassessmentworkhasbeen
undertakentoinformtheLocalPlanandthe
MasterplansbeingpreparedforBicesterand
Banbury (see Appendix 3: Evidence Base).
B.252Oneofthemostimportantelements
of the landscape which can add to the
character and identity of an area are natural
landscape features. Such features include
Muswell Hill, Crouch Hill, Madmarston Hill,
the River Cherwell and Otmoor, which all
makethoseareasdistinctandcreateasense
of place. Many form local landmarks valued
by the local communities. The Council's
LandscapeEvidenceBasedocumentsidentify
the key landform and landscape features of
value which include the following features
around Banbury and Bicester:
the open and agricultural setting and
identity of the outlying villages
surroundingBanburyandBicester,many
with locally distinctive historic cores
ironstone ridges and valleys
the historic villages and parkland of
Hanwell and Wroxton
Broughton Castle and Grade II
Registered Park
Crouch Hill: an important landmark
overlooking Banbury and the
surrounding area
the landscape to the east of the
motorway at Banbury which retains a
distinct historic pattern
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 110Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Salt Way and its setting
the Sor Brook Valley
the setting of the Oxford Canal and
River Cherwell corridor
specific features at Bicester noted for
their value include those showing
notable 'time depth' including Former
RAF Bicester, Wretchwick deserted
medieval village, Bignell Park and the
Roman roads
Graven Hill and Blackthorn Hill which
contrast with the relatively flat
surrounding landform
the River Ray floodplains.
B.253The Council will seek to retain
woodlands, trees, hedges, ponds, walls and
any other features which are important to
the character or appearance of the locallandscape as a result of their ecological,
historic or amenity value. Proposals which
would result in the loss of such features will
not be permitted unless their loss can be
justified by appropriate mitigation and/or
compensatory measures to the satisfaction
of the Council.
B.254Inorderthatdevelopmentconserves
and enhances the character of the
countryside,theCouncilwillcarefullycontrol
the type, scale and design of development,
including the materials used, taking into
accounttheadvicecontainedintheCouncil's
Countryside Design Summary SPG and the
OWLS.
B.255Inadditiontothispolicy,manyvillages
have conservation areas and in considering
development proposals within or adjacent
to them, special attention will be given to
the preservation or enhancement of their
characterandappearanceunder'PolicyESD
15: The Character of the Built and Historic
Environment'.
Policy ESD 13: Local Landscape Protection and Enhancement
Opportunitieswillbesoughttosecuretheenhancementofthecharacterand
appearance of the landscape, particularly in urban fringe locations, through
therestoration,managementorenhancementofexistinglandscapes,features
or habitats and where appropriate the creation of new ones, including the
planting of woodlands, trees and hedgerows.
Development will be expected to respect and enhance local landscape
character,securingappropriatemitigationwheredamagetolocallandscape
character cannot be avoided. Proposals will not be permitted if they would:
Cause undue visual intrusion into the open countryside
Cause undue harm to important natural landscape features and
topography
Be inconsistent with local character
Impact on areas judged to have a high level of tranquillity
111 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Harmthesettingofsettlements,buildings,structuresorotherlandmark
features, or
Harm the historic value of the landscape.
Development proposals should have regard to the information and advice
contained in the Council's Countryside Design Summary Supplementary
Planning Guidance, and the Oxfordshire Wildlife and Landscape Study
(OWLS),andbeaccompaniedbyalandscapeassessmentwhereappropriate.
PolicyESD14:OxfordGreenBelt
B.256Part of the District falls within the
Oxford Green Belt. The fundamental aim
of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
sprawl by keeping land permanently open;
themostimportantattributeofGreenBelts
is their openness. The Oxford Green Belt
was designated to restrain developmentpressureswhichcoulddamagethecharacter
of Oxford City and its heritage through
increased activity, traffic and the outward
sprawl of the urban area. Similarly, the
characterofOxfordinaruralsettingcannot
bemaintainedwithouttheprotectionofthe
spatial relationship of Oxford with nearby
settlements and the maintenance of the
character of the intervening countryside.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 112Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Map of Oxford Green Belt - for illustrative purposes only
113 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.257The outer boundaries of the Oxford
Green Belt were approved in 1975 and the
innerboundarieswithinCherwellhavebeen
carried forward since the Central
OxfordshireLocalPlanof1992. Thegeneral
extent of the Oxford Green Belt is shown
on the Policies Map (Appendix 5: Maps). A
number of villages are washed over by the
Green Belt and the villages of Kidlington,
YarntonandBegbroke(east)aresurrounded
bytheGreenBeltbutexcludedfromit.The
villages of Bletchingdon, Merton, Murcott
and Weston on the Green lie partly within
and partly outside the Green Belt. The
boundaryoftheGreenBeltisshownonthe
Policies Map (Appendix 5: Maps).
B.258Work undertaken for the revoked
South East Plan did not identify a need for
strategic review of the Green Belt
boundaries in Cherwell District. The plan
indicated that selective review should take
placetothesouthofOxfordandstatedthat
if the initial area of search to the south of
Oxford did not prove a suitable candidate
for review, a wider review across the area
could take place. A legal challenge to this
sectionoftheSouthEastPlanwasissuedon
the grounds that proper environmental
assessment of the proposals and reasonable
alternatives had not taken place. The
Treasury Solicitor conceded the legal
challenge but the issue was not finally
resolved before revocation of the plan.
B.259Government policy indicates that
GreenBeltboundariesshouldonlybealtered
in exceptional circumstances. The LocalPlan’s housing requirements and
development strategy can be achieved
without the need for a strategic review of
the Green Belt in the District. In terms of
local housing need, small scale affordable
housing schemes to meet specifically
identified local housing need may be met
through the release of rural exception sites
aspartofthedevelopmentcontrolprocess,
in accordance with Policy Villages 3.
Kidlington’s local housing needs are being
examined in more detail through the
preparation of a Kidlington Framework
Masterplan which will provide evidence for
Local Plan Part 2 and, potentially, a
NeighbourhoodPlan. ArecentEmployment
Land Review (2012) identified a need for
additionalemploymentlandintheKidlington
area. It is not anticipated that this land can
be accommodated on sites outside of the
Green Belt. A specific need has also been
identified for the Science Park at Begbroke.
Therefore, exceptional circumstances are
considered to exist to justify a small scale
local review of the Green Belt to meet
employmentneeds(see'PolicyKidlington1:
Accommodating High Value Employment
Needs').
B.260It is essential that the impact on the
Green Belt is minimised, therefore priority
will be given to locationsthat lie adjacentto
existingdevelopment,avoidthecoalescence
of settlements, protect the vulnerable
KidlingtonGapandotherwisehavetheleast
impact possible on the Green Belt.
Policy ESD 14: Oxford Green Belt
TheOxfordGreenBeltboundarieswithinCherwellDistrictwillbemaintained
in order to:
Preserve the special character and landscape setting of Oxford
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 114Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
CheckthegrowthofOxfordandpreventribbondevelopmentandurban
sprawl
Prevent the coalescence of settlements
Assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment
Assistinurbanregeneration,byencouragingtherecyclingofderelictand
other urban land.
DevelopmentproposalswithintheGreenBeltwillbeassessedinaccordance
withgovernmentguidancecontainedintheNPPFandNPPG. Development
within the Green Belt will only be permitted if it maintains the Green Belt’s
openness and does not conflict with the purposes of the Green Belt or harm
itsvisualamenities. Proposalsforresidentialdevelopmentwillalsobeassessed
against Policies Villages 1 and Villages 3.
A small scale local review of the Green Belt boundary in the vicinity of
Langford Lane, Kidlington and Begbroke Science Park will be undertaken as
part of the Local Plan Part 2, in order to accommodate employment needs
(see Policy Kidlington 1). Further small scale local review of the Green Belt
boundary will only be undertaken where exceptional circumstances can be
demonstrated.
Policy ESD 15: The Character of
the Built and Historic
Environment
B.261Conservation of the historic
environmentandsecuringhighqualityurban
design are very important in protecting and
enhancing the character of the District and
ensuring that Cherwell is an attractive place
to live and work. Cherwell District is
composedoffourlandscapecharacterareas,
which each display distinct, settlement
patterns, building materials and styles of
vernacular architecture to create a rural
environment that is strongly locally
distinctive. Each of the three urban areas
also displays its own unique character.
B.262The following features contribute to
thedistinctivecharacter,appearanceandhigh
quality environment of Cherwell District:
over 2,200 listed buildings and many
others of local architectural and
historical interest.
currently 60 conservation areas
115 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
36 Scheduled Ancient Monuments
5registeredHistoricParksandGardens
andaHistoricBattlefield,and6Historic
Parks and Gardens considered as
non-designated heritage assets
three urban centres: Banbury, Bicester
and Kidlington – with quite distinct
characters, retaining their medieval
street patterns
theOxfordGreenBelt(see'PolicyESD
14: Oxford Green Belt')
the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding
NaturalBeautyinthenorth-westofthe
District(see'PolicyESD12:Cotswolds
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
(AONB)')
the District's waterways, in particular
the River Cherwell and the Oxford
Canal
sites of ecological importance including
18 Special Areas for Conservation (see
'PolicyESD9:ProtectionoftheOxford
Meadows SAC') and Sites of Special
Scientific Interest (SSSIs).
B.263We will protect our historic
environment; it is a major resource
contributing to the local distinctiveness of
the District. Conservation Areas and other
heritage assets (including both designated
and undesignated assets) form part of the
historic fabric of the District and contribute
to the character of the area and will be
maintained. We will protect our
Conservation Areas and other heritage
assetsfromharmfulgrowthasthese help to
define how the area looks and feels, both in
the towns and villages. The Council has a
rolling programme of Conservation AreaAppraisals and review. We will maintain a
local register of Buildings at Risk and use
Article 4 Directions to maintain the
characterofourhistoricvillagesandtowns.
ARegisterofnon-designatedheritageassets
is also being compiled. Further information
onthesemeasuresiscontainedintheDesign
and Conservation Strategy for Cherwell.
B.264TheCouncilwillprotectandenhance
thespecialvalueofthesefeaturesindividually
andthewiderenvironmentthattheycreate.
Thestrategicpolicyonlandscapeprotection
can be found under 'Policy ESD 13: Local
Landscape Protection and Enhancement'. It
is also important, however, to provide a
frameworkforconsideringthequalityofbuilt
development and to ensure that we achieve
locally distinctive design which reflects and
respects the urban or rural landscape and
built context within which it sits.
B.265We will ensure that the new
developments,arearenewalandtowncentre
expansions are safe places to live, work and
visitthroughdesignstandardsbyusingtools
such as 'secured by design', also through
requiring CCTV where appropriate.
B.266 Design standards for new
developmentwhetherhousingorcommercial
development are equally important. High
designstandardsarecriticalinthetownand
village centres where Conservation Areas
exist, but more generally in ensuring
development is appropriate and secures a
strong sense of place and clear sense of
arrival at points of entry into the towns and
villages. Particular sensitivity is required
where development abuts or takes place
within designated Conservation Areas.
B.267It is also important to take into
account heritage assets located outside of
the District which may be affected by
development inside the District such as
Blenheim Palace, a World Heritage Site.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 116Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy ESD 15: The Character of the Built and Historic Environment
Successfuldesignisfoundeduponanunderstandingandrespectforanarea’s
uniquebuilt,naturalandculturalcontext. Newdevelopmentwillbeexpected
to complement and enhance the character of its context through sensitive
siting, layout and high quality design. All new development will be required
to meet high design standards. Where development is in the vicinity of any
of the District’s distinctive natural or historic assets, delivering high quality
design that complements the asset will be essential.
New development proposals should:
Be designed to deliver high quality safe, attractive, durable and healthy
places to live and work in. Development of all scales should be designed
toimprovethequalityandappearanceofanareaandthewayitfunctions
Deliver buildings, places and spaces that can adapt to changing social,
technological, economic and environmental conditions
Support the efficientuse of land and infrastructure,through appropriate
land uses, mix and density/development intensity
Contribute positively to an area’s character and identity by creating or
reinforcing local distinctiveness and respecting local topography and
landscape features, including skylines, valley floors, significant trees,
historic boundaries, landmarks, features or views, in particular within
designatedlandscapes,withintheCherwellValleyandwithinconservation
areas and their setting
Conserve, sustain and enhance designated and non designated ‘heritage
assets’(asdefinedintheNPPF)includingbuildings,features,archaeology,
conservation areas and their settings, and ensure new development is
sensitively sited and integrated in accordance with advice in the NPPF
andNPPG. Proposalsfordevelopmentthataffectnon-designatedheritage
assets will be considered taking account of the scale of any harm or loss
and the significance of the heritage asset as set out in the NPPF and
NPPG. Regenerationproposalsthatmakesensitiveuseofheritageassets,
particularlywherethesebringredundantorunderusedbuildingsorareas,
especially any on English Heritage’s At Risk Register, into appropriate
use will be encouraged
Include information on heritage assets sufficient to assess the potential
impact of the proposal on their significance. Where archaeological
potential is identified this should include an appropriate desk based
assessment and, where necessary, a field evaluation.
Respectthetraditionalpatternofroutes,spaces,blocks,plots,enclosures
and the form, scale and massing of buildings. Development should be
designedtointegratewithexistingstreetsandpublicspaces,andbuildings
configured to create clearly defined active public frontages
117 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Reflect or, in a contemporary design response, re-interpret local
distinctiveness, including elements of construction, elevational detailing,
windows and doors, building and surfacing materials, mass, scale and
colour palette
Promote permeable, accessible and easily understandable places by
creating spaces that connect with each other, are easy to move through
and have recognisable landmark features
Demonstrate a holistic approach to the design of the public realm to
createhighqualityandmulti-functionalstreetsandplacesthatpromotes
pedestrianmovementandintegratesdifferentmodesoftransport,parking
andservicing. TheprinciplessetoutinTheManualforStreetsshouldbe
followed
Considertheamenityofbothexistingandfuturedevelopment,including
matters of privacy, outlook, natural lighting, ventilation, and indoor and
outdoor space
Limit the impact of light pollution from artificial light on local amenity,
intrinsically dark landscapes and nature conservation
Becompatiblewithuptodateurbandesignprinciples,includingBuilding
for Life, and achieve Secured by Design accreditation
Consider sustainable design and layout at the masterplanning stage of
design, where building orientation and the impact of microclimate can
be considered within the layout
Incorporate energy efficient design and sustainable construction
techniques, whilst ensuring that the aesthetic implications of green
technologyareappropriatetothecontext(alsoseePoliciesESD1- 5on
climate change and renewable energy)
Integrateand enhance green infrastructureand incorporate biodiversity
enhancementfeatureswherepossible(seePolicyESD10:Protectionand
Enhancement of Biodiversity and the Natural Environment and Policy
ESD17GreenInfrastructure). Welldesignedlandscapeschemesshould
be an integral part of development proposals to support improvements
tobiodiversity,themicroclimate,andairpollutionandprovideattractive
places that improve people’s health and sense of vitality
Use locally sourced sustainable materials where possible.
The Council will provide more detailed design and historic environment
policies in the Local Plan Part 2.
The design of all new development will need to be informed by an analysisof
the context, together with an explanation and justification of the principles
thathaveinformedthedesignrationale. Thisshouldbedemonstratedinthe
Design and Access Statement that accompanies the planning application.
TheCouncilexpectsalltheissueswithinthispolicytobepositivelyaddressed
throughtheexplanationandjustificationintheDesign&AccessStatement.
Further guidance can be found on the Council’s website.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 118Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
TheCouncilwillrequiredesigntobeaddressedinthepre-applicationprocess
on major developments and in connection with all heritage sites. For major
sites/strategic sites and complex developments, Design Codes will need to
bepreparedinconjunctionwiththeCouncilandlocalstakeholderstoensure
appropriatecharacterandhighqualitydesignisdeliveredthroughout. Design
Codes will usually be prepared between outline and reserved matters stage
to set out design principles for the development of the site. The level of
prescription will vary according to the nature of the site.
B.268Theappearanceofnewdevelopment
anditsrelationshipwithitssurroundingbuilt
and natural environment has a significant
effectonthecharacterandappearanceofan
area. Securing new development that can
positively contribute to the character of its
local environment is therefore of key
importance. This policy identifies a number
of key issues that need to be addressed in
the design of new development.
B.269These issues are as relevant in urban
areas as in rural locations and also in recent
developmentasinhistoricareas. Thepolicy
seeks to protect, sustain and enhance
designated and non-designated ‘heritage
assets’. The NPPF defines these as ‘A
building, monument, site, place, area or
landscape identified as having a degree of
significancemeritingconsiderationinplanning
decisions, because of its heritage interest’.
Heritage assets with archaeological interest
will require the submission of relevant
assessment. In sensitive locations severe
constraints may direct the design approach,
but in many cases the Council will not wish
to prescribe a specific design solution.
Designs need to be sensitive and
complimentarytotheirsurroundingsbutthis
does not require merely replicating existing
styles and imitating architectural details;
moderninterpretationispossibleifinformed
by a full contextual analysis and proposals
promote and reinforce local distinctiveness.B.270Our urban areas will see significant
growth during the period of the Local Plan,
andwillneedtoadaptandrespondtothese
pressures both within their existing
boundariesandbeyond,whileretainingtheir
unique character and heritage. A balance
will need to be struck between making best
use of landandrespectingestablishedurban
character and creating new and vibrant
sustainable neighbourhoods. Applicants
shouldalsohaveregardtonationalguidance
andbestpracticeadviceondesign,including
on public space, street design, trees in the
streetscene,publicbuildings,housing,work
environments inclusive design, tall buildings
and eco-towns, e.g. guidance published by
the Commission for Architecture and the
Built Environment CABE (now merged with
the Design Council). English Heritage has
alsopublishedmuchguidanceonintegration
of development into the historic
environment. Applicants will also need to
have regard to policies from Oxfordshire
County Council, such as the Parking Policy.
B.271Our rural areas will need to
accommodate new development which
reinforcesthelocallydistinctivecharacterby
beingsensitiveinitslocation,scale,materials
and design, reflecting the traditional pattern
of development within the settlement,
balancing making best use of land with
respect for the established character and
respectingopenfeaturesthatmakeapositive
contribution. A large proportion of rural
settlements fall within conservation areas,
119 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
where the quality and special interest of the
areaisprotected. Councilpublications,such
as its Countryside Design Summary, which
analyses settlement types, and Appraisals of
the District's Conservation Areas, which
analysethespecialqualitiesandidentifythose
features that make a positive contribution
to the character of the place, will assist in
understanding a settlement. National
guidanceincludesNaturalEngland’sguidance
on undertaking Village Design Statements.
PolicyESD16:TheOxfordCanal
B.272TheOxfordCanalisaniconichistoric
structure running the length of the District
through the attractive valley of the River
Cherwell, and is of historic, ecological and
recreational significance. Following an
appraisal, the length of the canal throughCherwell District was designated as a
Conservation Area in October 2012. The
conservationareaboundaryhasbeendrawn
to include the towpath and towpath hedge,
canal related earthworks and features
including historic wharfs and locks, and
woodland. The biodiversity value of the
canal is reflected in a number of statutory
and non statutory designations along the
length of the canal. In terms of recreation,
thecanalispopularforboatersandanglers.
Apublicfootpathrunsthelengthofthecanal
and a section of the route is a public
bridleway. The canal and towpath is owned
andmaintainedbytheCanalandRiverTrust,
but the responsibility for planning matters
lies with the District Council. This policy
for the Oxford Canal draws on the recent
Design and Conservation Strategy (2012)
andreflectsitsstatusasaconservationarea.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 120Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.273'Policy ESD 8: Water Resources',
'PolicyESD10:ProtectionandEnhancement
ofBiodiversityandtheNaturalEnvironment',
'Policy ESD 13: Local Landscape Protection
andEnhancement'and'PolicyESD17:Green
Infrastructure' will be used to protect and
enhance water quality and the contribution
that the canal makes to the District’s
landscape, ecological and recreational
resource, for its entire length through the
District. 'Policy ESD 15: The Character of
theBuiltandHistoricEnvironment'willalso
be used to ensure that works to existing
structures are sympathetic to the historiccontext and that any new development is
sensitivelysitedanddesignedtoensurethat
the special character is preserved or
enhanced. The southern section of the
OxfordCanallieswithintheGreenBeltand
Policy ESD 14 will therefore be relevant to
proposals in that area. Inappropriate
development in the Green Belt will only be
permitted if very special circumstances can
be demonstrated, as set out in the NPPF.
The approach to residential canal moorings
and boater’s facilities on the Oxford Canal
will be set out in the Local Plan Part 2.
121 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Policy ESD 16: The Oxford Canal
We will protect and enhance the Oxford Canal corridor which passes south
tonorththroughtheDistrictasagreentransportroute,significantindustrial
heritage, tourism attraction and major leisure facility through the control of
development. The length of the Oxford Canal through Cherwell District is
a designated Conservation Area and proposals which would be detrimental
to its character or appearance will not be permitted. The biodiversity value
of the canal corridor will be protected.
We will support proposals to promote transport, recreation, leisure and
tourism related uses of the Canal where appropriate, as well as supporting
enhancement of the canal’s active role in mixed used development in urban
settings. We will ensure that the towpath alongside the canal becomes an
accessiblelongdistancetrailforallusers,particularlyforwalkers,cyclistsand
horse riders where appropriate.
Other than appropriately located small scale car parks and picnic facilities,
newfacilitiesforcanalusersshouldbelocatedwithinorimmediatelyadjacent
to settlements. The Council encourages pre-application discussions to help
identify significant issues associated with a site and to consider appropriate
designsolutionstotheseandwewillseektoensurethatallnewdevelopment
meets the highest design standards.
Policy ESD 17: Green
Infrastructure
B.274Green infrastructure comprises the
networkofgreenspacesandfeaturesinboth
urbanandruralareasincludingthefollowing:
parks and gardens (including historic parks
andgardens),naturalandsemi-naturalgreen
space, green corridors (including cycleways
and rights of way), outdoor sports facilities,
amenity green space, children's play space,
allotments, cemeteries and churchyards,
accessible countryside in urban fringe areas,
riverandcanalcorridors,woodlands,nature
reserves, green roofs and walls.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 122Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
B.275 Securing adequate green
infrastructureisanimportantcomponentof
achieving sustainable communities. Green
Infrastructure networks can deliver both
environmental and social benefits including
conserving and enhancing biodiversity,
recreation, landscape, water management,
social and cultural benefits to underpin
individualhealthandwell-being,contributing
to local distinctiveness and helping
communities to be more resilient to the
effectsofclimatechange. PolicyESD17will
be used to secure an adequate green
infrastructurenetworkinCherwellDistrict.
B.276Many sites which contribute to the
District's green infrastructure network are
not in the Council's ownership or control
and partnership working will therefore be
required to plan, provide and manage the
network to achieve the objectives of the
policy.
B.277Within Banbury, Bicester and
Kidlington the key components of green
infrastructureareareasofopenspace,sport
and recreation, sometimes linked by public
rights of way. Public rights of way are
protected in law and comprise four types:
footpaths,bridleways,restrictedbywaysand
byways open to all traffic (BOAT). The
County Council has responsibilityfor Public
RightsofWay,andassuchpublishesaRights
of Way Improvement Plan and promotes
routes for walkers, cyclists and horse riders
in order to encourage sustainable access to
thecountryside. Inrecognitionofthehealth
benefits of walking, cycling and horse riding
this Council also promotes a number of
circular walks and rides. Elsewhere in the
District the dominant strategic features
includetheRiverCherwellandOxfordCanal
corridors,statutorydesignatedsitessuchas
LocalNatureReserves,andotherareassuch
as RSPB Otmoor reserve and BBOWT
reserves. The Conservation Target Areas
(indicatedonthePoliciesMap)arethemostimportant areas for biodiversity in the
Districtwheretargetedconservationaction
will have the greatest benefit, and form an
important component of the green
infrastructurenetworkoftheDistrictwhich
canbeenhancedovertheperiodoftheplan.
B.278Assessmentsofopenspace,sportand
recreation provision highlighted various
deficiencies in both urban and rural areas of
theDistrict,asdetailedinSectionC‘Policies
for Cherwell's Places’. In addition an
assessment by Natural England and the
Forestry Commission indicated a lack of
accessible natural green space provision in
thedistrictcomparedtotheirstandards,with
72%ofCherwell'shouseholdsmeetingnone
of its requirements. This reflects the
relativelylownumbersofcountryparksand
commonlandintheDistrict;howeverthere
areanumberofsmallerareasofopenspace,
andcountrysidewhichisaccessiblesolelyby
Public Rights of Way, which was not taken
into account in the initial Natural England
analysis. TheDistricthasdevelopeditsown
local standards of provision in accordance
with government advice, which differ from
thoseadvocatedbyNaturalEngland. Other
than provision in Banbury, Bicester and
Kidlington there are few accessible large
areas of green space within the District;
however parks such as Blenheim, Rousham
and Stowe are located in close proximity to
it. The Council's proposed country park to
the north of Banbury will also help to
address this issue.
B.279Protectionandenhancementofopen
space,sportandrecreationsitesandsitesof
importancetonatureconservationwillassist
in maintaining the green infrastructure
network. Greencorridorsconsistofcanals,
rivercorridorsandhedgerows,togetherwith
publicrightsofway. Thesecanprovideareas
forwalking,cyclingandhorseridingandalso
provide opportunities for wildlife migration,
whichonastrategicscalecanhelptoaddress
123 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
theimpactofclimatechangeonbiodiversity.
Development proposals will be expected to
retainandenhanceexistinggreencorridors,
and maximise the opportunity to form new
links between existing open spaces.
B.280Development proposals, particularly
on larger sites, can offer the opportunity to
improve the green infrastructure network.
Policy BSC 11 usually requires open space
provision on site and biodiversity
enhancements secured by 'Policy ESD 10:
ProtectionandEnhancementofBiodiversity
andtheNaturalEnvironment'cancontribute
to the network by maintaining existing
habitats and reducing fragmentation. The
incorporationofsustainabledrainagesystems
can contribute to green infrastructure
provision and can perform dual roles of
helping to alleviate flooding and being
beneficial to biodiversity. New landscaping
areas,particularlyinthecaseofthestrategic
sites, will be required to assimilate
developmentintothelandscapeandassistin
the transition between the urban edge and
ruralareas. Effectivelinksintheseareascan
enable the urban fringe to provide a
recreational resource, providing accessible
countrysidewithinwalkingdistanceofurban
dwellers. Proposals should include details
of management and maintenance of green
infrastructure to ensure areas are securedin perpetuity. Further guidance on green
infrastructure provision is provided in the
SouthEastGreenInfrastructureFramework
- from Policy to Practice (available at
http://strategy.sebiodiversity.org.uk ).
B.281In Banbury and Bicester successive
local plans have sought to establish a series
of open spaces in the towns, and this plan
includes proposals for a new country park
in Banbury ('Policy Banbury 14: Cherwell
CountryPark'). Additionaldetailiscontained
under Section C: ‘Policies for Cherwell's
Places’. Thekeyopenspacecomponentsof
existing green infrastructure provision in
BanburyandBicesterareshownonthemaps
for each town (Appendix 5: Maps). Green
infrastructure provision will be examined in
more detail and progressed through the
townmasterplansandtheLocalPlanPart2.
AcountylevelGreenInfrastructureStrategy
is also being formulated with the District
Council being represented on the
stakeholder working group.
B.282South of the Canalside development
(PolicyBanbury1) the opportunityexists to
turn part of the existing floodplain of the
RiverCherwellintoamanagedhabitat. This
will be explored in more detail through the
preparation of the Banbury Masterplan.
Policy ESD 17: Green Infrastructure
TheDistrict'sgreeninfrastructurenetworkwillbemaintainedandenhanced
through the following measures:
Pursuing opportunities for joint working to maintain and improve the
green infrastructure network, whilst protecting sites of importance for
nature conservation
Protecting and enhancing existing sites and features forming part of the
green infrastructure network and improving sustainable connectivity
between sites in accordance with policies on supporting a modal shift in
transport (Policy SLE 4: Improved Transport and Connections), open
space, sport and recreation (Policy BSC 10: Open Space, Outdoor Sport
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 124Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
and Recreation Provision), adapting to climate change (Policy ESD 1:
Mitigating and Adapting to Climate Change), SuDS (Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)), biodiversity and the natural
environment(PolicyESD10:ProtectionandEnhancementofBiodiversity
and the Natural Environment), Conservation Target Areas (Policy ESD
11: Conservation Target Areas), heritage assets (Policy ESD 15) and the
Oxford Canal (Policy ESD 16)
Ensuring that green infrastructure network considerations are integral
to the planning of new development. Proposals should maximise the
opportunity to maintain and extend green infrastructure links to form a
multi-functional network of open space, providing opportunities for
walking and cycling, and connecting the towns to the urban fringe and
the wider countryside beyond
Allstrategicdevelopmentsites(SectionC:‘PoliciesforCherwell'sPlaces’)
will be required to incorporate green infrastructure provision and
proposalsshouldincludedetailsforfuturemanagementandmaintenance.
125 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 126Section B - Policies for Development in Cherwell
Section C - Policies for
Cherwell's Places
C.1 Introduction
C.1Development in and around the towns
of Bicester and Banbury will ensure that the
housinggrowththeDistrictneedsisfocused
on the locations that are most sustainable
and most capable of absorbing this new
growth.
C.2This Plan has set clear priorities for the
places at which we are looking to support
growth. We need to meet the needs of the
population for housing and jobs.
C.3We are taking a 'place-based' approach
that seeks to align growth and investment
byshowingwherebusiness,employmentand
residential growth will occur.
C.4We are taking a conscious decision to
concentrate growth at Bicester and to a
lesser degree at Banbury, to secure
economic benefits, especially in their retail,
commercial and manufacturing roles. The
twotownsarethemostsustainablelocations
for growth in the District and are the right
places to meet the economic and social
needs of the District whilst minimising
environmentalimpacts. Wearealsoseeking
to enhance Kidlington’s economic role to
buildontherecentdevelopmentofmodern
business parks and its proximity to both
London-Oxford Airport and Begbroke
Science Park.
C.5We want towns that are places for
working and visiting, not dormitory towns
thatarejustforsleeping. Wewantdynamic,
successful towns that provide a full range of
services to their rural hinterland.
C.6Wearelookingtosecurefullintegration
of new business and residential areas with
the existing towns. We wish to securemixed use development, not segregated
functionsandthereforeareseekingamixof
commercial,retailandresidentialinvestment
inourtowncentres. Atthesametime,new
infrastructureinvestmentwillstrengthenthe
vitality of the town centres by progressively
redirecting through traffic, promoting
sustainablemodesandstrengtheningthelinks
between the town centres and their
surrounding neighbourhoods. The delivery
of strategic sites provides the opportunity
for a coordinated approach to the planning
of infrastructure and services.
C.7Althoughmajorgrowthinthevillagesis
not appropriate as a growth approach,
putting additional pressure on small
communities, roads, schools and the
environment,weareseekingtosupportthe
long-term sustainability of our rural areas
through a measured approach to
development. Our villages and rural areas
are central in making Cherwell an attractive
place to live, work and visit.
C.8The following sections on Bicester,
Banbury, Kidlington and our Villages and
Rural Areas provide specific place shaping
policies which are supported by those for
Cherwell as a whole in Section B.
127 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 128Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.2 Bicester
C.9Bicester is a market town which has
grownrapidlyinthelast50yearsandwhere
further significant growth is planned. It has
good road and rail links and infrastructure
andsignificantfurtherinvestmentisplanned.
Employment in the town is mainly in the
distribution and manufacturing sectors.
There is significant out-commuting from
Bicester to Oxford, London and elsewhere
whichthisPlanwillhelpaddressthroughthe
provision of employment land. There are
areasofmilitaryoperation(pastandpresent)
which are in the process of re-organisation
andsomeofwhichareofhistoricvalue. The
town has retail, leisure and other services
which until recently have been under
provided for in some areas and where
further improvement is needed. Bicester is
generally less constrained than Banbury in
termsoflandscapesensitivitybutithasareas
of value and ecological importance with
villages close by. Bicester Village shopping
outlet in the town is an internationally
significant tourist attraction.
C.10The development of a Masterplan for
Bicester, to be adopted as a Supplementary
Planning Document (SPD) will provide the
meanstoestablishanintegrateddeliveryplan
for the growth of the town that respects itssetting, meets the needs for a stronger
economy, housing and community facilities,
and which helps deliver sustainable
development. The Council will explore all
potentialmechanisms,includingpublic-private
partnerships,andappropriatepowersforthe
deliveryofLocalPlansitesandkeyproposals,
to secure the development vision for the
town.
C.11Work on the Bicester Masterplan has
been helpful in developing a holistic town
vision to help ensure the town develops in
a coordinated, planned and integrated way.
TheMasterplanhashelpedforgeaconsensus
amongst stakeholders that the town needs:
to secure sustainable growth through
new job opportunities and a growing
population
to be a desirable employment location
that supports local distinctiveness and
economic growth
to be a sustainable community with a
comprehensive range of social, health,
sports and community functions
a vibrant and attractive town centre
with a full range of retail, community
and leisure facilities
an exemplar eco-town, building upon
Eco Bicester – One Shared Vision
a safe and caring community set within
attractive landscaped spaces
business and community networks that
promote the town and the
eco-development principles and
to be developed as a continuing
destination for international visitors to
Bicester Village and other destinations
in the area.
129 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Meeting the Challenge of
Developing a Sustainable
Economy in Bicester
C.12Bicester's economy is focused on the
defence activities at MoD Bicester, on
storageanddistribution,onfoodprocessing
and on engineering, particularly in the
motorsports sector. Its proximity to and
close relationship with Oxford helps the
townbycreatingopportunitiesforeconomic
development. The Cherwell Employment
Land Review (2006, revised 2012) also
highlights the Chilterns, M25 corridor and
London as market influences.
C.13Cherwell's Economic Development
Strategy(2011–2016)highlightsthecurrent
opportunities for Bicester to develop a
‘low-carboneconomy’,bydeveloping‘green’
technologiesandknowledgearoundexisting
and new employers, sectors and clusters -
tocreateacentreofexpertiseandpotential
competitive advantage.
C.14TheEconomicDevelopmentStrategy’s
vision for the future is that Bicester takes
advantage of both materials engineering and
biotechnologyinitseconomicfuture,thanks
to its location and the strength of those
sectors within the wider area. These are
becomingmore establishedand the breadth
of the town’s knowledge economy will
increase and encompass other areas of
innovationandconnectionstolocalindustry.
Anexampleisinthemotorsportengineering
strengths of Oxford & Cherwell Valley
College in Bicester. There are some recent
office developments that host high
technology companies including the
Avonbury Business Park to the north west
of Bicester.
C.15The key economic challenges facing
Bicester are:
Thereisasignificantimbalancebetween
homes and jobs. Out-commuting is a
particular problem with a significant
proportionofresidentsleavingthetown
to work. In 2001, Bicester South and
Bicester North wards jointly had the
second highest percentage of workers
in Oxfordshire travelling 60km or over
to work (8.8% each). The 2011 Census
shows this continuing with over 3,000
people leaving Bicester.
The provision of new services, facilities
and infrastructure in Bicester has not
kept pace with population growth.
There is a need to make Bicester more
attractivetonewbusinesses,particularly
knowledge based and high-technology
companies.
Some of Bicester's employment areas
are ageing and in need of rejuvenation.
A greater range of employment space
is needed.
There is a need to improve standards
of education and training in Bicester,
areasofwhichareamongtheworst20%
in England in terms of skills, education
and training.
The need to ensure the vitality and
viability of Bicester town centre, to
make it more attractive to both
residentsandvisitors,andtoenablethe
town centre and Bicester Village to
co-exist in a mutually productive way.
C.16Thekeyissuessectionaboveidentifies
a number of the key challenges facing
Bicester's economy. Bicester is also,
however, in an excellent position to benefit
fromanumberofimportantwiderinitiatives:
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 130Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
funding has been put in place for
infrastructure improvements including
Motorway junction improvements and
East-West Rail to help mitigate against
significant housing and employment
growth
theOxford-Cambridgecorridor. This
is an initiative to support high growth
technology companies in the corridor
between the two cities. The Economic
Development Strategy (2011-2016)
recognises that Bicester has every
opportunity to become a location for
higher value and knowledge based
business.
the proposed improvements to the rail
networkfromChilternRailwaysandthe
East-West Rail Consortium
North West Bicester was identified as
a potential eco-town location in a
national Eco-Towns Planning Policy
Statement (PPS). The PPS sets out
eco-town standards including a
requirement to match the number of
homestojobswithintheeco-townand
ensure that these are easily reached by
walking,cyclingand/orpublictransport.
Furthermore,the opportunity exists to
use the 'eco-town' proposals to
encouragearangeofenvironmentaland
green technology industries and the
developmentofemploymentclustersin
Bicester, as part of the employment
strategy for the ‘eco town’ and in
Bicester more widely.
C.17To meet the key economic challenges
facing Bicester, we need to make it an
attractive place for modern business and
improvethetown’sselfsufficiency. Ourplan
seeks to make the most of its locational
advantages in drawing in new business and
creating opportunities for knowledge andhigher value companies and businesses that
will help reduce the proportion of
out-commuting,providemoreeducationand
training opportunities, and contribute to
improving the image of the town.
C.18Following the analysis from the
Bicester Masterplan we are looking to
expand the economy of the town by:
enabling the provision of quality
employment sites for identified growth
sectors
maximisingBicester’sexcellentlocation
on the road and rail network
promoting a mix of employment and
housing in appropriate locations to
support the creation of sustainable
neighbourhoods
promoting employment opportunities
linked to the proposed rail freight sites
enablingthedevelopmentofBurePlace
Phase 2 and the new Civic venue
promoting the provision of hotels,
restaurants and leisure development
opportunities
supportingthesustainabledevelopment
of Bicester Village, one of the UK’s
premier ‘high end’ international retail
destinations
planninganddevelopingthecentralarea
of the town
establishing mechanisms such as a
Bicester Marketing Board to promote
Bicester as an employment location.
131 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.19Following the analysis from the
Bicester Masterplan we are looking to meet
the transport needs of the town by:
delivering new strategic highway
improvements including those on
peripheral routes to help improve
sustainablemovementsintherestofthe
town, service the long term growth
aspirations,throughtrafficandtoservice
keyemploymentsites,whilstconsidering
anypotentialimpactsonnearbyvillages
reducing traffic congestion on Kings
End/QueensAvenueandcreateastrong
sense of place
reducing traffic congestion into the
TescoandBicesterVillagedevelopment
and establishing a park and ride
improvingthelinkagesbetweenBicester
Business Park, Bicester Village, Graven
Hill, the town centre and improved
railway station for the Town to take
advantage of the improvements to
East-West rail
improving the connectivity and
attractiveness of the pedestrian and
cyclenetworkacrossBicesterwhichwill
link strategic developments with the
town centre, train stations, and other
settlements
delivering improvements to J9 and J10
of the M40 to improve journey times
and help tackle congestion in Bicester
and its surrounding villages
secure an expanded Rail Freight
Interchange at Graven Hill.MeetingtheChallengeofBuilding
a Sustainable Community in
Bicester
C.20Many of the community issues facing
Bicester are symptomatic of the town's
transition from a small market town
dependent on local industry, defence
activities and farming to a rapidly expanding
commuter town with newer storage,
distribution and manufacturing activities
benefiting from the town's location on the
strategic road and rail networks. The
historic central residential area of the town
- Bicester Town ward (pre-1950s) - is now
surrounded by new housing developments
builtmainlywithinthelast20years. Bicester
Townwardfaceslevelsofsocialdeprivation.
The extensive out-commuting from newer
housing estates creates its own problems in
terms of achieving social cohesion and
supporting the services, facilities and
infrastructure that Bicester needs to keep
pacewithitsrapidgrowth. Thereisasocial
and economic need to improve Bicester's
self-sufficiencyanditsimageasaplacetolive
and work.
C.21The key community challenges facing
Bicester are:
the lack of sufficient services and
facilitiesinBicesterforatownofitssize.
Implementation of the town centre
redevelopment scheme, and recently
completedsportscentremodernisation,
willcontributesignificantlyinaddressing
this, but there will remain a need to
continue to provide more services and
facilities for residents and visitors, and
toimprovetheimageofthetown. Car
parking in Bicester will be significantly
increasedbytheproposedTownCentre
redevelopment
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 132Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
the need to increase the sense of pride
and belonging to create more
community cohesion
high levels of out-commuting and rapid
housing growth make it more difficult
to achieve community cohesion within
newresidentialareasandbetweennew
and older parts of Bicester
household incomes for those who live
inBicesterarerelativelyhigh,butwages
for people who work in the area are
relatively low
parts of Bicester suffer from problems
ofdeprivationsuchaspoorhousingand
low incomes but these problems may
notbeinconcentratedenoughmeasure
to fall into a recognisable deprivation
category
inthecentralBicesterTownwardthere
are many people on low incomes, a
concentrationofolderpeople(Bicester
presently has a relatively young
population),manypeoplewithlong-term
illnesses and a significantly lower life
expectancy than for newer housing
areas
the need for an improved community
hospital and police infrastructure
theneedforimprovedlibraryprovision,
facilities for young people, a museum,
theatre and public art
Bicesterhasexistingdeficienciesinopen
space,sportsandrecreationamenities.
There is a shortfall of junior football
pitches, rugby pitches, parks and
gardens, natural/semi-natural green
space, children's play space, tennis
courts,abowlinggreenandallotments.
There are variations between wards
within these deficiencies.
additional open space, sport and
recreationprovisionwillberequiredto
provide for future development needs
there is also a long-term aspiration to
provideanathleticstrack,indoorbowls
facility and to improve synthetic turf
pitch provision
the town's existing cemetery has very
little capacity remaining with limited
scope for extension and there is an
urgent need for additional provision.
C.22Bicester will continue to grow over
the next two decades. If growth is to
continue at this pace and be successfully
accommodated, it is important that new
development integrates and interacts with
existing neighbourhoods, is accessible from
those neighbourhoods by non-car modes of
transport, and provides for a range of uses
and dwellings that will contribute to
deliveringmixedandcohesivecommunities.
Existingresidents,particularlythoseinolder
parts of the town must benefit from the
growthofthetown. Thereisanopportunity
at Bicester to provide new housing,
employmentopportunities,services,facilities
and infrastructure which will help reduce
deprivation, improve access to services and
improve health and well being.
C.23Following the analysis from the
Bicester Masterplan we are looking to build
a sustainable community by:
promotinghousingchoiceinsustainable
neighbourhoods with local facilities
improving access to higher quality local
employment
retro-fittingofexistinghousingstockto
improve eco standards
133 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
developingthetowncentreasthemain
retail centre and focus of community
and leisure services
expanding the schools and colleges to
match the needs of residents and
businesses
enablingthedevelopmentofnewhealth
careandsocialfacilitieswhichmeetthe
needs of an expanded town
expandingthesportsandleisurefacilities
providing significant green space, a new
cemetery, allotments, local nature
reserveandcommunityorchardaspart
of North West Bicester
expanding and enhancing the town
centre retail experience
identifying a future role for the Garth
offices and Garth Park.
MeetingtheChallengeofEnsuring
Sustainable Development in
Bicester
C.24Bicester's main environmental issues
arise from its rapid and continuing growth.
The amount of traffic on the roads has
accelerated in recent years as a result of
waves of new housing, high levels of
out-commuting and the draw of
developments such as Bicester Village.
Traffic congestion problems affect not only
Bicester's living environment but also its
historicenvironmentinandaroundthetown
centre.
C.25In addition to the implementation of
specific highway measures such as Junction
9improvementsandasouth-westperimeter
road, it is important that Bicester becomesmore self-sufficient. Reducing
out-commuting and providing sustainable
transport choices would make a significant
differencetoBicester'senvironment. There
is a need also to improve the built
environment and to provide more green
infrastructurebothforthebenefitofexisting
residents and to improve the image of the
town to attract new business, visitors and
futureresidents. Theprovisionoftransport
initiatives, including delivering new strategic
highway improvements including those on
peripheral routes, will secure substantial
gainsforthecentreofthetownbyreducing
the flow of through traffic.
C.26The key environmental challenges
facing Bicester are:
the need to improve the appearance of
the town centre and historic core,
delivering town centre redevelopment
and environmental improvements to
Market Square
accommodating major growth whilst
addressing constraints such as:
the severing effect of the town's
perimeter roads
managing growth in a way that will
not unacceptably harm important
natural and historic assets
addressing the capacity of the
sewage works and energy
infrastructure
the character, appearance and
setting of historic assets such as
RAF Bicester Conservation Area
and nearby villages
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 134Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
ecological constraints such as
designatedwildlifesites,ecologically
important landscapes and
conservation target areas, and
highway constraints such as traffic
congestion in the town centre and
at King's End / A41 and the need
forimprovementsto M40 Junction
9 and the Bucknell Road / Howes
lane junction within the town.
accommodating growth without having
an adverse effect on the Oxford
MeadowsSpecialAreaofConservation
addressing deficiencies in 'green'
infrastructure
improving the attractiveness of the
town's employment areas.
C.27Our aim is to help improve the image
of Bicester by delivering objectives set out
in the Eco Bicester One Shared Vision as
part of environmental improvements to the
town centre and to ensure that new
development is delivered to the highest
environmentalstandardstohelpimprovethe
image and attractiveness of the town. New
development needs to maximise
opportunities for improving and integrating
with Bicester's existing built environment,
respect environmental constraints, enhance
Bicester's biodiversity and address
deficiencies in 'green' infrastructure to
sustainably accommodaterapid growth. An
ecological assessment is being undertaken,
to examine the potential cumulative effects
of development sites on the biodiversity
resource of the town including the Local
Wildlife Site at Graven Hill, the Bicester
WetlandReserveLocalWildlifeSiteandthe
Ray Conservation Target Area. Abiodiversity mitigation and enhancement
strategy is being formulated and will be
incorporated into the Bicester Masterplan.
C.28Supported by work on a Bicester
Masterplan we are looking to ensure
sustainable development by:
improvingthe amenityandconnectivity
ofthetownwithanetworkofparkland,
landscaped areas and amenity space
creating a memorable ‘people place' in
Market Square
takingtheeco-townconceptacrossthe
whole town, by embedding the ‘eco-
principles’ in the planning policy for
North West Bicester and applying
policies from Local Plan Theme Three
as the standards we wish to see
achieved in all new development in
Bicester and across the District more
widely
encouraging a shift to more sustainable
travel
appointing a Design Panel to improve
thedesignqualityandecocredentialsof
development.
Bicester in 2031
C.29By 2031, Bicester will have grown
significantly to become an important
economiccentrein itsownrightandonthe
Oxford-Cambridge corridor. It will have
become a more attractive place to live and
work and will be significantly more
self-sustaining both economically and
socially. Bicester will have established itself
asalocationforhigher-technologybusinesses
building on its relationship with Oxford
throughtheBicesterGatewaydevelopment.
Its economy will have become more
135 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
knowledgebasedandthetown'simportance
as a centre for retail and leisure will have
increasedasaresultofanexpansionofboth
the town centre and the Outlet village.
Bicester will have an efficient sustainable
transport network within the town which
maximisesconnectivitybetweenthestrategic
developmentsites, the town centre and key
interchanges,particularlytherailwaystations,
so as to achieve high levels of sustainable
transport use.
C.30Over10,000newhomeswillhavebeen
constructed up to 2031, of which a
substantialnumberwillbe'affordable'. New
services,facilitiesandculturalandrecreation
opportunities will have been provided. The
North West Bicester Eco-Town
developmentwill be enteringitsfinalphases
of development. It will have brought with it
sustainable homes and substantial
infrastructureofbenefittothewholetown.
North West Bicester and development at
Graven Hill will be contributing greatly to
improving Bicester's profile by being a
pioneeringdevelopment,aneconomicdriver
and by delivering environmental gains.
Bicester's town centre will have been
redevelopedandenvironmentalandhighway
improvements will have been made to
Market Square. Bicester's improved
economicpositionandtheprovisionofnew
services and facilities will have contributed
to reducing deprivation in the town.
C.31The Eco Bicester One Shared Vision
(2010) set out the aims and ambitions for
the whole town, which the Bicester
Masterplan (2012) has developed and
significantly extended. In terms of the
economy the Shared Vision is to create a
nationalhubofthelowcarboneconomyand
the location of choice for business and
inwardinvestment. TheEcoBicesterShared
Vision includes providing local jobs for
Bicesterresidentsanddeliveringsustainable
travel to work, education and trainingopportunities,andemploymentspace. Italso
aims to understand and adapt to the
environmental challenges arising from the
eco-town project. The provision of green
infrastructure, biodiversity and habitat
creation is fundamental to Bicester and
already an important component of the
town.
C.32Our strategy for delivering Bicester's
vision is to:
Bringaboutpioneeringeco-development
which will establish a new sustainable
community,integratedwith,andforthe
benefit of, the whole of Bicester.
Ensureimplementationofthepermitted
urbanextensionatSouthWestBicester,
including the provision of a secondary
school, and employment development
east of the A41.
Deliver development that will increase
Bicester's self-containment, provide
'higher-value' job-opportunities and
reduce the proportion of out
commuting.
Provide for new development in
accessible locations that will maximise
opportunities for providing sustainable
transport choices, for reducing traffic
congestion and for reducing the
proportion of out-commuting.
Build on the recent town centre
redevelopment scheme, secure
improvements to Market Square and
provide for development that will
improve the appearance and image of
Bicester whilst ensuring accessibility to
the town centre.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 136Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Provide services, facilities and new
infrastructurerequiredtoaccommodate
major growth and which will help
reduce deprivation particularly in older
parts of the town.
Improve the attractiveness of existing
employment areas and providing for
new employment space that will be
attractive to knowledge based and
higher-technology businesses.
Deliver strategic open space and
recreation opportunities to address
existingdeficienciesandmeetthefuture
needs of development.
Provide for a new cemetery.
Integrate the Graven Hill development
area within Bicester’s economy and
community.
What will Happen and Where
C.33Bicester is well positioned to benefit
from targeted growth. Located on the
Oxford-Cambridge Corridor with two
railway stations, a vision for strategic
eco-development, major defence
landholdingsandatowncentrebeginningto
betransformed,Bicesterhasanopportunity
to draw in major investment, create new
employment, deliver new services and
facilities and provide new highway
infrastructure. It has an opportunity to
address its infrastructure deficiencies, to
widen its economic profile and to address
issues associated with high levels of
out-commuting.
C.34TheSouthWestBicester(Kingsmere)
urban extension is under construction. To
the west of the site, land is available for a
phase two development within the limit of
thenewperimeterroad. Nearby,totheeastof the A41, a major employment site has
been approved. Strategic housing has also
been approved as a first ‘exemplar’ stage of
theNorthWestBicestereco-development.
The North West Bicester development will
be pivotal in delivering highly-sustainable
long-termgrowth,investmentopportunities,
and in widening Bicester’s economic appeal.
C.35The redevelopment of MoD Bicester
to the south will enable the retention and
consolidation of national defence logistic
operations further south at Arncott. It will
also allow effective use to be made of an
extensive previously developed site with its
ownrailwayconnectionadjoiningtheexisting
urban edge from a Rail Freight Interchange.
C.36Developmenttothesouthofthetown,
togetherwithotheropportunitiestotheeast
along the A41 corridor, will provide scope
to invest in new highway infrastructure of
benefit to the whole town.
Strategic Development: Bicester
1 - North West Bicester
Eco-Town
C.37Following the (now revoked) South
EastPlan'spublication,NorthWestBicester
was identified in Annex A of the Eco-towns
PPS (2009) as one of the four potential
locations for the development of an
eco-town. An eco-town development of
6,000 homes will be developed on land
identified at North West Bicester in
accordancewiththestandardssetoutinthe
former Eco-Towns PPS. It was expected
that the development will be substantially
completed within the plan period but that
has been reviewed as part of the housing
trajectory.
137 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.38ThePoliciesmapandtheinsetmapfor
Bicester 1: North West Bicester Eco-Town
(Appendix5:Maps)identifythelocationand
the area of the eco-town proposals.
C.39Proposals should ensure:
zero-carbon development as defined in
the Eco-Towns PPS and Eco Bicester
One Shared Vision
delivery of a high quality local
environment
climate Change Adaptation - eco town
standards are met on water, flooding,
green infrastructure and biodiversity
homes that achieve at least Level 5 of
the Code for Sustainable Homes
employment-Atleast3,000jobswithin
the plan period (approximately 1,000
jobs on B use class land on the site
within the plan period). An economic
strategy will be required and there
should be local sourcing of labour,
including providing apprenticeships
during construction.
transport - at least 50% of trips
originatingfromthedevelopmenttobe
made by means other than the car
promotion of healthy lifestyles
provision of local services and facilities
green infrastructure and Biodiversity -
40% of the total gross site area will be
provided as green space of which at
least half will be public open space
sustainable management of waste.
C.40The development will be designed as
anexemplar,incorporatingbestpracticeand
provide a showcase for sustainable living. It
will allow Government, business and
communities to work together to develop
greener,lowcarbonliving. Amasterplanfor
the North West Bicester site will be
requiredtodemonstratehowproposalswill
achieve the standards set out in the
Eco-TownsPPSandEcoBicesterOneShared
Vision. Development will be considered on
the basis of a masterplan for the whole
development area, to ensure that
development takes place in an integrated,
coordinated and planned way, whilst
recognising that phasing of development
within the overall masterplan strategy will
be required. It will integrate with and
complementthe functionandurbanformof
Bicester and reinforce the role of Bicester
towncentreastheprimaryretailandservice
centre.
C.41The eco-town concept of more
sustainable living in new communities
provides the opportunity to completely
rethink how transport, employment, retail
and other services are provided as well as
providingnewhomestostandardswhichare
more challenging than would normally be
requiredfornewdevelopment. Biodiversity
projects will be incorporated as part of the
masterplanning process. The proposed
eco-town at North West Bicester provides
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 138Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
the potential to test a wide range of
innovativeandemergingtechnologiesdueto
its scale.
C.42TheCouncilwillcontinuetoworkwith
central Government, the promoters of
North West Bicester, the local community
andotherpartnerstoensurethedeliveryof
an exemplary eco-town that achieves the
highest environmental standards.
C.43The North West Bicester Eco-Town
is central to both our District-wide strategy
and our strategy for Bicester. Delivering an
eco-town is considered to be one of the
most sustainable means of accommodating
strategic growth at Bicester to 2031. The
development will provide a new community
to the highest environmental standards and
withitsownlocalservicesandfacilities. The
masterplan will include employment areas,
schools, services and facilities and extensive
greenandpublicopenspacetomaximisethe
opportunity for town wide economic,
communityandenvironmentalgains. Atthe
same time the Eco-Town will integrate with
andcomplementthefunctionandurbanform
of Bicester.
C.44The land at North West Bicester is
theleastconstraineddirectionofgrowthon
theurbanfringefordeliveringgrowthonthis
scale. The proposals for North West
Bicester will however need to consider the
impactonthesurroundingareaincludingthe
villages of Bucknell and Caversfield.
Employment
C.45Aneconomicstrategywillbeproduced
to support the proposals for the eco-town
at North West Bicester. It should
demonstratehowaccesstoemploymentwill
be achieved and deliver a minimum of one
employmentopportunitypernewdwelling.
For North West Bicester, this will mean
providing access to work and 6,000 jobs bythe end of the delivery of the North West
BicesterEco-Towndevelopment. TheLocal
Planestimatesthatover3,000homeswillbe
providedby2031andthereforesetsatarget
of approximately 3,000 job opportunities
associated with the project to be provided
within this period.
C.46The precise nature and location of
these jobs will be set by a masterplan being
prepared for the North West Bicester
allocation. The draftmasterplanshowsthat
about 10 hectares of employment land is
required at North West Bicester. This
wouldprovideforbusinessspaceforoffices,
workshops, factories and warehousing (B1,
B2andB8uses),butnotforretailandleisure
jobswhichwouldbelocatedinlocalcentres.
It is estimated that approximately 1,000 B
useclassjobswouldbelocatedattheNorth
West Bicester site. The remainder would
be provided through other uses including
home working. Some jobs are likely to be
located away from the site, for example in
the town centre or on other employment
sites.
North West Bicester
Development Standards
C.47The North West Bicester Eco-Town
will play a major role in delivering the
strategicgrowthidentifiedforBicesterduring
and beyond the plan period. The One
Shared Vision for Eco Bicester is expected
toguidethedeliveryofhigherenvironmental
standardswhiletheproposalsfortheNorth
WestBicesterEco-Townwillactasacatalyst
for the transition of the town as a whole
towards a more sustainable community.
C.48The Vision aims to "Create a vibrant
Bicester where people choose to live, work
and spend their leisure time in sustainable
ways…” (Eco Bicester One Shared Vision
December 2010).
139 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.49Proposals for development at North
West Bicester will be required to meet the
eco-town development standards set out in
the Eco-TownsPPS. Othersitesin Bicester
will be required to meet the improving
building standards set at national level and
District-wide standards set out in policies
ESD 1-5.C.50Further guidance on the approach to
design and sustainable construction in
Cherwell will be set out in the Sustainable
Buildings in Cherwell SPD.
Policy Bicester 1: North West Bicester Eco-Town
Development Area: 390 hectares
Development Description: A new zero carbon(i)mixed use development
including 6,000 homes will be developed on land identified at North West
Bicester.
Planning permission will only be granted for development at North West
Bicester in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan for the whole area
to be approved by the Council as part of a North West Bicester
SupplementaryPlanningDocument. TheCouncilwillexpecttheMasterplan
andapplicationsforplanningpermissiontomeetthefollowingrequirements:
Employment
Land Area – a minimum of 10 ha, comprising business premises focused
at Howes Lane and Middleton Stoney Road, employment space in the
local centre hubs and as part of mixed used development
Jobscreated–Atleast3,000jobs(approximately1,000jobsonBuseclass
land on the site) within the plan period
Use classes – B1, with limited B2 and B8 uses
It is anticipated that the business park at the South East corner of the
allocation will generate between 700 and 1,000 jobs in use classes B1, B2
and B8 early in the Plan period
ACarbonManagementPlanshallbeproducedtosupportallapplications
for employment developments
Aneconomicstrategytobeproducedtosupporttheplanningapplications
foreco-townproposalsdemonstratinghowaccesstoworkwillbeachieved
and to deliver a minimum of one employment opportunity per new
dwellingthatiseasilyreachedbywalking,cyclingand/orpublictransport
iThe definition of zero carbon in eco-towns is that over a year the net carbon dioxide emissions
from all energy use within the buildings on the eco-town development as a whole are zero or
below.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 140Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Mixed use local centre hubs to include employment (B1(a), A1, A2, A3,
A4, A5, C1, D1 and D2 )
New non-residential buildings will be BREEAM Very Good with the
capability of achieving BREEAM Excellent.
Housing
Number of homes – Up to 6,000 (3,293 to be delivered within the plan
period)
Affordable Housing – 30%
Layout to achieve Building for Life 12 and Lifetime Homes standards
HomestobeconstructedtobecapableofachievingaminimumofLevel
5 of the Code for Sustainable Homes on completion of each phase of
development, including being equipped to meet the water consumption
requirement of Code Level 5
The provision of extra care housing
Have real time energy monitoring systems, real time public transport
information and Superfast Broadband access, including next generation
broadband where possible. Consideration should also be given to digital
accesstosupportassistedlivingandsmartenergymanagementsystems.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – Sufficient secondary, primary and nursery school provision
onsitetomeetprojectedneeds. Itisexpectedthatfour2FormsofEntry
primaryschoolsandonesecondaryschoolwillberequired. Thereshould
beamaximumwalkingdistanceof800metresfromhomestothenearest
primary school.
Health–toprovidefora7GPsurgerytothesouthofthesiteandadental
surgery
BurialGround–toprovideasiteofaminimumof4haforaburialground
which does not pose risks to water quality (this may contribute to the
Green Infrastructure requirements)
Greeninfrastructure–40%ofthetotalgrosssiteareawillcomprisegreen
space of which at least half will be publicly accessible and consist of a
networkofwellmanaged,highqualitygreen/openspaceswhicharelinked
to the open countryside. This should include sports pitches, parks and
recreation areas, play spaces, allotments, the required burial ground
(possibly a woodland cemetery) and SUDS.
Planning applications shall include a range of types of green space and
meet the requirements of Policy BSC11
AccessandMovement–proposalstoincludeappropriatecrossingsofthe
railway line to provide access and integration across the North West
Bicestersite. ChangesandimprovementstoHowesLaneandLordsLane
to facilitate integration of new development with the town.
141 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Community facilities – to include facilities for leisure, health, social care,
education,retail,arts,culture,libraryservices,indoorandoutdoorsport,
playandvoluntaryservices. Thelocalcentrehubsshallprovideforamix
of uses that will include retail, employment, community and residential
provision. Education,healthcare,communityandindoorsportsfacilities
will be encouraged to locate in local centres and opportunities for
co-locationwillbewelcomed. Provisionwillbeproportionatetothesize
of the community they serve. Each neighbourhood of approximately
1,000 houses to include provision for community meeting space suitable
for a range of community activities including provision for older people
and young people. A site of 0.5 ha for a place of worship to be reserved
for future use.
The submission of proposals to support the setting up and operation of
afinanciallyviableLocalManagementOrganisationbythenewcommunity
to allow locally based long term ownership and management of facilities
in perpetuity
Utilities – Utilities and infrastructure which allow for zero carbon and
waterneutralityonthesiteandtheconsiderationofsourcingwasteheat
from the Ardley Energy recovery facility. The approach shall be set out
inanEnergyStrategyandaWaterCycleStudy. TheWaterCycleStudy
shallcoverwaterefficiencyanddemandmanagement,waterqualityand
how it will be protected and improved, WFD compliance, surface water
management to avoid increasing flood risk and water services
infrastructure improvement requirements and their delivery, having
regard to the Environment Agency’s guidance on Water Cycle Studies.
Zero Carbon (see PPS definition) water neutral development is sought.
Development proposals will demonstrate how these requirements will
be met.
Waste Infrastructure – The provision of facilities to reduce waste to
include at least 1 bring site per 1,000 dwellings positioned in accessible
locations. Provision for sustainable management of waste both during
construction and in occupation shall be provided. A waste strategy with
targets above national standards and which facilitates waste reduction
shall accompany planning applications.
Monitoring
Embodied impacts of construction to be monitored, managed and
minimised (ET21)
Sustainability metrics, including those on zero carbon, transport, water
andwastetobeagreedandmonitoredforlearning,goodgovernanceand
dissemination (ET22).
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 142Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Highqualityexemplarydevelopmentanddesignstandardsincludingzero
carbon development, Code Level 5 for dwellings at a minimum and the
use of low embodied carbon in construction materials, as well as
promoting the use of locally sourced materials.
All new buildings designed to incorporate best practice on tackling
overheating, taking account of the latest UKCIP climate predictions.
Proposalsshouldenableresidentstoeasilyreducetheircarbonfootprint
to a low level and live low carbon lifestyles.
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivity between new and existing communities.
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods.
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided that link with existing
networks, the wider urban area and community facilities with a legible
hierarchy of routes to encourage sustainable modes of travel
A layout which makes provision for and prioritises non-car modes and
encourages a modal shift from car use to other forms of travel.
Infrastructuretosupportsustainablemodesoftransportwillberequired
including enhancement of footpath and cyclepath connectivity with the
town centre, employment and rail stations. Measures to ensure the
integrationofthedevelopmentwiththeremainderofthetownincluding
measures to address movement across Howes Lane and Lords Lane
A well designed approach to the urban edge, which relates development
at the periphery to its rural setting and affords good access to the
countryside, minimising the impact of development when viewed from
the surrounding countryside
Developmentthatrespectsthelandscapesettingandthatdemonstrates
enhancement, restoration or creation of wildlife corridors to achieve a
net gain in biodiversity
Consideration should be given to maintaining visual separation with
outlying settlements. Connections with the wider landscape should be
reinforcedandopportunitiesforrecreationaluseoftheopencountryside
identified. Developmentproposalstobeaccompaniedandinfluencedby
a landscape/visual and heritage impact assessment
Careful consideration of open space and structural planting around the
sitetoachieveanoverallimprovementinthelandscapeandvisualimpact
of the site
No development in areas of flood risk and development set back from
watercourses which would provide opportunity for green buffers.
Proposals should include a Flood Risk Assessment.
Maximisationofthesustainabletransportconnectivityinandaroundthe
site
Consideration and mitigation of any noise impacts of the railway line.
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided for,
includingtheprovisionofabusroutethroughthesitewithbusesstopping
at the railway stations and at new bus stops on the site
143 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Contributions to improvements to the surrounding road networks,
includingmitigationmeasuresforthelocalandstrategichighwaynetwork,
consistentwiththerequirementoftheEco-TownsPPStoreducereliance
on the private car, and to achieve a high level of accessibility to public
transportservices,improvementstofacilitiesforpedestriansandcyclists
and the provision and implementation of a Travel Plan to maximise
connectivity with existing development
Provision of a Transport Assessment
Measures to prevent vehicular traffic adversely affecting surrounding
communities.
Significant green infrastructure provision, including new footpaths and
cycleways, enhancing green modal accessibility beyond the site to the
town centre and Bicester Village Railway Station, and adjoining
developments. Public open space to form a well connected network of
green areas suitable for formal and informal recreation
Preservationandenhancementofhabitatsandspeciesonsite,particularly
protected species and habitats and creation and management of new
habitatstoachieveanoverallnetgaininbiodiversityincludingthecreation
of a local nature reserve and linkages with existing BAP habitats
Sensitive management of open space provision to secure recreation and
health benefits alongside biodiversity gains.
A Landscape and Habitats Management Plan to be provided to manage
habitats on site and to ensure this is integral to wider landscape
management.
Carefuldesignofemploymentunitsonsitetolimitadversevisualimpact
and ensure compatibility with surrounding development
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity
The retention and respect for important existing buildings and heritage
assets with a layout to incorporate these and consideration of Grade II
listed buildings outside the site
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Provision of sustainable drainage in accordance with Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), taking account of the
recommendations of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary.
A soil management plan may be required to be submitted with planning
applications.
Undertake a staged programme of archaeological investigation.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 144Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Strategic Development: Bicester
2 - Graven Hill
C.51GravenHill tothe southofBicesteris
part of an extensive MoD site comprising
some 600 hectares of land stretching for
over 5km from the edge of Bicester to the
villages of Arncott to the south and
Piddington to the north east. It includes a
number of distinct, built-up sites separated
by areas of countryside and accommodates
a number of military functions. Part of the
site is a major logistics and distribution hub
serving the armed forces, but with the
potential from this proposed development
at Graven Hill to help strengthen Bicester’s
economic role within the Oxford to
Cambridge corridor.
C.52Following a national Operational
Efficiency Programme (OEP) in 2008, the
MoD identified a need to modernise its
estate,improveefficiencies,reducecostsand
improve the support services to the Armed
Forces. It reviewed its assets and concluded
that the widely dispersed estate at Bicester
was ageing and suffering from
under-investment.
C.53The MoD wishes to retain its valued
presence in Bicester. It has decided to
rationalise and consolidate its logistics
operations with the development of a new
freight and distribution interchange at
Arncott. The land at Graven Hill, Bicester
can then be released with the receipts usedtofundtheconsolidationandmodernisation
programme in Bicester, to improve support
services to the Armed Forces.
C.54The MoD’s financial viability exercises
have concluded that a mixed use scheme of
some 2,100 homes with major employment
wouldenabletherequiredmodernisationto
proceed and secure between 420 and 620
additional military jobs. The land released
atGravenHillcouldprovideafurther2,000
civilian jobs. Development of the site will
identify Bicester as a prime location for
investmentthroughthecreationofsignificant
jobs-led economic growth to address the
town’shistorichousing/jobsimbalance. The
developmentareacoveredbyPolicyBicester
2 will include land at Langford Park Farm.
Development should be concentrated
towardstheeasternpartofthisareatotake
account of the potential impact of
developmentonLangfordParkFarm(which
is a listed building) and the sewage works.
C.55The Graven Hill site represents a
uniquesustainabledevelopmentopportunity,
consisting of predominantly previously
developed land in single ownership that is
well located in relation to the centre of
Bicester,BicesterVillageRailwayStationand
strategic development sites. It has existing
infrastructureandlandscaping,butpreviously
stoodseparatefromthetown.Development
of this site presents the opportunity for
integration of this development area with
Bicester and for its development to be
undertakeninanintegrated,coordinatedand
planned way.
C.56Within the Graven Hill site standsthe
woodland topped hill itself, which is a
landmark in the local landscape that could
be opened up for public access providing
recreational and health benefits (subject to
careful management given the ecological
value of the woodlandand its designationas
a Local Wildlife Site).
145 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.57The site benefits from excellent
transportconnections. Therearerailtracks
still on the site and rail linked distribution
warehouses. There are also planned
transport improvements for the town
including East-West Rail (to improve links
between Oxford, Bicester, Milton Keynes
and Bedford), and M40 J9 improvements.
The site will also contribute to transport
infrastructure improvements. Graven Hill
couldaccommodateapossiblereliefroadas
one possible option for highway
improvements to the town through the
easternpartofthedevelopmentarea. New
road links on the site may be either site
accesses only or form part of a strategic
relief road.
C.58The proposal will also support local
economicgrowthincludingthewarehousing
and logistics sector in a location that lends
itself to both national and regional
distribution. This sector is well placed to
maximise the strategic accessibility from
which Bicester benefits. A Bicester Rail
Freight Interchange (RFI) would provide alogical continued use of this existing
employment area. The job creation impact
of a RFI will make a positive and significant
contribution to the employment provision
for Bicester.
C.59Thedeliveryofrailserveddistribution
nodes is a key part of the Government’s
policy of transferring freight from roads to
rail. Government policy recommends that
sites with unique transport connections to
develop as rail freight interchanges should
be protected from other forms of
development. This site is located adjacent
to the A41 and within easy access of the
Strategic Highway Network, ensuring that
operations based at Bicester will perform
well in termsof transportcostminimisation
and in being able to attract rail freight from
the UK and international locations. The
close proximity of the improved Junction 9
on the M40 presents a unique opportunity
to locate a RFI on a highly sustainable and
accessible site with limited impact on
residential properties.
Policy Bicester 2: Graven Hill
Development Area: 241 hectares
Development Description: This predominantly brownfield site to the south
of Bicester is proposed for a mixed use development of 2,100 dwellings,
significant employment land providing for high quality job opportunities,
associated services, facilities and other infrastructure including the potential
for the incorporation of a rail freight interchange.
Employment
Land Area for employment – 26ha
Jobs created – approximately 2,000 jobs
Use classes – Mixed B1, B2 and B8 uses.
Housing
Number of homes – Approximately 2,100
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 146Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Dwelling mix – to be informed by Policy BSC4: Housing Mix
Affordable Housing – 30%
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for self build
affordable housing.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – At least a two form of entry primary school
Health – no on site requirements anticipated
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
outdoor sports provision as outlined in Policy BSC 11: Local Standards
ofProvision–OutdoorRecreation.Outdoorsportsprovisiontobelocated
in the north- west part of the site. Public open space to include the hill
top area.
AccessandMovement–contributiontoimprovementstothesurrounding
localandstrategicroadnetworks. Newpointsofaccessbetweensiteand
Bicester.
Community facilities – local centre to include retail provision
Utilities - Off site improvements to utilities may be required.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivity between new and existing communities, with appropriate
consideration of the relationship of the development with any retained
military uses
Alayoutthatmaximisesthepotentialforwalkableneighbourhoods,with
a legible hierarchy of routes with new footpaths and cycleways provided
on site that link to existing networks beyond the site
A well designed approach to the urban edge, which relates development
at the periphery to its rural setting and affords good access to the
countryside
Developmentthatrespectsthelandscapesettingandthatdemonstrates
enhancement, restoration or creation of wildlife corridors, and that
respectstherelationshipbetweenthewoodlandandopenareasofGraven
Hill and the development through the creation of ‘green fingers’ leading
into the development area
Careful consideration of open space and structural planting around the
sitetoachieveanoverallimprovementinthelandscapeandvisualimpact
of the site
Provision of a road alignment within the site to secure strategic highway
improvements for Bicester
Maximisationofthetransportconnectivityinandaroundthesite,including
the use of the rail tracks on site to serve commercial logistics and
147 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
distributionuses,subjecttoconsiderationofnoisemitigationifproximate
to sensitive receptors
Contribution to improvements to the surrounding local and strategic
roadnetworks,goodaccessibilitytoandimprovementofpublictransport
services, including financial or in-kind contributions to bus services and
busstopinfrastructure,engineeredpedestrianandcyclistconnectivityto
the A41 underpass to facilitate potential routes to the town centre,
improved facilities for pedestrians and cyclists to cross the A41, and the
provision of a Travel Plan to maximise connectivity with existing
development
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Developmentshouldtakeaccountofthefloodcompensationworkswithin
the site
Provision of a buffer between new development and the sewage works,
including a nature reserve
Protection of the character, appearance and setting of Langford Park
Farm
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
Biodiversity protection and enhancement measures should be
implemented in any future development. Protected species surveys for
bats and great crested newts will be required, and sufficient mitigation
measures agreed prior to planning permission being granted
Anarchaeologicalfieldevaluationtoassesstheimpactofthedevelopment
on archaeological features
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided for,
includingtheprovisionofabusroutethroughthesitewithbusesstopping
at the railway stations and at new bus stops on the site
Significantsustainableaccessprovisionincludingfootpathsandcycleways,
enhancing green modal accessibility beyond the site to the town centre,
Bicester Village Railway Station, adjoining developments and linking the
development to the existing Public Rights of Way Network
Public open space to form a well connected network of green areas
suitable for formal and informal recreation
Provision of opportunities for Green Infrastructure links beyond the
development site to the wider town and open countryside
Preservation and enhancement of protected habitats and species on site
and creation and management of new habitats to achieve an overall net
gain in biodiversity
Sensitive management of recreational access to Graven Hill woodland
whilst acknowledging recreational tourism and health benefits.
AnEcologicalandLandscapeManagementPlantobeprovidedtomanage
the woodland and other habitats onsite
Carefuldesignof employmentunitsonsiteto limitadversevisualimpact
on the new development and the wider area
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 148Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity
Remediation of contaminated land
The retention or appropriate treatment of on-site and off- site heritage
assets and their settings, particularly given the archaeological interest in
and beyond the site, the heritage significance of the MOD site and also
in relation to listed buildings beyond the site
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for self-build
housing
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
Recycling and potential reuse of demolition materials where possible
Adoption of a surface water management framework to reduce run off
to greenfield rates
Consideration of the requirements in the Council’s SFRA including the
use of SuDS in accordance with Policy ESD7: Sustainable Drainage
Systems (SuDS) specifically combined infiltration and attenuation
techniques in the north western corner of the site, and attenuation
techniques across the vast majority of the site.
Strategic Development: Bicester
3 - South West Bicester Phase 2
C.60Phase 1 of the South West Bicester
urbanextension(nowknownasKingsmere)
is under construction. It will provide 1,742new homes, new primary and secondary
schools,publicopenspace,healthandsports
facilities, employment, a hotel, and other
local facilities. As part of the development,
anewperimeterroadhasbeenconstructed.
149 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.61A 28 hectare area of land to the west
of the main development was originally
identified by the Council for formal sports
facilities. These facilities are now being
provided within the main Phase 1
development site making the unused land
available for development.
C.62The development area offers an
opportunitytoprovidenewhomes,services
and facilities integrated with the Phase 1
development. Itisarelativelyunconstrained
site with low landscape sensitivity, no
substantive flooding issues, and which has
relativelylowecologicalvalueotherthanthat
provided by a small number of hedgerows
and trees.C.63Development would be contained
withinthe'inside'ofthenewperimeterroad
avoiding further encroachment into the
wider countryside. The site is in an
accessible location relatively close to the
towncentre. Theoccupiersofnewhousing
will have access to the secondary school,
other services and facilities, public open
space, places of employment and health
village already planned for provision within
Phase 1. The site is well located with
immediateaccesstothenewperimeterroad,
and the potential to extend Phase 1 bus
services,cyclewaysandfootpaths. Italsohas
good accessibility to places of employment,
services and facilities elsewhere in Bicester.
C.64ThePhase2developmentwillprovide
additional services and facilities, provide an
opportunity to extend green corridors, and
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 150Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
provideimprovedaccesstothecountryside
with links to a new community woodlandbetweentheperimeterroadandChesterton
village.
Policy Bicester 3: South West Bicester Phase 2
Development Area: 29 hectares
DevelopmentDescription: 726homeswithassociatedservices,facilitiesand
other infrastructure.
Housing
Number of homes– Approximately 726
Dwelling mix – to be informed by Policy BSC4:Housing mix
Affordable Housing – 30%
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing.
Infrastructure Needs
Education–2FEPrimarySchool,contributionstowardssecondaryschool
provision
Health – to be provided at North West Bicester
Open Space - to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
outdoor sports provision as outlined in Policy BSC 11: Local Standards
of Provision – Outdoor Recreation
Access and Movement – link to Phase 1 bus service to Bicester Village
Railway Station and Park and Ride at Phase 1
Communityfacilities–conveniencestore,acommunityfacility/enhanced
community facilities as part of Phase 1
Utilities – extension of Phase 1 connections. Off site improvements to
utilities may be required.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
A distinctive residential neighbourhood for Bicester that integrates well
with the existing phase 1 development at South West Bicester
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivitywithdirectvehicular(includingcycle)andpedestrianlinkages
between South West Bicester Phases 1 and 2 and to existing networks
A transport assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
151 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities, with a legible hierarchy of routes, with new
footpaths and cycleways provided on site that link to existing networks
beyond the site
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by
ensuring that the bus routes and bus stops to be provided within the site
areaccessiblebypedestriansandcyclistsviaeffectivefootpathsandcycle
routes
DevelopmentthatrespectsthesettingofChestertonConservationArea
and the wider landscape setting
Retention of hedgerows and the preservation and enhancement of the
biodiversity value of the site, with the enhancement, restoration and
creation of wildlife corridors provided for through an ecological survey
Development set back from the minor watercourse along the site’s
northern boundary to meet Environment Agency requirements
A surface water management framework and the incorporation of
infiltrationSustainableDrainageSystems(SuDS)toreducesurfacewater,
control drainage and protect a Minor Aquifer (subject to further ground
investigation)
Public open space to form a well connected network of green areas
suitable for formal and informal recreation
Retention of the existing Public Right of Way which crosses the site
Provision of opportunities for Green Infrastructure links beyond the
development site to the wider town and open countryside
A well designed approach to the urban edge, which relates development
at the periphery to its rural setting and Chesterton village and affords
good access to the countryside
Development proposals should seek to protect cultural heritage and
archaeology,including in the conversion of any important farm buildings
where possible especially with regard to the conversion of Whitelands
Farmandassociatedbuildings,locatedtothesouthwestoftheallocation.
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity
Land to be provided for and assist in facilitating a community woodland
between Chesterton village and the Development Area
Provision of sustainable drainage in accordance with ‘Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)’. taking account of the
recommendations of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5.
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary
A soil management plan may be required to be submitted with planning
applications.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 152Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Take account of the Council’s SFRA for the site
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by a
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments.
Strategic Development: Bicester
4 - Bicester Business Park
C.65There is a sustainable opportunity for
theprovisionofstrategicemploymentspace
to the south of Bicester Town Centre and
adjoining the A41. The Bicester Business
Park site has planning permission for a
60,000m2businessparkincorporatingoffices
(B1) and hotel (C1) use. This development
areaislocatedimmediatelytotheeastofthe
South West Bicester (Kingsmere) urbanextension, less than 1 km from Bicester
Village Railway Station and close to major
retail uses and town centre facilities. The
site has immediate access to the strategic
highway network (Oxford-Aylesbury) with
Junction 9 of the M40 motorway situated
about 3 km to the south. Major growth is
planned nearby with the redevelopment of
Graven Hill (Policy Bicester 2: Graven Hill,
phase 2 of the South West Bicester
extension (Policy Bicester 3: South West
Bicester Phase 2 and the expansion of the
centre of the town.
C.66Although full implementation of the
permitted scheme requires the completion
of Junction 9 improvements, phase 1 of the
highway works haves been completed. TheCouncilwishestosupportthedevelopment
of this important site and in doing so will
workwithCountyCouncilwhohaveagreed
junction improvements.
153 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Bicester 4: Bicester Business Park
Development Area: 29.5 hectares
Development Description: This site to the south west of Bicester, bounded
by the A41 to the north and west, is proposed for employment generating
development in the form of a high quality B1 office scheme.
Employment
Jobs created – up to approximately 6,000 jobs. Site constraints and
implementation of alternative use planning permissions may reduce
numbers slightly.
Use classes – B1a (Office).
Infrastructure needs
Open space – structured open space and planting that provide a strong
landscapesetting,supportSUDSandimprovementstothemicroclimate
Access and Movement - M40, Phase 2 improvements to Junction 9.
Contributions to improvements to the surrounding local and strategic
road networks.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
A distinctive commercial development that provides a gateway into the
town
Ahighqualitydesignandfinish,withcarefulconsiderationgiventolayout,
architecture,materials,colouringsandbuildingheightstoreduceoverall
visual impact
Layoutthatenablesahighdegreeofintegrationandconnectivitybetween
newandexistingdevelopmentparticularlythemixeduseurbanextension
atSouthWestBicestertothewest,thegardencentretothesouth,and,
to the north, Bicester town centre and Bicester Village retail outlet
Considerationoftheoperationalcharacteristicsofthesewagetreatment
works, including ensuring that there will be no adverse amenity impact
on occupiers of the development
Provision for safe pedestrian access from the A41 including facilitating
the crossing of the A41 to the north and west, and the provision and
upgrading of footpaths and cycleways that link to existing networks to
improve connectivity generally and to develop links between this site,
nearby development sites and the town centre.
Take account of the Council’s SFRA for the site
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 154Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided for,
including the accommodation of new bus stops to link the development
to the wider town
A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
Asequentialapproachshouldbefollowed;wherepossible,buildingsshould
be located away from areas at high risk of flooding but where it is
necessarydevelopmentshouldbemadesafewithoutmeasuresincreasing
flood risk elsewhere. Up to date information should be used for a Flood
Risk Assessment (FRA).
Developmentthatdoesnotencroachwithin8mofthewatercoursebanks
Adoption of a surface water management framework to reduce surface
water run off to greenfield rates
Structuralplantingandlandscapeproposalswithinthesitetoprovidefor
the enhancement, restoration and creation of wildlife corridors and to
limit visual impact of new buildings and car parking on the existing
character of the site and its surroundings, including viewpointsalong the
A41 to the west and north (where the road is more elevated) and along
the southern boundary (important in longer distance views of the site)
Provision of opportunities for Green infrastructure links beyond the
development site to the wider town and open countryside
Biodiversity should be preserved and enhanced
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
Full mitigationof flood riskin compliancewithPolicyESD 6: Sustainable
Flood Risk Management including the use of SuDS (Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS))specifically attenuation SuDS
techniques, taking account of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment
Provision for a staged programme of archaeological work in liaison with
statutory consultees, given the archaeological potential on site
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary
A soil management plan may be required to be submitted with planning
applications
155 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Strategic Development: Bicester
5 - Strengthening Bicester Town
Centre
C.67BicesterTownCentreandthePrimary
Shopping Frontage will remain unchanged in
thisLocalPlan(seeMapBicester5,Appendix
5).
C.68Changes to the boundaries of the
TownCentreandPrimaryShoppingfrontage
will be explored in the Local Plan Part 2.
C.69Informed by work on the Bicester
Masterplan an ‘Area of Search' has been
identified in the centre of Bicester (Map
Bicester 5).
C.70The aim of this is to:
support the viability and vitality of the
existing town centre
encourage economic activity
assistwiththeconnectivitybetweenthe
existing town centre, a new Bicester
Village Railway Station, Bicester Village
and adjoining existing and proposed
residential areas
improve the character and appearance
of the centre of Bicester and the public
realm.
C.71Much of the centre, including Sheep
Street and Market Square, lies within the
Bicester Conservation Area. There are an
increasing number of vacancies in Bicester
towncentreandtowncentreimprovements
willcontributetowardsaddressingthisissue.
C.72Partial redevelopment of the town
centre has been achieved with the recent
Bure Place redevelopment scheme and a
secondphaseofdevelopmentisplanned(seePolicy Bicester 6). Phase 1 is anchored by a
major food retailer and a new cinema and
willprovideimpetusforfurtherinvestment.
However, work for the emerging Bicester
Masterplan has identified how the area to
the south of the town centre could also be
improved to consolidate and expand the
town centre to provide space to help
accommodate Bicester’s growth needs. It
could also enable improvements to the
connectivityoftheexistingtowncentrewith
a redeveloped Bicester Village Railway
Station, Bicester Village and potential new
publicopenspaceandprovideforimproved
accessibilitytonewresidentialdevelopments
to the south of the town.
C.73In 2010 the Council commissioned an
updatetoits2006PPS6RetailStudy. In2012
a further study was commissioned which
identifies the capacity for comparison and
convenience retail floorspace in the District
up to 2031. No additional capacity for
convenienceretailfloorspaceisidentifiedfor
Bicester on top of the floorspace identified
as part of the Bicester town centre
expansion (Policy Bicester 6: Bure Place
Town Centre Redevelopment Phase 2).
However,thestudydoesidentifymoreneed
for comparison retail within the town.
C.74Bicester Village will have a role in the
improvement of central Bicester by
continuingtobringtouriststothetownand
also potentially through involvement in
furtherre-developmentproposals. Bicester
Villageisthereforeincludedwithinthe‘Area
of Search’. Any further development at
Bicester Village would be required to
complement and help improve connectivity
with the existing town centre and not
undermineitsvitalityandviability.Conditions
will be attached to planning permissions if
necessary.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 156Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.75Delivering these policy aims will
requiretheimplementationofanActionPlanto be prepared as part of the Bicester
Masterplan.
Policy Bicester 5: Strengthening Bicester Town Centre
Shopping,leisureandother'MainTownCentreUses'willbesupportedwithin
Bicester town centre. Residential development will be supported in
appropriate locations in Bicester town centre except where it will lead to a
loss of retail or other main town centre uses.
Thechangeofuseofsitesusedformaintowncentreusesinthetowncentre
forresidentialdevelopmentwillnormallybepermittedifproposalscontribute
significantly to the regeneration of the town centre. Mixed use schemes will
be encouraged.
Only A1 and A3 uses will be permitted on the ground floor in the primary
shopping frontage. Residential development will be encouraged within the
primary shopping frontage above ground floor level.
The Council will review the town centre boundary through the Local Plan
Part 2. Prior to this retail and other main town centre uses will only be
supported within the Area of Search if they form part of new schemes which
help deliverthe aims for centralBicesterset out above.In order to maintain
the retail viability of the existing town centre, A1 uses should only be small
units and form a small part of wider development proposals.
Residential development will also be supported within the Area of Search in
appropriate locations.
Development should have particular regard to enhancing the character of
the Conservation Area.
In all cases proposals for town centre uses will be considered against Policies
SLE 2, ESD 10 and ESD 15.
Strategic Development: Bicester 6 -
Bure Place Town Centre
Redevelopment Phase 2
C.76The redevelopment of Bicester Town
Centre has started with the redevelopment
of Bure Place, a site within the town centre
bounded by Sheep Street to the east,Manorsfield Road to the west, St. John’s
Street to the north and Crown Walk to the
south.
157 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.77A Phase 1 development is now
complete and involved the diversion of the
town brook and associated landscaping, andthe development of a new supermarket,
cinema, restaurants, other shops, a car park
and a new bus interchange.
C.78Phase2 of the redevelopmentis to be
undertaken as a partnership between the
Council, Sainsbury's and Stockdale Land.
Oxfordshire County Council will become a
partner for phase two with a view to
providinganewlibraryandcivicoffices. The
provision of the new civic buildings will
provide the opportunity for a new public
focal point to be provided and will further
assist in improving the attractiveness and
vitality of Bicester Town Centre,
strengthening the town centre function in
accordance with Policy Bicester 5.
Policy Bicester 6: Bure Place Town Centre Redevelopment Phase 2
TheCouncilwillworkwiththeCountyCouncilandotherpartnerstodeliver
newcivicbuildingsasasecondstagetotheBicestertowncentredevelopment
involvingnewpublicspaceandalibrary. Proposalswillbeconsideredagainst
Policy ESD15 and other relevant policies in the Plan.
Strategic Development: Bicester
7 - Meeting the Need for Open
Space, Sport and Recreation
C.79The evidence base studies have
identified a number of existing deficiencies
andfutureshortfallsofopenspace,sportand
recreation provision in Bicester.
C.80Someofthesedeficienciescanbe met
through improvement to the quality of and
accesstoexistingfacilitiesandusingexisting
areas of one type of open space to meet
deficienciesinanothertype.Inadditionsome
new provision will be required to meet
Bicester’sgrowth;thepotentiallocationswill
be identified in the Bicester Masterplan and
Local Plan Part 2.
C.81The Playing Pitch Strategy Action Plan
(2008) indicated that existing deficiencies in
playing pitch provision could be addressed
throughconversionofadulttojuniorfootball
pitches, developing dual use agreements for
community access to schools facilities, and
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 158Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
new pitches to be provided as part of the
committed development at South West
Bicester. Existing deficiencies identified in
the Green Space Strategy (2008) were
partially updated in 2011 (see Appendix 3
Evidence Base). Some of the existing
deficiencies in open space provision will
require the allocation of land through the
Local Plan process, as follows:
11.69 ha parks and gardens
2.87hanatural/semi-naturalgreenspace
8.18 ha allotment provision.
C.82The Playing Pitch and Green Space
Strategy estimated that the following
additional provision was required to meet
needs to 2026:
4 junior football pitches
2 mini-soccer pitches
2 additional cricket pitches
2 additional rugby pitches
7ha park
3.4hanatural/semi-naturalspacethrough
newprovision/publicaccessagreements
to privately owned sites
4.2ha of amenity open space
6.58haofchildren'splayspacetobemet
through new equipped play areas and
additionalplayopportunitiesusingother
open space
1 Multi Use Games Area
3 tennis courts
2.6ha of allotments.
C.83The Playing Pitch and Green Space
Strategies were formulated before the
amount and preferred distribution of
development in Bicester over an extended
plan period had been established, and, as a
result, future needs are being updated.
Indoor sports provision needs are being
updated. Initial indications are that there is
the potential for provision of an additional
sports hall to meet demand to 2031, with
some unmet demand for swimming pool
provision.
C.84‘PolicyBSC10: Open Space,Outdoor
Sport and Recreation Provision’,’Policy BSC
11: Local Standards of Provision- Outdoor
Recreation’and‘PolicyBSC12:IndoorSport,
RecreationandCommunityFacilities’willall
beusedtohelpaddressexistingdeficiencies
in provision and future development needs,
inadditionto‘PolicyBicester7:Meetingthe
NeedforOpenSpace,SportandRecreation’.
C.85The proposed strategic allocations
shown on the Polices Map (Appendix 5:
Maps) will be expected to make provision
on site for open space and recreation to
meet the needs of the new development.
Whilst new development can only be
expected to make provision for its own
needs,themosteffectivewayofplanningfor
someofthecurrentandfuturerequirements
may be through integrating provision with
the planning of strategicsites. Overall open
space provision and green infrastructure
requirements are being examined in more
detail as part of the Bicester Masterplan
work. Any additional non-strategic
allocations required will be contained in the
Local Plan Part 2.
159 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.86The proposed urban edge park is the
continuation of a long term objective to
address the poor distribution of open space
inBicester. Thepolicyaimstomaximisethe
value of existing open spaces by increasing
their accessibility and linking them to each
other through a network of
footpaths/cycleways, and create new areas
of open space to contribute towards the
network of provision, improving green
infrastructurelinks. Thecoreofthenetwork
is currently centred to the north, south and
east of the town centre, formed by areas
suchasPingleField,BicesterFields,andland
in the Town Council's ownership adjacent
to Skimmingdish Lane. Committed
development at South West Bicester will
contributetothenetwork. Inadditionthere
are a number of areas in private ownership
used informally for recreation purposes
whichcontributetothenetwork,albeitthere
is currently no secured public access.
C.87The proposed strategic allocations at
North West Bicester, Graven Hill, South
West Bicester, South East Bicester and at
North East Bicester provide a majoropportunity to extend the network around
thetown,andincombinationwiththeurban
edge park should offer the opportunity to
help address the existing shortfalls in parks
and gardens and natural/semi-natural
provision together with some of the
estimated future needs of the town. The
proposed network will be investigated
further to enable land allocations to be
indicated in more detail within the Bicester
Masterplan and Local Plan Part 2 as
appropriate.
C.88Stratton Audley Quarry (Elm Farm
Quarry) is the subject of an extant planning
permission for infilling to form a country
park, with the planning consent having been
partially implemented. In view of the site’s
designation as a Local Wildlife Site only low
intensity recreation use of the site is likely
tobeappropriate. Howeverthesiteisclose
to the edge of Bicester making it easily
accessibletothetown'sresidentsandcould
assist in the establishment of long distance
links from the town to the villages and
countryside beyond.
Policy Bicester 7: Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport and Recreation
Aspartofmeasurestoaddresscurrentandfuturedeficienciesinopenspace,
sport and recreation provision in the town we will:
Seek to establish an urban edge park around the outskirts of the town,
byprotectingtheexistingnetworkofgreenspacesandsecuringnewopen
space and linear route provision linked with public footpaths/cycleways,
to create a circular route with connections to the town centre and the
countryside beyond
Seek to establish a community woodland between the South West
Bicester link road and Chesterton
EncourageproposalsfortherestorationanduseofStrattonAudleyQuarry
for informal outdoor recreation, provided that the proposals are
compatiblewiththesite'sdesignationasa LocalWildlifeSiteand partial
SSSI.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 160Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Strategic Development: Bicester
8 – Former RAF Bicester
C.89The Former RAF Bicester is an
inter-warairfieldsituatedimmediatelytothe
north-east of Bicester. Historically it
comprised a 'Domestic Site' and 'Technical
Site' together with the large open space of
the flying field. English Heritage described
the site as “the best preserved bomber
airfield dating from the period up to 1945”.
Thewholeofthesiteisaconservationarea,
which was reviewed and extended in 2008,
andmostofthebuildingsandstructuresare
protected by listing and scheduling. In
addition a Local Wildlife Site and proposed
extension to the Local Wildlife Site covers
a large part of the site.
C.90The Council worked with the MOD
andEnglishHeritageandpreparedaplanning
brief for the site in 2009. This brief
recognises the complex issues, and the
unique opportunities, raised by the site and
the need to maintain and re-use its historicbuildings and the flying field. The brief
proposes a 'conservation-led' approach to
the site, recognising that finding a use which
canbestpreservethesensitivehistoricfabric
of the buildings may require a flexible
approach in terms of the use to which the
buildings are put.
C.91Planning permission has been granted
for the conversion of the Domestic Site to
thesouthofCaversfieldvillageforresidential
useandthisisbeingimplemented. Themain
technical site and flying field have also
recently been sold by the MoD, thereby
ending the ‘RAF’ status of the site.
C.92Policy Bicester 8 seeks to secure
appropriate uses for a long-lasting
'conservation-led' approach to the technical
site and flying field. It aims to establish uses
that will be complementary to, and help
enhance, the character and appearance of
the conservation area and the nationally
importantheritagevalueofthesite. Itseeks
to encourage a mix of uses that will best
preserve the sensitive historic fabric and
layout of the buildings and the openness of
the grass airfield. However, the need to
allow some flexibility in the interests of
securing an economically viable future for
the site is recognised.
C.93The Planning Brief indicates that
employmentusesonthetechnicalsitecould
beappropriatealthoughitdoesalsopropose
a range of other uses including aviation,
museum,cultural,sportandcommunityuses.
Policy Bicester 8: Former RAF Bicester
TheCouncilwillencourageconservation-ledproposalstosecurealong-lasting,
economically viable future for the Former RAF Bicester technical site and
flying field.
161 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
It will support heritage tourism uses, leisure, recreation, employment and
communityuses. Thedevelopmentofhotelandconferencefacilitieswillalso
be supported as part of a wider package of employment uses.
All proposals will be required to accord with the approved Planning Brief for
the site and take into account the Bicester Masterplan.
They must maintain and enhance the character and appearance of the
conservation area, protect listed, scheduled and other important buildings,
their setting, and protect the sensitive historic fabric of the buildings and
preserve the openness of the airfield. The biodiversity of the site should be
protected and enhanced and habitats and species surveys (including a Great
CrestedNewtsurvey)shouldbeundertaken. Thecontinuationofglidinguse
willbesupported. Opportunitiesforimprovingaccesstothecountrysidewill
beencouraged. TheCouncil’sSFRAshouldbeconsidered. Proposalsshould
be considered against Policy ESD 15.
Strategic Development: Bicester
9 – Burial Site Provision in
Bicester
C.94Bicester cemetery is nearing capacity
and there is limited opportunity to increase
this. It is evident that a site for a new
cemetery needs to be secured as a matter
of urgency. Bicester Town Council has
already undertaken a considerable amount
of investigative work and although work is
continuing, it is estimated that a site of
approximately 4 hectares is required to
accommodateacemeteryandareaforgreenburial. It is anticipated that a site will be
provided within the North West Bicester
Eco-Townarea(SeePolicyBicester1:North
West Bicester Eco-Town).
C.95We will continue to work with
BicesterTownCounciltoidentifyandsecure
a suitable site as part of strategic
development at Bicester, to enable delivery
of new burial facilities for the town at the
earliest opportunity. Potential land will be
surveyed to confirm initial findings on the
suitability of ground conditions and inform
the decision on where these new burial
facilities should be located.
Policy Bicester 9: Burial Site Provision in Bicester
Anewcemeteryisrequiredtomeettheneedsofboththeexistingpopulation
and future development in the town. As such developer contributions will
be sought from new development in the town towards the establishment of
thefacility. FurtherdetailswillbecontainedintheDeveloperContributions
SPD.
Detailedinvestigationswillberequiredtodeterminethesuitabilityofground
conditions for cemetery use.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 162Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Strategic Development: Bicester
10 - Bicester Gateway
C.96DevelopmentontheBicesterGateway
site has the potential to contribute towards
buildingandreinforcingamodernknowledge
economy for Cherwell and surroundings,
securing a location for science and research
and technology transfer and commercial
application.
C.97This site has the potential to be a
major high quality employment area at this
critical gateway to the town. Being a major
development site at the southern edge of
Bicester will require exemplary building
quality and design to provide a strong sense
ofarrivaltothetownandastatementofthe
sortofeconomywehaveaimstosecurefor
inwardinvestorsorlocalcompaniesinneed
of land for expansion.C.98There is an opportunity to encourage
the knowledge economy in Cherwell by
enablingbusinesseswhichhaveorwantlinks
to the Oxford cluster, as well as direct spin
outcompaniesfromsuccessfulresearchand
development, to locate in Bicester. Oxford
is constrained by its historic environment
and by the Green Belt. Bicester is only 10
milesfromOxford,withgoodtransportlinks
between the two.
C.99Development of this site will provide
employment in Bicester helping to reduce
the number of people out commuting to
Oxford and London. The development will
alsocomplementtheproposedemployment
development at Silverstone and will form
partofthetechnologycorridorfromOxford
to Northamptonshire and Oxford to
Cambridge.
Policy Bicester 10: Bicester Gateway
Development Area: 18 hectares
Development Description: Knowledge economy employment development
to the south of the existing retail area (Wyvale Garden Centre), adjacent to
the A41.
Employment
Jobscreated–approximately3,500. Siteconstraintsmayreducenumbers
slightly
Use classes – B1 Business uses: high tech knowledge industries.
Infrastructure Needs
Open Space – structured open spaces and planting that provide a strong
landscapesetting,supportSUDsandimprovementstothemicroclimate
Access and Movement – M40, Phase 2 improvements to Junction 9.
Contributions to improvements to the surrounding local and strategic
road networks, including safeguarding land for future highway
improvements to peripheral routes on this side of the town.
163 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15.
A well designed modern area with the provision of high quality property
to attract and retain ‘best in class’ technology companies.
Ahighqualitydesignandfinish,withcarefulconsiderationgiventolayout,
architecture,materialsandcolouringsandcarefulconsiderationgivento
building heights to reduce overall visual impact.
ConservationandenhancementofthesettingofAlchesterRomanTown
Scheduled Ancient Monument and the setting out of opportunities to
better reveal its significance.
Layoutthatenablesahighdegreeofintegrationandconnectivitybetween
newandexistingdevelopmentparticularlythemixeduseurbanextension
atSouthWestBicestertothewest,thegardencentretothenorth,and,
further to the north, Bicester Village retail outlet and Bicester town
centre.
Provision of opportunities for Green Infrastructure links beyond the
development site to the wider town and countryside.
Provision and encouragement for sustainable travel options as the
preferred modes of transport rather than the private car, and provision
of a Travel Plan. Good accessibility to public transport services should
be provided for.
The provision of a detailed transport assessment tailored to assess in
detailtheimpactoftheproposeduseclassandfloorspaceonthestrategic
road network.
Provision for safe pedestrian and cyclist access from the A41 including
facilitating the provision and upgrading of footpaths and cycleways that
linkwithexistingnetworks toimproveconnectivitygenerally,tomaximise
walkingandcyclinglinksbetweenthissiteandnearby developmentsites
and the town centre.
Accommodationofbusstopstolinkthedevelopmenttothewidertown.
Maximisation of walking and cycling links to the adjoining mixed use
development at South West Bicester as well as the garden centre to the
north.
Contribution to the creation of a footpath network around Bicester.
Flood plain land in the eastern parts of the site to be used for informal
recreation and ecological benefit in order to enhance Bicester’s green
infrastructurenetwork,intheformof'bluecorridors'whichprovideopen
space near watercourses and provide a natural wetland buffer between
the development and the adjacent nature reserve.
Development should not encroach within 8m of the watercourse banks.
Adequateinvestigationof,protectionofandmanagementofpriorityand
protected habitats and species on site given the ecological value of the
site, with biodiversity preserved and enhanced. An ecological survey
should be undertaken, investigating the cumulative impacts of
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 164Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
development at this site and at other sites on the Local and District
Wildlife Sites in the vicinity.
Provision for a staged programme of archaeological work in liaison with
statutory consultees, given the archaeological potential close to the site.
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity.
Structural planting and landscape proposals within the site to include
retentionofexistingtreesandhedgerows,theenhancement,restoration
orcreationofwildlifecorridors,andtolimitvisualimpactofnewbuildings
andcarparkingontheexistingcharacterofthesiteanditssurroundings.
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5.
Asequentialapproachshouldbefollowed;wherepossible,buildingsshould
belocatedawayfromareasathighriskoffloodingbutwheredevelopment
is necessary, the development should be made safe without measures
increasing flood risk elsewhere. Up to date information should be used
for a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA).
Adoption of a surface water management framework to reduce surface
water run off to greenfield rates.
Full mitigationof flood riskin compliancewithPolicyESD 6: Sustainable
Flood Risk Management including the use of SuDS (Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)) specifically infiltration SuDS
techniquesinthefarsouthwesterncornerofthesite,combinedinfiltration
andattenuationtechniquesinthenorthwesternandsoutheasternareas,
and attenuation techniques in the central and north eastern area of the
site, taking account of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment. A
Flood Risk Assessment should investigate opening the culverted
watercoursethatcrossesthroughtheeastofthesitetoreducefloodrisk
and improve its ecological value.
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary.
A soil management plan may be required to be submitted with planning
applications.
Take account of the Council’s SFRA for the site.
No built development will be located in Flood Zone 3b and the principle
set out in Policy ESD 6 will be followed.
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments.
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities.
Planting of vegetation along strategic route ways to screen the noise.
165 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Strategic Development: Bicester
11 – Employment Land at North
East Bicester
C.100Thesiteprovidestheopportunityto
restore the balance of housing and jobs
provisioninBicesterbyprovidingforB1,B2andB8usesinasustainablelocationinclose
proximity to the town’s existing areas of
employment and residential uses.
C.101Careful design and landscaping is
required to ensure development respects
and preserves the setting and character and
appearance of the Former RAF Bicester
Conservation Area.
Policy Bicester 11: Employment Land at North East Bicester
Development Area: 15 hectares
Development Description: Employment development
Employment
Jobscreated–approximately1,000. Siteconstraintsmayreducenumbers
slightly.
Use classes – B1, B2 and B8 uses.
Infrastructure Needs
Open space – structured open spaces and planting that provide a strong
landscape setting, support SUDs and improvement to the microclimate
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15.
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivitybetweennew and existingdevelopment,includingadjoining
employment areas, nearby residential areas and the town centre.
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided for
including providing bus stops for the site.
Provision of new footpaths and cycleways to connect with the existing
footpath/cycleway links around the site including along Skimmingdish
Lane, to Launton Road and to services and facilities in Bicester’s wider
urban area.
Retention and enhancement of existing Public Rights of Way, and the
provisionoflinksfromthedevelopmentandBicester’surbanareatothe
wider Public Rights of Way network.
A green buffer with planting immediately adjacent to the Care Home
and beyond this, B1a development to surround the Care home in order
to protect residential amenity.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 166Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
A detailed Transport Assessment to be undertaken and Travel Plan to
be provided focusing on maximising access by means other than the
private car including demonstration of the provision of adequate cycle
parking. Consultation with the Local Highways Authority regarding
potential future improvements to Skimmingdish Lane and any design
implications for the development frontage.
Ahighquality,welldesignedapproachtotheurbanedgewhichfunctions
as a high profile economic attractor but which also achieves a successful
transition between town and country environments.
Buildings that provide for an active frontage to Skimmingdish Lane and
a strong gateway at the site entrance.
The site lies adjacent to a designated Local Wildlife Site and a proposed
Local Wildlife Site. Ecological surveys must be undertaken to identify
habitats and species of value and any mitigation measures required.
Features of value, including existing mature hedgerows and important
trees, should be preserved, retained and enhanced and the proposals
should result in a net gain in biodiversity.
Developmentthatrespectsthelandscapesetting,andthatdemonstrates
the enhancement, restoration of creation of wildlife corridors, and
contributes towards creation of a green infrastructure network for
Bicester.
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments.
A comprehensive landscaping scheme to limit visual intrusion into the
widerlandscape,particularlygiventheneedtoconservetheopensetting,
character and appearance of the Former RAF Bicester Conservation
Area.
ConserveorenhancethesettingoftheRAFBicesterConservationArea
and adjoining Scheduled Ancient Monument.
Preparation of an archaeological and cultural heritage assessment to
inform development proposals.
Ahighqualitydesignandfinish,withcarefulconsiderationgiventolayout,
architecture,materialsandcolouringsandcarefulconsiderationgivento
building heights to reduce overall visual impact.
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity.
Adoptionofasurfacewatermanagementframeworktomaintainrunoff
at Greenfield rates.
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site.
A Flood Risk Assessment should be undertaken. Use of SuDS in
accordance with Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS).
Detailed site analysis and ground investigation should be undertaken to
establish if infiltration techniques are acceptable; it is likely that
attenuation techniques will be more appropriate due to the underlying
geologicalcomposition and groundwatervulnerability,takingaccount of
167 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
the recommendations of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
andtheAssessmentforthesite. Appropriatebuffersshouldbeprovided
alongside surface watercourses.
NobuiltdevelopmentwillbelocatedinFloodZone3bandtheprinciples
set out in Policy ESD 6 will be followed.
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5.
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary.
A soil management plan may be required to be submitted with planning
applications.
Strategic Development: Bicester
12 – South East Bicester
C.102The site at South East Bicester
consists of mainly open farmland. It is
adjacent to a Scheduled Ancient Monument
(WretchwickDesertedMedievalSettlement)
andisinthevicinityoftheRayConservation
Target Area which extends into the site to
the north. Development on this site will
require careful design consideration, due to
its location next to the historic asset and
proximity to an ecologically important area.C.103The landscape studies found the site
to have medium-high capacity to accept
developmentin areasapartfromthose with
ecological and archaeological importance.
The Council considers the site offers an
opportunityformixeduseddevelopmentto
the South East of Bicester that will enable
the delivery of important infrastructure in
the area to support wider proposals for the
town.
Policy Bicester 12: South East Bicester
Development Area: 155 hectares
Development Description: A mixed use site for employment and residential
development to the east of the ring road to the south east of Bicester
Employment
Land Area – Approximately 40 hectares
Jobs created – Approximately 3,000
Use classes – Mixed B1, B2 and B8 uses (primarily B8 uses).
Housing
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 168Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Number of homes – 1,500
Dwelling mix – to be informed by Policy BSC4: Housing mix
Affordable Housing – 30%
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing.
Infrastructure Needs
Health – No on site requirements are anticipated
Open space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
outdoor sports provision as outlined in Policy BSC11:Local Standards of
Provision – Outdoor Recreation
AccessandMovement–contributestoimprovementstothesurrounding
localandstrategicroadnetworks. Safeguardingoflandforfuturehighway
capacity improvements to peripheral routes.
Community facilities – Mixed use local centre to include a multi-use
communityhall,conveniencestoreandsmallscaleemploymentpremises
Schools–toincludetheprovisionofaprimaryschoolonsiteandfinancial
or in kind contributions to secondary school provision
Utilities – off site improvements to utilities may be required.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15.
The development of a comprehensive masterplan for the allocated site
in consultation with the Council, Oxfordshire County Council, English
Heritage, the Local Nature Partnership (Wild Oxfordshire) and local
communities.
Commercial buildings with a high quality design and finish, with careful
consideration given to layout, architecture, materials, colourings and to
building heights to reduce overall visual impact.
Developmentproposalsshouldprotectculturalheritageandarchaeology,
inparticulartheGradeIIlistedWretchwickFarmhouseandWretchwick
Deserted Medieval Settlement, a Scheduled Ancient Monument, and
incorporateanappropriatelandscapebuffer,tomaintaintheSAM’sopen
setting. In consultation with Historic England, appropriate public access
and interpretation facilities should be provided.
ProvisionofopenspaceinaccordancewithPolicyBSC11:LocalStandards
ofProvision–OutdoorRecreation,particularlytoallowforaccesstothe
monument.
Retention and enhancement of hedgerows and the introduction of new
landscaping features that will ensure the preservation and enhancement
of biodiversity. resulting in an overall net gain. Development should
demonstrate the enhancement, restoration or creation of wildlife
corridors.
169 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
A well designed approach to the urban edge, which relates development
at the periphery, and affords good access, to the countryside.
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity.
Aproposalthatiswellintegrated,withimproved,sustainableconnections
between existing development and new development on this site.
Newfootpathsandcyclewaysshouldbeprovidedforthatlinktoexisting
networksandthewiderurbanarea. Thisincludeslinksfromthesiteinto
Bicestertowncentreandtofacilitateaccesstorailwaystations,secondary
schools, other community facilities and places of employment.
Connectivity with Launton Road, Langford Village and London Road
should be improved.
A legible hierarchy of routes should be established to encourage
sustainablemodesoftravelandthedevelopmentlayoutshouldmaximise
the potentialfor walkableneighbourhoodsand incorporatecycleroutes.
Protection of the line and amenity of existing Public Rights of Way.
ConnectivityandeaseofaccessfromthedevelopmenttothewiderPublic
Rights of Way network.
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided for,
includingathroughrouteforbusesbetweentheA4421CharbridgeLane
andtheA41AylesburyRoad,witheffectivefootpathsandcycleroutesto
bus stops, including a financial contribution towards the provision of a
bus service through the site and new bus stops with effective footpaths
and cycle routes to bus stops form dwellings and commercial buildings.
A transport assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals.
Public open space to form a well-connected network of green areas
suitable for formal and informal recreation.
ProvisionofopportunitiesforGreenInfrastructurelinkswithinandbeyond
the development site to the wider town and open countryside including
appropriate improvements to connectivity between areas of ecological
interest.
Adequate investigation of, protection of and management of protected
habitats and species on site given the ecological value of the site, with
biodiversity preserved and enhanced.
The preparationand implementationof an EcologicalManagementPlan
to ensure the long term conservation of habitats and species within the
site.
A scheme, to be agreed with the Council, for the protection of existing
wildlife habitats and species during construction of the development.
Ensure that there are no detrimental impacts on downstream sites of
Special Scientific Interest through hydrological, hydro chemical or
sedimentation impacts.
The northern section of the site within the Conservation Target Area
should be kept free from built development. Development must avoid
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 170Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
adversely impacting on the Conservation Target Area and comply with
the requirements of Policy ESD11 to secure a net biodiversity gain.
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments.
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5.
A flood risk assessment should include detailed modelling of the
watercourses. Development should be excluded from flood zone 3 plus
climate change and public open space/recreation areas located near
watercourses to create 'blue corridors'.
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site.
The incorporation of SUDS (see Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage
Systems(SuDS)),takingaccountoftherecommendationsoftheCouncil's
StrategicFloodRiskAssessment. Detailedsitespecificanalysisandground
investigation to determine whether infiltration SuDS techniques are
acceptable; due to underlying geology and groundwater vulnerability
attenuation techniques are likely to be required.
Development that considers and addresses any potential amenity issues
which may arise – including noise impact from the rail line to the far
north. Theintroductionofbuffers/barriers/screeningandthelocationof
uses should be carefully considered to mitigate potential nuisances.
The provision of a scheme, to be agreed with the Council, for the
appropriate retention and re-use of existing farm buildings.
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary.
A soil management plan may be required to be submitted with planning
applications.
Anarchaeologicalfieldevaluationtoassesstheimpactofthedevelopment
on archaeological features.
Strategic Development: Bicester
13 – Gavray Drive (re-adopted)
C.104Themajorityofthesiteispartofthe
River Ray Conservation Target Area. Part
of the site is a Local Wildlife Site and is
situatedtotheeastofBicestertowncentre.
It is bounded by railway lines to the north
and west. The site comprises individual
trees, tree and hedgerow groups, andscrubland/vegetation. The Langford Brook
water course flows through the middle of
the site.
C.105The central and eastern section of
the site contains lowland meadow, a BAP
priority habitat. There are a number of
protected species located towards the
eastern part of the site. There are several
ponds and a small stream, known as the
Langford Brook, which runs from north to
south through the middle of the site. A
171 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
rangeofwildlifehasbeenrecordedincluding
butterflies, great crested newts and other
amphibians, reptiles, bats and birds.
C.106There are risks of flooding on some
parts of the site therefore mitigation
measuresmustbeconsidered. Thereisalso
a risk of harming the large number of
recorded protected species towards the
eastern part of the site. Impacts need to be
minimised by any proposal. Approximatelya quarter of the site is within Flood Zones
2 and 3 therefore any development would
need to be directed away from this area.
C.107Although there are a number of
known constraints such as Flood Zone 3,
River Ray Conservation Target Area and
protected species, this could be addressed
withappropriatemitigationmeasuresbyany
proposal.
Policy Bicester 13: Gavray Drive (re-adopted)
Development Area: 23 hectares
DevelopmentDescription:ahousingsitetotheeastofBicestertowncentre.
ItisboundedbyrailwaylinestothenorthandwestandtheA4421totheeast
Housing
Number of homes - 300 dwellings
Affordable Housing - 30%.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – Contributions sought towards provision of primary and
secondary school places
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
sportsprovisionasoutlinedinPolicyBSC11:LocalStandardsofProvision
–OutdoorRecreation. Acontributiontooff-siteformalsportsprovision
will be required.
Community – contributions towards community facilities
Access and movement – from Gavray Drive.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15.
Ahighqualitydevelopmentthatislocallydistinctiveinitsform,materials
and architecture. A well designed approach to the urban edge which
relates to the road and rail corridors.
DevelopmentmustavoidadverselyimpactingontheConservationTarget
Area and comply with the requirements of Policy ESD11 to secure a net
biodiversity gain.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 172Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
ProtectionoftheLocalWildlifeSiteandconsiderationofitsrelationship
and interface with residential and other built development.
Detailed consideration of ecological impacts, wildlife mitigation and the
creation, restoration and enhancement of wildlife corridors to protect
and enhance biodiversity. The preparation and implementation of an
Ecological Management Plan to ensure the long-term conservation of
habitats and species within the site.
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments.
The preparation of a structural landscaping scheme, which incorporates
and enhances existing natural features and vegetation. The structural
landscaping scheme should inform the design principles for the site.
Development should retain and enhance significant landscape features
(e.g.hedgerows)whichareorhavethepotentialtobeofecologicalvalue.
AcentralareaofopenspaceeithersideofLangfordBrook,incorporating
part of the Local WildlifeSite and with access appropriatelymanaged to
protect ecological value. No formal recreation within the Local Wildlife
Site.
Provisionofpublicopenspacetoformawellconnectednetworkofgreen
areas within the site, suitable for formal and informal recreation.
Provision of Green Infrastructure links beyond the development site to
the wider town and open countryside.
Retention of Public Rights of Way and a layout that affords good access
to the countryside.
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided that link with existing
networks, the wider urban area and schools and community facilities.
Access should be provided over the railway to the town centre.
A linked network of footways which cross the central open space, and
connect Langford Village, Stream Walk and Bicester Distribution Park.
Ensure that there are no detrimental impacts on downstream Sites of
Special Scientific Interest through hydrological, hydro chemical or
sedimentation impacts.
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities.
A legible hierarchy of routes to encourage sustainable modes of travel.
Good accessibility to public transport services with local bus stops
provided. Provision of a transport assessment and Travel Plan.
AdditionalbusstopsontheA4421CharbridgeLanewillbeprovided,with
connecting footpaths from the development. The developers will
contribute to the cost of improving local bus services.
Provision of appropriate lighting and the minimisation of light pollution
based on appropriate technical assessment.
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility and
identity.
173 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5.
Take account of the Council’s SFRA for the site.
Consideration of flood risk from Langford Brook in a Flood Risk
Assessment and provision of an appropriate buffer. Use of attenuation
SuDStechniques(andinfiltrationtechniquesinthesoutheasternareaof
the site) in accordance with Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems
(SuDS) and taking account of the Council's SFRA.
HousingmustbelocatedoutsideFloodZone3andtheprinciplessetout
in Policy ESD 6 will be followed.
The provision of extra-care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing.
Anarchaeologicalfieldevaluationtoassesstheimpactofthedevelopment
on archaeological features.
A detailed survey of the agricultural land quality identifying the best and
most versatile agricultural land and a soil management plan.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 174Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.3 Banbury
C.108BanburyistheDistrict’slargesttown
with its own sub-region. It is a focus for
major retail developments, employment,
housing and cultural and community uses
that attract large numbers of people.
C.109Banbury is a market town with an
historic core and is expected to see
continued growth over the period of the
LocalPlan. Thegrowingpopulationwillhave
consumer, employment and community
needs.Whilstmostemploymentandhousing
growth will take place on the edge of the
town,thePlanseekstoalsotakeactivesteps
to strengthen the town centre. The town
centre of Banbury will adapt and evolve to
meet the new growth and changing needs,
demands and patterns of activity.C.110Banbury faces topographic and
historic landscape constraints important to
the setting of the town including the River
Cherwell valley to the east, a steep sided
valleyandvillagestothewest,risinglandform
and village conservation areas to the north
and an open aspect and village to the south
beyondthe Salt Way. These are all barriers
to growth that have shaped how the town
has grown and which will affect its growth
in the future. More recently, the M40
motorway has also become a significant
factorinidentifyingdirectionsofgrowthand
the need for focused urban renewal has
become more pressing. The identified
strategicdevelopmentsitesinthissectionof
thePlanreflecttheseconstraintsandissues;
particularly the need to retain Banbury’s
historic landscape context and character.
C.111ThedevelopmentofaMasterplanfor
Banbury, to be adopted as a Supplementary
Planning Document (SPD) will provide the
meanstoestablishanintegrateddeliveryplan
for the growth of the town that respects its
setting, meets the needs for a stronger
economy, housing and community facilities,
and delivers sustainable development. The
Councilwillexploreallpotentialmechanisms,
including public-private partnerships, and
appropriatepowersforthedeliveryofLocal
Plan sites and key proposals, to secure the
development vision for the town.
Meeting the Challenge of
Developing a Sustainable
Economy in Banbury
C.112Banbury's economy is focused on
manufacturing, distribution, service
industries, local government and health.
Generally it has had very low levels of
unemployment and a high demand for
labour. However,thereisaneedtofurther
diversifyitseconomy,toattractmorehighly
skilled businesses, to increase the levels of
education,trainingandambitioninthetown
175 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
andtocontinueaddressingtheimpactofthe
recent recession. In recent years the major
manufacturers Hella (automotive parts) and
SAPA (aluminium) have left the town with
the loss of about 800 jobs.
C.113The key economic issues facing
Banbury are:
ensuring the town remains competitive
so that it retains and attracts major
employers
addressing the impact of recession on
the unemployment level: the claimant
count has reduced in Cherwell since it
rosefairlysharplyin2009butitremains
higher in Cherwell than in other rural
Oxfordshire Districts. In areas of
Grimsbury and Castle Ward and
Banbury Ruscote ward unemployment
as a percentage of working age
population was at 8.2% and 7.4%
respectively, again the highest in
Oxfordshire.
the need to improve standards of
educationandtraining:fiveareaswithin
Banbury Ruscote ward and one in
BanburyNeithropareintheworst10%
in England in terms of skills, education
and training. GCSE performance is
below county and national averages. A
thirdofresidentshavenoqualifications.
Thereisanaboveaverageconcentration
of people employed in low-skilled and
lower paid occupations.
maintaining a strong manufacturing
sector but further diversifying the
economy and creating more higher
skilled and knowledge based job
opportunities
the need to improve the overall
attractiveness of the town as a place to
live and work
theneedtoimprovetheappearanceand
vitality of the town centre outside of
the Castle Quay shopping centre
Banbury has undergone considerable
growth over the last 20 years and the
Council’s Economic Development
Strategy (2011-2016) (EDS) envisages
thisascontinuinginthelong-term. The
EDS considers that there will be a
reduction in the size of the town’s
manufacturing sector (in common with
UK trends)howeversincemuchof this
is in higher value and specialised areas
whicharemoredependentuponskilled
input, it is of great importance that the
sector remains an important local
employer. The town has a strong
industrialheritageandtheEDSseesthis
evolving over the 21st century into a
robust engineering economy driven by
flagshipsectorssuchasmotorsportand
advanced materials.
some of Banbury’s employment
areas/sitesareinneedofinvestmentand
there are vacant buildings.
Development should take place on
existing employment sites wherever
possible to help regenerate these and
ensure land is used efficiently.
C.114AkeychallengefortheLocalPlanwill
be to ensure that the needs of both existing
employers seeking to relocate and expand,
and new businesses moving to the area can
be met, by ensuringthat the redevelopment
ofsitesandbuildingsonexistingsiteswithin
thetownisencouragedbyplanningpolicies.
This is a particular issue as this Local Plan
seeks to regenerate the Canalside area of
the town. This 26 hectare area includes a
number of existing businesses and it will be
important that there are sites and help
available to relocate any of these that wish
to develop locally.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 176Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.115Banbury has the largest supply of
employment land in the District and the
Council’s Employment Land Review (2006,
updated 2012) identified a range of available
sitestotallingover46hectares. InthisLocal
Plan Bicester will be the focus for new
employmentlandtorespondtoitssignificant
planned housing growth and to reduce
out-commuting. Banbury also has valued
landscapes on the edge of the town where
growth is not appropriate. Whilst many of
the sites in Banbury are non-strategic, one
site is considered to be of strategic
importancetosecuringBanbury’slongterm
supply of employment land and is identified
in this Local Plan (Policy Banbury 6:
Employment Land West of M40). Planning
permission has recently been granted for
newemploymentusesonthissite. Another
site at Junction 11 of the M40 will provide
for mixed employment uses. Existing
employmentsitessuchasthevacantformer
Hella site could be occupied by smaller and
medium size businesses, such as those that
relocate from the Canalside site. Proposals
for the town centre set out in this plan will
alsoprovidejobsparticularlyintheretailand
leisure sectors.
C.116Providing for economic growth and
diversification is necessary to increase the
number of economically active residents, to
lowerunemploymenttopre-recessionlevels,
to provide more training opportunities and
to encourage more ambitious educational
attainmentinBanbury. Thiswillhelpprovide
a broader range of employment
opportunities and potential access to more
highly skilled jobs. Our plan seeks to build
onthecurrentmanufacturingstrengthofthe
town with support for new business units
for small-medium enterprises (SME’s). We
wish to encourage a wider range of
employersintothetown,particularlyhigher
skilled and higher technology businesses, by
providing suitable employment land,
delivering regeneration and improving thequality of the built environment, to help
create the conditions that will help reduce
deprivation and improve the attractiveness
of Banbury as a place to live, work and visit.
Strengthening Town Centre
Vitality
C.117This Plan seeks to ensure that the
town centre remains the primary focus for
new development; particularly retail uses
togetherwithotherappropriatetowncentre
usessuchasemployment,community,leisure
and residential development being
accommodated in accordance with the
principles of the NPPF.
C.118In addition to the town centre there
are out-of-centre retail locations including
freestanding supermarkets, retail parks and
neighbourhood centres. Banbury’s role
within the District is also supported by
BicesterandKidlington,togetherwithother
local centres that provide a hierarchy of
facilities to serve Cherwell’s population.
C.119The existing and future role of
Banbury has been considered in relation to
the competition experienced from other
centres outside the District. The principal
centresthatcurrentlycompetewithBanbury
are as follows:
Leamington Spa - 22 miles
Stratford upon Avon - 27 miles
Oxford - 28 miles
Northampton - 32 miles
Milton Keynes - 35 miles.
C.120Thesecentresgenerallyfulfilasimilar
role to Banbury within their respective
catchmentareas,althoughOxfordandMilton
177 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Keynesareidentifiedashigherlevelregional
centres. Other centres such as
Northamptonarealsogrowingrapidlywhich
is increasing the level of competition
experienced by Banbury (and also Bicester
andKidlington). Inadditiontothis,significant
commercial development is being delivered
inOxfordCityCentrewhichwillsignificantly
enhance the commercial offer in the city
centre.
C.121Thiscompetitionillustratestheneed
to maintain the renewal and strengthening
of the town centre.
C.122We will strengthen Banbury town
centretobethefocusofthetown. Thisplan
will ensure that it remains a pleasant place
to spend time and a usable space for all
members of the community which brings
peopletogetherandfostersastrongersense
ofbelonging. Thisplanbuildsontheheritage
and natural assets of the town, but will also
encourage change. It must be a place that
people choose to use and enjoy. Therefore
we will:
create more natural flows of people
betweenitsvariousquarters,creatinga
single whole rather than a group of
unrelated parts
bring together a broad mix of uses
including open space, commercial,
residential, leisure, shopping, and
education, to ensure there is a human
dimension throughout the day
ensure the town is accessible from a
variety of transport options
make features and focal points of our
keyassetsincludingourwatersideareas,
and our built and cultural heritage, to
create and maintain uniqueness and a
sense of community ownership
promote a wide variety of activities at
all times of the year.
C.123 In general terms, mixed-use
(residential, commercial and retail)
developmentwillbefavouredtoensurethat
there is an active ground floor commercial
use.
MeetingtheChallengeofBuilding
a Sustainable Community in
Banbury
C.124Banbury faces some challenging
community and social issues. Increasing
opportunities in the Ruscote, Neithrop and
GrimsburyandCastlewardsisapriorityand
many of Banbury's main social issues are
related, but not confined, to the complex
problems of deprivation. This includes
educational attainment, teenage pregnancy,
anti-social behaviour, child well-being and
accesstoservicesandfacilitiesandaffordable
housing. This Local Plan provides for new
development in a way that helps deal with
Banbury's social issues and provides
necessary community facilities, working in
combination with the Council’s ‘Brighter
Futures in Banbury’ project which has been
established to improve outcomes. In
particular, the proposals for area renewal
around Woodgreen and the wider Bretch
Hill area are concerned with renewing the
physical and community fabric of the area,
to help reduce social disadvantage, improve
healthandwell-being,educationalattainment
and employment outcomes. This approach
will be extended to other wards within
Banburyoverthelifeofthisplanandbeyond.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 178Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.125The key community issues facing
Banbury are:
Theneedtoensuresocialopportunities
increase in a number of wards in
Banbury,particularlyRuscotewardand
two areas of Banbury Grimsbury and
Castle Ward which are in the 20 per
cent most deprived areas nationally
according to the Index of Multiple
Deprivation 2010.
The need to foster social cohesion,
integration and equal opportunity:
Banbury has a diverse population, with
higher concentrations of people of
non-white ethnic origin than elsewhere
intheDistrict,manyofwhomliveinthe
more deprived areas.
The need to reduce the incidences of
teenagepregnancy,anti-socialbehaviour
and to improve educational attendance
and attainment.
The need for a replacement library.
The need for affordable housing and a
more diverse private rented housing
sector.
Theneedtoimproveaccesstoservices
andfacilitiesandtoaddressdeficiencies.
A new ground is needed for Banbury
United Football Club, and the town is
lacking 11 junior football pitches, 1
cricket pitch, children's play space,
allotments and tennis court provision.
There are deficiencies in
natural/semi-natural green space.
Accessibility to open space and
recreationopportunitiesis alsomixed.
Improved cultural facilities are also
needed.
Additional open space, sport and
recreation provision will also be
required to provide for future
development needs.
New cemetery space is also needed.
C.126TheSustainableCommunityStrategy
emphasises the importance of increasing
opportunity across all wards in Banbury,
reducing crime, anti-social behaviour and
providing affordable housing and better
training and employment opportunities. It
looks to improve the skills and aspirations
ofyoungpeopleandtheopportunitiesopen
to them. It aims to provide better access
for diverse communities to services and the
provision of affordable recreational
opportunities to help residents of all ages
stayhealthy. RetentionofBanbury’sHorton
General Hospital remains of particular
importance as a valued community facility
and given the distance to alternatives.
MeetingtheChallengeofEnsuring
Sustainable Development in
Banbury
C.127Banbury's rapid post-war and
continuing expansion has placed great
pressures on its environment. The quality
anddistinctivenessofBanbury’stowncentre,
its residential areas, green spaces and
employment areas are important to the
well-being of existing residents and in
attractingnewbusinessesanddrawingpeople
to the town. Growth has pushed the
built-up perimeter of the town close to
major landscape and other constraints and
managing further expansion is a major
challenge. Improvingthetown'sriver/canal
corridor and continuing with regeneration
to improve the environment and make
effective and efficient use of land is also
179 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
necessary. Banburyhassomedeficienciesin
'green' infrastructure which also need to be
addressed.
C.128 Banbury's key environmental
challenges are:
managing growth in a way that will not
unacceptably harm important natural
and historic assets
the need to manage traffic congestion
and to provide more opportunities to
travel using more sustainable modes
improving footpaths and cycle ways to
encourage walking and cycling
preservingandenhancingthequalityand
distinctiveness of the urban area
including the historic street pattern of
the town centre
recognising the river and canal as an
asset and improving the river / canal
corridor to improve the setting of the
town centre
makemoreefficientandeffectiveuseof
land and enhance its ecological value
improving access to natural and
semi-natural green space
the need for more publicly accessible
woodland and protecting existing areas
of urban woodland
protecting the ecological value and the
historic rural character of Salt Way.
C.129The major environmental challenges
at Banbury are managing growth in a way
that will not unacceptably harm areas of
sensitive landscape around the town; which
will preserve and, where possible, enhancenatural and historic assets; plus its green
spaces to provide more wooded areas and
tominimisetheimpactofnewdevelopment
on the natural environment which will
enhancebiodiversity,improvethequalityand
distinctiveness of the built environment and
which will maximise the opportunity for
more sustainable traffic management and
reducingcarbonemissions. Inparticularwe
will regenerate land east of Banbury town
centre and west of the railway line to
improvethesettingofBanburytowncentre,
the river/canal corridor and make effective
and efficient use of underused land.
Banbury in 2031
C.130By 2031, Banbury will have become
a larger and more important economic and
social focus for its residents, for business,
and for a large rural hinterland.
The town will have a more diverse
economic base and new employment
areas will have been established with
levels of deprivation reduced.
Over 7,000 new homes will have been
constructed by 2031 of which a
substantial number will be 'affordable'.
New services, facilities and cultural and
recreationopportunitieswillhavebeen
provided. A new football ground will
have been provided.
The town centre will be vibrant,
regionally competitive and at the heart
of the town; a place that builds on our
heritageandnaturalassets. The quality
and distinctiveness of the built
environment will have improved,
particularly as a result of Canalside
regeneration and the construction of
new urban extensions. There will be
more opportunity to travel on foot, by
cycleandbybusandtrafficmanagement
measures will have been implemented.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 180Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
There will be more natural and
semi-natural open space accessible to
the public including new wooded areas
and a green corridor or ‘lung’ will have
been created through the town, with
effective screening and access.
Electrificationoftherailwaylinethrough
Cherwellwillencourageinvestmentand
regeneration at Banbury.
C.131To achieve this vision, our strategy
for Banbury is to:
bring about Canalside regeneration for
the benefit of the whole town
ensureimplementationofthepermitted
urban extension at Bankside
support the role of the town centre by
creating opportunities for further
growth to meet the needs of local
people
help reduce the level of deprivation by
securing benefits achieved through
specific development proposals and by
economic growth and diversification
secure a site that will deliver a new
ground for Banbury United Football
Club in an accessible location
provide for new development that will
bring with it new open space and
recreation opportunities
plannewdevelopmentinawaythatwill
improve access to natural and
semi-natural green space and promote
opportunitiesfornewpubliclyaccessible
wooded areas
provide for new development in
accessible locations which will provide
good opportunities for improving and
accessing public transport services, for
delivering and using new cycleways, for
travellingonfootandforminimisingthe
impact on the highway network and
traffic congestion
What will Happen and Where
C.132Mixedusestrategicdevelopmentsites
deliveringhousing,servicesandfacilitiesand
contributions to local infrastructure are
considered to be the most sustainable way
of meeting Banbury's housing needs and
addressing the issues facing the town. We
have sought to identify sites which will
maximisebenefitsintermsofprovidingnew
homes and affordable housing, address
deprivation, encourage economic growth
and achieve good urban design, and to
balance this with the need to minimise the
useofnaturalresources,theharmtonearby
villages and the surrounding the landscape,
and the pressure on the road network.
C.133A major strategic site of some 1,090
dwellingshasalreadybeenpermittedforthe
south east of Banbury at Bankside and will
be delivered with a new primary school,
park, playing fields, shops, community
facilities and employment opportunities. A
further extension of the site and the
relocation of the town’s football club next
to the existing rugby club will complete
development in this area. The now
completed redevelopment of the former
Cattle Market site will be complemented by
major Canalside regeneration close to the
181 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
town centre. An extension to the west of
the town will be accompanied by proposals
tohelptheregenerationofthewiderBretch
Hill area and extensions to the north of the
town will bring about new housing and
community facilities.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
1 - Banbury Canalside
C.134Banbury Canalside is the name given
to the land between Banbury Town Centre
andBanburyRailwayStation. Thesuccessful
regeneration of Canalside and its potential
to act as a catalyst for change in the town
has been a key component of Cherwell
DistrictCouncil’splanningandregeneration
aims for a number of years.
C.135Canalside represents a major
opportunity to redevelop a substantial area
close to the town centre, to secure
improved access to the town’s railway
station, the reintegration of the canal as a
central feature of the town, and to provide
new residential, commercial and retail
development.
C.136Canalside is a highly sustainable
location for housing development close to
thetowncentre,railwaystation,busstation,
leisure centre, parks, a supermarket, health
centre and community centre. Its
redevelopment will make effective use of
brownfield land, contribute towards the
remediation of contaminated land and
significantly reduce the need for less
sustainable greenfield development on the
edges of the town.
C.137Given the complexities of the site, a
separate SPD is in preparation which will
formthebasisfordevelopinganActionPlan
to take forward this regeneration scheme.
Policy Banbury 1: Banbury Canalside
Development Area: 26 hectares
Development Description: Provision of new homes, retail, office and leisure
uses,publicopenspace,pedestrianandcycleroutesincludingnewfootbridges
over the railway line, river and canal, and multi-storey car parks to serve
Banbury railway station. Re-development would bring about significant
environmental benefits in terms of improving the appearance of the built
environment,thetowncentre,andthequalityoftheriverandcanalcorridor.
The wider community will have access to new services and facilities and
Banbury’s economy will benefit with the increase in the number of visitors
to the town.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 182Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Housing
Number of homes – Approximately 700. Dwelling mix - approximately
70% houses 30% flats. Generally, flats and smaller homes to the north
and west of the site, larger family homes to the south and east
Affordable Housing – 30%
The provision of extra-care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing.
Employment
Land Area - 15,000m2
Use classes - Commercial uses (only limited new B1a office use classes).
Town centre uses (in the northern part of the site – see Policy Banbury
7).
Infrastructure Needs
Education – Contributions will be required to primary and secondary
education provision
Health – No health requirements anticipated
Open Space – High quality open spaces that follow the canal and river
corridorandsupportgreaterconnectivityoftheareaandprovidedinline
with Council requirements
Access and Movement – Use of existing junctions at Station Approach
(fromBridgeStreet),CanalStreet(fromWindsorStreet),LowerCherwell
Street(fromWindsorStreet)andTramwayRoad(orarealignedTramway
Road)withanewjunctionoffSwanCloseRoadprovidedwestofTramway
Road. Provisionof a bus only link provided from Station Approach to an
extended Tramway Road. Improvements to Windsor Street, Upper
Windsor Street and Cherwell Street corridor
Community facilities – Nursery. A contribution towards indoor sports
provision may be required.
Utilities– Keyconstraintstodevelopmentarelocatedwithintheareato
the east of the Oxford Canal. A twin foul rising main is also present,
crossing the site from Canal Street to the football ground and there are
also multiple existing services located in other places. The anticipated
costsassociatedwithrelocatingorrealigningtheotherexistingapparatus
throughout the site are unlikely to be significant or ‘abnormal’ for a
development of this type in a town centre location.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
183 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
AdistinctiveresidentialpropositionforBanburythatintegrateswelland
helps make connections with the adjoining town centre and Railway
Station
An appropriate location for higher density housing to include a mixture
of dwelling styles and types
Ahighqualitydesignanduseofinnovativearchitecture,includingtheuse
ofrobustandlocallydistinctivematerials,whichreflectthecharacterand
appearance of Banbury, respect the setting of the retained historic
buildings and in particular reference the canal side location
Taking advantage of the accessibility of the town centre, an age friendly
neighbourhoodwithextracarehousingandhousingforwheelchairusers
and those with specialist supported housing needs
Retail, commercial and leisure uses focused in the north of the site
adjacent to the town centre and station, not including any significant
convenience retail
Unitssizedandlocatedtoattractsmallspecialistleisureandnicheretailers
which combine to create a destination
Selectedleisureandentertainmentusesincludingartspacesandgalleries,
restaurants and cafes
The potential inclusion of live/work units
A noise survey will be required to accompany any planning application
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities. New footpaths and cycleways should be provided
that link to existing networks, with provision of a designated pedestrian
and cycle route from the station to the town centre over the canal and
river and a new pedestrian / cycle bridge over the railway
NewpedestrianandcyclebridgeserectedovertheOxfordCanalandthe
RiverCherwelltoenableandencouragewalkingandcyclingthroughthe
site
The River Cherwell should be maintained in a semi natural state and
mature trees should remain
Provision of a landscape corridor along the edge of the river to facilitate
a footpath and cycleway on one or both sides for the length of the river
throughCanalsidetolinktheopencountrysideoftheCherwellValleyto
the south with Spiceball Park to the north
Open/urban spaces provided in various locations within the site and new
trees planted
High quality open spaces that follow the canal and river corridor and
support greater connectivity of the area
The implementation of proposals in the Movement Strategy including
improved junction arrangements on Bridge Street and Cherwell Street
to improve traffic capacity but also to facilitate pedestrian movement
between the town centre and Canalside
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 184Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Buildings fronting Windsor Street enabling pedestrian permeability of
the site to correspond with the proposed highway improvements which
include frequent informal crossing points along Windsor Street
ParkingprovisionthatcomplieswithCountyCouncil’sParkingStandards
for new Residential Developments Policy and will not exceed maximum
standards.Somecarfreeareasorareasofreducedlevelsofparkingwith
innovative solutions to accommodating the private car
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided for,
includingtheprovisionofabusroutethroughthesitewithbusesstopping
at the railway Station and at new bus stops on the site
A transport assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
Development fronting on to the canal and public access to and from the
canal
The continued use of canal boats for leisure purposes with a canal basin
and mooring facilities located in the northern part of the site with the
opportunity to enhance facilities and mooring in this area.
Preservation and enhancement of the biodiversity value of the site, with
theenhancement,restorationorcreationofwildlifecorridors(recognising
the importance of the river and canal corridors)
Retentionandintegrationofthemostvaluablehistoricbuildings/structures
includingtheGradeIIListedOldTownHallandthebridgeovertheriver.
The integration of existing historic buildings, which will enrich the
environment and maintain the long term character of the area
Public art should be provided and there is the opportunity for this to be
creativelyengagedthroughthecreativerefurbishmentofexistingbuildings
and new bridges to the canal
Appropriate treatment and remediation of contaminated land
Provision of sustainable drainage in accordance with Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), taking account of the
recommendations of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Compliance with policies ESD 1-5 on climate change mitigation and
adaptation
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Development proposals to be accompanied by a landscape and visual
impact assessment together with a heritage assessment.
Additional requirements for this large complex site include:
Development proposals will be expected to be in accordance with a
SupplementaryPlanningDocument(SPD)forthesite. Ideallyproposals
should come forward for the whole site accompanied by a detailed
masterplan but applications for parts of the site may be permitted
provided that they clearly demonstrate their proposals will contribute
towards the creation of a single integrated community. Applications
185 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
should cover significant land area within the site in order to achieve
continuity in design and delivery of the vision. Reduced levels of open
spacemaybeconsideredifitcanbedemonstratedthathighqualityurban
spaces are being provided within the scheme and strong links are being
provided to the open areas to the north and the south by improvements
to the Canal walkway.
The Council will expect an application to demonstrate it has complied
with the SPD and has taken into account the known or anticipated
implicationsoftheproposalsonadjoiningareas. TheCouncilwillexpect
applications to comply with the requirements for each character area in
the SPD, but will not expect applications to necessarily cover the same
geographical area.
The Council believes that the most effective and equitable means of
promotingdevelopmentatCanalsidewillbebasedonanoutlineplanning
application being made by consortia of key landowners and/or their
developer partners, supported by a masterplan. It is expected that key
landownerswillhaveagreedameansofcapturingandmutuallybenefiting
from the uplift in land values as a result of a successful development
scheme.
TheCanalsideareafallsprimarilywithinFloodZones2and3atpresent.
IthasbeensubjecttofloodinginrecentyearsandtheEnvironmentAgency
(EA) has completed a scheme to provide flood alleviation to the town
centre. The scheme will provide a defence for flood events up to the 1
in200year(0.5%annualprobability)byconstructingafloodstoragearea
upstream of the town centre and bunds in places in the Canalside area.
ToassessthepotentialfloodriskintheCanalsidearea,alevel2Strategic
Flood Risk Assessment has been undertaken to assess both the fluvial
floodrisktothedevelopmentproposalsfromtheRiverCherwellandthe
flood risk associated with the Oxford Canal. This confirms that with the
implementationoftheFloodAlleviationSchemeandtheimplementation
of other measures on the site the site can be redeveloped safely.
Applications will be required to follow the requirements set out in the
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and a detailed Flood Risk Assessment
(FRA) for the site will be required with any planning application.
The proposals for Canalside mean that nearly all existing land uses,
buildings and businesses could be removed in the long term. One of the
Council’skeyprioritiesistoensurethatbusinessesremaininBanburyor
the District. The actual amount of land needed to accommodate
operationalbusinessesatCanalsideisnotsignificantandthereareseveral
options available to businesses. In terms of locations where businesses
may wish to relocate to this could include within vacant units/premises
elsewhere or in new buildings elsewhere. This could include on existing
employment sites (through intensification) such as on the former SAPA
andHellasites,orin/onnewbuildings/sitesallocatedintheCouncil’sLocal
Plan or Local Plan Part 2 such as on land near the motorway. The
re-developmentofCanalsidewillprovidebusinesseswiththeopportunity
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 186Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
to expand and invest for the future and the Council’s Economic
Development team will assist any businesses to relocate. The
redevelopmentofCanalsideisalongtermplanandthereforeitispossible
some businesses may want to remain on a temporary basis for some
time. All of the existing businesses could be relocated but the Council
will encourage existing businesses which are offices, retail units and
community uses which are conducive to the aims of this Policy and the
SPD to remain and occupy new buildings on the site, potentially helping
them to expand and prosper in this town centre location. A number of
the older buildings and the site of former industrial premises, offer
considerable opportunities for re-use or re-development for industrial
enterprises.Someoftheindustrialuses(Buseclasses)couldremainand
700 dwellings can be delivered on the site with some of these remaining
on the site. The particular uses and businesses that remain will be
explored further in the SPD for the site which will include further
consultation with landowners and businesses.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
2 - Hardwick Farm, Southam
Road (East and West)
C.138ThedevelopmentareaEastandWest
of Southam Road at Hardwick Farm is a
sustainable location for housing growth on
thenorthernperipheryofBanbury. Thesite
is bounded to the east by the M40 and by a
cemetery to the west.C.139The design of the development will
need to respect the landscape sensitivity of
the site, especially to the west where only
the south east corner of the site is
considered suitable for built development.
The topography of the area rises to the
north and the potential visual impact will
needtobeaddressed. Carefulconsideration
will be needed to the nearby heritage assets
including Hardwick House, a listed building
andanareaofarchaeologicalpotentialtothe
north of Noral Way (Hardwick Deserted
Medieval Village) in the creation of a high
quality neighbourhood.
Policy Banbury 2: Hardwick Farm, Southam Road (East and West)
Development Area: 32 hectares
Development Description: The Development Area east and west of the
Southam Road is located in a sustainable location, close to existing
employmentusesandnorthofBanburytowncentre. Residentialdevelopment
(of approximately 600 dwellings) will be permitted provided it can be
demonstrated that high quality design has been applied to address the
potential landscape/visual impact issues and that careful consideration has
beengiventominimisetheimpactonhistoricassets/potentialarchaeological
187 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
sensitivity of the sites. A masterplan for the whole development area (east
andwest)shouldbesubmittedwhichdemonstratesthatproposalsmeetwith
the design and place shaping principles set out below; the masterplan should
also demonstrate the successful integration of the development area with
therestofthetownaswellasanintegratedapproachbetweentheareaseast
and west.
Housing
Number of homes: approximately600 including no more than 90 homes
to the western side of Southam Road
Dwellingmix:Avarietyofdwellingtypes(seePolicyBSC4:HousingMix)
Affordable Housing - 30%
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – primary school required on site, location to be negotiated,
with contributions towards secondary school provision
Health – no requirements anticipated
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
onsite or offsite outdoor sports provision as outlined in Policy BSC 11:
Local Standards of Provision- Outdoor Recreation
Community facilities – ideally an onsite community facility to include a
communityhallandwithpotentialforalocalshop. Offsitecontributions
towards community hall at Hanwell Fields may also be required in
addition. However the precise nature of the provision remains to be
negotiated.
Utilities – off site improvements to utilities network may be required.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
AhighqualityresidentialDistrictforthenorthofBanburythatisdesigned
in configuration with the landscape setting and well integrated with the
adjacent commercial and residential uses
A well considered approach to mitigating the landscape sensitivities
through good design, including consideration of lower density building
typologies, building height and form
Developmentthatrespectsthelandscapesettingwithparticularattention
to the west of Southam Road where the visual sensitivity is considered
to be greater. Careful consideration should be given to address the
topographical changes on the site to ensure minimal visual impact
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 188Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Thelandscapesensitivityneedstobefullyunderstoodandshouldinclude
afulllandscapeandvisualimpactassessmentwhichestablishesthezones
of visual impact and the development envelope
Alowerhousingdensityisanticipatedonpartsofthesiteduetolandscape
constraints
Development that retains and enhances significant landscape features
(e.g. hedgerows) which are or may be of ecological value; and where
possibleintroducesnewfeatures(e.g.greenbufferalongthewatercourse)
to enhance, restore or create wildlife corridors and therefore preserve,
enhance and increase biodiversity in the area
A great crested newt survey will be required
An archaeological survey will be required due to close proximity to
heritage assets. Development should respect and have minimal impact
onthehistoricenvironment,includinglistedbuildings(HardwickHouse)
and area of archaeological potential north of Noral Way (Hardwick
Deserted Medieval Village)
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivity between new and existing communities
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided that link to existing
networks, the wider urban area and community facilities, with a legible
hierarchy of routes to encourage sustainable modes of travel
Goodaccessibilitytopublictransportservicesshouldbeprovidedforwith
effective footpaths and cycle routes to bus stops including the provision
of a bus route through the site with buses stopping at the railway station
and at new bus stops on the site
A transport assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
Consideration needs to be given to the traffic calming of Southam Road,
including safe pedestrian crossing points and provision for walkers and
cyclists to ensure ease of movement between the two sites.
Development that considers and addresses any potential amenity issues
which may arise- including noise impact from the M40 (forming the
north-east boundary), and any issues arising from the crematorium (to
thenorth). Theintroductionofbuffers/barriers/screeningandthelocation
of uses should be carefully considered to mitigate potential nuisances
Publicopenspacetoformawell-connectednetworkofgreenareaswithin
thesitesuitableforformalandinformalrecreation,withtheopportunity
to connect to the Cherwell Country Park (Policy Banbury 14: Cherwell
Country Park)
Provision of Green Infrastructure links beyond the development site to
the wider town and open countryside
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity
A well designed approach to the urban edge, which relates development
at the periphery to its rural setting and affords good access to the
countryside
189 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
The incorporationof SuDS in accordance with PolicyESD 7: Sustainable
DrainageSystems(SuDS),takingaccountoftheCouncil'sStrategicFlood
Risk Assessment. The Council’s Level 2 SFRA recommends for the east
of Southam Road; combined infiltration and attenuation techniques are
likely to be suitable in the north western corner, central and eastern
areas, and attenuation SuDS techniques for the western, north eastern,
south western, and south eastern areas. To the west of Southam Road,
the Level 2 SFRA recommends combined infiltration and attenuation
techniques are suitable for the north eastern corner, with the rest of the
area incorporating attenuation SuDS techniques
TheCouncil’sLevel2SFRAasksfortheadoptionofasurfacemanagement
framework as part of the masterplan to reduce surface water runoff
The requirements in the level 2 SFRA need to be considered including
theprovisionofdryaccessandegressandtakingintoaccounttheCouncil’s
Emergency Plan
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
A detailed survey of the agricultural land quality identifying the best and
most versatile agricultural land and a soil management plan.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
3 - West of Bretch Hill
C.140Helping to create opportunity for all
and positively renew and regenerate areas
with challenging social conditions in parts of
Banbury is important to the delivery of the
objectives of the Local Plan. This strategic
development to the west of Bretch Hill will
positively contribute to improving
opportunities in western Banbury by
providing new housing and associated
facilities and improvements to the built
environment. It will also enhance the built
environment and provide opportunities for
contributions and linkages to long-term
community based projects and schemes
designed to specifically help community
development.
C.141Accommodatingdevelopmentinthis
areahaschallengesduetoissuesoflandscape
sensitivity. TheridgesandslopesandhistoricenvironmenttothewestofBanbury,andthe
ruralcharacterof,andimportantviewsfrom,
theBanburyFringeCircularWalkinthisarea
will all warrant a very carefully designed
development. The boundary of the site
shown extends to Stratford Road to the
north and the bridleway to the west.
However, the whole of this area will not be
developed. It is important that the rural
characterofthebridlewayismaintainedand
that open space and landscaping is used to
protectthecharacter,appearanceandsetting
oftheDraytonConservationArea,thelisted
Drayton Arch, the registered Wroxton
Abbey Historic Park and Garden and the
listedWithycombeFarmhousetothesouth.
The relationship with the wider landscape
will also need careful consideration. Whilst
some impact will be inevitable, the wider
growthofthetownandpotentialcommunity
benefits are considered to be overriding
justificationforstrategicdevelopmentinthis
area.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 190Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Banbury 3: West of Bretch Hill
Development Area: Approximately 26.5 hectares
Development Description: Land west of Bretch Hill will be developed with
approximately 400 homes to provide an integrated extension to the Bretch
Hill area, to provide a mix of housing together with physical and social
infrastructure.
Housing
Number of homes: Approximately 400
Dwelling mix – to be informed by Policy BSC4:Housing Mix
Affordable Housing – 30%
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for community
self build affordable housing.
Employment
Inclusion of some small scale enterprise space.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – contributions will be required towards the expansion of
existing primary schools. Contributions may also be sought towards
provision of additional secondary school places.
Health – improvements to existing surgery/on site provision
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
outdoor sports provision as outlined in Policy BSC 11: Local Standards
of Provision- Outdoor Recreation
Access and Movement - A transport assessment and travel plan will be
required to assess the transportation implications of the proposed
development and identify mitigation measures. The existing Bretch Hill
bus service may need amending/improving to serve the site. Vehicular
access to the site should be provided from the existing development to
the east of the site depending on the movement strategy of the Banbury
Masterplan.
Community facilities – contributions will be required towards the
improvementofexistingcommunityfacilitiesinthearea. Thiswillinclude
a contribution towards improvement of indoor sports provision at
Woodgreen.
Police- Thames Valley police will require an on site drop in facility (or
alternative contribution)
Utilities – off site improvements to utilities network may be required.
191 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15. An archaeological survey
will be required.
Development must respect the landscape setting, particularly the major
ridgeline to the west of the site and the undulating landscape to the
south-west. A landscape and visual impact assessment will be required.
Development must respect the historic environment, including listed
buildings(WithycombeFarmhouse,DraytonArchandParkFarmBarns),
Drayton Conservation Area and Wroxton Abbey parkland and their
settings. Development must respect and enhance significant landscape
features (e.g. hedgerows) which are or may be of ecological value; and
where possible introduce new features to enhance, restore or create
wildlife corridors. Ecological surveys should be used to identify wildlife
corridors and features to be protected, including badger, bat and bird
surveys. Overall, biodiversity should be preserved and enhanced.
Existingtreesand hedgerowsand the area of woodland in the north east
corner of the site should be retained
New planting will be required to take place at an early stage to ensure
planting is established prior to development being completed
A well designed and soft approach to the urban edge will be required,
which relates development at the periphery to its sensitive landscape
setting and affords good access to the countryside. The development
should improve the appearance of Banbury’s western edge within the
landscape
The development layout should enable a high degree of integration with
theBretchHillareatotheeastandconnectivitybetweennewandexisting
communities,includingtheprovisionoffootpathsandcyclewaysthatlink
with existing networks.
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided that link to existing
networks, the wider urban area and community facilities with a legible
hierarchy of routes to encourage sustainable modes of travel
Goodaccessibilitytopublictransportservicesshouldbeprovidedforwith
effective footpaths and cycle routes to bus stops
A transport assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
DevelopmentshouldbringaboutwidercommunitybenefitsfortheBretch
Hill area
Proposals should include provision of extra care housing and the
opportunity for self-build affordable housing
Alayoutthatmaximisesthepotentialforwalkableneighbourhoodswith
a legible hierarchy of routes. Existing public rights of way should be
preserved and enhanced.
Agreenbuffershouldbeprovidedeithersideofthebridlewaythatmarks
the western boundary of the site, to safeguard the rural character of the
bridleway marking the western boundary of the site and forming part of
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 192Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
the Banbury Fringe Circular Walk which should be maintained and kept
separate from the development
Public open space should form a well connected network of green areas
withinthesitesuitableforformalandinformalrecreationandconnected
withwiderstrategiclandscaping.Thisshouldprotectthelandscapesetting
andprovideagreennorth/southlinearparkalongthewesternportionof
the site. Formal recreation would be best located at the northern end
of the site
Provision of Green Infrastructure links beyond the development site to
the wider town and open countryside
Careful consideration should be given to the relationship of the
development with existing streets and houses to the east
Careful consideration should be given to the relationship between the
existing edge of Bretch Hill and new development to ensure that the
impact on existing residents is minimised
Careful consideration should be given to building heights in relation to
the landscape setting
The provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility
and identity
Asurfacewatermanagementframeworkshouldbepreparedtomaintain
runoff rates to greenfield run off rates and volumes
Sustainable drainage should be provided for, including the use of SuDS
inaccordancewith‘PolicyESD7:SustainableDrainageSystems(SuDS)’.
The Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and a site specific flood
riskassessmentshouldincludeconsiderationofwhetherinfiltrationSuDS
techniques are suitable or whether attenuation techniques would be
appropriate, informed by a site geological investigation
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
A detailed survey of the agricultural land quality identifying the best and
most versatile agricultural land and a soil management plan will be
required.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
4 - Bankside Phase 2 (Links to
Policy Banbury 12: Land for the
RelocationofBanburyUnitedFC)
C.142A south-eastern urban extension to
Banbury, providing some 1,090 new homes,
has been granted planning permission and
will be developed over the coming years.The development will change the existing
rural character of the area north-east of
BodicoteontheeasternsideofOxfordRoad
butwillprovidemuchneededfamilyhomes,
includingaffordablehousing. Itwillalsobring
about new services and facilities, canalside
facilities,andanextensiveareaofpublicopen
space. In this changing context, there is
capacity for this area to receive some
additional development.
193 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.143A Phase 2 development in this area
would enable the consolidation of new
infrastructuresuchasschoolprovision,sport
facilitiesandpublicopenspacetogetherwith
the Phase 1 scheme. Land adjacent to the
sitewouldalsobeavailabletoprovideanew
football ground for Banbury United to
replace the existing ground which would be
redeveloped as part of the proposals for
Canalside (Policy Banbury 1: Banbury
Canalside). Thiswouldprovidethepotential
forsomejointsharingoffacilitiessuchascar
parks with the Banbury Rugby Club already
located off Oxford Road at Bodicote.
C.144The Phase 2 site comprises mostly
‘Best and Most Versatile’ agricultural land
(grade 2 with some grade 3b). However,
the site has relatively low landscapesensitivity,nosubstantivefloodingissues,and
relatively few ecological constraints.
Development will provide the opportunity
toenhancebiodiversityinthisareaincluding
through the possibility of surface water
attenuation as part of a Sustainable Urban
Drainage System (SuDS)
C.145The site will benefit from the
provisionofnewservicesandfacilities,anew
employment area and a large valley park to
be provided within Phase 1. There is
potential to extend Phase 1 bus services,
cycleways and footpaths to provide good
accessibility to key destinations in the south
of the town, particularly secondary schools,
a major supermarket, GP surgeries and the
hospital.
Policy Banbury 4: Bankside Phase 2
Development Area: 27 hectares
Development Description: 600 homes with associated services, facilities and
other infrastructure.
Housing
Number of homes – Approximately 600
Dwelling mix – to be informed by Policy BSC4: Housing Mix
Affordable Housing - 30%
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing.
Infrastructure
Education–contributiontoexpansionofPhase1schoolandcontributions
to secondary education provision
Provision of vehicular, cycle and pedestrian access directly from the site
into site Banbury 12
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
outdoor sports provision as outlined in ‘Policy BSC 11: Local Standards
of Provision- Outdoor Recreation’. Account will be taken of open space
provision in the Phase 1 scheme.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 194Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Access and Movement – bus route extension from Phase 1
Community facilities – local centre, contributions towards the
enhancement of community facilities to be provided as part of phase 1
may be preferable to a community facility being provided on site. A
contribution towards indoor sports provision may be required.
Utilities–extensionandenlargementofPhase1connectionsandpumping
station if required.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivity with Bankside Phase One
Alayoutthatmaximisesthepotentialforwalkableneighbourhoodswith
a legible hierarchy of routes with footpaths and cycleways provided on
site with good linkages for cyclists and pedestrians to the wider urban
area, existing networks and community facilities
Goodaccessibilitytopublictransportservicesshouldbeprovidedforwith
effective footpaths and cycle routes to bus stops and the provision of a
bus route through the site
A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
Development that respects the identity of Bodicote village
Development that respects the Cherwell Valley landscape setting, the
importanceofBanbury’ssouthernapproach,andwhichprotectsimportant
views from the south and east
Development that ensures that important valley views from the park
within Phase 1 are secured and retained
A surface water management framework and the incorporation of
attenuation Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SuDS) in accordance
with ‘Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)’ and taking
account of the recommendations of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment, to reduce surface water, control drainage and protect a
Minor Aquifer (subject to further ground investigation)
The retention of the line of Ash trees on the site’s western boundary
The protection of other important trees, the retention of hedgerows
where possible to provide wildlife corridors, and the preservation and
enhancement of the biodiversity value of the site. Development should
demonstratetheenhancement,restorationorcreationofwildlifecorridors
Publicopenspacetoformawell-connectednetworkofgreenareaswithin
the site suitable for formal and informal recreation. Outdoor sports
provisionshouldideallybelocatedincloseproximitytotheexistingpitch
provision at Banbury Rugby Club or the proposed relocation site for
BanburyUnitedFootballClub(PolicyBanbury12:LandfortheRelocation
of Banbury United FC)
195 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Layout and design that ensures a satisfactory relationship between this
development site and the proposed relocation site for Banbury United
Football Club
DevelopmentoftheDesignCodeforPhaseOnewithcarefulconsideration
ofstreetfrontagestoensureanappropriatebuildinglineandincorporation
of active frontages. A well designed approach to the urban edge, which
relates development at the periphery to its rural setting, creates clearly
defined but soft boundaries, and affords good access to the countryside
Protection of the rural character of the Public Right of Way along the
site’s southern boundary
A green buffer to be provided to the north and east of the development
and to the south to the east of the Rugby Club
The incorporation of well-designed noise attenuation techniques in view
of the site’s proximity to the M40 motorway
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility and
identity
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
A detailed survey of the agricultural land quality identifying the best and
most versatile agricultural land and a soil management plan
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Consideration of potential linkages to the Bankside Phase 1 community
park and linear park identified under Policy Banbury 11
Retention and enhancement of existing Public Rights of Way, and the
provisionoflinksfromthedevelopmentandBanbury’surbanareatothe
widerPublicRightsofWaynetworkincludingtheOxfordCanalTowpath
Provision of vehicular, cycle and pedestrian access directly from the site
into site Banbury 12
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
Anarchaeologicalfieldevaluationtoassesstheimpactofthedevelopment
on archaeological features.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
5 - North of Hanwell Fields
C.146An area of land to the north-west of
Banburyhasbeenidentifiedfordevelopment
asanextensiontotherecentHanwellFields
development. The 26 hectare site lies
immediatelynorthofDukesMeadowDrive,a carefully designed residential spine road
which links Warwick Road to the west
(adjoining the site) with Southam Road to
the east. The road presently marks the
northern extent of the town. The site will
be developed in a planned, coordinated,
integrated way using a single masterplan for
the area as a whole.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 196Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.147The site benefits from its proximity
to employment areas, a secondary school,
supermarkets and a retail park in the north
of the town. It is large enough to
accommodatesomesmallscaleemployment
uses in addition to providing local services
andfacilitiestocomplementthosenearbyin
HanwellFieldsandtothesouthinHardwick.
Itcanbereadilyconnectedto,andintegrated
with,existingresidentialdevelopmenttothe
south and there is also the potential to
improvelocalbusservicestothewiderarea.
C.148Thesiteincludesgrade2and3a‘Best
and Most Versatile’ agriculturalland and has
ecological value in its small areas of
woodland, hedgerows and semi-improved
grassland. Bats and badgers have also been
recorded. Whilst the site is of some
landscape value it is considered capable of
accommodating some development and has
nofloodingissues. Thereisscopeforwildlife
mitigation and biodiversity enhancement
through the replacement and improvement
of existing features and the extension of
green corridors.
C.149Hanwellvillageissituatedabout500m
to the north and the southern boundary of
itsConservationAreaisapproximately400m
from the site. The village also hosts a
community observatory. Development ofthesitecanbeachievedwithoutharmtothe
character and appearance of the
Conservation Area but the existence of a
localridgelinemeansthatnew housescould
protrudeintotheskylinewhenviewedfrom
the north. Careful design will therefore be
necessary to ensure harm to the historic
environment is avoided and the impacts on
the character of the rural area and local
amenity are minimised. This should include
theenhancementofthebandofsemi-mature
trees on the site’s northern and western
boundaries and detailed consideration of
building heights and lighting schemes. The
improvement of woodland to the north
would help permanently establish a green
buffer between the site and Hanwell.
C.150It will also be important that
development respects the design and layout
of the Hanwell Fields development, sits well
in the rural landscape, and ensures that a
‘soft’ urban edge is created in view of the
site’s prominent position at a northern
gateway to Banbury.
C.151Land North of Hanwell Fields has
been identified as having the potential to
provide up to 544 homes and associated
services, facilities and other infrastructure,
set out in the policy below.
Policy Banbury 5: North of Hanwell Fields
Development Area: 26 hectares
Development Description: Located at the northern edge of Banbury, this
residential-led strategic development site will provide approximately 544
dwellings with associated facilities and infrastructure in a scheme that
demonstrates a sensitive response to this urban fringe location.
Housing
Number of homes – Approximately 544
Dwelling mix – to be informed by Policy BSC4:Housing Mix
197 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Affordable Housing - 30%
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for community
self build affordable housing.
Infrastructure Needs
Education - contributions will be required towards the expansion of
existing primary schools. Contributions may also be sought towards
provision of additional secondary school places.
Health – Health needs would be best met by expansion/improvement of
existing surgeries or development of a branch surgery
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
outdoor sports provision as outlined in ‘Policy BSC 11: Local Standards
of Provision- Outdoor Recreation’. Additional playing pitches can be
providedtowardsthe westernedge,and children’splayspaceon a phase
by phase basis
Access and Movement – Access off existing roundabout and Warwick
Road. Extension and improvement of existing bus services.
Community facilities – A contribution towards indoor sports provision
may be required
Utilities–Twonewelectricalsubstationswillberequired;HanwellFields
water booster station will need to be upgraded, Hardwick Hall booster
pumps will need to be upgraded, SuDS will be required, off-site
improvements to the sewerage networks may be required
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivity with the Hanwell Fields development to the south
AhighqualityresidentialDistrictforthenorthofBanburythatisdesigned
with consideration to the landscape setting and well integrated with the
adjacent residential area
Development should actively address Dukes Meadow Drive, providing
active frontage and surveillance onto this route
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided that link with existing
networks, the wider urban area and community facilities with a legible
hierarchy of routes to encourage sustainable modes of travel
Goodaccessibilitytopublictransportservicesshouldbeprovidedforwith
effective footpaths and cycle routes to bus stops including the provision
of a bus route through the site and new bus stops on the site
ProvisionofatransportassessmentandTravelPlanincludingtomaximise
connectivity with existing development, including linkages with and
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 198Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
improvements to existing public transport servicing Hanwell Fields and
the Hardwick area
Awelldesigned,‘soft’approachtotheurbanedge,whichintegrateswith
the design and layout of the Hanwell Fields development and which
respects the rural, gateway setting
Themaintenanceoftheintegrityandqualityofthestrategiclandscaping
for the Hanwell Fields development
RetentionofthetwoPublicRightsofWayandalayoutthataffordsgood
access to the countryside
Retentionandenhancementofthesemi-maturebandoftreesonnorthern
andwesternboundariesandestablishmentofagreenbufferbetweenthe
site and Hanwell village
Publicopenspacetoformawellconnectednetworkofgreenareaswithin
the site, suitable for formal and informal recreation
Provision of Green Infrastructure links beyond the development site to
the wider town and open countryside
Detailedconsiderationofecologicalimpacts,wildlifemitigationincluding
relocation of a bat roost and the creation, restoration and enhancement
of wildlife corridors to preserve and enhance biodiversity
Development that retains and enhances significant landscape features
(e.g. hedgerows) which are or may be of ecological value; and where
possible introduces new features
Carefuldesignoftheheightandextentofbuiltdevelopmenttominimise
adverse visual impact on the setting of Hanwell village and Hanwell
Conservation Area
An archaeological survey will be required due to close proximity to
heritage assets
Provision of appropriate lighting and the minimisation of light pollution
in order to avoid interference with Hanwell Community Observatory
based on appropriate technical assessment
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility and
identity
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
Use of attenuation SuDS techniques (and infiltration techniques in the
southeasternareaofthesite)inaccordancewithPolicyESD7:Sustainable
Drainage Systems (SuDS) and taking account of the Council's Strategic
Flood Risk Assessment
The provision of extra-care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing
Ifnecessary,thesatisfactoryincorporationof3existingdwellingsintothe
scheme
A detailed survey of the agricultural land quality identifying the best and
most versatile agricultural land and a soil management plan
199 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Take account of the Council's SFRA for the site
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
6 – Employment Land West of
M40
C.152The Council’s aspirations for a new
strategic employment site in this highly
prominent location adjoining the M40
motorway and close to Junction 11 are inthe process of being released. Planning
permission for B2 and/or B8 uses on 5.5
hectares of land in the northern part of the
site has been implemented. A planning
application has now been approved on the
land extending further south covering most
oftheallocationintheLocalPlan. Ifanynew
applications are submitted for the site the
following policy will apply.
C.153Thestrategicroadnetworkandlocal
distributor routes can be readily accessed
fromthisareaandbedonesoavoidinglorrymovements through residential areas.
Although an edge of town site, it is also
within walking distance of the town centre
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 200Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
and bus and railway stations. Development
inthisareaprovidesanopportunityforhigh
visibility economic investment, the
remediation of land that is potentially
contaminated(tertiarytreatmentofsewage),
and the bringing into effective use land that
wouldotherwisebeunsuitableforresidential
purposesduetotheimpactsofneighbouring
land uses. Land will be reserved for a newroadconnectionthatenablestraffictobypass
the town centre, enabling more sustainable
movements within other parts of the town.
C.154Policy Banbury 6 therefore seeks to
deliver this land for economic development
in the interest of delivering jobs and
investment in a highly sustainable location.
Policy Banbury 6: Employment Land West of M40
Development Area: 35 hectares (in total)
Development Description: Located on the eastern edge of Banbury in an
important position adjoining the M40, this strategic site provides for 35
hectares of mixed employment generating development. A variety of
employmenttypeswillbesoughttoreflecttheneedfordiversityandresilience
in the local economy expressed in the Economic Development Strategy.
Employment
Use classes – B1 (Office), B2 (General Industrial) and B8 (Storage and
Distribution)
Land area – 35 ha (6 hectares already built)
Jobs – approximately 2,500 (35 hectares).
Infrastructure Needs
Open space – Incidental
AccessandMovement-routetobereservedforfutureroadconnection.
Necessary contributions to other transport improvements to be sought.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
A high quality commercial District for the east of Banbury that has high
connectivity to major transport routes and is well integrated with the
adjacent commercial uses
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivitybetweennew and existingdevelopment,includingadjoining
employment areas, nearby residential areas and the town centre
Provision of new footpaths and cycleways that link to existing networks
Protection of the amenity of the public footpath network including
satisfactory treatment of existing footpaths on the site and diversion
201 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
proposals where appropriate. Development should seek to connect the
site to the existing footpath network to the west and east.
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided for
Contributions to the cost of establishingbus services to this area, linking
with residential parts of Banbury, to reduce over-dependence on the car
and consequent congestion on the road network
Satisfactoryaccessarrangementsincludingadetailedtransportassessment
and Travel Plan given the location of the site close to the strategic road
network
Development that reserves the land for a future highway connection to
bypass the town centre
Ahighquality,welldesignedapproachtotheurbanedgewhichfunctions
as a high profile economic attractor but which also achieves a successful
transition between town and country environments
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
Developmentthatrespectsthelandscapesetting,thatdemonstratesthe
enhancement, restoration or creation of wildlife corridors, and the
creation of a green infrastructure network for Banbury
A comprehensive landscaping scheme including on-site provision to
enhance the setting of buildings onsite and to limit visual intrusion into
the wider landscape, particularly given the key views afforded into the
site from higher ground in the wider vicinity
Adequate investigation (through an ecological survey) treatment and
management of protected habitats and species onsite to preserve and
enhance biodiversity including habitat creation
Ahighqualitydesignandfinish,withcarefulconsiderationgiventolayout,
architecture, materials and colourings to reduce overall visual impact
The height of buildings to reflect the scale of existing employment
development in the vicinity
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility and
identity
An archaeological survey will be required due to close proximity to
heritage assets
Development must not adversely affect the significance of the Banbury
No9FillingFactoryScheduledmonumentontheeastsideoftheM40or
the associated archaeological remains of the filling factory on the west
side of the motorway, which although not scheduled, are regarded by
English Heritage as being of national importance and which therefore
should be considered in the same way as a Scheduled Monument.
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Full mitigationof flood riskin compliancewithPolicyESD 6: Sustainable
Flood Risk Management including the use of SuDS (Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)), specifically attenuation SuDS
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 202Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
techniques, taking account of the recommendations of the Council's
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Development should be rolled back to outside the modelled Flood Zone
3 envelope to create ‘blue corridors’ which provide public open space /
recreation areas near watercourses
Adoption of a surface water management framework to reduce run off
to greenfield rates
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
An assessmentof whether the site contains contaminated land including
a detailed site survey where necessary
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary.
A soil management plan may be required to be submitted with planning
applications.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
7 - Strengthening Banbury Town
Centre
C.155Banbury town centre is the largest
shoppingandservicecentreinthehierarchy
of the District's centres. It is a regional
centre which draws in visitors from south
Warwickshire,andsouthNorthamptonshire,
as well as from a rural hinterland within
Oxfordshire. The town centre has
substantial shopping floorspace as well as
leisure, cultural, commercial and civic uses.
C.156Thehistoricheartofthetowncentre
is the Market Place, and much of the town
centre lies within the Banbury conservation
area. Thetowncentrehas,however,grown
significantly in recent years to the east with
the opening of the Castle Shopping Centre
in 1974 and its expansion into the Castle
Quay Shopping Centre in 2000. There are
anincreasingnumberofvacanciesinBanbury
town centre. Focusing development in the
town centre will contribute to addressing
this issue.
C.157The Council has worked with the
Banbury Town Centre Partnership to
develop a strategy for Banbury and this has
informed the preparation of the Local Plan.
Thespatialstrategyidentifiesavisionforthe
town centre and from this a number of
themes emerge:
We need to create more natural flows
ofpeoplebetweenthevariousquarters
of the town centre.
203 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
We need to encourage a broad mix of
useswithinthetowncentreandensure
thereisa'humandimension'throughout
the day.
The town centre should be accessible
by a variety of transport options.
Weshouldmakethemostofourassets
(our waterways, built and cultural
heritage)usingfeaturesandfocalpoints
to create and maintain the uniqueness
and sense of community ownership.
We should promote a wide variety of
activities at all times of the year.
Weneedtoreflectandadapttochanges
yetprotecttheassetofthetowncentre.
The Retail Assessment carried out in
2012identifiedanumberofsiteswhere
it was considered that there is
development potential. This work has
been further supported by other work
for the Canalside, Bolton Road and
Spiceball Development Areas. On the
basis of this work, the following sites
are identified as being of strategic
importance in meeting the Plan’s
objectives:
Canalside(PolicyBanbury1)-This
area is identified as a strategic
housing allocation to deliver a
housing-ledmixed-useregeneration
of this area. This area will form an
importantlinkbetweentherailway
station and new housing to the
south and the heart of the town
centre.
Bolton Road Development Area
(PolicyBanbury8)-Thisisamajor
opportunity for the regeneration
of this area through mixed use
development.
Banbury Spiceball Development
Area (Policy Banbury 9) - Including
land at the former Spiceball Sports
and Leisure Centre, this site
provides a unique opportunity to
regenerate this area and introduce
new retail and provision for the
nighteconomyaswellasimproved
arts and cultural uses within an
expanded town centre.
C.158Land at Calthorpe Street also
provides the opportunity to regenerate this
historic part of the town centre which has
experienced vacancies. It provides the
opportunity to deliver a mixed use scheme
including car parking. Opportunities for the
site will be explored further in the Banbury
Masterplan.
C.159In addition, the Banbury Bus Station
is an important site that links the existing
CastleQuayshoppingcentre,Canalsideand
the Spiceball Development Area. It will be
redeveloped within this plan period as part
of a major investment programme to
strengthen the town centre.
C.160Theboundaryforthetowncentreis
to be extended to facilitate additional town
centre development that will broaden the
attraction of central Banbury and assist
economic growth. The existing boundary
combinesthetowncentreshoppingareaand
town centre commercial area as previously
setoutintheNon-StatutoryCherwellLocal
Plan2011(seeMapBanbury7,Appendix5).
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 204Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
This Local Plan extends the town centre to
include the Spiceball Development Area
(Policy Banbury 9).
C.161The Plan also includes an area of
searchintheinterestofextendingthetown
centre into the northern part of the
Canalside site (Policy Banbury 1) which
includes the railway station. The
regeneration of the Canalside area provides
anopportunitytoimprovetheattractiveness
of the eastern edge of the town centre and
take advantage of the river and canal
corridor. DetailedplanningoftheCanalside
area is continuing and therefore an area of
search has been identified for further
consideration in the Local Plan Part 2. This
will be supported by further work through
theBanburyMasterplanandCanalsideSPDs.
C.162LandatBoltonRoad(PolicyBanbury
8), another key development site, already
lies within the town centre.
C.163The Primary Shopping Frontage is
thatdefinedintheNon-StatutoryLocalPlan
2011 (reproduced at Map Banbury 7,
Appendix 5). Any further, non-strategic
review of the Town Centre Shopping Area,
the Town Centre Commercial Area or the
Primary Shopping Area will be undertaken
through preparation of Local Plan Part 2.C.164In 2010 the Council commissioned
an update to its 2006 PPS6 Retail Study and
this identifies the capacity for comparison
and convenience floorspace in each of the
District’s urban centres up to 2026. In the
lightofrecentchangesfacingtheretailsector
this study has itself been followed by a
further examination of retail needs through
to 2031 and the opportunity that exists to
strengthen Banbury’s retail offer. In 2012 a
study was commissioned and produced by
CBRE which identifies the capacity for
comparison and convenience retail
floorspaceintheDistrictto2031. Astrategy
for sites to accommodate retail floorspace
is identified for Banbury. With proposals at
Spiceball expected to deliver a new
supermarket and some A3 uses and Bolton
Road proposed to deliver new dwellings on
a significant proportion of the site, land at
Calthorpe Street is likely to contribute to
ensuringthattheretailneedsofanexpanding
town are met. Following the CBRE study
our Plan aims to help strengthen the retail
base of the town centre, supporting the
growthofretailers,particularlyindependent
retailers and the night economy, to
encouragedwelltimeandhelpgeneratenew
employment. The Local Plan identifies land
within Banbury town centre that will help
meet Banbury’s identified need as well as
positioningBanburytocompeteonaregional
basis.
Policy Banbury 7: Strengthening Banbury Town Centre
Shopping,leisureandother'MainTownCentreUses'willbesupportedwithin
the boundary of Banbury town centre. Residential development will be
supported in appropriate locations in the town centre except where it will
lead to a loss of retail or other main town centre uses.
Thechangeofuseofsitesusedformaintowncentreusesinthetowncentre
forresidentialdevelopmentwillnormallybepermittedifproposalscontribute
significantly to the regeneration of the town centre. Mixed use schemes will
be encouraged.
205 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
A1 uses will not be permitted within the existing Town Centre Commercial
Area.
Only A1 and A3 uses will be permitted on the ground floor in the primary
shoppingfrontage.Residentialdevelopmentwillnotbepermittedwithinthe
primary shopping frontage unless above ground floor level.
TheCouncilwillidentifyanextensiontotheTownCentrewithinthedefined
‘TownCentreExtension-AreaofSearch’. Priortothisretailandothermain
town centre uses will only be supported within the ‘Area of Search’ should
theyformpartofapackageofproposalstohelpdelivertheaimsforBanbury
Canalside and be in accordance with Policy Banbury 1.
In all cases proposals for town centre uses will be considered against Policies
SLE2, ESD10 and ESD15.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
8 – Bolton Road Development
Area
C.165Land at Bolton Road will be
developed to provide new shopping,
residentialandothertowncentreuses. The
site lies immediately to the west of the
Castle Quay Shopping Centre and to the
northofParsonsStreet. Itcomprisesalarge
multi-storey car park, a number of smaller
car parks and service areas associated with
commercial units fronting Parsons Street, a
former car repair workshop, a Bingo Hall
and a number of historic outbuildings.
C.166ThePPS6Assessmentcarriedoutfor
the Council in 2006, its subsequent review
‘TheRetailStudyUpdate2010’andtheinitial
Bolton Road site analysis identified that this
site could offer suitable accommodation for
larger retailers and should be given the
greatest priority by the Council. The site
offers an ideal opportunity to provide
significantadditionalretailfloorspaceadjacent
tothecurrentShoppingCentreandpresentsthe potential to provide a link through to
Parsons Street to improve pedestrian
circulation in this area capitalising on the
recent pedestrianisation of Parsons Street.
C.167TheCouncilispreparingamasterplan
for the Bolton Road site in the form of a
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).
It will set out the capacity and mix of uses
that should be supported on the site to
ensure a comprehensive and viable scheme
that sits well with the Conservation Area
that it sits alongside. The aim is to secure a
mixofconvenienceandcomparisonshopping
on the site, together with other uses
including high quality residential and leisure
uses at the heart of Banbury. The site will
connect and integrate with the Castle Quay
shoppingcentre,andlinkthroughtoParsons
Street, strengthening the role of the
independentsectortoincreasefootfall. We
intend to secure a high quality mixed use
development on the site which would also
provide the option for food retailing. The
siteprovidestheopportunitytoprovidehigh
quality residential development in a town
centre location.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 206Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Banbury 8: Bolton Road Development Area
Development Area: 2 hectares
DevelopmentDescription:BoltonRoadislocatedinaprominentlocationon
the northern edge of Banbury Town Centre. The Council will seek the
redevelopmentoftheareatoincludearangeoftowncentreandhighquality
residentialusesthatwillregenerateandenliventhispartofthetowncentre.
Proposals should respect and enhance the historical setting, and include the
creation of a high quality public realm, which ensures successful integration
and connectivity with the rest of the town centre.
Employment
Use classes:
Retail: including small scale class A1, A3 including boutique stores
Hotel (C1)
Leisure (D2)
Ancillary Residential (C3)
Car parking.
Housing
200 dwellings – Residential use would be acceptable in conjunction with
the wider retail and leisure proposal.
Infrastructure Needs
Education–Contributionstowardsprimaryandsecondaryschoolprovision
Access and Movement – Improved links between the site and Parsons
Street
Community facilities – Replacement of the Bingo hall is required. A
contribution towards indoor sports provision may be required.
Utilities – off site improvements to utilities network may be required.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
AhighqualitylandmarkmixedusedevelopmentinBanburyTownCentre
that will support the regeneration of this area and its integration in to
the wider town centre
Pedestrianandcyclelinkagesthatenableahighdegreeofintegrationand
connectivitywithexistingnetworks,particularlybetweenParsonsStreet,
207 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
North Bar Street and Castle Street integrating these areas through well
considered connections, building configuration and public realm
Residentialdevelopmentthatisdesignedtoaveryhighqualityconsidering
the impact on the conservation area
A transport assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
Provisionofhighqualityroutestoallowforaccessibilitytopublictransport
services and sustainable modes of travel
Ahighqualitydesign,withtheuseofhighqualitymaterialsinlightofthe
adjoining historical setting
A design which respects and enhances the conservation area and the
historicalgrainoftheadjoiningareasespeciallytheGradeIIlistedbuilding
to the west of the site
The creation of a high quality public realm with careful consideration of
streetfrontagesandelevationtreatmenttoensureanactiveandvibrant
public realm
Height and massing sensitive to the surroundings, ensuring there is no
adverse effect on important views/vistas
Thereisanopportunityforlowkey,highenddevelopment,formedalong
new lanes that connect the area to Parsons Street
Architectural innovation is expected where large scale buildings and car
parking areas are proposed to ensure that these objectives are met
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility and
identity
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
TheincorporationofSuDS(PolicyESD7:SustainableDrainageSystems
(SuDS)),takingaccountoftheCouncil'sStrategicFloodRiskAssessment
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5.
Anarchaeologicalfieldevaluationtoassesstheimpactofthedevelopment
on archaeological features.
Additional requirements for this site include:
Development proposals will be expected to be in accordance with a
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) for the site. A comprehensive
approach to site planning and delivery is preferred with proposals being for
the whole site accompanied by a detailed masterplan. A phased approach
maybepermittedprovidedthattheyclearlydemonstratethatproposalswill
contributetowardsthecreationasingleintegratedcommunityandcoherent
development. In order to achieve continuity in design and delivery of the
vision, a small-scale piecemeal approach would not be appropriate.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 208Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
The Council will expect an application to demonstrate it has complied with
theSPDandhastakenintoaccountandplannedfortheknownoranticipated
implications of the proposals on remaining areas.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
9 - Spiceball Development Area
C.168Thelandtotheimmediatenortheast
oftheCastleQuayShoppingCentreishome
to a range of uses including the Mill Arts
Centre,theBanburyMuseumandthesiteof
the former Spiceball Sports and Leisure
Centre. On the other side of the river a
newSpiceballLeisureCentrewascompleted
in December 2009.
C.169With the Museum and Arts Centre
already established and the former sports
centre site cleared, land between the canal
and river is uniquely placed to deliver a
shared vision of the District and County
Councils: to deliver a further extension to
the town centre to provide new retail and
leisure uses, provide opportunities for a
strengthened night economy, and enhance
the appeal of central Banbury to both
residents and visitors. It will be important
that development in this area capitalises on
its excellent linkages with the existing town
centre and in particular the recreational
potentialofitscanalandriverfrontlocation.
A high standard of design will be essential.
C.170The Council is working with the
County Council to deliver this project and
willworkwithotherstakeholdersinshaping
the proposals.
Policy Banbury 9: Spiceball Development Area
Development Area: 5 hectares
DevelopmentDescription:LandbetweenthecanalandriverCherwelltothe
north east of the Castle Quay Shopping Centre will be developed to provide
a mixture of town centre uses, comprising new retail and leisure uses
associated with strengthening the night economy of the centre of Banbury.
Use classes - Retail (including small A1, A3), Hotel (C1), Leisure (D2),
Car parking.
209 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Infrastructure Needs
Open Space – to be focused on the canal/river corridor and linking with
existingopenspacetocontributetotheobjectiveofcreatingalinearpark
and thoroughfare from the north of the town to Bankside in the south
Access and Movement – access achieved from existing Spiceball park
Road
Utilities – off site improvements to utilities network may be required.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD10 and ESD15
Well-designed retail premises and leisure services should form a key
element of this mixed use development
A high quality landmark mixed retail and leisure development that
supportsthegrowthoftheTownCentretothenorthoftheOxfordCanal
and helps integrate and improve access to the existing Spiceball Leisure
Centre
A refurbished Mill Arts Centre
A new library for Banbury
A public space focusing on the Oxford Canal and/or river and improved
pedestrian access to the new Spiceball Centre from the town centre
Public transport should be provided for, including the provision of new
bus stops
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided, that link to existing
networks
Additionalcarparkingwithopportunitiesforcommercialandresidential
uses above
A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
The creation of a high quality public realm with careful consideration of
streetfrontagesandelevationtreatmenttoensureanactiveandvibrant
public realm
Architectural innovation is expected with large scale buildings and car
parking areas to ensure that these objectives are met
Height and massing sensitive to the surroundings, ensuring there are no
adverse effects on important views/vistas
A design which respects and enhances the adjoining historical setting,
especially the Mill arts centre and other historic canal related heritage
AdesignwhichmaximisestheopportunityoftheCanal,providingactive
uses and more footfall in this area
Pedestrian and cycle linkages that are fully integrated with a new, high
qualitypublicrealmandenableahighdegreeofintegrationbetweenthe
town and Spiceball Leisure Centre
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 210Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Provision for public art, relating to the canal to enhance the quality of
the place, legibility and identity
TheOxfordCanalTowpathshouldbeimprovedtoencouragemovement
northtoSpiceballCountryParkandsouthtotheCanalsideareaandthe
Bus Station
Sustainable modes of travel should be encouraged
A Flood Risk Assessment will be required for any future planning
application
ProvisionofsustainabledrainageincludingtheuseofSuDSinaccordance
with ‘Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)’ and taking
account of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA), and
the Level 2 SFRA
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5.
Additional requirements for this site include:
A comprehensive approach to site planning and delivery is preferred with
proposals for the whole site being accompanied by a detailed masterplan. A
phased approach may be permitted provided it can be clearly demonstrated
thatproposalswillcontributetowardsthecreationofasingleintegratedand
coherentdevelopment. In order to achievecontinuityin designand delivery
of the vision, a small-scale, piecemeal approach would not be appropriate.
Applications should take into account and plan for the known or anticipated
implications of proposals on remaining areas.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
10 - Bretch Hill Regeneration
Area
C.171The Bretch Hill area is centred on
RuscoteWard. Thisisawardwithrelatively
lowlevelsofincomeandemployment,while
poorer health and well-being and lower
education and training outcomes are
particular issues in this area of the town.
The ‘Brighter Futures in Banbury’ initiative
bringstogetherkeyagenciestoaddresssuch
issues in the town and a number of projects
arebeingpursuedtargetingwesternBanbury,
togetherwithGrimsburyineasternBanbury.C.172Helping to create opportunity for all
and positively renew and regenerate areas
with challenging social conditions in parts of
Banbury is important to the delivery of the
objectives of the Local Plan. The strategic
development to the west of Bretch Hill
(Policy Banbury 3: West of Bretch Hill) will
positively contribute to improving
opportunities in western Banbury by
providing new housing and associated
facilities and improvements to the built
environment. It will also provide
opportunitiesfor contributionsand linkages
tolong-termcommunitybasedprojectsand
schemes designed to specifically help
community development.
211 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.173A number of opportunities exist to
furtherimprovetheBretchHillareaandthe
identificationofaregenerationareafocused
on Ruscote Ward and part of Neithrop
Ward under ‘Policy Banbury 10: Bretch Hill
Regeneration Area’ below is intended to
promotedevelopmentproposalsthatwould
help to address some of the issues in this
part of the town.
C.174The area of Bretch Hill will be
regeneratedthroughhousinginvestmentand
new retail, community facilities and other
investmentfromamulti-agencypartnership.
Area renewal will help improve the
community fabric of the area, help reduce
socialdisadvantage,improvehealthandwell-
being, educational attainment and
employment opportunities. This
development area takes forward many
elementsofthe‘BrighterFuturesinBanbury’
initiative on a multi-agency basis.
C.175Planning permission will be granted
for small scale redevelopment/renewal
proposalsthatwouldresultinimprovements
to the existing housing stock, retail and
community facilities and services, and local
employment, including opportunities for
redevelopmentintheWoodgreenarea. An
Area Action Plan will be prepared as the
required means of delivery.
C.176The Sanctuary Group owns and
manages a significant proportion of the
affordable housing in the area, whichprovides the opportunity for further
improvements to the housing stock.
NeighbourhoodPlanningFrontRunnerstatus
hassecuredfundingforacommunityledself
build housing scheme at the Fairway
Methodist site. This is the first scheme to
be developed under the Council’s “Build!”
programme and the land will be owned by
the Community Land Trust (CLT) being
established to facilitate community-led
housing on a wider scale. The policy
encourages further development proposals
whichwouldincludeanelementofselfbuild
andcommunityinvolvement,toprogressthe
aims of “Build!” and the CLT.
C.177Proposalswhichwouldprovidelocal
employment opportunities will be
encouraged and the proposed development
tothewestofBretchHill(PolicyBanbury3:
West of Bretch Hill) will include local
recruitment of labour.
C.178Local retail and community facilities
intheWoodgreenareaareintheownership
of Cherwell District Council and
OxfordshireCountyCouncil,whichprovides
the opportunity for improvements and
regenerationtomaximisetheuseofbuildings
by co-locating/ sharing of facilities, ensuring
the facilities can be used for longer periods
of time, providing better accessibility and
improved facilities.
Policy Banbury 10: Bretch Hill Regeneration Area
Development Area: Development area is indicative
Development Description: Development proposals will be permitted within
theBretchHillregenerationareaforsmallscaleredevelopment/renewalthat
would result in improvements to the existing housing stock, retail and
community facilities and services, and provide local employment. This will
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 212Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
include opportunities for redevelopment in the Woodgreen area, through
investment from a multi-agency partnership. Development proposals
incorporating elements of the following will be encouraged:
Housing
Improvement/renewal of existing stock where opportunities exist e.g.
Sanctuary Group improvement programme
Small scale redevelopment where opportunities exist e.g. Orchard Way
flats, Woodgreen
Opportunities for community led self build housing in accordance with
the “Build!” programme and Community Land Trust initiatives
Developmentproposalsincludinganelementofsharedownership/shared
equity properties.
Employment
Increased opportunities for local employment and career progression
through apprenticeships.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – opportunities to improve educational attainment
Health – improvements to existing surgery may be required
Open Space – improvement/enhancement of open space/recreation
facilities
Access and Movement – Improved access to facilities. Enhance existing
bus services to the town centre and improve links to employment sites
through promoting greater awareness of opportunities to travel by bus,
enhancing public transport infrastructure in Bretch Hill and walking and
cycling links to bus stops
Community facilities – Improvement of existing community facilities at
theSunshineCentreandfacilitiesintheWoodgreenarea.Opportunities
for community involvement and services to be managed by local people
will be encouraged.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD10 and ESD15
Layout of new development should enable a high degree of integration
and connectivity with the existing communities and support improved
walking and cycling connections to the Town Centre
Developmentproposalsshouldassistinaddressingproblemsofdeprivation
in the existing community and aid community development
213 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of place, legibility and
identity.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
11 - Meeting the Need for Open
Space, Sport and Recreation
C.179There are existing deficiencies and
futureshortfallsinopenspaceandrecreation
provision which will need to be addressed
in part through the Local Plan. The action
plans contained in the Playing Pitch and
Green Spaces Strategies recommended
deficienciesbeingmetthroughacombination
ofimprovementstothequalityofandaccess
to existing facilities, using existing areas of
one type of open space to meet deficiencies
inanothertype(e.g.locatingplayequipment
on some areas of amenity open space), and
the provision of new areas of open space.
C.180Open space should form an integral
part of new development and ‘Policy BSC
11: Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor
Recreation’ indicates that provision should
usually be made on site. The proposed
strategic sites shown on the Policies Map
(Appendix5:Maps)willbeexpectedtomake
provision on site for open space and
recreation to meet the needs of the new
development. The precisecompositionand
size of green space provision will be
determined in relation to the overall size of
development, the character of the site, the
overall green space provision in the locality
and with reference to the minimum
standards of provision set out in Policy BSC
11: Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor
Recreation.C.181Whilstnewdevelopmentwillonlybe
expected to make provision for its own
needs,meetingexistingdeficienciesrequires
land to be allocated through the Local Plan
process. Basedonthedeficienciesidentified
in the Playing Pitch Strategy and the Green
SpaceStrategy(asupdatedbythe2011Open
Space review) land is required for the
following:
3 junior football pitches
1 cricket pitch
9.75 ha of allotments
8.81 ha of natural/semi-natural green
space.
C.182The Playing Pitch and Green Space
Strategy estimated that the following
additional provision was required to meet
development needs to 2026:
6 junior pitches
2 mini-soccer pitches
2 cricket pitches
3 rugby pitches
3.3haparkonthenorthwestoutskirts
of the town
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 214Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
3.7 ha of natural/semi-natural space
through new provision/public access
agreements to privately owned sites
3.5 ha of amenity open space
5.41 ha of children's play space to be
met through new equipped play areas
and additional play opportunities using
other open space
2 multi-use games areas (MUGAs)
2 tennis courts
1 bowling green
2.1 ha of allotments.
C.183The Playing Pitch and Green Space
Strategies were based on allocations in the
draft Core Strategy and future needs are
being updated to reflect the amount and
preferreddistributionofdevelopmentinthe
Districtforanextendedplanperiodthrough
to 2031.
C.184The most effective way of planning
to meet current and future requirements is
through integrating provision with the
planning of the strategic sites. For example,
the proposed strategic allocation on land
west of Bretch Hill should provide the
opportunitytocontributetowardsprovision
of a park on the north west outskirts of the
town, which could assist in landscaping the
proposed development and improving the
urbanfringe,inadditiontoprovidingafacility
for the local population. The intended
components of open space and recreation
provision of the strategic sites are briefly
summarised in the site allocation policies.
Overall open space provision and green
infrastructure requirements are being
examined in more detail as part of the
BanburyMasterplanworkandanyadditionalnon-strategicallocationswillbecontainedin
the forthcoming Local Plan Part 2. Further
work is also being undertaken in relation to
indoor sports provision.
C.185'PolicyBSC10:OpenSpace,Outdoor
SportandRecreationProvision','PolicyBSC
11: Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor
Recreation'and'PolicyBSC12:IndoorSport,
RecreationandCommunityFacilities'willbe
used to help address existing deficiencies in
provision and future development needs, in
addition to 'Policy Banbury 11: Meeting the
NeedforOpenSpace,SportandRecreation'.
C.186The strategy retains the long-term
objective of seeking to establish a series of
openspacesbasedontheOxfordCanaland
River Cherwell linked by public
footpaths/cycleways. TheCherwellCountry
Park proposal (Policy Banbury 14: Cherwell
CountryPark)representsamajorexpansion
of the public green space available to the
citizensofBanbury. Therivercanalcorridor
providesthe opportunityforflat,trafficfree
andpleasantfootpathcyclewayrouteslinking
residential areas to employment areas, the
towncentre,railwaystationandbusstation.
Theprovisionoftheseroutesisanimportant
measure in seeking to reduce the need to
travelbyprivatecar. Contributionstowards
the provision of these routes and areas of
open space will be sought from developers
when it can be shown to be necessary in
order to ensure that the development is
adequately served by sustainable transport
modes in a safe, segregated environment.
C.187TheregenerationofCanalside(Policy
Banbury1:BanburyCanalside)andSpiceball
Development Area (Policy Banbury 9:
Spiceball Development Area) will provide
theopportunitytoformpublicaccessroutes
alongside the canal and river, together with
new areas of open space, improving the
amenity and appearance of the area. Much
of the land in the river /canal corridor lies
215 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
withinthefloodplainandtheremaybeother
opportunities to improve the open space
network;forexampletheCouncil'sproposed
country park and community woodland at
Wildmere Wood (Policy Banbury 14:
Cherwell Country Park), which has thepotential to contribute to the green
infrastructure network of the town,
improving the river corridor by providing a
screen for the M40 to the north and
Wildmere Industrial Estate to the south.
Policy Banbury 11: Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport and Recreation
Aspartofmeasurestoaddresscurrentandfuturedeficienciesinopenspace,
sport and recreation provision in the town we will:
Retain the long-term objective of seeking to establish a series of open
spaces based on the Oxford Canal and River Cherwell linked by public
footpaths/cycleways, with the intention of creating a linear park and
thoroughfarefromthenorthofthetownandGrimsburyreservoirtothe
newparktobeprovidedaspartofthecommitteddevelopmentsouthof
Bankside. Development that would prejudice this objective will not be
permitted.
Identify a site for the relocation of Banbury United Football Club (see
‘Policy Banbury 12: Land for the Relocation of Banbury United FC').
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
12 - Land for the Relocation of
Banbury United FC
C.188Banbury United Football Club is an
importantsportingandcommunityassetwith
a long history. ‘The Puritans’ have over 20
teamsincludingyouthsquadsandateamfor
people with learning difficulties. The club
presently occupies the Spencer Stadium at
Station Approach but has been in need of a
new ground for a number of years. The
proposalsforCanalsideregeneration(Policy
Banbury1:BanburyCanalside)meanthatan
alternative site needs to be secured.
C.189Land to the south of Banbury Rugby
Club at Oxford Road, Bodicote is available.
The site is in a suitable location on a main
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 216Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
transportcorridor. TheLocalPlanidentifies
a site larger than required for the football
club and the remaining land is considered
suitableforanewsecondaryschooltoserve
the town. There is also the potential for
some sharing of facilities with the adjacentrugby club. Sport England will be consulted
on the proposals. In developing proposals,
consideration will need to be given to the
detailed traffic and amenity impacts arising
from the proposed use of the site.
Policy Banbury 12: Land for the Relocation of Banbury United FC
An area of land to the east of the Oxford Road at Bodicote, to the south of
Banbury Rugby Club, will be secured for the relocation of Banbury United
Football Club and for sport and recreation use.
Development proposals for relocation of the football club will need to be
accompanied by:
An assessment of the potential effects on the local community
Atransportassessmentandtravelplantoensurethesiteisaccessibleby
sustainablemodesoftransportandthetrafficimpactofthedevelopment
is minimised
Adetailedsurveyofagriculturallandqualityandasoilmanagementplan
to ensure that soils are retained on site or re-used off site
An ecological assessment including appropriate mitigation
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
Alightingstrategydesignedtolimitupwardglareinordertoavoidadverse
effects on nearby residents and wildlife.
Vehicular access to the football ground shall be provided from Oxford Road.
The remaining land not required for the football club is considered suitable
for a new secondary school to serve the town.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
13 – Burial Site Provision in
Banbury
C.190As indicated above, additional burial
site provision will be required during the
Local Plan period to meet the needs of thetown. The Town Council has carried out
initial investigations and has requested that
landbeallocatedtoprovideincreasedburial
capacity. However, this does not require a
strategic land allocation to be made in the
Local Plan and will therefore be progressed
as part of the Local Plan Part 2.
217 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Banbury 13: Burial Site Provision in Banbury
An extension to the existing cemetery is required to meet the needs of both
the existing population and future development in the town. As such
developer contributions will be sought from new development in the town
towards the establishment of the facility. Further details will be contained
in the Developer Contributions SPD.
Detailedinvestigationswillberequiredtodeterminethesuitabilityofground
conditions for cemetery use.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
14 – Cherwell Country Park
C.191The Council has for some time held
aspirations for a new community woodland
to be established on the fringe of Banbury.
It owns land at Wildmere Wood,
immediately to the north of Wildmere
Industrial estate, and the completion of the
Banbury Flood Alleviation scheme to the
north has provided the opportunity for the
Council and the Environment Agency to
workinpartnershiptodesignandimplement
a scheme for a new country park, designed
to benefit both residents of and visitors to
the town. The site is approximately 3 miles
from the town centre and will be located in
close proximity to the proposed Banbury
Gateway retail development site. A Grade
2 listed lock and Lock Cottage on the
Oxford Canal is located at the north end of
the proposed country park.
C.192The site comprises approximately
33haofunusedpasturelandandincludesthe
flood alleviation scheme comprising earth
embankments to the east of the M40
corridorandafloodstorageareawithflood
controlstructuresadjacent. Additionallandacquired by the Council will enable the
provision of a country park, including new
woodland planting and to the north of the
M40therewillbeareasofwetlandmeadow,
reedbeds and scrapes.
C.193A visitor car park will be provided
accessed via the Environment Agency’s
maintenance access to the Flood Alleviation
SchemeembankmentofftheA361Daventry
Road. A network of existing rights of way
andpermissivepathswillenablepublicaccess
tomostareasoftheparkandwillalsoallow
access to Wildmere Wood, currently
inaccessible due to its position between the
industrial estate, railway line embankment
and private land.
C.194Provisionofacountryparkwithnew
woodlandplantingwillhelpmeetdeficiencies
in natural/semi-natural provision identified
intheevidencebase,andwillalsocontribute
to the objectives of the Council’s BAP. It
will also help contribute to the objective of
establishing a series of linked open spaces
through the town based on the river canal
corridor (Policy Banbury 11: Meeting the
Need for Open Space, Sport and
Recreation).
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 218Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Banbury 14: Cherwell Country Park
Development Area: 33 hectares
Development Description: Land to the north of Wildmere Road industrial
estate and east of the M40 will be developed as a country park, with a
permissive footpath network with DDA access.
Infrastructure Needs
Access and Movement – A visitor car park is proposed off the A361
Daventry Road which will allow access to the Flood Alleviation Scheme
Embankment permissive footpath and the proposed parkland between
the canal, M40 and railway. Pedestrian and maintenance access will be
provided between the existing Wildmere Wood and the new Country
Park’s permissive path system linking with the canal towpath, and the
bridleway on the defunct Daventry Road.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Woodland planting will form a major component of the scheme
The scheme will include the creation of new habitats such as wetland
scrapes, grassland and meadows.
StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
15 – Employment Land North
East of Junction 11
C.195Thisstrategicemploymentsiteinthis
highlyprominentlocationadjoiningtheM40
motorway and close to Junction 11 is
allocated for employment. This new
employment site will ensure that the
economic strengths of Banbury in
manufacturing,highperformanceengineering
andlogisticscanbemaintained. Thestrategic
road network and local distributor routescan be readily accessed from this area and
be done so avoiding lorry movements
throughresidentialareas. Althoughanedge
oftownsite,itisalsowithinwalkingdistance
of the town centre and bus and railway
stations. Developmentinthisareaprovides
an opportunity for high visibility economic
investment and the bringing into effective
uselandthatwouldotherwisebeunsuitable
for residential purposes. Policy Banbury 15
therefore seeks to deliver this land for
economic development in the interest of
delivering jobs and investment in a highly
sustainable location.
Policy Banbury 15: Employment Land North East of Junction 11
Development Area: 13 hectares (in total)
219 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Development Description: Located on the north eastern edge of Banbury in
an important position adjoining the M40 and the A361, this strategic site
comprises 13 hectares of land for mixed employment generating
development. A variety of employment types will be sought to reflect the
need for diversity and resilience in the local economy expressed in the
Economic Development Strategy.
Employment
Jobs created – approximately 1,000
Use classes – B1 (Office), B2 (General Industrial) and B8 (Storage and
Distribution).
Infrastructure Needs
Open space - Incidental
Access and Movement – access to A361 and M40 via Junction 11.
Necessarycontributionstoothertransportimprovementswillbesought,
including improvements to bus services, walking and cycling routes.
Contributions will also be required to improve operation of Junction 11
and Hennef Way junctions and to improved bus services.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
A high quality commercial District for the east of Banbury that has high
connectivity to major transport routes and is well integrated with the
adjacent commercial uses
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivitybetweennew and existingdevelopment,includingadjoining
employment areas, nearby residential areas and the town centre
Provision of new footpaths and cycleways that link to existing networks
to link the site with the Banbury urban area
Protection of the amenity of the public footpath network including
satisfactory treatment of existing footpaths on the site and diversion
proposals where appropriate
Good accessibilityto public transportservicesshould be provided to link
thesitewiththeBanburyurbanareaandprovideanalternativetotravel
by car
Satisfactoryaccessarrangementsincludingadetailedtransportassessment
and Travel Plan given the location of the site close to the strategic road
network
Ahighquality,welldesignedapproachtotheurbanedgewhichfunctions
as a high profile economic attractor but which also achieves a successful
transition between town and country environments
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 220Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Developmentthatrespectsthelandscapesetting,thatdemonstratesthe
enhancement, restoration or creation of wildlife corridors, and the
creation of a green infrastructure network for Banbury
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
A comprehensive landscaping scheme including on-site provision to
enhance the setting of buildings onsite and to limit visual intrusion into
the wider landscape, particularly given the key views afforded into the
site from higher ground in the wider vicinity
Include planting of vegetation along strategic route ways to screen the
noise
Adequate investigation (through an ecological survey) treatment and
managementofpriorityhabitatsandprotectedspeciesonsitetopreserve
and enhance biodiversity
Ahighqualitydesignandfinish,withcarefulconsiderationgiventolayout,
architecture, materials and colourings to reduce overall visual impact
The height of buildings to reflect the scale of existing employment
development in the vicinity
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Full mitigationof flood riskin compliancewithPolicyESD 6: Sustainable
Flood Risk Management including the use of SuDS (Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)), specifically attenuation SuDS
techniques, taking account of the recommendations of the Council's
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Adoption of a surface water management framework to reduce run off
to greenfield rates
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingdemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirementsofpolicies
ESD 1 – 5
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary.
Strategic Development in South
West Banbury
C.196The Development Area known as
BanburySouthWestcomprisesanumberof
adjoining development sites which will,
collectively, deliver up to 1,495 dwellings in
local communities with strong links to the
town centre. The developments will bring
forward affordable housing, a new primaryschoolandlocalcentreaswellasformaland
informalopenspaceandotherinfrastructure
benefits.
C.197 The Banbury South West
Development Area is bounded by the
existingurbanedgeofBanburyandSaltWay
to the north, by White Post Road to the
east, and extends to Crouch Farm to the
west. The A361 bisects the development
sites in a north south direction.
221 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.198The broad layout and design of the
developments within the Banbury South
West Development Area will reflect the
existingcharacterandformofthelandscape
and will contribute to the creation and
enhancement of local green infrastructure
networks. Proposals should demonstrate:
strong design and place shaping
principles
howdevelopmentdoesnotcompromise
butcomplementsadjoiningdevelopment
– existing and proposed
facilitatesorcontributestothedelivery
of necessary infrastructure.
C.199Each individual development site will
provide the necessary infrastructure to
supportitselftoavoidplacinganyconstraint
or unreasonable burden upon either
preceding or subsequent development sites
thatcollectivelycomprisetheBanburySouth
West area. Each development site will
therefore contribute as necessary to the
delivery of infrastructure within the area
through onsite provision or an appropriate
off-site financial contribution towards
provision elsewhere in the Banbury South
West areas to be secured through s106
agreementorCIL. Thisapproachwillensure
that individual sites are capable of coming
forward independently, yet in a
complementary manner.
C.200Each individual development site is
supportedbyitsownsite-specificpolicythat
sets out the necessary infrastructure
required for that specific development to
provide the necessary confidence regarding
the relationship between each of the sites
thatcollectivelycomprisetheBanburySouth
West area and to ensure timely and
appropriate provision of infrastructure
alongside the delivery of development.StrategicDevelopment:Banbury
16 – South of Salt Way - West
C.201This site is located to the south of
Salt Way, to the west of the A361 Bloxham
Road. Public rights of way cross the site
from north to south and run along part of
the eastern site boundary, whilst the public
right of way of the Salt Way, an important
historical, ecological and recreational route,
runs along the site’s northern boundary.
C.202Part of Salt Way is a proposed new
Local Wildlife Site and is a non-designated
heritage asset. There is BAP habitat
(broadleavedwoodland)along the northern
site boundary and some stretches of the
eastern boundaries, and dense hedgerows
aroundthesiteboundary. Therearerecords
of protected species in the locality. Crouch
Farm, to the west of the site, is Grade II
listed and there are further listed buildings
in the wider vicinity (Wykham Park Farm).
The site is located in an area of
archaeological potential where a number of
Iron Age and Roman sites have been
recorded.
C.203Crouch Hill (together with its
setting), to the north west of the site, is an
important historical and topographical
landscape landmark in Banbury and is
considered to be a non-designated heritage
asset. Site Banbury 16 provides the
opportunity to develop the south west of
Banburyinacoordinatedandintegratedway,
delivering the necessary facilities and
infrastructure in a timely manner. The
westernmost extent of the site identified as
Banbury16reflectstheexistingdevelopment
to the north at Waller Drive, and follows
existing field boundaries. Beyond this,
developmentwouldhavesignificantlandscape
andvisualimpactsincludinguponthesetting
of Crouch Hill.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 222Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Banbury 16: South of Salt Way - West
Development Area: 8 hectares
DevelopmentDescription:Developmentof land at South of SaltWay– west
will deliver up to 150 dwellings with associated facilities and infrastructure.
Housing
Number of homes - Up to 150 dwellings
Affordable Housing - 30%.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – contributions will be required towards the expansion of
existingprimaryschoolsand/ortheprovisionofthenewschoolatBanbury
17. Contributions will also be sought towards provision of secondary
school places;
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
sportsprovisionasoutlinedinPolicyBSC11:LocalStandardsofProvision
– Outdoor Recreation. Contributions towards off site provision for
allotmentsandsportsprovisiontobeprovidedtothesouthofsiteBanbury
17 will be required in lieu of provision on site;
Community – contributions will be required towards the improvement
of existing community facilities in the area;
Access and movements – A transport assessment and travel plan will be
required to assess the transportation implications of the proposed
development and to identify appropriate mitigation measures – Access
to be created off the Bloxham Road (A361).
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
Development must respect the landscape setting and provide an
appropriate development interface with Salt Way (any buffer is likely to
be some 10-20 metres in accordance with the approach adopted at land
east of Bloxham Road and south of Salt Way)
Existing natural features and additional structural planting will reinforce
the landscape framework upon which to structure development parcels
A linked network of cycle and footways to provide access into Banbury
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivity with existing development
A high quality locally distinctive residential District for the south west of
Banburythatisdesignedwithconsiderationtothelandscapesettingand
well integrated with the adjacent residential area
223 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Consideration of the impact of development on Crouch Hill
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided that link with existing
networks, the wider urban area and community facilities with a legible
hierarchy of routes to encourage sustainable modes of travel
The existing footpath extending from the southern corner of the site to
Salt Way should be enhanced to enable a circular link from the new
footpath/ bridleway to be provided at the southern edge of site Banbury
17 to Salt Way
Goodaccessibilitytopublictransportservicesshouldbeprovidedforwith
effective footpaths and cycle routes to bus stops
BusstopsshouldbeprovidedonBloxhamRoad,withgoodwalkingroutes.
The developers will be required to contribute to the cost of improved
public transport
Provision of a transport assessment and Travel Plan to maximise
connectivity with existing development, including linkages with and
improvements to existing public transport
A well designed, ‘soft’ approach to the urban edge, which respects the
rural setting
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
Retention of Public Rights of Way and a layout that affords good access
to the countryside
Retention and enhancement of existing hedgerows and trees
Provision of Green Infrastructure links beyond the development site to
the wider town and open countryside
Publicopenspacetoformawellconnectednetworkofgreenareaswithin
the site, suitable for formal and informal recreation
Detailed consideration of ecological impacts, wildlife mitigation,
restorationandenhancementofwildlifecorridorstopreserveandenhance
biodiversity. EcologicalSurveystoaccompanyanydevelopmentproposal
Planting of vegetation along strategic route ways to screen the noise
Development that retains and enhances significant landscape features
(e.g. hedgerows) which are or may be of ecological value; and where
possible introduces new features
Provision of appropriate lighting and the minimisation of light pollution
based on appropriate technical assessment
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility and
identity
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 224Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Full mitigationof flood riskin compliancewithPolicyESD 6: Sustainable
Flood Risk Management including use of SuDS techniques in accordance
with Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) and taking
account of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
The provision of extra-care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing
A detailed survey of the agricultural land quality identifying the best and
most versatile agricultural land and a soil management plan
Anarchaeologicalfieldevaluationtoassesstheimpactofthedevelopment
on archaeological features.
PolicyBanbury17– SouthofSalt
Way – East
C.204This site is located to the south of
Salt Way, to the east of the A361 Bloxham
Road. ItincludesthelandadjoiningtheA361
for which planning permission has already
been granted for 145 dwellings. There is a
dense hedgerow along the site’s northern
boundary,theSaltWay,whichisaproposed
newLocalWildlifeSite. SaltWayisapublic
right of way of important historical and
recreational significance running along the
northern boundary of the site; a number of
otherpublicrightsofwaycrossthesitefrom
north to south.
C.205The Salt Way is a non-designated
heritage asset. There are dense hedgerow
boundarieswithinthesite,ofgoodcondition,
and areas of BAP habitat and individual
woodland parcels around the boundaries of
the site. Wykham Farmhouse, to the south
of the site, is Grade II listed.
C.206The development of site Banbury 17
combines two adjoining sites that have the
potential to be developed as part of a single
developmentarea. Banbury17providesthe
opportunity to develop the south west of
Banbury in a coordinated, integrated andplanned way, delivering the necessary
facilities and infrastructure in a timely
manner.
C.207Structure planting and landscaping
will be required along the site’s southern
boundary in order to mitigate the visual
impacts of the site upon the Sor Brook
Valley.
C.208A new footpath bridleway will be
required to be provided running from east
to west along the southern boundary of the
development area, incorporating links with
existing footpaths to form a new circular
route around the development linking back
to Salt Way.
C.209Formal outdoor sports provision is
to be located to the south east of Banbury
17, ensuring that land extending towards
Wykham Lane, where the potential for
adverselandscapeandvisualimpactishigher,
will be kept free from built development,
whilst the eastern most part of the site is to
be utilised as informal open space in order
to maintain an important gap between the
settlements of Banbury and Bodicote, with
eachmaintainingitsseparateidentityandthe
character of Bodicote Conservation Area
protected.
225 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Banbury 17: South of Salt Way - East
Development Area: 68 hectares (in total)
DevelopmentDescription-DevelopmentoflandsouthofSaltWay-Eastwill
deliveranewneighbourhoodofupto1,345dwellingswithassociatedfacilities
and infrastructure as part of South West Banbury. The site is in more than
one ownership (Land east of the Bloxham Road and land west of Bodicote)
butthedevelopmentareaformsacoherentwhole. Anintegrated,coordinated
andcomprehensiveplanningapproachwillbetakenwithalinkroadbetween
thesitesinseparateownerships. Thesitewillrequireamasterplantoensure
this is delivered.
Housing
Numberofhomes-Upto1,345dwellings(including145withpermission)
Affordable Housing - 30%.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – an on-site primary school. Contributions will also be sought
towards provision of secondary school places. Land also needs to be
reserved to meet town wide secondary school needs.
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
sportsprovisionasoutlinedinPolicyBSC11:LocalStandardsofProvision
– Outdoor Recreation
Community – on-site provision including community and/or local retail
facilities
Access and movement – Principal access to be created off the Bloxham
Road(A361). Thelayoutshouldalsoprovidearouteforaneast-westlink
to join White Post Road for local traffic
A transport assessment and travel plan will be required to assess the
transportationimplicationsoftheproposeddevelopmentandtoidentify
appropriate mitigation measures.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
The development of a comprehensive masterplan for the allocated site
in consultation with the Council, Oxfordshire County Council, the Local
Nature Partnership (Wild Oxfordshire) and local communities
Development must respect the landscape setting and provide an
appropriate development interface with Salt Way (any buffer is likely to
be20metreswideinaccordancewiththeapproachadoptedatlandeast
of Bloxham Road and south of Salt Way)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 226Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Existing natural features and additional structural planting will reinforce
the landscape framework upon which to structure development parcels
Publicopenspacetoformawellconnectednetworkofgreenareaswithin
the site, suitable for formal and informal recreation. Formal recreation
should be located and phased to come forward as part of development
at the southern part of the site; Informal open space is to be located
where the site adjoins Bodicote village in order to create a buffer to
maintainseparationbetweenthetwosettlementsandrespectthesetting
of the Bodicote Conservation Area
A linked network of cycle and footways to provide access into Banbury
A high quality locally distinctive residential District for the south west of
Banburythatisdesignedwithconsiderationtothelandscapesettingand
well integrated with the adjacent residential area
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided that link with existing
networks, the wider urban area and community facilities with a legible
hierarchy of routes to encourage sustainable modes of travel
Anewfootpathbridlewaytobeprovidedrunningfromeasttowestalong
thesouthernboundaryofthedevelopmentarea,incorporatinglinkswith
existing footpaths to form a new circular route around the development
linking back to Salt Way
Goodaccessibilitytopublictransportservicesshouldbeprovidedforwith
effective footpaths and cycle routes to bus stops including the provision
of a bus route through the site and new bus stops on the site
ProvisionofatransportassessmentandTravelPlanincludingtomaximise
connectivity with existing development, including linkages with and
improvements to existing public transport
Inadditiontotheprovisionofabusservicethroughthesiteandassociated
bus stops, provision is required for buses to turn around during the early
part of housing delivery
Early delivery of the A361 to A4260 Link Road is required, along with
associated junctions. The developer will be required to fund the cost of
additional public transport to serve the site.
A well designed, ‘soft’ approach to the urban edge, which respects the
rural setting
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
Planting of vegetation along strategic route ways to screen the noise
Retention of Public Rights of Way and a layout that affords good access
to the countryside
Retention and enhancement of existing hedgerows and trees including
the boundary with the Salt Way
Provision of Green Infrastructure links beyond the development site to
the wider town and open countryside
227 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Detailed consideration of ecological impacts, wildlife mitigation and the
creation, restoration and enhancement of wildlife corridors to preserve
and enhance biodiversity. Ecological Surveys to accompany any
development proposal.
Development that retains and enhances significant landscape features
(e.g. hedgerows) which are or may be of ecological value; and where
possible introduces new features
Provision of appropriate lighting and the minimisation of light pollution
based on appropriate technical assessment
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility and
identity
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Use of SuDS techniques in accordance with Policy ESD 7: Sustainable
Drainage Systems (SuDS) and taking account of the Council's Strategic
FloodRiskAssessment. DevelopmentproposalstobesubjecttoaFlood
Risk Assessment
The provision of extra-care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing
If necessary, the satisfactory incorporation of existing dwellings into the
scheme
A detailed survey of the agricultural land quality identifying the best and
most versatile agricultural land and a soil management plan
TheneedtophysicallypreservethelocationoftheNeolithiccausewayed
enclosure. The remainder of the archaeological features will require
further investigation and recording ahead of any development, together
with a programme of archaeological mitigation.
Policy Banbury 18: Land at
Drayton Lodge Farm
C.210Thesiteislocatedtothewestofthe
Warwickroad(B4100)andtothenortheast
of the village of Drayton. The village of
Hanwell is located to the north east of the
site. The Warwick road is on the north
easternboundaryofthesiteandbeyondthis
there is residential development at Hanwell
Fields. Currently there is agricultural land
tothenorth,south,eastandwestofthesite.C.211Atthecentreofthesiteisagolfclub
with a course, driving range and a small car
park, a farm, dwellings and a small caravan
park with maintained pitches, paths,
hedgerows and a copse. The remainder of
thesiteisinagriculturaluse. Thereisasmall
lake to the south west of the site and the
North Oxfordshire Academy is located to
the south east of the site. There are public
rightsofwaythroughoutthesite.Partofthe
site is an archaeological constraint priority
area.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 228Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.212It is considered that part of the site
is suitable for residential development. The
field to the north of the farm and the golf
driving range could be developed subject to
recreation uses being replaced elsewhere.
The site could be linked to the existing site
with planning permission to the south and
to existing and proposed development to
the north east of the site.
C.213Landscape evidence has recognised
that consideration should be given to the
protection of the Drayton Conservation
Area which the site abuts to the south, and
thatcareshouldalsobetakentoavoidvisual
prominenceofdevelopmentfromwithintheSorBrookValley. Theaddendumstatesthat
the landscape is relatively open with views
west towards the Sor Brook Valley creating
a feeling of exposure in some locations;
primarily within the arable landscape. The
addendumnotesanimportanthedgerowon
the site’s northern boundary.
C.214Thecentralpartofthesitecontaining
the existing dwellings and copse should be
protectedfromdevelopmenttoaccountfor
these uses and the steep and undulating
landscape on this part of the site. Impacts
on landscape, conservation area and the
residential properties in the centre of the
site should be minimised by any proposal.
Policy Banbury 18: Land at Drayton Lodge Farm
Development Area: 15 hectares
Development Description: Located at the northern edge of Banbury, this
residentialstrategicdevelopmentsitewillprovideapproximately250dwellings
with associated facilities and infrastructure in a scheme that demonstrates a
sensitive response to this urban fringe location.
Housing
Number of homes – Approximately 250
Dwelling mix – to be informed by 'Policy BSC 4: Housing Mix'
Affordable Housing - 30%
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing.
Infrastructure Needs
Education–landforaprimaryschoolandfinancialorinkindcontributions
towards secondary education provision
Open Space – to include general greenspace, play space, allotments and
sportsprovisionasoutlinedin'PolicyBSC11:LocalStandardsofProvision
– Outdoor Recreation'
Community–onsiteprovisionforcommunityand/orlocalretailfacilities
229 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Access and movement – Principal access to be created off the Warwick
Road (B4100)
A transport assessment and travel plan will be required to assess the
transportationimplicationsoftheproposeddevelopmentandtoidentify
appropriate mitigation measures.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
An archaeological investigation to inform an archaeological mitigations
scheme
A high quality development that is locally distinctive
Carefuldesignoftheheightandextentofbuiltdevelopmenttominimise
adverse visual impact on the setting of Drayton village and Drayton
Conservation Area
Development proposals to be accompanied and influenced by a
landscape/visual and heritage impact assessments
Existing natural features and additional structural planting will reinforce
the landscape framework upon which to structure development parcels
Publicopenspacetoformawellconnectednetworkofgreenareaswithin
the site, suitable for formal and informal recreation. Formal recreation
should be located and phased to come forward as part of development
at the southern part of the site
A linked network of cycle and footways to provide access into Banbury
Layout of development that enables a high degree of integration and
connectivity with existing development
A high quality residential area that is designed with consideration to the
landscape setting and well integrated with the adjacent proposed
residential area.
Retentionofdwellingsandthecopseatthecentreofthesitewithnonew
development in close proximity
The provision of a green buffer surrounding the existing dwellings and
along the western boundaries of the site
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities including to land which has planning permission to
the south and east
New footpaths and cycleways should be provided that link with existing
networks, the wider urban area and community facilities with a legible
hierarchy of routes to encourage sustainable modes of travel
Goodaccessibilitytopublictransportservicesshouldbeprovidedforwith
effective footpaths and cycle routes to bus stops on the Warwick Road
ProvisionofatransportassessmentandTravelPlanincludingtomaximise
connectivity with existing development, including linkages with and
improvements to existing public transport
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 230Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
A well designed, ‘soft’ approach to the urban edge, which respects the
rural setting
Retention of Public Rights of Way and a layout that affords good access
to the countryside
Retention and enhancement of existing hedgerows and trees
Provision of Green Infrastructure links beyond the development site to
the wider town and open countryside
Detailed consideration of ecological impacts, wildlife mitigation and the
creation, restoration and enhancement of wildlife corridors to preserve
and enhance biodiversity
Development that retains and enhances significant landscape features
(e.g.hedgerows)whichareormaybeofecologicalvalue;andintroduces
new features
Provision of appropriate lighting and the minimisation of light pollution
based on appropriate technical assessment
Provision of public art to enhance the quality of the place, legibility and
identity
Consideration of noise mitigation along the B4100
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Use of SuDS techniques in accordance with Policy ESD 7: Sustainable
Drainage Systems (SuDS) and taking account of the Council's Strategic
Flood Risk Assessments
The provision of extra-care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing
A detailed survey of the agricultural land quality identifying the best and
most versatile agricultural land and a soil management plan.
Policy Banbury 19: Land at
Higham Way
C.215This site is a former waste
management facility and concrete batching
plantandislocatedtosoutheastofBanbury
town centre. The site is bounded by
residential and sports pitches to the north,
railwaylinestothesouthandformerrailway
land within site Banbury 6 to the east.C.216The site is within Flood Zone 2 and
3. AFloodAlleviationScheme(FAS)forthe
northofBanburywascompletedin2012and
a large part of the site falls within the
defendedarea. Theproximitytotherailway
would present noise pollution to future
residentsandrequireabuffer/designsolution
which might reduce yield.
C.217In principle the site offers a suitable
location for development, and would
contributetothecreationofsustainableand
mixedcommunities. Thesiteisclosetothe
231 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
town centre and railway station and is in
need of bringing back into effective use.
However, there are current physical
constraintsthatneedtobeovercomebefore
development can be progressed. These
include addressing the potential for land
contamination from the previous use, and
noise mitigation measures to reduce noiseimpactfromtherailwayforfutureresidents.
A replacement waste management site for
Grundons has been approved nearby. The
Cemex site had been cleared and is surplus
to requirements. The access road (Higham
Way) is in the process of being adopted.
The site was marketed for a mixed use
development in 2013.
Policy Banbury 19: Land at Higham Way
Development Area: 3 hectares
DevelopmentDescription:Re-developmentwouldbringaboutenvironmental
benefits in terms of using previously developed and vacant land within the
town.
Housing
Number of homes – Approximately 150
Dwelling mix - approximately 70% houses 30% flats.
Affordable Housing – 30%
The provision of extra-care housing and the opportunity for community
self-build affordable housing.
Infrastructure Needs
Education – Contributions towards Primary School and secondary
education provision
Access and Movement – Access via Higham Way
Open space – as outlined in Policy BSC 11.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles
Proposals should comply with Policy ESD15
AdistinctiveresidentialpropositionforBanburythatintegrateswelland
helps make connections with the adjoining town centre and Railway
Station
An appropriate location for higher density housing to include a mixture
of dwelling styles and types
Taking advantage of the accessibility of the town centre, an age friendly
neighbourhoodwithextracarehousingandhousingforwheelchairusers
and those with specialist supported housing needs
The potential inclusion of live/work units
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 232Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
A layout that maximises the potential for walkable neighbourhoods and
enables a high degree of integration and connectivity between new and
existing communities. New footpaths and cycleways should be provided
that link to existing networks
Provision of Green Infrastructure links beyond the development site to
the wider town and open countryside
Open/urban spaces provided in various locations within the site and new
trees planted
Development should promote biodiversity enhancement
The implementation of proposals in the Movement Strategy including
improved junction arrangements on Bridge Street and Cherwell Street
to improve traffic capacity but also to facilitate pedestrian movement
between the town centre and the site
Some car free or reduced levels of parking with innovative solutions to
accommodating the private car
Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided for
A transport assessment and Travel Plan to accompany development
proposals
Appropriate treatment and remediation of contaminated land
The completion of a flood risk assessment for the site
A sequential approach to development in relation to flood risk
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
Provision of sustainable drainage in accordance with Policy ESD 7:
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), taking account of the
recommendations of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Compliance with policies ESD 1-5 on climate change mitigation and
adaptation
A noise survey will be required to accompany any planning application.
233 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 234Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.4 Kidlington
C.218Kidlington is both an urban area and
a village. Its built-up area includes part of
Gosford and Water Eaton Parish. Its village
centre is the smallest of the three urban
centres in the District, and primarily serves
the local area.
C.219The village centre is compact and
includes both the High Street and a parade
running south along the A4260 Oxford
Road. Thereisasmallarcade,theKidlington
Centre,locatedofftheHighStreetopposite
SterlingRoadApproach. Withinoradjacent
totheCentreareanumberoflocalservices
includingthelibrary,healthcentreandExeter
Hall.
C.220LocalorganisationswithinKidlington
have worked to prepare their own spatial
strategy for the village and have identified a
vision for how the centre should grow and
evolve. At the heart of this is a perception
that Kidlington is failing to achieve its full
potential despite its size. The main issues
that have been identified are as follows:
definingrobustboundariesforthevillage
centre to allow for future growth
improvements to the public realm
creatingstrongerlinksbetweenvarious
uses including Exeter Hall which lies
over200metresfromtheshopsonthe
High Street.
C.221The Local Plan will be supported by
a ‘Framework Masterplan’ for Kidlington
which is being prepared as evidence to
inform future work on non-strategic site
allocationsorwhichcouldbeusedtoinform
a Neighbourhood Plan. The Framework is
being used to examine local issues and
optionsinmoredetailwithaviewtomeeting
LocalPlanobjectivesto2031andidentifying
specific development opportunities. It
includes an examination of demographic,
town centre, housing, employment,
recreation and infrastructure issues in the
contextoftheconstraintsoftheGreenBelt,
therelationshipofKidlingtontoOxford,and
the village’s expanding economic role. The
Framework also presents an opportunity to
identify longer term issues for future Local
Plan reviews.
C.222Due to a lack of spare education
capacityinthetown,expansionofoneofthe
existing primary schools will be required
over the plan period and developer
contributions will be sought.
C.223The CouncilpublishedaRetailStudy
(2012) which examines Kidlington’s role as
a service centre. The village’s proximity to
Oxfordispartlyresponsiblefortherelatively
low provision of comparison retailers
compared with convenience shopping and
the Plan looks to strengthen the village
centre.
C.224AsanurbanareaclosetoOxfordand
a number of other villages, Kidlington is
surroundedbyGreenBelt. TheLocalPlan’s
housing requirements for the plan period
235 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
and the development strategy can be
achieved without the need for a strategic
reviewoftheGreenBeltintheDistrict. The
Oxfordshire District, City and County
Councils are jointly considering how to
accommodate any unmet housing needs
arisingin the wider HousingMarketAreaas
set out in para B.95. With regard to
Kidlington’s own needs, policies Villages 1
and2providesomeopportunity. Smallscale
affordable housing schemes to meet
specificallyidentifiedlocalhousingneedmay
alsobebroughtforwardthroughtherelease
of rural exception sites (Policy Villages 3).
The Kidlington Framework Masterplan will
also identify further opportunities. A Local
Housing Needs Study will be commissioned
in consultation with Kidlington Parish
Council.
C.225There is potential for Kidlington to
haveasignificantroleinCherwelldiversifying
its economic base. The District can take
advantage of its location on the hi-tech
corridor between London and Cambridge,
and the proximity to Oxford University and
Silverstone which is actively investing in the
HighPerformanceEngineeringsector. Most
growth will be directed to Bicester but
Kidlington, with a number of unique
economic attractors, has the potential to
capture some of this investment.
C.226A recent Employment Land Review
(2012) identified a need for additional
employment land in the Kidlington area. It
is not anticipated that this land can be
accommodated on sites within the built-up
limitsofKidlington. Aspecificneedhasalso
beenidentifiedattheLangfordLaneareaand
the Science Park at Begbroke. Therefore,
exceptionalcircumstancesareconsideredto
exist to justify a small scale local review of
the Green Belt to meet employment needs
(see Policy Kidlington 1: Accommodating
High Value Employment Needs).What will Happen and Where
Strategic Development:
Kidlington 1 – Accommodating
High Value Employment Needs
C.227Kidlington plays an important role in
theDistrict’swideremploymentcontextand
along with Begbroke Science Park has the
potential to develop further to support the
provision of land for hi-tech university
spin-outs and help pave the way for a wider
high value, economic base. At Kidlington,
London-Oxford Airport and Langford Lane
industrial estate form an employment
cluster. Due to the implementation of
strategic development proposals in the Plan
including East West Rail, the new station at
Water Eaton and a growth in employment
opportunities at Kidlington and Bicester the
Council would expect demand for an
increased role for the airport. The Council
will work with London-Oxford Airport
operators and the Civil Aviation Authority
and other stakeholders to consider any
proposals.LangfordLanehasinrecentyears
become a location for a wide range of
commercialuses. TheproposalsinthisPlan
aim to improve the quality of the
employment offer and, in doing so, establish
a new gateway at this northern entrance to
Kidlington.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 236Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.228Over the medium to longer term,
progressive improvements to the Langford
Lane employment area will be encouraged
to accommodate higher value employment
usessuchashightechnologyindustries. This
will reinforce and strengthen the emerging
cluster of such industries in this area
adjoining London-Oxford Airport. All
proposalswillneedtobeconsideredagainst
Policy SLE1.
C.229The Employment Land Review
identified a need for additional land to be
allocatedforemploymentuseatKidlington.
It is recognised that Kidlington has a very
different economic role from the other
villages in the District, and accordingly, the
need for more employment land is likely to
behigher. Howeverthereisinsufficientland
availablewithinthevillage(onnon-greenbelt
land) to meet this need. The need for
employment land to accommodate higher
value employment uses in the research and
development sector demonstrates
exceptional circumstances leading to the
need for a small scale review of the Green
Belt.C.230The University of Oxford plays a
significant and leading role in research both
intheUKandworldwideandinthiscontext
Begbroke Science Park is a vital site. The
Universityismovingtowardsdeliveryofthe
remaining phase of its core site; however,
oncecomplete,furthergrowthisconstrained
by the Oxford Green Belt. The amount of
scientific research however continues to
expand. There are two exceptional
circumstancesthatjustifyasmallscalereview
ofGreenBeltboundariesaroundtheScience
Park; the location of the Science Park, given
the importance of being directly linked to
University facilities and the research
environment; and the potential for the
Science Park to deliver wider benefits for
the immediate locale through support for
the development of a high-tech cluster and
through the wider District with expected
growthinscientificresearch,connectingwith
local businesses, nurturing enterprise and
drawing investment into the District.
C.231Inadditiontosupportingdevelopment
of the existing sites above, the Council
proposesthat a localGreen Belt reviewwill
be undertaken in preparing the Local Plan
Part 2 in the vicinity of London-Oxford
Airport and the Begbroke Science Park as
illustrated on the Kidlington map. The
boundariesshownontheproposalsmapare
indicative only; the review will need to
consider exactly how and where the Green
Belt boundary will be changed to
accommodate employment uses. Any
subsequentdevelopmentproposalswillneed
to have regard to the design and place
making principles outlined in Policy
Kidlington 1 below.
237 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Kidlington 1: Accommodating High Value Employment Needs
We will undertake a small scale local review of the Green Belt to
accommodate identified high value employment needs at two distinct and
separate locations:
(A) Langford Lane /Oxford Technology Park/ London –Oxford Airport
(B) Begbroke Science Park
Key site specific design and place shaping principles:
Design for buildings that create a gateway with a strong sense of arrival
including when arriving from the airport
A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan should accompany any
development proposals which should show how public transport links to
the area will be improved
A well designed approach to the urban edge, which achieves a successful
transition between town and country environments
Development that respects the landscape setting of the site
Acomprehensivelandscapingschemetoenhancethesettingofbuildings
onsite and to limit visual intrusion into the wider landscape
Public art will need to be provided for
A development that preserves and enhances biodiversity, with the
enhancement, restoration or creation of wildlife corridors
Ahighqualitydesignandfinish,withcarefulconsiderationgiventolayout,
architecture, materials and colourings to create a Technology Park for
high value employment uses
The height of buildings to reflect the scale of existing employment
development in the vicinity
Provision for sustainable drainage, including SuDS, in accordance with
Policy ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) and taking account
of the Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD 1 – 5
An assessment of whether the site contains best and most versatile
agricultural land, including a detailed survey where necessary
A soil management plan may be required to be submitted with planning
applications to ensure that soils will be retained onsite and used where
possible.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 238Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Strategic Development:
Kidlington 2 - Strengthening
Kidlington Village Centre
C.232ItisimportantthatKidlingtoncentre
is supportedand strengthenedto help meet
the aspirations of Kidlington and to ensure
that the everyday shopping needs of
residents are met, avoiding the need for
unnecessary journeys to Oxford, Bicester
and other destinations.
C.233KidlingtonVillageCentreperformsa
particular function in the hierarchy and
network of town centres in the District.
Smaller than Banbury and Bicester centres,
Kidlingtonishoweverlarger,intermsofthe
number and range of retail units than the
local centres present in the larger villages in
the District.
C.234Many improvements to the village
centre have been implemented in recent
years in a partnership between the District
Council, Kidlington Parish Council and the
KidlingtonVillageCentreManagementBoard,
includingmostrecentlythepedestrianisation
of the core retail area throughout the day.C.235The 2012 Retail Study showed that
significant new development should not be
directed to Kidlington but that the centre
needed some further environmental
improvements and the evening economy
should be encouraged. It is proposed to
expand the geographical area defined as
Kidlington Village Centre to include land on
the western side of the Oxford Road and
other small areas of commercial uses. The
exactboundarywill be determinedin Part2
of the Local Plan. The aim of the extension
is to:
support the viability and vitality of the
existing village centre
encourage economic activity
assistwiththeconnectivitybetweenthe
existing village centre and the civic,
communityandgreenopenspaceatthe
Exeter Hall area
contributetoandmaximisethebenefits
of improvements to the character and
appearanceofthevillagecentreandthe
public realm.
Policy Kidlington 2: Strengthening Kidlington Village Centre
Shopping,leisureandother'MainTownCentreUses'willbesupportedwithin
the boundary of Kidlington Village Centre. Residential development will be
supported in appropriate locations in the village centre except where it will
lead to a loss of retail or other main town centre uses.
ThechangeofuseofsitesusedformaintowncentreusesintheVillagecentre
forresidentialdevelopmentwillnormallybepermittedifproposalscontribute
significantly to the regeneration of the Village centre. Mixed use schemes
will be encouraged.
Proposals should be considered against Policies SLE 2, ESD 10 and ESD 15.
239 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 240Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.5 Our Villages and Rural Areas
Meeting the Challenge of
Developing a Sustainable
EconomyintheVillagesandRural
Areas
C.236MostofruralCherwell’seconomically
active residents commute to their
workplaces, and less than a quarter of them
workwithin5kmofhome. Therearelimited
employment opportunities in Cherwell’s
villages. Kidlington is the exception to this
pattern. In recent yearsit has developedits
hightechnology,officeandairportofferings,
positioning itself to absorb the potential
overflow from Oxford University's spin off
businesses. Kidlingtoniswellconnectedwith
easily accessible business premises, and is
well positioned to continue to provide for
overflow needs from Oxford.
C.237The key economic issues facing the
villages and rural areas are:
Addressing the changing needs of the
ruraleconomyandtheDistrict'sfarming
communities. Farming remains of vital
importance to Cherwell’s rural identity
and to local food production. In orderto remain viable many farms are
diversifying into tourism, recreation,
food retail and other types of business.
Ensuring that there are appropriate
opportunitiesforlocalruralemployment
and to support home working will be
important; there is a lack of fast
broadband in some locations.
The need to support the vibrant visitor
economyinawaywhichcontributesto
thelocaleconomywhilstalsopreserving
the local environment.
Theneedtosupporttheeconomicrole
of Kidlington.
Potential future demand for airport
expansion at Kidlington and the
potential for employment land in this
location.
Preserving the canal and its immediate
surroundings whilst maintaining and
realising its recreational potential.
C.238Our vision for our rural areas is that
our villages should be "lived in" as well as
"slept in". To achieve this, rural areas must
seek to provide appropriate opportunities
for new jobs such as support for farm
diversification proposals and rural
employment opportunities that are
sustainable and support local communities,
whilst at the same time protecting the
landscape and built environment of the
District. In particular we will encourage
appropriate proposals that can support a
vibrant tourist economy whilst also
preserving the local environment.
C.239At Kidlington, we will support the
function of the Village Centre as a vibrant
heart of the village and build on Kidlington's
strength as a focus for employment
241 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
generating development as a quality centre
for office and laboratory based businesses,
recognising its proximity to Oxford.
MeetingtheChallengeofBuilding
Sustainable Villages and Rural
Areas
C.240CherwellDistricthasmanyattractive
villages with valued built and natural
environments. High house prices and an
emphasisoncommutingbyprivatecarmean
that those of limited means, and those
seeking to live, work and access services
locally,canbedisadvantaged. Therearealso
pockets of deprivation in Cherwell’s rural
areas.
C.241The key community issues facing the
villages and rural areas are:
A lack of affordable homes of all types.
Thereisalackofprivaterentedhomes,
social rented housing stock and smaller
homes generally. In some areas there
isalackofanynewhousingcomingonto
the market at all. House prices are
more expensive in Kidlington and the
rural areas compared to Banbury and
Bicester, meaning that it is less likely
that those born in a village will be able
to purchase a house there.
The Council's Playing Pitch and Green
Space Strategy and 2011 Open Space
Update have identified that there are
deficiencies in open space provision in
the rural areas.
Thenumberofpermanentlocalservices
is generally declining. Public transport
provision is variable across the rural
areas. In smaller and more isolated
villages, it can be infrequent or nonexistent. There is a need to protect
servicesandfacilitiesandimprovethem
wherever possible.
A lack of school places, meaning that
housingdevelopmentsmightrequirethe
villageschooltoexpand. Anassessment
of education provision will need to
inform development proposals.
C.242As our District continues to grow, a
key challenge will be to steer development
towards the most sustainable locations in a
manner which meets the needs of our
villages and rural communities as far as
possible. We will aim to provide good
quality,affordableruralhousingandsupport
the provision of services and facilities to
meet the needs of rural communities for
services where possible.
MeetingtheChallengeofEnsuring
Sustainable Development in our
Villages & Rural Areas
C.243There is a need to manage the rural
environment to create inclusive, sustainable
communities and help meet the needs of
thosewholiveandworkthere. Wewishto
protect our built and natural environments
and the character and appearance of our
villages.
C.244The key environmental issues facing
the villages and rural areas are:
The need to protect the biodiversity of
the rural areas. The Oxford Meadows
Special Area of Conservation, which is
ofEuropeanimportance,islocated2km
from Kidlington.
The need to address the challenges
faced by the legacy of major
developments that have taken place in
the rural areas. In particular, the MOD
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 242Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
has developed significant assets across
the District, and over time their needs
for these will change. The former RAF
base at Upper Heyford has particular
challenges as it is redeveloped for new
uses.
The impact of growth and new
development in the rural areas may
impact upon the quality, character and
landscape setting of villages.
Any further expansion of Kidlington
needs to be carefully considered in
relation to the Green Belt.
Theruralareasarenotcongestedwhen
compared to the towns but traffic is an
issueintheruralareaowingtothehigh
level of commuting to larger urban
areas. Traffic congestion is an issue for
Kidlington. TheSustainableCommunity
Strategy highlights the need to address
traffic management and issues resulting
fromthemainroadbisectingthevillage.
C.245The major environmental challenge
forourvillagesandruralareasistomaintain
and enhance the quality of our natural, built
and historic environment in the face of
pressures for new development. In
addressingthischallengetheLocalPlanaims
toprotectandenhancebiodiversity;support
a pattern of development which reduces
people’s need to travel, maximises
opportunities to use public transport and,
minimisesadditionallevelsofroadtrafficand
pollution.
Our Vision and Strategy for Our
Villages and Rural Areas
C.246By2031,wewillhaveprotectedand,
where possible, enhanced our services and
facilities, landscapes and the natural and
historic built environments of our villagesand rural areas. We will have encouraged
sustainable economic opportunities and we
will have provided 5,392 (2011-2031)
dwellings in total in the rural area including
Kidlington and the development of a new
settlement at the former RAF Upper
Heyford.
C.247Wewillcherish,protectandenhance
theappearanceandcharacterofourvillages
by protecting conservation areas and by
promoting high standards of design for new
development. We will protect and enhance
the beauty and natural diversity of the
countryside for the enjoyment of all.
C.248To secure our vision this Local Plan
has a strong urban focus which seeks to
direct housing towards Bicester and
Banbury. However,thereisaneedforsome
development within the rural areas to meet
local and Cherwell wide needs. The overall
level of housing growth for our villages and
ruralareasissetoutinPolicyBSC1:District
Wide Housing Distribution.
What will Happen and Where
C.249In identifying the strategic approach
towardsnewdevelopmentinourvillagesand
rural areas, this Local Plan must do three
things. It must:
identify the overall level of growth to
be developed within the rural areas
identifyasustainablehierarchyofvillages
tosetaframeworkforconsideringhow
proposals within villages will be
determined
identify an approach for distributing
growth across the different villages
within the rural areas.
243 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.250 Our approach to providing
development in the rural areas seeks to:
deliver a new settlement at the former
RAF Upper Heyford to enable
conservation and environmental
improvements and to contribute in
meetingCherwellwideandlocalhousing
needs
providenewhousingforpeopleinrural
areas to meet, in particular, the needs
of newly forming households
provide affordable housing in what are
generally areas of higher housing cost
deliver housing at villages where local
shops, services and job opportunities
are available and accessible or where
access to nearby towns would be
sustainable in transport terms
consider the relationship between
‘clusters’ of villages
provide development to help sustain
ruralservicesandfacilities,includingbus
routes
avoid significant environmental harm
support the neighbourhood planning
process.
C.251Tothisend,PolicyVillages1provides
a categorisation of the District’s villages to
ensure that unplanned, small-scale
development within villages is directed
towards those villages that are best able to
accommodate limited growth. The Policy
establishes which villages are, in principle,
appropriate for conversions and infilling
(Category C) and which are suitable for
accommodating minor development
(Categories A and B). Policy Villages 2providesforadditionalplanneddevelopment
tobeaccommodatedatthemostsustainable
villages (Category A) to meet District
housingrequirementsandtohelpmeetlocal
needs. PolicyVillages3seekstorespondto
often acute issues of affordability in rural
areasandallowsforaffordablehousingtobe
providedinanyofCherwell’svillagestomeet
locally identified needs in locations or on
sites that might otherwise not be
appropriate. Policy Villages 4 establishes a
frameworkforaddressingopenspace,sport
and recreation deficiencies at the villages.
Policy Villages 5 seeks to deliver the new
settlement at the former RAF Upper
Heyford.
C.252We do not allocate specific sites
within villages in this document. The
suitability of individual sites will be
considered through work on a Local Plan
Part 2, where appropriate, through the
preparation of Neighbourhood Plans or
through the determination of planning
applications for planning permission.
Neighbourhood Plans may provide an
opportunity for local communities to
propose development not identified in the
Local Plan providing it is in general
accordance with the Local Plan’s strategic
policies and objectives. Where
Neighbourhood Plans have been prepared,
formallyexamined,andhavebeensupported
through a local referendum, they will be
adopted as part of the statutory
Development Plan. The Council will advise
and support Parish Councils and relevant
Neighbourhood Forums in preparing their
Plans.
C.253Developmentproposedinvillageswill
be required to be built to exemplary design
and building standards as set out in Section
B3: Policies for Ensuring Sustainable
Development.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 244Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Villages 1: Village
Categorisation
C.254Policy Villages 1 provides a
categorisation of villages to guide the
consideration of small-scale proposals for
residential development within the built-up
limits of settlements. Village categorisation
helps understand which villages are in
principle best placed to sustain different
levelsofresidentialdevelopment. ThePolicy
ensures that unanticipated development
within the built-up limits of a village is of an
appropriatescaleforthatvillage,issupported
by services and facilities and does not
unnecessarilyexacerbatetravelpatternsthat
are overly reliant on the private car and
which incrementally have environmental
consequences. Policy Villages 1 seeks to
manage small scale development proposals
(typicallybutnotexclusivelyforlessthan10
dwellings) which come forward within the
built-up limits of villages. It also informs
Policy Villages 2 which provides a rural
allocation for sites of 10 or more dwellings
at the most sustainable category A villages
andwhichwillguidepreparationofboththe
Local Plan Part 2 and Neighbourhood Plans.
C.255Villageshavebeen categorisedbased
on the following criteria:
population size
the number and range of services and
facilities within the village (shops,
schools, pubs, etc.)
whetherthereareanysignificantknown
issuesinavillagethatcouldbematerially
assisted by an increase in housing (for
example to maintain pupil numbers at a
primary school)
the accessibility (travel time and
distance) of the village to an urban area
by private car and public transport
(includinganassessmentofanynetwork
constraints)
accessibility of the village in terms of
walking and cycling
local employment opportunities.
C.256 Survey work was previously
undertaken to inform village categorisation
andthiswassupplementedby‘theCherwell
Rural Areas Integrated Transport & Land
UseStudy’(CRAITLUS)whichwasproduced
in association with Oxfordshire County
Council. The survey work was updated in
2014.
C.257The principle of categorising villages
is well established within the District, with
this approach being taken in both the
Cherwell Local Plan 1996 and the
Non-Statutory Cherwell Local Plan in 2004.
It is considered that this approach is still
appropriate.
C.258This Local Plan has also considered
the issue of village clustering. Some villages,
which may not necessarily have many
services and facilities of their own, are
geographicallyclosetovillageswhichdohave
services and facilities. People living in the
245 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
rural areas may use services and facilities in
other nearby villages. Those larger villages
with services and facilities (the ‘service
centre’ villages) in combination with the
smaller“satellite”villagescanbeconsidered
toformafunctional“cluster”.Clusteringwill
allow for:
thesupportofcommunityfacilities(such
as shops) in service centres, by locating
new development and therefore
people/customers close to as well as
within service centre villages
small sites to come forward for
development in satellite villages where
sites in service centres may be limited
the reduction in length of car journeys
in the rural areas (i.e. between satellite
villages and service centres)
where appropriate, the potential for
developer contributions or other
mechanism to support the delivery of
infrastructureandservicestobeapplied
to needs in any village in a cluster.
C.259It is not proposed that clustering
forms part of the development strategy in
'PolicyVillages2:DistributingGrowthAcross
theRuralAreas’astheservicesandfacilities
in most satellite villages are too limited to
sustainably accommodate the development
of larger allocated sites. However, it is
considered to be a role for satellite
(CategoryB)villagestoaccommodateminor
development which is set out in ‘Policy
Villages 1: Village Categorisation’ below.
C.260The following categorisation will be
used to assess residential proposals that
come forward within villages.
Policy Villages 1: Village Categorisation
Proposals for residential development within the built-up limits of villages
(including Kidlington) will be considered having regard to the categorisation
below. OnlyCategoryA(ServiceCentres)andCategoryB(SatelliteVillages)
willbeconsideredtobesuitableforminordevelopmentinadditiontoinfilling
and conversions.
Type of
DevelopmentVillages by Category Category
Minor Development Service Villages A
Infilling Adderbury, Ambrosden, Arncott,
Begbroke, Bletchingdon (*), Bloxham,
Bodicote, Chesterton, Cropredy, Conversions
Deddington, Finmere, Fringford,
Fritwell, Hook Norton, Kidlington,
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 246Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Type of
DevelopmentVillages by Category Category
Kirtlington,Launton,Milcombe,Sibford
Ferris/Sibford Gower, Steeple Aston,
Weston-on–the-Green(*), Wroxton,
Yarnton
Minor Development Satellite Villages B
Infilling Blackthorn, Claydon, Clifton, Great
Bourton, Hempton, Lower Heyford,
MiddleAston,Milton,Mollington,South
Newington, and Wardington.Conversions
Infilling All other villages C
Conversions
(*)Denotes villagespartly within and partly outside the Green Belt. In those
parts that lie within the Green Belt, only infilling and conversions will be
permitted.
C.261ThereisaneedforCherwell’svillages
to sustainably contribute towards meeting
thehousingrequirementsidentifiedinPolicy
BSC1. Policy Villages 1 allows for the most
sustainable villages to accommodate ‘minor
development’andallvillagestoaccommodate
infilling or conversions. The appropriate
formofdevelopmentwillvarydependingon
thecharacterofthevillageanddevelopment
intheimmediatelocality. Inallcases,‘Policy
ESD 15: The Character of the Built and
Historic Environment’ will be applied in
considering applications.
C.262In assessing whether proposals
constitute acceptable 'minor development’,
regardwillbegiventothefollowingcriteria:
the size of the village and the level of
service provision
the site’s context within the existing
built environment
whether it is in keeping with the
character and form of the village
its local landscape setting
carefulconsiderationoftheappropriate
scale of development, particularly in
Category B (satellite) villages.
247 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.263In considering the scope of new
residential development within the built-up
limits of Kidlington, consideration will be
given to its role as a larger service centre
and its urban character, the functions that
existing gaps and spaces perform and the
quality of the built environment.
C.264Infilling refers to the development of
a small gap in an otherwise continuous
built-up frontage. Not all infill gaps will be
suitable for development. Many spaces in
villages’streetsareimportantandcannotbe
filled without detriment to their character.
Such gaps may afford views out to the
landscape or help to impart a spacious rural
atmospheretothevillage. Thisisparticularly
important in a loose knit village pattern
wherethespacesmaybeasimportantasthe
buildings.
C.265Adderbury, Ambrosden, Arncott,
Begbroke,Bletchingdon,Bloxham,Bodicote,
Chesterton,Cropredy,Deddington,Finmere,
Fringford,Fritwell,HookNorton,Kidlington,
Kirtlington, Launton, Milcombe, Sibford
Ferris/Sibford Gower, Steeple Aston,
Weston on the Green, Wroxton and
Yarnton are Category A villages. The
Category A villages which perform as
“service centres” for the “satellite villages”
(forming a “village cluster”) shown in the
table at paragraph C.260 are Adderbury,
Ambrosden,Bloxham,Cropredy,Deddington
and Steeple Aston.
C.266The category B villages are satellite
villages associated with a larger service
centre. Thesatellitevillagesare:Blackthorn,
Claydon, Clifton, Great Bourton, Hempton,
Lower Heyford, Middle Aston, Milton,
Mollington, South Newington, and
Wardington. They do not ‘score’ highly
enough in their own right to be included as
categoryAvillagesbutareconsideredtobe
appropriateforminordevelopmentbecause
of the benefits of access to a service centrewithin a village cluster. For example,
Claydon, Great Bourton, Mollington and
Wardington benefit from their relationship
with Cropredy. As smaller settlements, the
satellite villages have been given a separate
‘B’ Category as they would not be suitable
for larger scale development provided for
by Policy Villages 2.
C.267All other villages are classified as
Category C villages.
C.268Appropriate infilling (and minor
developmentforaffordablehousing)inthese
“satellite villages” may help to meet needs
not only within the village itself but also the
larger village with which it is clustered.
C.269Policy Villages 1 applies to all villages
in the District including those that are, in
wholeorinpart,withintheGreenBelt. The
general extent of, and policy for, the Green
Belt is set out in ‘Policy ESD 14: Oxford
Green Belt' and on the Policies Map
(Appendix 5: Maps). The villages of
Kidlington, Yarnton and Begbroke (all
“category A” villages) are “inset” villages
withintheGreenBeltandthereforewillnot
be covered by Green Belt policy. All other
villages within the Green Belt, however, are
“washed over” by Green Belt designation
and Policy ESD 14 will apply in relation to
whether development maintains the Green
Belt’s openness and does not conflict with
the purposes of the Green Belt or harm its
visual amenities. Policy ESD14 will apply in
the same way for those parts of Weston on
the Green and Bletchingdon that lie within
the Green Belt.
Policy Villages 2: Distributing
Growth across the Rural Areas
C.270The Local Plan must set out an
approachfor identifying the development of
new sites for housing across the rural areas
to meet local needs in sustainable locations
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 248Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
and to meet the strategic targets set in
‘Policy BSC 1: District Wide Housing
Distribution’.
C.271The Housing Trajectory shows that
theDistrictalreadyhasasubstantialhousing
supply from rural areas:
Completions (2011-2014):
85 DLO Caversfield
247 Rural Areas (including Kidlington) (10 or more dwellings)
196 Rural Areas including Kidlington (less than 10 dwellings)
528 Total
Planning Permissions at 31/3/14:
761 Former RAF Upper Heyford
111 DLO Caversfield
888 RuralAreas(includingKidlington)(10ormoredwellings)
1760 Total
(excludes permissions for sites of less than 10 to avoid duplication with a future windfall allowance)
C.272In the interests of meeting local
housing need in rural areas, an allocation is
also being made to enable the development
ofsomenewsites(for10ormoredwellings)
in the most sustainable locations. A further
750 dwellings will be developed in the rural
areas including Kidlington. Sites for 10 ormore dwellings that have received planning
permission after 31 March 2014 will
contribute in meeting these requirements.
Additionally,a realisticwindfall allowanceof
754 homes is identified for sites of less than
249 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
10 dwellings for the period (2014-2031). In
total, some 5,392 homes will be deliveredacross the rural areas from 2011 to 2031.
Policy Villages 2: Distributing Growth across the Rural Areas
A total of 750 homes will be delivered at Category A villages. This will be in
addition to the rural allowance for small site ‘windfalls’ and planning
permissions for 10 or more dwellings as at 31 March 2014.
Sites will be identified through the preparation of the Local Plan Part 2,
through the preparation of Neighbourhood Plans where applicable, and
through the determination of applications for planning permission.
In identifying and considering sites, particular regard will be given to the
following criteria:
Whether the land has been previously developed land or is of lesser
environmental value
Whether significant adverse impact on heritage or wildlife assets could
be avoided
Whether development would contribute in enhancing the built
environment
Whether best and most versatile agricultural land could be avoided
Whether significant adverse landscape and impacts could be avoided
Whether satisfactory vehicular and pedestrian access/egress could be
provided
Whether the site is well located to services and facilities
Whether necessary infrastructure could be provided
Whether land considered for allocation is deliverable now or whether
there is a reasonable prospect that it could be developed within the plan
period
Whetherlandthesubjectofanapplicationforplanningpermissioncould
be delivered within the next five years
Whether the development would have an adverse impact on flood risk.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 250Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
PolicyVillages3:RuralException
Sites
C.273Housing is generally less affordable
in rural areas than in Cherwell's towns.
There are also less new housing
opportunities than in urban areas and a low
turnover of existing social or 'affordable'
homes. This makes it particularly difficult
forthosewhocannotaffordmarkethousing
including many newly forming households.
The Council’s Housing Strategy (2012-17)
highlights that the attraction of rural areas
adds to the pressure on affordability.
Allowing opportunities for small scale
affordablehousingtomeetlocalneedsasan
exception to planning policies which
otherwiserestraindevelopmentcanprovide
homes for people in rural areas who
otherwise might have to move out of their
communities.
C.274Such 'rural exception sites' do not
have the same economic value as market
housing sites. It is therefore important that
thekeypartiesinvolvedworkinpartnership.
In limited occasions consideration will be
given to the introduction of market housing
to enable a degree of cross-subsidisation.
This approach is supported by the National
Planning Policy Framework.
C.275The Council will support proposals
for community self-build or self-finish
affordable housing where they will meet a
specific, identified local housing need and
particularlywheretheywillresultinsuitable
empty properties being brought into
residential use. Arrangements will be made
to restrict the occupancy of the housing to
ensurethatitcontinuestomeetlocalneeds
in perpetuity.C.276In identifying suitable sites, it will be
necessary to balance the advantages of
providingaffordablehousingwiththedegree
of harm that would be caused, for example
to the appearance of the village, the
surrounding landscape or to the historic
environment. Itwillbeparticularlyimportant
that proposals for developments in the
Green Belt are able to demonstrate that
there are no alternative sites outside of the
Green Belt that could reasonably meet the
identified needs (for example if part of the
village lies outside the Green Belt or needs
could be met in another village close by).
C.277In considering the number of homes
proposedandtheformofdevelopment,the
suitability of villages to accommodate
additional development will be assessed
having regard to ‘Policy Villages 1: Village
Categorisation’ and to demonstrated local
housing need.
C.278Where rural exceptions sites are
shown to be unviable, the Council will
consider whether an element of market
housingwould be appropriateto securethe
deliveryofaffordablehousing. ‘Open-book’
analysis of the costs of development will be
expected. The policy sets a limit of 25%
market housing. This will be kept under
review and, if necessary, adjusted by way of
a Supplementary Planning Document.
C.279TheCouncilwillworkinpartnership
with the Oxfordshire Rural Community
Council, Parish Councils, Registered
Providers and other interested parties in
identifying suitable opportunities.
251 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Villages 3: Rural Exception Sites
TheCouncilwillsupporttheidentificationofsuitableopportunitiesforsmall
scale affordable housing schemes within or immediately adjacent to villages
to meet specific, identified local housing needs that cannot be met through
the development of sites allocated for housing development.
Arrangements will be secured to restrict the occupancy of the housing to
ensure that it continues to meet local needs in perpetuity.
Market housing for private rent or sale will only be considered on rural
exception sites in the following circumstances:
• The number of market homes should not exceed 25% of the total number
of homes proposed
• The market housing must be shown to be required to secure the viability
of the proposal and development costs must be justified
•Noalternative,suitablesiteisavailabletoprovidearuralexceptionsiteand
a robust site search can be demonstrated
• The market housing ensures that no additional subsidy for the scheme is
required
• The development has the support of the local community
• The total number of dwellings and the scale of development is in keeping
with the categorisation, character and form of the village and its local
landscape setting.
Policy Villages 4: Meeting the
Need for Open Space, Sport and
Recreation
C.280The evidence base studies have
identified a number of existing deficiencies
andfutureshortfallsinprovisioninKidlington
and the Rural Areas. The action plans
contained in the Playing Pitch and Green
Space Strategies (See Appendix 3: Evidence
Base) recommended deficiencies being met
through a combination of improvements to
the quality and accessibility of existing
facilities, using existing areas of one type ofprovision to meet deficiencies in another
type,andtheprovisionofnewareasofopen
space.‘PolicyBSC10:OpenSpace,Outdoor
SportandRecreationProvision’,‘PolicyBSC
11: Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor
Recreation’and‘PolicyBSC12:IndoorSport,
RecreationandCommunityFacilities’willbe
used to help address existing deficiencies in
provision and future development needs.
C.281Theevidencebasestudiesdividedthe
District’s Rural Areas into three sub-areas
for analysis purposes, comprising the
following:
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 252Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Table 11: Rural Sub Areas: Open Space
Wards Sub Area
Adderbury, Bloxham and Bodicote, Cropredy, Hook Norton,
Sibford, WroxtonRural North
Caversfield, Deddington, Fringford, The Astons and Heyfords Rural Central
AmbrosdenandChesterton,Yarnton,GosfordandWaterEaton,
Kirtlington, Launton, OtmoorRural South
Policy Villages 4: Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport and Recreation
IntermsofaddressingexistingdeficienciesinKidlington,basedonthefindings
of the Playing Pitch Strategy and Green Space Strategy (as updated by the
2011 Open space Update) land would need to be allocated for the following
if possible:
1 new junior football pitch
A park ideally on the northern outskirts of Kidlington
11.29 ha of amenity open space with priority provision in South ward
1.51ha of allotments.
The Playing Pitch and Green Space Strategy estimated that the following
additional provision was required to meet needs to 2026:
1 adult football pitch
4 junior football pitches
5 mini-soccer pitches
0.4ha park ideally on the northern outskirts of Kidlington
0.1ha natural/semi-natural green space
0.4ha amenity open space
0.2ha allotments.
These strategies were formulated before the amount and preferred
distribution of development in the District for an extended plan period had
beenestablished,andasaresultfutureneedswillneedtobeupdatedtocover
the period through to 2031.
253 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
In terms of addressing existing deficiencies in the rural areas, based on the
findings of the Playing Pitch Strategy and Green Space Strategy (as updated
by the 2011Open space Update)new areasof open space would be required
for the following:
6.38 ha of amenity open space in Rural North sub-area with priority
provision in Adderbury, Bloxham and Bodicote, Cropredy and Sibford
Wards
2.87 ha of amenity open space in Rural South sub-area with priority
provisioninGosfordandWaterEaton,Kirtlington,Launton,Otmoorand
Yarnton.
The Playing Pitch and Green Space Strategy estimated that the following
additional provision was required to meet needs to 2026:
Rural South Sub Area Rural Central Sub
AreaRural North Sub Area
1 junior pitch 1 junior pitch 2 junior pitches
1 mini-soccer pitch 1 mini-soccer pitch 1 mini-soccer pitch
2 cricket pitches 2 cricket pitches 2 cricket pitches
2.7haamenityopenspace 1.5ha amenity open
space5.3ha of natural/semi-natural
green space (through new
provision or public access
agreements)
1 tennis court 2.6ha amenity open space
1 bowling green subject
to local demand
C.282Itisimportantthatprovisiontomeet
future open space and recreation needs is
made in conjunction with new housing, in
order to achieve development that secures
sustainablecommunities. TheLocalPlansets
outtheframeworkforhousingdevelopment
in Kidlington and the Rural Areas but site
specificallocationswillbedeterminedbythe
Local Plan Part 2 and this will includeallocations to help address deficiencies in
open space, sport and recreation provision
for the plan period.
C.283As indicated above, the strategies
were formulated before the amount and
preferreddistributionofdevelopmentinthe
District for an extended plan period had
beenestablished,andasaresultfutureneeds
will need to be updated as the Local Plan
Part2/NeighbourhoodPlansareprogressed.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 254Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Policy Villages 5: Former RAF
Upper Heyford
C.284TheformerRAFUpperHeyfordsite
islocated7kmnorthwestofBicester,inan
isolatedrurallocation,withintheparishesof
Upper Heyford, Somerton and Ardley. The
airbase site measures approximately 500
hectares in total.
C.285TheUSAirForcevacatedtheairbase
in 1994 and since 1996 this unique site has
beenallocatedforresidentialledmixeduses
as enabling development to secure
environmental improvements and
conservation of the heritage interest of the
siteassociatedwithitsformeruseasaCold
War military base.
C.286The airbase is located at the top of a
plateau and is set within otherwise open
countryside. Land to the west falls sharply
totheCherwellvalleyandOxfordCanal(the
Canal itself has been designated as a
Conservation Area). The Grade I listed
Rousham Park is located in the valley to the
southwestofthesite. TheRousham,Lower
Heyford and Upper Heyford Conservation
Area adjoins the airbase site, whilst the
airbase itself has been designated as aConservation Area in view of the national
importance of the site and the significant
heritage interest.
C.287There are a number of Scheduled
AncientMonuments,listedbuildings,andnon
designated heritage assets of national
importanceonsite,aswellasotherunlisted
buildings that make a positive contribution
to the character or appearance of the
conservation area, and much of the airfield
is of ecological importance including a Local
Wildlife Site (recently extended in area).
The site has been divided into three main
functional character areas: the main flying
field and a technical site to the north of
Camp Road and the residential area that is
mainly to the south of Camp Road which
itself consists of five distinctive character
areas reflecting different functions and
historic periods of construction. The flying
field represents the core area of historic
significance,andisofnationalsignificancedue
to its cold war associations.
C.288The site was previously subject to a
policy from the Oxfordshire Structure Plan
2016 (Policy H2) which was saved by the
SouthEastPlanandretainedupontheSouth
East Plan’s revocation. Policy Villages 5
below replaces Policy H2 in guiding the
future redevelopment of the site and
provides a positive policy framework within
which opportunities to accommodate
development are considered having regard
to known constraints, principally heritage,
ecology and transport impacts associated
with additional development.
C.289Since the airbase closed in 1994
temporary planning permissions were
granted for the reuse of a large number of
the buildings on the site. At present there
arejustover300residentialdwellingsonthe
site, the majority of which are rented.
Buildings used for employment purposes
provide around 1000 jobs. The Cherwell
255 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
InnovationCentreisalsolocatedonthesite,
providing serviced offices and flexible office
space, lab space, and meeting rooms. The
Centreishometoalargenumberofscience,
technologyandknowledge-basedbusinesses.
Paragon Fleet Solutions operate on a large
partoftheformerairbase,undertakingoffice,
technical and transport related activities
centred around ‘car processing’.
C.290Anumberofmattersraisedina2008
public inquiry, set out in the appeal decision
from the Secretary of State in January 2010
remain relevant to the consideration of the
scale,locationandtypeofdevelopmentthat
can take place at Upper Heyford including:
the delivery of the required balance of
historical/cultural objectives,
environmentalimprovements,ecological
benefits and public access
whether the scale, type and location of
employment and storage proposed for
theflyingfieldwouldharmthecharacter
oftheConservationAreaandsettingof
Listed Buildings
the extent of demolition/reuse of
historic buildings on the site
whether adequate opportunities for
travel other than by private car would
be delivered
whether adequate infrastructure could
be delivered; and
whether a comprehensive and lasting
approach to the whole site could be
delivered.
C.291ThesiteisallocatedinthisLocalPlan
as a means of securing the delivery of a
lastingarrangementonthisexceptionallarge
scale brownfield site, whilst additionalgreenfield land is now allocated in the
context of meeting the full objectively
assessed housing needs of the District by
realising the opportunities presented by the
development of this new settlement. The
former airbase site currently has planning
permission for a new settlement of some
1,075 homes (gross), and 'Policy Villages 5'
providesforadditionaldevelopmentthrough
a combination of the intensification of the
densityofdevelopmentproposedontheless
sensitive previously developed parts of the
site, and new, limited, greenfield
developmentaroundthemainairbasesitein
locations that will be complementary to the
approved development. The additional
development areas are shown on inset map
'Policy Villages 5'. The policy allows for
residentialdevelopmentfocusedtothesouth
of the flying field, avoiding the most
historically significant and sensitive parts of
thesite,andonlimitedgreenfieldlandtothe
southofCampRoad(andonegreenfieldarea
to the north of Camp Road, east of Larsen
Road). Giventheruralandisolatedlocation
ofthesettlement,anditssignificantheritage
interest, securing adequate transport
arrangements and funding the necessary
mitigation of transport and heritage impacts
willbeofparticularimportance,whilst'Policy
Villages 5' also makes provisions relating to
the importance of high quality design to
reflect the distinctive character areas of the
site.
C.292A comprehensive approach will be
required and it will be necessary to
demonstrate how the additional land
identifiedcanbesatisfactorilyintegratedwith
the approved development. The additional
land will not be permitted to be developed
independently of the main development and
infrastructurecontributionswillbeexpected
for the wider scheme.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 256Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
C.293Consultation with Historic England
will be required in formulating specific
development proposals for the site, whilst
regard should also be had to the following
documents in preparing any such scheme:
Upper Heyford Landscape Sensitivity
and Capacity Assessment (2014)
UpperHeyfordAssessmentInterimFinal
Report (2014)
Strategic Housing Land Availability
Assessment Update (2014)
The 2014 approved masterplan for the
site
RAF Upper Heyford Revised
Comprehensive Planning Brief SPD
(2007)
RAFUpperHeyfordConservationArea
Appraisal (2006)
FormerRAFUpperHeyfordLandscape
Character Assessment of the Airbase
South of the Cold War Zone (2006)
Former RAF Upper Heyford
Conservation Plan (2005)
FormerRAFUpperHeyfordLandscape
and Visual Impact and Masterplan
Report (2004)
Restoration of Upper Heyford Airbase
– A Landscape Impact Assessment
(1997).
Policy Villages 5: Former RAF Upper Heyford
Development Area: 520 ha
Development Description: This site will provide for a settlement of
approximately1,600 dwellings(in addition to the 761 dwellings(net) already
permitted) and necessary supporting infrastructure, including primary and
secondaryeducationprovisionandappropriatecommunity,recreationaland
employment opportunities, enabling environmental improvements and the
heritage interest of the site as a military base with Cold War associations to
be conserved, compatible with achieving a satisfactory living environment.
A comprehensive integrated approach will be expected.
Housing
Number of homes – approximately 1,600 (in addition to the 761 (net)
already permitted
Affordable housing – at least 30%
Employment
Land Area – approximately 120,000 sq. metres
Jobs created – approximately 1,500
257 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Use classes – B1, B2, B8
Any additional employment opportunities further to existing consent to
be accommodated primarily within existing buildings within the overall
sitewhereappropriateoronlimitedgreenfieldlandtothesouthofCamp
Road.
Infrastructure Needs
Alldevelopmentproposalswillbeexpectedtocontributeasnecessarytowards
the delivery of infrastructure provision through onsite provision or an
appropriate off-site financial contribution to:
Education–provisionofa2.22hasiteforanew1-1.5formentryprimary
school with potential for future expansion, if required, and contributions
to primary and secondary school place provision
Health – contributions required to health care provision
Open Space – sports pitches, sports pavilion, play areas, indoor sport
provision
Community Facilities – nursery, community hall, local centre/hotel, a
neighbourhood police facility
Access and Movement – transport contributions and sustainable travel
measures as detailed below, countryside access measures, fencing along
the boundary of the new settlement and the flying field
Utilities–contaminationremediation,improvementstothewatersupply
and sewerage network, as well as other utilities, may be required.
Key site specific design and place shaping principles:
Proposalsmustdemonstratethattheconservationofheritageresources,
landscape, restoration, enhancement of biodiversity and other
environmental improvements will be achieved across the whole of the
site identified as Policy Villages 5
In order to avoid development on the most historically significant and
sensitivepartsofthesite,newdevelopmentistobefocusedtothesouth
of the flying field and on limited greenfield land to the south of Camp
Road(andonegreenfieldareatothenorthofCampRoad,eastofLarsen
Road)
Theareasproposedfordevelopmentadjacenttotheflyingfieldwillneed
specialconsiderationtorespectthehistoricsignificanceandcharacterof
thetaxiwayandentrancetotheflyingfield,withdevelopmentbeingkept
back from the northern edge of the indicative development areas
The release of greenfield land within the allocated site Policy Villages 5
will not be allowed to compromise the necessary environmental
improvements and conservation of heritage interest of the wider site
Thesettlementshouldbedesignedtoencouragewalking,cyclinganduse
of public transport rather than travel by private car, with the provision
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 258Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
offootpathsandcyclewaysthatlinktoexistingnetworks.Improvedaccess
to public transport will be required
Development should accord with Policy ESD 15 and include layouts that
maximise the potential for walkable neighbourhoods with a legible
hierarchy of routes
Retention and enhancement of existing Public Rights of Way, and the
provision of links from the development to the wider Public Rights of
Waynetwork,includingthe reinstatementof the historicPortwayroute
across the western end of the extended former main runway as a public
right of way on its original alignment
Layouts should enable a high degree of integration with development
areas within the 'Policy Villages 5' allocation, with connectivity between
new and existing communities
Measurestominimisetheimpactoftrafficgeneratedbythedevelopment
onthesurroundingroadnetworkwillberequiredthroughfundingand/or
physicalworks,includingtoanynecessarycapacityimprovementsaround
Junction 10 of the M40, and to the rural road network to the west of the
site and around Middleton Stoney including traffic calming and
management measures
Developmentwillprovideforgoodaccessibilitytopublictransportservices
and a plan for public transport provision will accompany any planning
application
Designandlayoutshouldreflectthemanagementandmitigationofnoise
impacts associated with the development
A Travel Plan should accompany any development proposals
The construction of the settlement on the former technical core and
residentialareasshouldretainbuildings,structures,spacesandtreesthat
contributetothecharacterandappearanceofthesiteandintegratethem
into a high quality place that creates a satisfactory living environment
Integration of the new community into the surrounding network of
settlementsbyreopeninghistoricroutesandencouragingtravelbymeans
other than private car as far as possible
Thepreservationofthestarkfunctionalcharacterandappearanceofthe
flyingfieldbeyondthesettlementarea,includingtheretentionofbuildings
ofnationalinterestwhichcontributetothearea’scharacter(withlimited,
fully justified exceptions) and sufficient low key re-use of these to enable
appropriate management of this area
The achievement of environmental improvements within the site and of
views to it including the removal of buildings and structures that do not
makeapositivecontributiontothespecialcharacterorwhicharejustified
on the grounds of adverse visual impact, including in proximity to the
proposed settlement, together with limited appropriate landscape
mitigation, and reopening of historic routes
Theconservationandenhancementoftheecologicalinterestoftheflying
field through appropriate management and submission of an Ecological
Mitigation and Management Plan, with biodiversity preserved and
259 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
enhanced across the site identified as 'Policy Villages 5', and wildlife
corridorsenhanced,restoredorcreated,includingtheprovisionforhabitat
forgreatcrestednewtsandgroundnestingbirdsinparticular. Anetgain
in biodiversity will be sought
DevelopmentshouldprotectandenhancetheLocalWildlifeSite(including
the new extension to the south)
Visitor access, controlled where necessary, to (and providing for
interpretation of) the historic and ecological assets of the site
Provision of a range of high quality employment opportunities, capable
of being integrated into the fabric of the settlement, and providing that
theusewouldnotadverselyaffectresidentsorotherbusinessesandwould
not have an unacceptable impact on the surrounding landscape, historic
interest of the site, or on nearby villages
New and retained employment buildings should make a positive
contribution to the character and appearance of the area and should be
located and laid out to integrate into the structure of the settlement
A full arboricultural survey should be undertaken to inform the
masterplan, incorporating as many trees as possible and reinforcing the
planting structure where required
Newdevelopmentshouldreflecthighqualitydesignthatrespondstothe
established character of the distinct character areas where this would
preserve or enhance the appearance of the Former RAF Upper Heyford
Conservation Area
New development should also preserve or enhance the character and
appearance of the Rousham, Lower Heyford and Upper Heyford
Conservation Area, as well as the Oxford Canal Conservation Area, and
their settings
Development on greenfield land within 'Policy Villages 5' should provide
for a well-designed, ‘soft’ approach to the urban edge, with appropriate
boundary treatments
Management of the flying field should preserve the Cold War character
ofthispartofthesite,andallowforpublicaccess.Newbuiltdevelopment
on the flying field will be resisted to preserve the character of the area
Landscape/VisualandHeritageImpactAssessmentsshouldbeundertaken
aspartofdevelopmentproposalsandinformthedesignprinciplesforthe
site
Proposals should demonstrate an overall management approach for the
whole site
Aneighbourhoodcentreor hub shouldbeestablishedattheheartofthe
settlementtocompriseacommunityhall,placeofworship,shops,public
house, restaurant, and social and health care facilities. Proposals should
also provide for a heritage centre given the historic interest and Cold
War associations of the site
The removal or remediation of contamination or potential sources of
contamination will be required across the whole site
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 260Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
The scale and massing of new buildings should respect their context.
Buildingmaterialsshouldreflectthelocallydistinctivecolourpaletteand
respond to the materials of the retained buildings within their character
area, without this resulting in pastiche design solutions
Public art should be provided
Recycling and potential reuse of demolition materials where possible
The provision of extra care housing and the opportunity for self build
affordable housing in accordance with Policies BSC 3 and BSC 4
Public open space should be provided to form a well connected network
of green areas, suitable for formal and informal recreation
Provision of Green Infrastructure links to the wider development area
and open countryside
Take account of the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for the
site
ProvisionofsustainabledrainageincludingSuDSinaccordancewithPolicy
ESD 7: Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), taking account of the
Council's Strategic Flood Risk Assessment development should be set
back from watercourses
Demonstration of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
includingexemplarydemonstrationofcompliancewiththerequirements
of policies ESD1 – 5
Development on the site will be required to investigate the potential to
make connections to and utilise heat from the Ardley Energy Recovery
facility to supply the heat demands of residential and commercial
development on the site
Anarchaeologicalfieldevaluationtoassesstheimpactofthedevelopment
on archaeological features
In all instances development proposals will be subject to the other
appropriate development plan policies.
261 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 262Section C - Policies for Cherwell's Places
Section D - The Infrastructure
Delivery Plan
D.1The Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)
provides confidence that critical
infrastructure can be supported, that the
Plan’s development strategy is deliverable,
and that social, physical and green
infrastructure can be secured to enable the
planned development. The Local Plan
includes provision for a range of key
infrastructuresuchasschools,newstrategic
highway improvements including those on
peripheralroutes,and‘green’infrastructure.
The IDP identifies indicative costs
attributable to the proposed levels of
growth, requirements of each type of
growth, and considers how and when
infrastructure should be provided having
regard to the phasing of development and
possible funding opportunities.
D.2The infrastructure needed to support
the Cherwell Local Plan will be delivered
throughpartnershipworkingbetweenpublic,
private and voluntary sector organisations.
The Council is working with those
organisations which have a role in providing
services and facilities in Cherwell and hasidentified in the InfrastructureDelivery Plan
the projects and initiatives required to
support the Local Plan policies and overall
strategy.
D.3The IDP identifies the infrastructure
necessary for the successful delivery of this
plan and informed the policies for Building
Sustainable Communities in Section B and
Cherwell’s Places in Section C. Many sites
require infrastructure, such as road access,
new schools, neighbourhood and health
facilities. The planning process determines
at what point in a development they are
required. The IDP identified costs as far as
possible and gaps in funding in consultation
withtheinfrastructureandserviceproviders
operating in Cherwell.
D.4The funding of infrastructure has
traditionallyprovedtobechallengingbecause
of the expense it required. Therefore a
cautious,realisticapproachhasinformedthe
infrastructure assessment of the sites and
the Plan as a whole. The involvement of
landowners and developers is essential to
the delivery of the Plan and continues as an
active process, in many cases leading to
planningapplicationsforanumberofthekey
strategic developments.
D.5Ourplanningforinfrastructureistaking
a long term focus, using available funding
from both the public and private sector
wisely. Planning properly for growth over a
20 year period (2011-2031) requires a
strategicandrationalapproachtoinvestment
where priorities are set and the phasing of
investment is mapped out to secure
maximum gain.
D.6TheLocalPlanpresentsanopportunity
to take an integrated approach to growth
managementwhereinfrastructureinvestment
and delivery are coordinated with land-use
proposals.
263 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section D - The Infrastructure Delivery Plan
Policy INF 1: Infrastructure
D.7InfrastructureasdefinedinthePlanning
Act 2008, covers a wide range of
infrastructuretypesandcanincludeschools,
sports facilities, transport, culture, green
infrastructure, community, health and social
care facilities among others.
D.8Infrastructure is a critical underpinning
forthedevelopmentstrategyoftheDistrict.
Infrastructure such as transport, energy,
water, waste and communications, as well
ascommunityinfrastructureineducationand
health are essential to meet the needs of
residents. Otherinfrastructuretypesrelate
to quality of life and environmental
protection or enhancements.
D.9Although the Council wishes to secure
all infrastructure items identified in the IDP,
given the resources available to us and our
partners,itislikelywewillhavetoprioritise
infrastructure items at some point in time.
D.10Thecriterionforincludingitemsinthe
IDP is that they have an important role in
achieving the vision of the Plan and enable
the delivery of strategic policies. The IDP
provides a category for each infrastructure
item, depending on the level of risk it poses
to the delivery of the Local Plan.
D.11Infrastructure should be provided as
an integral part of development in order to
achievethevisionandobjectivesofthePlan.
The approach to infrastructure provision is
set out within Section B: ‘Policies for
Development in Cherwell’ and Section C:
‘PoliciesforCherwell'sPlaces’.Infrastructurewill need to be provided and phased
alongside development and the Local Plan
sets out the key elements of infrastructure
requirements.
D.12The Integrated Transport Studies for
thetwomainurbanareasandtheruralareas,
together with the Movement Strategies for
theurbanareas,aswellasupdatedevidence
studies undertaken in 2014, provide the
evidence to support the provision of new
and improved transport infrastructure.
D.13The LocalTransportPlan sets out the
likely transport infrastructure requirements
andprioritiesforCherwellaimedattackling
congestion, promoting sustainable travel,
safer roads and improving the street
environment. The specific schemes and
projects are included in the Infrastructure
Delivery Plan in Appendix 8.
D.14Cherwell’s future success depends on
key public bodies such as the District
Council, Town and Parish Councils and
Oxfordshire County Council working
together on the sustained implementation
of this strategy over the long term.
D.15This plan seeks to support growth by
securing infrastructure to ensure
development is sustainable and takes into
account existing infrastructure deficits.
Infrastructure to support housing and
employmentdevelopmentisessentialtothe
creation of sustainable communities. The
plan considers the physical, social and green
infrastructure needed to enable the amount
ofdevelopmentproposedtakingintoaccount
its type and distribution.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 264Section D - The Infrastructure Delivery Plan
Policy INF 1: Infrastructure
TheCouncil'sapproachtoinfrastructureplanningintheDistrictwillidentify
the infrastructure required to meet the District's growth, to support the
strategic site allocations and to ensure delivery by:
Working with partners, including central Government, and other local
authorities, to provide physical, community and green infrastructure
Identifyinginfrastructureneedsandcosts,phasingofdevelopment,funding
sources and responsibilities for delivery
Completing a Developer Contributions SPD to set out the Council's
approach to the provision of essentialinfrastructureincluding affordable
housing, education, transport, health, flood defences and open space
Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that
infrastructure requirements can be met including the provision of
transport, education, health, social and community facilities.
KeyInfrastructureRequirements
D.16In order to ensure the right
infrastructure is provided to support the
growth set out in the Local Plan, a detailed
schedule of infrastructure requirements is
set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan
contained in Appendix 8.
D.17The IDP suggests that infrastructure
to support the local transport network will
be a key priority for the delivery of the
strategic site allocations in Bicester and
Banbury. The Plan supports the delivery of
highwaycapacityimprovementsonperipheral
routesatBicesterandcapacityimprovements
to north-south and east-west routes at
Banbury as set out in the IDP schedule in
Appendix 8. The Local Plan contains
site-specific information relating to
infrastructurerequirementsandaDeveloper
Contributions SPD is being prepared.
D.18In addition to key transport
infrastructure,thereareanumberofspecific
issues and deficiencies to be consideredfurtherwhichincludetheneedfornewburial
capacity at both Bicester and Banbury. In
Banbury,theCanalsidedevelopment(Policy
Banbury 1: Banbury Canalside) sets out the
developmentandinfrastructurerequirements
fortheredevelopmentoftheareacomprising
a mix of uses including up to 700 homes,
retail,15,000sqmoftowncentre/commercial
uses,publicopenspaceandmultistoreycar
parks. The now completed Banbury Flood
Alleviation Scheme is important to the
delivery of the site.
D.19In Bicester, the North West Bicester
eco-townproposals(PolicyBicester1:North
West Bicester Eco-Town) involving the
development of 6,000 homes and jobs
requiresschools,40%openspace,sustainable
transport, community facilities, local shops
and services, energy and waste facilities.
D.20The Local Plan does not allocate
specific sites for growth within the rural
areas, other than making an allocation for a
new settlement at the Former RAF Upper
Heyford, but contains strategic policies for
thedistributionofgrowth. PolicyKidlington
265 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section D - The Infrastructure Delivery Plan
1 identifies a small scale Green Belt review
atKidlingtonandBegbrokeforemployment
purposes and Policy Kidlington 2 aims to
strengthenKidlington’svillagecentre. These
policiesareimportanttoattractinvestment.
D.21TheLocalPlanPart2willallocatenon
strategic sites in the District and provide
greater certainty to the specific location of
growth in the rural areas. More detailed
information on the provision of
infrastructure in the rural areas will arise
through the progression of this DPD, and
Neighbourhood Plans.
Infrastructure Proposals for
Bicester,Banbury,Kidlingtonand
Rural Areas
D.22The projects included in the IDP
(Appendix 8) were identified following the
assessment of policies, and discussions with
infrastructure providers. Deficiencies and
future infrastructure needs were informed
by evidence documents and plans and
programmes from infrastructure providers
and other organisations. The projects are
directly linked to the Local Plan and divided
into 3 schedules reflecting planned growth
in Bicester, Banbury, and Kidlington and
Rural Areas.
Overview ofFutureGrowth in
Bicester 2011-2031:
North West Bicester Eco-Town of
6,000 homes and jobs with 40% open
space (3,293 expected to be delivered
by 2031)
Graven Hill, 2,100 homes, logistics and
distribution hub
Land at Bure Place, Town Centre
Redevelopment (Phase 2)
Extension to Bicester Town Centre
(Area of Search)
South West Bicester Phase 1 1,462
homes and 726 homes at Phase 2
South East Bicester 1,500 homes
Bicester Business Park
Employment land at Bicester Gateway
Employment Land at North East
Bicester
Tourism-led development at Former
RAF Bicester
Gavray Drive 300 homes
New Cemetery.
Overview ofFutureGrowth in
Banbury 2011-2031:
Bankside Phase 1, 600 homes at Phase
2
Canalside, including 700 homes, retail,
office and leisure uses
West of Bretch Hill, 400 homes
North of Hanwell Fields 544 homes
Southam Road, Banbury 600 homes
Employment Land West of M40
Relocation of Banbury United Football
Club
Extendedtowncentre(AreaofSearch)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 266Section D - The Infrastructure Delivery Plan
Bolton Road Development Area, 200
homes, retail and other mixed uses
RetailandothermixedusesatSpiceball
Development Area
Bretch Hill Regeneration Area
Cherwell Country Park
Bankside Community Park
EmploymentlandNorthEastofJunction
11
South of Salt Way - East, 1345 homes
South of Salt Way - West, 150 homes
Land at Drayton Lodge Farm, 250
homes
Land at Higham Way, 150 homes.Overview ofFutureGrowth in
Kidlington andruralareas
2011-2031:
AccommodatingHighValueEmployment
Needs: Langford Lane/London-Oxford
Airport; Oxford Technology Park and
BegbrokeSciencePark(subjecttosmall
scale Green Belt review)
Kidlington Village Centre
Allocation for 2,361 homes (in total,
including 761 already consented) at
FormerRAFUpperHeyford;750across
the rural areas and Kidlington. The
specificsitestobeidentifiedintheLocal
Plan Part 2 and Neighbourhood Plans
when developed.
D.23The IDP indicates where and when
infrastructure is needed. It also indicates
potential costs, means and sources of
funding, and the delivery progress of
infrastructure projects. These have been
categorisedascritical,necessaryordesirable
to reflect their relevance to the delivery of
the Local Plan.
Desirable Necessary Critical
Infrastructure is desirable in
order to build sustainableInfrastructure necessary to support
development but the precise timingInfrastructure without
which development
cannot commence. communities.Timingandphasing and phasing is less critical and
is not critical over the plan
period.developmentmay commenceahead
of its provision.
D.24In some instances, infrastructure may
beneededaheadofdevelopmenttakingplace
andsomeprojectssuchastheBanburyFlood
Alleviation Scheme have already beendelivered. These projects are included in
theIDPbecausetheyenabletheforthcoming
delivery of policies and allocations.
267 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section D - The Infrastructure Delivery Plan
D.25TheIDPisalivedocumentsupporting
the Local Plan and it will be adjusted to
reflect changes in circumstances and
strategies over time. It will be monitored
alongside Policy INF 1 – Infrastructure, as
detailed in the Local Plan Monitoring
Framework (Appendix 6) and delivery
progressreportedintheAnnualMonitoring
Report.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 268Section D - The Infrastructure Delivery Plan
Section E - Monitoring and
Delivery of the Local Plan
E.1Effective monitoring is important to
ensure that Local Plan policies are being
implemented and are achieving their aims,
given that all development proposals are
subject to viability testing.
E.2Ourmonitoringreportwillmeasureand
reportontheeffectivenessofpolicieswithin
theLocalPlanandassociateddocuments. It
will report on a range of data to assess
whether:
policy targets have been met, or
progressisbeingmadetowardsmeeting
them
policy targets are not being met, or are
not on track to being achieved, and the
reasons for this
policies are having an impact in respect
of national and local policy targets, and
any other targets identified in local
development documents
policies need adjusting or replacing
because they are not working as
intended
policiesneedchangingtoreflectchanges
in national policy or strategic needs
appropriate infrastructure is being
delivered to support growth.
E.3If policies need changing the monitoring
reportwilllisttheactionsneededtoachieve
this.
E.4Ourmonitoringreportwillbepublished
at least every 12 months. Under the
previous legislation, reports have been
published at the end of each calendar year
and relate to the previous monitoring year
(1 April to 31 March). They have focused
on measuring the progress of Local Plan
preparation, and on the collection of data
for the (now removed) national set of
indicators. These can be viewed online at
http://www.cherwell.gov.uk .
The Monitoring Framework
E.5For each policy in the Local Plan, we
have developed an indicator and a target,
which will be used to measure the policy’s
effectiveness. The Sustainability Appraisal
(SA)alsolistsanumberof‘significanteffects
indicators’whichwillbeusedtomonitorthe
‘significanteffects’identifiedintheSA. Data
collectedontheseindicatorswillbereported
oninourmonitoringreport. Asummaryof
the indicators is set out below, grouped
together under the relevant theme of the
Local Plan. The detailed Monitoring
Framework is included as Appendix 6.
269 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
E.6We have also developed a set of
trajectories for housing and employment to
address delivery across the programme
period as a whole. These are of necessity
indicative, but are a clear baseline against
which overall implementation can be
assessed. They include completions and
strategic developments which have an
existing planning permission.
Theme One - Achieving a
Sustainable Local Economy
E.7The strategic employment trajectory
which follows shows how the release of the
strategicdevelopmentsitessetoutinSection
C ‘Policies for Cherwell's Places’ would
secure significant employment growth in
Cherwell that is focused on Bicester and
Banbury. There are other smaller sites
which are excluded from this assessment.
E.8Wewilluseanumberofindicators(see
Appendix6)tomonitorhowwellpoliciesare
deliveringouraimof'achievingasustainable
local economy'. These include:
change of use/loss of employment land
tonon-employmentuse(hectares)/gain
of employment floorspace
allocated employment land completed,
committed and remaining
employment development on non
allocated land (hectares)
amount of retail/town centre uses
completed within and outside of town
centres
diversity of uses within urban centres
amountofnewtourismdevelopmentin
the District
numbersofvisitorstotouristattractions
in the District.
ThemeTwo-BuildingSustainable
Communities
E.9The housing trajectory which follows
shows how the release of the strategic
development sites set out in Section C
‘PoliciesforCherwell'sPlaces’wouldenable
theoverallhousinggrowthtargetstobemet
and a 5 year supply to be maintained.
Although the trajectory sets out when
deliverycanreasonablybeexpected,itdoes
not prevent earlier or accelerated delivery.
E.10Housing delivery will be monitored to
ensure that the projected housing delivery
is achieved. The District is required by the
NPPF and the NPPG to maintain a
continuous five year supply of deliverable
(available, suitable and achievable) sites as
well as meeting its overall housing
requirement. TheDistrictmustalsoprovide
an additional buffer of 5% on top of its five
year land supply delivery requirement. This
increases to 20% where there has been a
record of persistent under delivery. The
Council’s housing land supply position will
be formally reported and comprehensively
reviewed on an at least annual basis in the
monitoring report. Updates to the housing
land supply position will be undertaken
during the year should there be a significant
change in circumstances to the District’s
housing land supply position.
E.11ThisLocalPlanallocatesstrategicsites
for development. The non strategic sites
required to accommodate the remainder of
the development identified in the Housing
Trajectory will either be allocated in the
LocalPlanPart2orinNeighbourhoodPlans,
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 270Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
or will be identified through the
determination of applications for planning
permission. The Council will regularly
reviewitsStrategicHousingLandAvailability
Assessment to ensure there is sufficient
potential supply.
E.12Wewillalsouseanumberofindicators
(see Appendix 6) to monitor how well
policies are delivering our wider aim of
‘building sustainable communities’. These
include:
housing completions on previously
developed land
density of housing completions
affordable housing completions /
acquisitions
housing completions by type and size
number of extra care units completed
number of Gypsy and Traveller pitches
and Travelling Show people plots
provided/lost
number (or floorspace) of new health
care facilities provided
number (or floorspace) of new
community facilities provided
number of new educational places
provided (primary/secondary/tertiary)
amount, type and location of open
space/sport/recreation facilities
areas deficient in recreation provision
by type and amount
open space/sport/recreation facilities
lost to development
developer contributions towards open
space/sport/recreation facilities
numberofareasofopenspaceachieving
quality standards.
Theme Three - Ensuring
Sustainable Development
E.13Wewilluseanumberofindicators(see
Appendix 6) to monitor how well policies
aredeliveringouraimof‘ensuringsustainable
development’. These include:
planning permissions granted contrary
toEnvironmentAgencyadviceonflood
risk grounds
number/capacity of consented
renewable energy schemes
number of consented developments
making use of District heating
number of developments achieving
BREEAM standards, and at what level
permissions granted contrary to
BBOWT/Natural England/Environment
Agency advice
area of biodiversity habitat/number of
species
progress towards Conservation Target
Area targets (not set or monitored by
the Council, but by the Oxfordshire
Local Nature Partnership 'Wild
Oxfordshire')
numberofecologicalsurveyssubmitted
with applications
271 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
number of development schemes
permitted in AONB
number of urban fringe improvement
schemes
development in the Green Belt.
Delivering the Local Plan
E.14Data on these indicators will be
gathered and reported on an at least annual
basis. We will also report on whether the
established targets have been met, and, if
not, what actions are to be taken to ensure
they are met in future.
E.15The strategy in the Local Plan will be
delivered through the planning application
process and the implementation of the:
Local Plan Part 2
Neighbourhood Plans
Town wide masterplan SPDs for
Bicester and Banbury
Site specific SPDs for Canalside and ,
Bolton Road
Developer Contributions SPD and
where appropriate other funding
mechanisms to support the delivery of
infrastructure and services which could
includeaCommunityInfrastructureLevy
or other tariff system
Sustainable Buildings in Cherwell SPD.
E.16We have worked with our delivery
partners including Oxfordshire County
Council during the preparation of this Local
Plan and its Infrastructure Delivery Plan to
ensure the Council focuses on themonitoring and delivery of strategic policies
with the right infrastructure at the right
times.
E.17We will continue to work with
neighbouring authorities and other
organisations on cross boundary issues
throughtheOxfordshireGrowthBoardand
the two Local Enterprise Partnerships
covering the District, amongst others. The
DutytoCooperateTopicPapershowsjoint
working undertaken during the preparation
of the Local Plan, and details the various
forums and organisations we work with on
a regular basis to debate and coordinate
strategic planning issues. Actions resulting
from cooperation with other local planning
authoritiesororganisationswillbereported
in the monitoring report.
E.18OurMonitoringReportwillassessthe
effectiveness of the Local Plan including the
rate of delivery of allocated sites by
measuringperformanceagainsttheindicators
identified in the Monitoring Framework.
E.19Ifthesupplyofdeliverablehousingland
drops to five years or below and where the
Council is unable to rectify this within the
next monitoring year there may be a need
fortheearlyreleaseofsitesidentifiedwithin
this strategy or the release of additional
land. Thiswillbeinformedbyannualreviews
of the Strategic Housing Land Availability
Assessment.
E.20We have worked with infrastructure
providers and landowners to allocate
deliverable strategic sites in and around the
towns of Bicester and Banbury as the most
sustainable locations in the Policies for
Cherwell Places in section C of the Local
Plan.
E.21If lack of infrastructure funding were
to delay the delivery of sites, we will work
withourpartnerstoseekalternativesources
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 272Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
of funding. In doing this we will explore a
range of funding mechanisms available
through public and private sources such as
grantsandcontributions,incentivesschemes
such as New Homes Bonus, prudential
borrowing or opportunities to reduce
infrastructure costs.
E.22Annual monitoring will inform future
Local Plan reviews. These reviews may be
in response to shortfalls in the
implementation of the Plan’s policies and in
the delivery of infrastructure, to changes in
national policy or strategic needs or due to
the need to roll forward the plan period. A
small scale review of policy could in some
instancesbeundertakenthroughpreparation
of other development plan documents or
theirreview. ThepossibilityofanearlyPlan
review to help meet unmet needs arising
elsewhere in the Housing Market Area is
provided for at paragraph B.95.
273 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 274Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
Local Plan Housing Trajectory 2011-2031
Plan Period Total
Supply 2011-203130/31 29/30 28/29 27/28 26/27 25/26 24/25 23/24 22/23 21/22 20/21 19/20 18/19 17/18 16/17 15/16 14/15 Total Projected
Supply 2014-2031Local Plan: New
Allocation
2014-2031Permissions
Granted at
31 March 2014Completions
2011-2014
Bicester
3293 200 200 200 200 210 210 210 210 210 210 210 210 210 210 179 143 71 3293 2900 393 0 North West Bicester (Bicester 1)
2100 0 50 100 100 100 150 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 150 50 0 0 2100 2100 0 0 Graven Hill (Bicester 2)
1742 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 126 200 200 200 200 200 200 136 1462 100 1362 280 South West Bicester Phase 1
726 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 76 90 140 140 70 70 70 70 0 0 726 726 0 0 South West Bicester Phase 2 (Bicester 3)
1500 0 0 0 0 100 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 50 0 0 1500 1500 0 0 South East Bicester (Bicester 12)
300 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 125 125 50 0 0 300 300 0 0 Gavray Drive (Bicester 13)
125 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 20 40 45 20 125 0 125 0 Talisman Road (approved site)
202 0 0 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 12 12 154 100 54 48 Other sites - 10 or more dwellings
141 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 104 104 71 37 Windfall sites - less than 10 dwellings
10129 204 254 314 314 424 524 574 650 668 844 918 848 973 943 657 408 247 9764 7830 2005 365 Sub-Total
Banbury
700 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 100 100 100 50 50 0 0 0 0 0 700 700 0 0 Canalside (Banbury 1)
600 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 155 150 150 145 0 600 0 600 0 Southam Road (Banbury 2)
400 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 110 120 120 50 0 400 400 0 0 West of Bretch Hill (Banbury 3)
1090 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 82 100 100 150 150 150 150 150 50 1082 0 1082 8 Bankside Phase 1
600 0 0 0 0 50 100 100 100 100 100 50 0 0 0 0 0 0 600 600 0 0 Bankside Phase 2 (Banbury 4)
544 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 60 84 75 125 125 75 0 544 544 0 0 North of Hanwell Fields (Banbury 5)
200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 75 75 0 0 0 200 200 0 0 Bolton Road (Banbury 8)
150 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 100 50 0 0 150 150 0 0 South of Salt Way - West (Banbury 16)
1345 0 0 100 100 100 100 100 150 150 100 100 100 100 50 55 40 0 1345 1200 145 0 South of Salt Way - East (Banbury 17)
300 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 70 90 90 50 0 300 0 300 0 West of Warwick Road
250 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 100 75 50 0 0 0 250 250 0 0 Drayton Lodge Farm (Banbury 18)
150 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 100 25 0 0 150 150 0 0 Higham Way (Banbury 19)
474 21 21 21 21 21 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 369 150 219 105 Other sites - 10 or more dwellings
516 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 416 416 156 100 Windfall sites - less than 10 dwellings
7319 37 37 137 137 287 338 338 388 486 454 439 588 889 1064 819 564 104 7106 4760 2502 213 Sub-Total
Elsewhere
2361 140 140 140 141 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 100 50 2361 1600 761 0 Former RAF Upper Heyford (Villages 5)
196 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 31 40 40 111 0 111 85 DLO Caversfield
1885 50 50 50 50 50 75 100 100 100 100 130 130 130 130 130 130 133 1638 750 888 247 RuralAreas(incl.Kidlington)-10ormoredwellings
950 29 29 29 29 29 29 29 29 58 58 58 58 58 58 58 58 58 754 754 255 196 Windfall sites - less than 10 dwellings
5392 219 219 219 220 229 254 279 279 308 308 338 338 338 338 369 328 281 4864 3104 2015 528 Sub-Total
22840 460 510 670 671 940 1116 1191 1317 1462 1606 1695 1774 2200 2345 1845 1300 632 21734 15694 6522 1106 Grand Total
Notes:
1. The trajectory represents the anticipated annual rate of housing delivery in the current housing market (2014). It does not preclude the earlier delivery of sites.
2. Permissions for windfall sites - less than 10 dwellings (shown in italics) are not taken into account in figures for 'Total Projected Supply 2014-2031' nor for 'Plan Period Total Supply 2011-2031' to avoid double counting with the windfall allocation for the plan period.
3. Projections will change in the light of future monitoring.
275 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 276Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
Local Plan Employment Trajectory 2011-2031
Employmentfloorspace(sqm)expectedwithinthePlanperiodanddelivery
dateArea (ha) of total land allocated
expected to provide for
employment uses within the Plan
periodTotal area of land covered
by site Policy in the Local
Plan (ha)Land use allocation in the Local
Plan
2021-2031 2016-2021 2011-2016
Bicester
35,000 10 390 Mixed Use North West Bicester (Bicester 1)
91,000 26 241 Mixed Use Graven Hill (Bicester 2)
103,250 29.5 29.5 Employment Bicester Business Park (Bicester 4)
63,000 18 18 Employment Bicester Gateway (Bicester 10)
52,500 15 15 Employment Land at North East Bicester (Bicester 11)
56,000 70,000 14,000 40 155 Mixed Use South East Bicester (Bicester 12)
138.5 Sub-Total
Banbury
tbc tbc Mixed Use Canalside (Banbury 1)
122,500 35 35 Employment Land West of M40 (Banbury 6)
45,500 13 13 Employment Land North East of junction 11 (Banbury 15)
45,500 13 N/A Employment Former SAPA site
61 Sub-Total
Elsewhere
N/A 520 Mixed Use Former RAF Upper Heyford
N/A Sub-Total
56,000 434,000 162,750 199.5 Grand Total
277 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 278Section E - Monitoring and Delivery of the Local Plan
Appendix 1 Background to
Cherwell's Places
1.1CherwellissituatedinnorthOxfordshire
and lies between London and Birmingham,
immediately north of Oxford and south of
Warwick / Leamington Spa. The District
shares boundaries with Oxford City, South
Oxfordshire, Vale of White Horse, West
Oxfordshire, Aylesbury Vale, South
Northamptonshire and Stratford-on-Avon
districts.
Cherwell Today
1.2Cherwell is predominantly a rural
District. It has two towns, Banbury in the
north and Bicester in the south, and a third
urbancentreatKidlington,averylargevillage
close to Oxford. The District has over 90
villages and hamlets.
1.3The District's largest employment
sectors are: distribution, manufacturing,
office,retailingandotherservices,andpublic
sector employment including in health,
defence and education. In recent times,
unemployment has generally been low in
Cherwell. However, it doubled during the
economic downturn.1.4Banbury is principally a manufacturing
town and service centre whilst Bicester is a
garrison town with a military logistics,
storage and distribution and manufacturing
base. Both towns featured as important
economic locations in the former Regional
Spatial Strategy. Kidlington functions as a
villageservicecentrebuthasalarger,varied
employment base benefiting from its
proximitytoOxford,itslocationnexttothe
strategic road network, and the location of
London-Oxford Airport immediately to the
north.
1.5Bicester and Kidlington lie within
Oxford's hinterland. In rural areas, the
function of villages as places to live and
commute from has increased as the
traditionalruraleconomyhasdeclined. The
number of people employed in agriculture
fell by 18% between 1990 and 2000.
1.6The M40 motorway passes through
Cherwell close to Banbury and Bicester.
TherearedirectraillinksfromBanburyand
Bicester to London, Birmingham and
Oxford. The rail link from Bicester to
Oxford is being improved as part of wider
east-west rail objectives. The District has a
clear social and economic relationship with
Oxford and to a lesser extent with
Northamptonshire. Banbury has its own
rural hinterland and housing market area
whichextendsintoSouthNorthamptonshire
and less so into West Oxfordshire and
Warwickshire. London has a significant
commuting influence.
1.7The character of Cherwell's built
environment is diverse but distinctive.
Banbury and Bicester have changed as a
result of post-war expansion and economic
growthbroughtaboutbytheM40butretain
their market town origins. The District has
a few fairly large, well served villages and
many smaller villages but no small towns as
in other parts of Oxfordshire such as
279 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 1 Background to Cherwell's Places
Chipping Norton or Wallingford. In the
north of the District, the predominant
traditional building material is ironstone; in
the south, limestone. Many villages have
retained their traditional character.
Cherwell has approximately 2,300 listed
buildings, an increasing number of
conservation areas (presently 60), 59
ScheduledAncientMonumentsandanumber
ofregisteredparksandgardensandahistoric
battlefield. In some areas the MoD's
presence has influenced the built
environment.
1.8Cherwell's natural environment is also
varied. The River Cherwell and Oxford
Canalrunnorth-souththroughtheDistrict.
There are Ironstone Downs in the
north-west (a small proportion of which is
within the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty in the north west of the
District),thePloughleyLimestonePlateauin
theeastandtheClayValeofOtmoorinthe
south. Part of the Oxford Meadows Special
Area of Conservation lies north of the
boundary with Oxford City and the District
has a large number of designated wildlife
sites, Sites of Special Scientific Interest and
other designated areas of natural interest.
Approximately14%oftheDistrictlieswithin
the Oxford Green Belt to the south which
surrounds the urban area of Kidlington.
1.9Development in the District has been
ledbywavesofurbanexpansiontoBanbury
and Bicester as part of a countywide
approachtofocusgrowthonOxfordandits
satellitecountrytowns. Anurbanextension
tothenorthofBanburyofover1,000homes
wascompletedin2008/09. Urbanextensions
producing some 1600 homes at Bicester
were completed in 2004/05. Average
housing completions from 2001 to 2014
were 520 per annum, 38.5% of which were
in Banbury, 23% in Bicester and 38.5%
elsewhere. Banbury'stowncentrebenefited
from redevelopment in the 1990s and isregionally important. Improvements to
Bicester town centre have been permitted
to provide much needed retail, leisure and
community facilities and are now largely
complete.
1.10Permissions are in place for further
extensionstoBanburyandBicesterof2,502
and 2,005 homes respectively and these are
now underway. There is currently planning
consent for 761 dwellings (net) at former
RAF Upper Heyford.
Bicester Today
1.11Bicester is a rapidly expanding historic
market town with a long-standing military
presence.Ithasgrownsubstantiallyoverthe
last 50 years and now has a population of
approximately 30,000. This represents
population growth of 50% since 1981 and,
influencedbythestrategyinthisPlan,further
growth, to approximately 40,000 people is
projected by 2026. Bicester's growth has
been influenced by its location on the
strategic road network close to Junction 9
of the M40, where the A34 meets the A41.
It is also close to Junction 10 with the A43
which connects the M40 and M1. Bicester
hasaparticularlycloseeconomicrelationship
with Oxford.
1.12Asubstantialprogrammeofcontinuing
developmentinthetownisinplace. Planning
permission has been granted for a strategic
housing site of 1,642 homes at ‘South West
Bicester’ Phase 1, including a health village,
sports provision, employment land, a hotel,
a new secondary school, a community hall
and a local centre. A new perimeter road
hasnowbeenbuilttoservethedevelopment
andtoassistinremovingthroughtrafficfrom
the town centre. North West Bicester was
identified by Government as a location for
an eco-town development. Bicester's
location within the Oxford sub-region and
on the Oxford-Cambridgearc makes it well
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 280Appendix 1 Background to Cherwell's Places
located for growth. In the Autumn
Statement2014,theGovernmentannounced
plans to “support Bicester to provide up to
13,000newhomessubjecttovalueformoney”.
1.13Phase 1 of a £50m redevelopment of
the town centre has now been completed
including a Sainsburys supermarket, other
retail premises, and a cinema. 'Bicester
Village', an internationally successful factory
outlet centre at the southern edge of
Bicester, has also recently expanded. The
Council has grantedplanning permissionfor
a new business park comprising 50,000m2
of B1 employment space and a hotel to the
southofBicesterVillageandeastoftheA41.
Full build out of this will be subject to
improvements to Junction 9 of the M40.
1.14In terms of other significant
infrastructure, development commenced in
summer 2013 for the replacement of
Bicester’s community hospital. In terms of
railimprovements,in2013,ChilternRailways
commenced work to upgrade the railway
betweenOxfordandBicester,tosignificantly
improve services between Oxford and
London via Bicester and provide an
alternative to using the M40 and A34. This
willresultinimprovedservicesfromBicester
and the redevelopment of Bicester Town
RailwayStation. Furthermore,theEastWest
Rail Link Project, which will pass through
Bicester,seekstoestablishastrategicrailway
connecting East Anglia with Central,
Southern and Western England.
1.15The town's military presence remains
today. MoD Bicester to the south of the
townisamajorlogisticssitefortheDefence
Storage and Distribution Agency (DSDA)
and has an army, other military and civilian
presence. The site extends to some 630
hectaresfromthesouthofBicesterintothe
ruralareaaroundthevillagesofAmbrosden
and Arncott. Logistics operations at the
Graven Hill site are being rationalised andconsolidated,withthedevelopmentofanew
‘Fulfilment Centre’ at Arncott’s existing ‘C’
site,releasingmuchofthelandattheGraven
Hill site for allocation for development in
this Local Plan. The MoD wishes to retain
its valued presence in Cherwell and it
remains a major employer in the District.
Former RAF Bicester to the north east of
the town was established as a Royal Flying
Corps Aerodrome and became a Royal Air
Force station. The site is now a
Conservation Area and retains: "… better
thananyothermilitaryairbaseinBritain,the
layout and fabric relating to pre-1930s
military aviation…". It also has "...the
best-preserved bomber airfield dating from
theperiodupto1945…"(EnglishHeritage).
The airfield itself is now used by a gliding
club.
1.16Other major employers at Bicester
includeBicesterVillage(about1500people),
Tesco (about 400 people) and Fresh Direct
(fruit and vegetable merchants employing
about 350 people). Bicester does however
experience high levels of out-commuting,
particularlytoOxford,andthisisasignificant
issue for the Local Plan.
1.17Bicester was identified in the former
South East Plan as a main location for
developmentwithintheCentralOxfordshire
area sub-region around Oxford to improve
its self-containment. The South East Plan
hadpreviouslystatedthateveryopportunity
should be taken to promote the town,
amongst other things, as a new location for
highervalueandknowledge-basedbusiness.
Bicester is generally less constrained than
Banbury in terms of landscape sensitivity,
flooding and agricultural land quality but has
more designated ecological constraints.
Under-provision of services and facilities is
a concern. Whilst some measures, such as
town centre redevelopment, are in place to
address this, more needs to be done.
Improving self-containment and delivering
281 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 1 Background to Cherwell's Places
jobs, services, facilities, traffic management
measuresandotherinfrastructureto match
Bicester's rapid and continuing expansion
and reduce levels of deprivation are central
to this strategy.
Banbury Today
1.18BanburyisthelargestofCherwell'stwo
towns and is a commercial, retail,
employment and housing market centre for
alargeruralhinterland. Ithadbeenidentified
asaPrimaryRegionalCentreintherevoked
South East Plan. Although still a market
town,Banburyexpandedrapidlyinthe1960s
to assist in dealing with London's housing
needs. Since then, it has seen continued
economicandpopulationgrowthinpartdue
to the construction of the M40 motorway.
1.19Banbury's major employers are the
HortonGeneralHospitaltothesouthofthe
town centre (about 1,200 people) which
servesNorthOxfordshireandneighbouring
areas,Kraft(about800people)tothenorth
ofthetowncentre,andtheDistrictCouncil
based in the adjoining village of Bodicote to
the south (about 700 people). The main
employmentareasaretothenorthandeast
of the town.
1.20The town has two residential areas
which suffer significantly from deprivation:
an area in western Banbury in and around
theBretchHillestate,builttoaccommodate
overspill from London; and parts of
Grimsbury,originallyaVictorianareatothe
eastofthetowncentrewhichexpandedwith
the construction of local authority housing
and has experienced further development
over the past 20 years. Grimsbury has
relativelyhighnumbersofpeoplefromethnic
minority groups.
1.21Banbury experienced major retail
redevelopment in the 1990s (Castle Quay)
whichhasbroughtgreatbenefitstothetowncentrebuthasalsomadeitmorechallenging
for the historic High Street area. Areas of
land east and west of the railway station to
the east of the town centre have been in
need of regeneration for some years. The
easternmostarea-theformerCattleMarket
and adjoining land - has now been
developed. The 'Canalside' industrial area
tothewestismorechallengingassignificant
parts of it are in active use by a wide range
of businesses.
1.22Banbury is located on the River
Cherwell / Oxford Canal corridor and its
development potential is constrained by
sensitive landscape and topography in most
directions. ThisincludestheCherwellValley,
Sor Brook Valley and significant ridgelines.
Banburyexperiencedseriousfloodingin1998
and to a lesser extent in 2007. A flood
alleviation scheme for the town has now
been delivered. Junction 11 of the M40 lies
immediately to the north east of the town
and the motorway runs close to the town's
eastern perimeter. Currently traffic must
pass through the town centre or through
residential areas to travel between Junction
11 and the south side of town.
Kidlington Today
1.23Kidlington,inthesouthoftheDistrict,
makes a proud claim to be Britain's largest
village with a population of about 15,000.
By reason of its size, and due to its function
as an employment and service centre, it
comprises the District's third urban area.
Kidlington is located only 5 miles north of
Oxford City and is located near a major
junctionconnecting3separateAroads-the
A34, A40 and A33. Kidlington operates as a
localshoppingcentrewhichprimarilyserves
customersfromthelocalvicinity. Thevillage
centre fulfils the role of 'top up' or
convenience shopping. Within the centre
there was found to be a relatively high
proportion of service and office sector
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 282Appendix 1 Background to Cherwell's Places
dominancewhilstoutsideofthecentre,there
isaconcentrationofemploymentgenerating
development to the west of the village
around Langford Lane, with Langford
BusinessParks,SpiresBusinessParkandthe
Oxford Motor Park. London-Oxford
Airport is also situated in this area. One of
the challenges at Kidlington is meeting the
needs of an urban area constrained by
surrounding Green Belt.
Our Villages and Rural Areas
Today
1.24There are over90 villagesand hamlets
in Cherwell. Bloxham, in the north of the
District, is the second largest village (after
Kidlington) with a population of just over
3,000. Yarnton, to the south west of
Kidlington,hasapopulationofabout2,500.
Adderbury, Deddington, Hook Norton and
Bodicote, each in north Cherwell, also have
populations in excess of 2,000.
1.25Each of Cherwell's villages has its own
uniquecharacterandmanyhaveconservation
areas which help to conserve and enhance
their historic core. All of the villages have
seen growth over the centuries, and some
havegrownsignificantlyinthe20thand21st
centuries.
1.26Cherwell's villages can be generally
characterised as having a fairly limited
number and range of services and facilities,
however there are significant differences
between villages. The larger villages often
have some or all of the following; a post
office, primary school, shops, pubs, bus
services, recreation areas and community
halls and other community facilities. Some
also have local employment opportunities.
1.27Thecharacteroftheruralareaisvaried
andincludeslandofsignificantlandscapeand
biodiversity value. A small part of the
Cotswolds AONB lies within the northwesternpartoftheDistrictandtothesouth
lies the Oxford Meadows Special Area of
Conservation. This environment helps
attract tourists to the area to destinations
such as Hook Norton Brewery, the
Cropredy festival and the Oxford Canal.
Former RAF Upper Heyford
1.28Within Cherwell’s rural areas lies the
500ha former RAF Upper Heyford site,
vacated by the US Air Force in 1994. The
site is located at the top of a plateau and is
setwithinotherwiseopencountryside.Land
to the west falls sharply to the Cherwell
valley and Oxford Canal (which has been
designated as a Conservation Area). The
GradeIlistedRoushamParkislocatedinthe
valley to the south west of the site. The
Rousham, Lower Heyford and Upper
Heyford Conservation Area adjoins the
airbasesite,whilsttheairbaseitselfhasbeen
designated as a Conservation Area in view
of the national importance of the site and
thesignificantheritageinterestreflectingthe
ColdWarassociationsoftheairbase.There
are a number of Scheduled Ancient
Monuments, listed buildings, and non
designated heritage assets of national
importanceonsite,aswellasotherunlisted
buildings that make a positive contribution
to the character or appearance of the
conservation area, and much of the airfield
is of ecological importance including a Local
WildlifeSite(recentlyextendedinarea).The
site has been divided into three main
functional character areas: the main flying
field and a technical site to the north of
Camp Road and the residential area that is
mainly to the south of Camp Road which
itself consists of five distinctive character
areas reflecting different functions and
historic periods of construction. The flying
field represents the core area of historic
significance,andisofnationalsignificancedue
to its Cold War associations.
283 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 1 Background to Cherwell's Places
1.29Over the last 10 years numerous
applications have been made seeking
permission to either develop the whole site
or large parts of it and a number have gone
to appeal demonstrating the significant
environmental and heritage constraints and
the complexities of the site. An application
in2008proposedanewsettlementof1,075
dwellings (gross) (761 net), together with
associated works and facilities including
employment uses, community uses, school,
playing fields and other physical and social
infrastructure for the entire site. Following
a major public inquiry in 2008 the Council
received the appeal decision from the
Secretary of State in January 2010. The
appeal was allowed, subject to conditions,
togetherwith24conservationareaconsents
thatpermitteddemolitionofbuildingsonthe
site including 244 dwellings. The 2010
permissiongrantedconsent for some of the
many commercial uses already operating on
temporary consents on the site. More
recently,andfollowingachangeofownership
of the site, a new outline application was
made and granted in 2011 for a revised
schemefocusingonthesettlementareaonly.
A new masterplan was produced in which
the same numbers of dwellings were
proposed with the majority of the existing
units retained but the development area
extends further westwards. Residential
development has now commenced south of
Camp Road. The delivery of a new
settlementatthisexceptionalbrownfieldsite
is therefore underway.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 284Appendix 1 Background to Cherwell's Places
Appendix 2 Links between
Policies and Objectives
Appendix 2: Links between Policies and Objectives
Relevant Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Number Policy Title
A Strategy for Development in
Cherwell
All objectives Policy PSD1 Presumption in Favour of Sustainable
Development
Theme One: A Sustainable Local
Economy
1, 3, 12, 13 SLE 1 Employment Development
1, 3, 4, 6, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 SLE 2 Securing Dynamic Town Centes
2, 5, 10, 13, 14, 15 SLE 3 Supporting Tourism Growth
10, 13 SLE 4 Improved Transport and Connections
10, 12, 15 SLE 5 High Speed Rail
Theme Two: Building Sustainable
Communities
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 BSC 1 District Wide Housing Distribution
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 BSC 2 Effective and Efficient Use of Land -
Brownfield Land and Housing Density
8 BSC 3 Affordable Housing
7, 9 BSC 4 Housing Mix
3, 10, 14 BSC 5 Area Renewal
7, 10 BSC 6 Travelling Communites
10 BSC 7 Meeting Education Needs
285 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 2 Links between Policies and Objectives
Relevant Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Number Policy Title
10 BSC 8 Securing Health and Well-Being
10 BSC 9 Public Services and Utilities
10, 11, 14, 15 BSC 10 OpenSpace,SportandRecreationProvision
10, 11, 14, 15 BSC 11 Local Standards of Provision - Outdoor
Recreation
10, 11, 14 BSC 12 Indoor Sport, Recreation and Community
Facilities
Theme Three: Ensuring Sustainable
Development
11, 12, 13, 15 ESD 1 Mitigating and Adapting to Climate Change
11 ESD 2 Energy Hierarchy
11 ESD 3 Sustainable Construction
11 ESD 4 Dencentralised Energy Systems
11 ESD 5 Renewable Energy
11 ESD 6 Sustainable Flood Risk Management
11 ESD 7 Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS)
OurCoreAssets
11 ESD 8 Water Resources
15 ESD 9 Protection of Oxford Meadows SAC
11, 15 ESD 10 ProtectionandEnhancementofBiodiversity
and the Natural Environment
11, 15 ESD 11 Conservation Target Areas
12, 14 ESD 12 Cotswolds AONB
12, 14 ESD 13 Local Landscape Protection and
Enhancement
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 286Appendix 2 Links between Policies and Objectives
Relevant Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Number Policy Title
12, 14 ESD 14 Oxford Green Belt
6, 14 ESD 15 The Character of the Built and Historic
Environment
10, 13, 14, 15 ESD 16 The Oxford Canal
10, 11, 14, 15 ESD 17 Green Infrastructure
Policies for Cherwell's Places
Bicester
1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15Bicester 1 North West Bicester Eco-Town
1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15Bicester 2 Graven Hill
6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,
15Bicester 3 South West Bicester Phase 2
1, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 Bicester 4 Bicester Business Park
1, 3, 4, 10, 14 Bicester 5 Strengthening Bicester Town Centre
1, 3, 4, 10, 14 Bicester 6 Bure Place Town Centre Redevelopment
Phase 2
10, 14 Bicester 7 Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport
and Recreation
1, 3, 5, 10, 14 Bicester 8 RAF Bicester
10 Bicester 9 Burial Site in Bicester
1, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 Bicester 10 Land at Bicester Gateway
1, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 Bicester 11 Employment Land at North East Bicester
1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15Bicester 12 South East Bicester
287 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 2 Links between Policies and Objectives
Relevant Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Number Policy Title
6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,
15Bicester 13 Gavray Drive
Banbury
3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15Banbury 1 Banbury Canalside
6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,
15Banbury 2 Hardwick Farm, Southam Road (East and
West)
3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13 Banbury 3 West of Bretch Hill
6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15Banbury 4 Bankside Phase 2
6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15Banbury 5 North of Hanwell Fields
1, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 Banbury 6 Employment Land West of M40
1, 3, 4, 10, 14 Banbury 7 Strengthening Banbury Town Centre
1, 3, 4, 10, 14 Banbury 8 Land at Bolton Road
3, 4, 10, 12, 14, 15 Banbury 9 Spiceball Development Area
1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14 Banbury 10 Bretch Hill Regeneration Area
10, 14 Banbury 11 Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport
and Recreation
10, 14 Banbury 12 Land for the Relocation of Banbury United
FC
10 Banbury 13 Burial Site Provision in Banbury
10, 14, 15 Banbury 14 Cherwell Country Park
1, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 Banbury 15 Employment Land North East of Junction
11
6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,
15Banbury 16 Land south of Salt Way (West)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 288Appendix 2 Links between Policies and Objectives
Relevant Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Number Policy Title
6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,
15Banbury 17 Land south of Salt Way (East)
6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,
15Banbury 18 Land at Drayton Lodge Farm
6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,
15Banbury 19 Land at Higham Way
Kidlington
1, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 Kidlington 1 Accommodating High Value Employment
Needs
1, 3, 4, 10, 14 Kidlington 2 Strengthening Kidlington Village Centre
Our Villages and Rural Areas
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 Villages 1 Village Categorisation
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 Villages 2 Distributing Housing Growth Across the
Rural Areas
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 14 Villages 3 Rural Exception Sites
10, 14 Villages 4 Meeting the Need for Open Space, Sport
and Recreation
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 Villages 5 Former RAF Upper Heyford
Delivering the Local Plan
10 INF 1 Infrastructure
289 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 2 Links between Policies and Objectives
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 290Appendix 2 Links between Policies and Objectives
Appendix 3 Evidence Base
Economic Evidence
Cherwell Economic Analysis Study (Aug 2012)
Cherwell Retail Study update (Nov 2010)
Cherwell Retail Study (Oct 2012)
Cherwell Tourism Development Study (Aug 2008)
Employment Land Review (July 2006)
Employment Land Review update (Feb 2012)
PPS6 Town Centres Study (Dec 2006)
Area Renewal and Bretch Hill Regeneration Area Background Paper (Jan 2014)
Oxfordshire Strategic Economic Plan (March 2014)
The Oxfordshire Innovation Engine (Oct 2013)
South East Midlands Strategic Economic Plan (March 2014)
Cherwell Economic Analysis Addendum (August 2014)
Updated Employment Land Forecasts (May 2014)
Environmental &EnergyEvidence
Addendum to Habitats Regulations Assessment (stage 1 - screening of Proposed Submission
Draft Local Plan, Aug 2012) Final Screening of Proposed Changes March 2013 (March 2013)
Addendum to Habitats Regulations Assessment (stage 1 - screening of Proposed Submission
Draft Local Plan, Aug 2012) Final Screening of Proposed Changes March 2013 and Further
Proposed Changes October 2013 (Oct 2013)
Background Paper on Policies ESD 1-5 of the Proposed Submission Local Plan (Aug 2012)
Banbury Analysis of Potential for Strategic Development - Final Report (Sept 2013)
Banbury Environmental Baseline Report - Final Report (Sept 2013)
Banbury Green Buffers Report - Final Report (Sept 2013)
291 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 3 Evidence Base
Banbury Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Assessment - Final Report (Sept 2013)
Bicester Environmental Baseline Report - Final Report (Sept 2013)
Bicester Green Buffers Report - Final Report (Sept 2013)
Bicester Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Assessment - Final Report (Sept 2013)
Canalside Level 2 SFRA (Oct 2012)
Cherwell and West Oxon Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (Level 1) (May 2009)
Habitats Regulations Assessment (stage 1)- screening of Options for Growth consultation
on directions of growth) (Nov 2009)
Final Habitats Regulations Assessment (stage 1 - screening) of Draft Core Strategy) (Sept
2010)
Final Habitats Regulations Assessment (stage 1 - screening) of Proposed Submission Local
Plan August 2012) (Aug 2012)
Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Assessment (Sept 2010)
Renewable energy and sustainable construction study (Sept 2009)
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (Level 2) (March 2012)
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (Level 2) Additional Sites Addendum (Sept 2012)
Addendum to Habitats Regulations Assessment (Stage 1 Screening of Proposed Submission
draft Local Plan, Aug 2012) Final Screening of Proposed Changes March 2013
Addendum to Habitats Regulations Assessment (Stage 1 Screening of Proposed Submission
draft Local Plan, Aug 2012) Final Screening of proposed Changes March 2013 and Further
Proposed Changes October 2013
Banbury Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Assessment Addendum (August 2014)
Bicester Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Assessment Addendum (August 2014)
Habitats Regulations Assessment - Addendum to HRA Stage 1 Screening of the Proposed
Submission Cherwell Local Plan (Screening of Proposed Modifications) (August 2014)
Upper Heyford Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Assessment (August 2014)
Sequential Test and Exception Test (Flooding) (August 2012, updated October 2013)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 292Appendix 3 Evidence Base
Sequential Test and Exception Test (Flooding): Strategic Sites October 2014
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (Level 2) Additional Sites Addendum (August 2014)
Upper Heyford Assessment Interim Final Report (August 2014)
Heritage Evidence
Oxford Canal Conservation Area Appraisal (Oct 2012)
Wroxton and Drayton Strategic Heritage Impact Assessment Report - Final Report (Sept
2013)
RAF Upper Heyford Revised Comprehensive Planning Brief SPD (2007)
RAF Upper Heyford Conservation Area Appraisal (2006)
Former RAF Upper Heyford Landscape and Visual Impact and Masterplan Report (2004)
Former RAF Upper Heyford Landscape Character Assessment of the Airbase South of the
Cold War Zone (2006)
Former RAF Upper Heyford Conservation Plan (2005)
Restoration of Upper Heyford Airbase – A Landscape Impact Assessment (1997)
The 2014 approved masterplan for the site
Housing Evidence
Affordable Housing Viability Study (March 2010)
Affordable Housing Viability Study update (March 2013)
Analysis of the viability of Extra Care Housing units within Section 106 scheme in Cherwell
DC (Feb 2011)
Cherwell Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) Review and Update (Dec 2012)
Cherwell Submission Local Plan - Housing Density Background Paper (Nov 2013)
Cherwell, West Oxfordshire and South Northamptonshire Gypsy and Traveller Needs
Assessment 2012/13 (Jan 2013)
GypsyandTravellerAccommodationNeedsAssessmentfortheThamesValleyregion(Sept
2006)
293 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 3 Evidence Base
Living in Cherwell (July 2010)
Local Plan Background Paper - extra care/elderly accommodation (Feb 2013)
Needs Assessment for Travelling Showpeople - executive summary (Nov 2008)
Oxfordshire Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) (Dec 2007)
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) - Final Report (Oct 2013)
Oxfordshire SHMA 2014 – Summary – Key Findings on Housing Need (March 2014)
Oxfordshire SHMA 2014 - Oxfordshire Economic Forecasting Final Report 2014
Oxfordshire Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) (April 2014)
Cherwell Housing Deliverability (May 2014)
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment Update (August 2014)
Village Categorisation Update October 2014
Infrastructure Evidence
Banbury Integrated Transport and Land Use Study (BANITLUS) (Dec 2009)
Banbury Movement Study (Feb 2013)
Bicester Integrated Transport and Land Use Strategy - draft (BICITLUS) (Feb 2009)
Bicester Movement Study (Feb 2013)
Cherwell Rural Areas Integrated Transport and Land Use Study (Aug 2009)
Banbury Movement Study Addendum (2014)
Bicester Movement Study Addendum (2014)
Halcrow Technical Note: Bicester SATURN Model May 2013 (January 2014)
Bicester Transport Modelling (October 2014)
Banbury Highway Model: Forecasting Report (October 2014)
Upper Heyford Transport Technical Note (October 2014)
District Wide Transport Note (October 2014)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 294Appendix 3 Evidence Base
Summary of Transport Technical Note (October 2014)
LeisureEvidence
Green Space Strategy & background document (July 2008)
Open Space update (Sept 2011)
Playing Pitch Strategy & background document (July 2008)
PPG17 Assessment - indoor sports and recreation facilities assessment (Aug 2006)
PPG17Assessment-openspace,sportandrecreationalfacilitiesneedsassessmentauditand
strategy (Aug 2006)
IndoorSports,RecreationandCommunityFacilities-StrategicAssessmentofneedforAGPs
Provision in Cherwell Interim Report, April 2014
Indoor Sports, Recreation and Community Facilities- Strategic Assessment of need for Halls
Provision in Cherwell Interim Report, April 2014
IndoorSports,RecreationandCommunityFacilities-StrategicAssessmentofneedforPools
Provision in Cherwell Interim Report, April 2014
Plan-Wide Evidence
Banbury Canalside Viability Study (Sept 2013)
Local Plan Viability Study (Oct 2013)
Local Plan Viability Update Executive Summary (August 2014)
Local Plan Viability Update (September 2014)
Superseded Studies
AssessingthetypeandsizeofhousingstockrequiredinCherwell(SUPERSEDED)(Sept2009)
BanburyAnalysisofPotentialforStrategicDevelopment-FinalDraft(SUPERSEDED)(March
2013)
Banbury Environmental Baseline Report - Final Draft (SUPERSEDED) (March 2013)
Banbury Green Buffers Report - Final Draft (SUPERSEDED) (March 2013)
Banbury Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Assessment - Final Draft (March 2013)
(SUPERSEDED)
295 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 3 Evidence Base
Bicester Environmental Baseline Report - Final Draft (SUPERSEDED) (March 2013)
Bicester Green Buffers Report - Final Draft (SUPERSEDED) (March 2013)
Cherwell Landscape Sensitivity and Capacity Assessment - Final Draft (Sep 2009)
Cherwell Housing Needs Assessment (SUPERSEDED) (June 2008)
Cherwell Housing Needs Assessment (SUPERSEDED) (June 2009)
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) - Draft Final Report 2013
(SUPERSEDED) (April 2013)
Wroxton and Drayton Strategic Heritage Impact Assessment Report - Final Draft
(SUPERSEDED) (March 2013)
GypsyandTravellerAccommodationNeedsAssessmentfortheThamesValleyregion(Sept
2006)
Interim Transport Technical Note (August 2014)
Relevant Documents/Data Sources
Annual Monitoring Reports
Cherwell in Numbers 2010
Conservation and Urban Design Strategy for Cherwell 2012 – 2015
Economic Development Strategy 2011 – 2016
Low Carbon Environmental Strategy (2012)
National Heat Map (Department of Energy & Climate Change)
http://tools.decc.gov.uk/nationalheatmap/
Oxfordshire Data Observatory
http://insight.oxfordshire.gov.uk/cms/
Oxfordshire Local Transport Plan
http://www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/cms/public-site/local-transport-plan
Oxfordshire Wildlife and Landscape Study
http://owls.oxfordshire.gov.uk/wps/wcm/connect/occ/OWLS/Home//
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 296Appendix 3 Evidence Base
Appendix 4 Glossary
Definition Phrase
Model standards devised by English Nature (now Natural England) for
theprovisionof‘natural’greenspace,i.e.accessibleareasthatalsoprovideAccessible Green Space
Standards
potential wildlife habitat. The model sets out that no person should live
morethan300mfromtheirnearestareaofnaturalgreenspaceofatleast
2ha in size; that there should be at least one accessible 20ha site within
2kmofhome;thatthereshouldbeoneaccessible100hasitewithin5km
ofhome;andthatthereshouldbeoneaccessible500hasitewithin10km
of home.
The approval, after independent examination, of the final version of a
Local Plan by a local planning authority for future planning policy and
decision making.Adoption
Includes affordable rented, social rented and intermediate housing,
provided to specified eligible households whose needs are not met by
the market.Affordable Housing
A report produced at least annually assessing progress of the LDS and
theextenttowhichpoliciesinLocalDevelopmentDocumentsarebeing
successfully implemented.AnnualMonitoringReport
(AMR)
AprocessrequiredbyEuropeanDirectives(BirdsDirective79/409/EEC
and Habitats Directive 92/43/EEC) to avoid adverse effects of plans,Appropriate Assessment
programmesandprojectsonNatura2000sitesandtherebymaintainthe
integrity of the Natura 2000 network and its features.
AtypeofDevelopmentPlanDocumentfocuseduponanareawhichwill
be subject to significant change.Area Action Plan (AAP)
Areas of national importance for their landscape character and
appearance, within which the conservation and enhancement of theirArea of Outstanding
Natural Beauty (AONB)
natural beauty is a priority. A small area of the Cotswolds AONB falls
within the District.
Acollectivetermforplants,animals,micro-organismsandbacteriawhich,
together, interact in a complex way to create living ecosystems.Biodiversity
Thelastingandsignificantchangeinweatherpatternsoverperiodsranging
fromdecadestohundredsofyears,impactingonriverandsealevelsand
the rate of flows on watercourses.Climate Change
297 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 4 Glossary
Definition Phrase
Alevyallowinglocalauthoritiestoraisefundsfromownersordevelopers
of land undertaking new building projects in their area.CommunityInfrastructure
Levy (CIL)
A locally designated area of special architectural interest, where the
character or appearance is desirable to preserve or enhance.Conservation Area
Thestatutorytermusedtorefertotheadoptedspatialplansandpolicies
that apply to a particular local planning authority area. This includesDevelopment Plan
adopted Local Plans (including Minerals and Waste Plans) and
Neighbourhood Development Plans and is defined by Section 38 of the
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.
DocumentswhichmakeuptheLocalPlan. AllDPDsaresubjecttopublic
consultation and independent examination.Development Plan
Documents (DPDs)
A statutory duty placed on public bodies to cooperate constructively,
actively and on an on-going basis to maximise the effectiveness of Local
Plan preparation in the context of strategic cross boundary matters.Duty to Cooperate
A ‘green technology’ cluster of environmental goods and services
businesses.Eco-innovation hub
The energy bound up in making a building's materials, transportingthem
to the site and constructing the building.Embodied Energy
The information and data collated by local authorities to support the
policy approach set out in the Local Plan.Evidence Base
The process by which an independent Planning Inspector considers
whether a Development Plan Document is 'sound' before it can be
adopted.Examination
Union of European Member States European Union (EU)
Areasoflandassessedasbeingoflowrisk(FloodZone1),medium(Flood
Zone2),high(FloodZone3a)andthefunctionalfloodplain(FloodZone
3b).Flood Zones
Adesignationforlandaroundcertaincitiesandlargebuilt-upareas,which
aims to keep this land permanently open or largely undeveloped.Green Belt
Green spaces that provide avenues for wildlife movement, often along
streams, rivers or other natural features. They often provide pleasant
walks for the public away from main roads.Green Corridors
The network of accessible, multi-functional green and open spaces. Green Infrastructure
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 298Appendix 4 Glossary
Definition Phrase
Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including
such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family's orGypsies and Traveller
dependant'seducationalorhealthneedsoroldagehaveceasedtotravel
temporarily or permanently, but excluding members of an organised
group of travelling show people or circus people travelling together as
such.
HRA is required under the European Directive 92/43/ECC on the
"conservation of natural habitats and wild fauna and flora for plans" thatHabitats Regulations
Assessments (HRA)
may have an impact of European (Natura 2000) Sites. HRA is an
assessment of the impacts of implementing a plan or policy on a Natura
2000 Site.
Alltheancillaryworksandserviceswhicharenecessarytosupporthuman
activities, including roads, sewers, schools, hospitals, etc.Infrastructure
The IDP's role is to identify all items of infrastructure needed to ensure
the delivery of the growth targets and policies contained in the LocalInfrastructure Delivery
Plan (IDP)
Plan. This ensures that an appropriate supply of essential infrastructure
is provided alongside new homes, workplaces and other forms of
development.
Local Area for Play LAP
Local Equipped Area for Play LEAP
BuildingsandstructureswhicharelistedbytheDepartmentforCulture,
Media and Sport are being of special architectural and historic interestListed Buildings
and whose protection and maintenance are the subject of special
legislation.
The collective term for Development Plan Documents, Supplementary
PlanningDocumentsandotherdocumentscontainingstatementsrelating
to planning policy and the development and use of land.Local Development
Documents (LDDs)
ALocalDevelopmentSchemeisastatutorydocumentrequiredtospecify
(among other matters) the documents which, when prepared, willLocal Development
Scheme (LDS)
comprise the Local Plan for the area. It sets out the programmefor the
preparation of these documents.
The plan for the local area which sets out the long-term spatial vision
and development framework for the District and strategic policies and
proposals to deliver that vision.Local Plan
Agroupofpeopleandorganisationsfromthelocalcommunityincluding
from public, private, community and voluntary sectors within a localLocalStrategicPartnership
(LSP)
299 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 4 Glossary
Definition Phrase
authority area, with the objective of improving the quality of life of the
local community.
Atransportstrategypreparedbythelocalhighwaysauthority(theCounty
Council).Local Transport Plan
(LTP)
The Localism Act introduced changes to the planning system (amongst
other changes to local government) including making provision for theLocalism Act 2011
revocation of Regional Spatial Strategies, introducing the Duty to
Cooperate and Neighbourhood Planning.
Multi-Use Games Area MUGA
A document setting out the Government’s planning policies. National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF)
TheGovernment’splanningguidancesupportingnationalplanningpolicy. NationalPlanningPractice
Guidance(NPPGorPPG)
Neighbourhood Equipped Area for Play NEAP
A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a
particularneighbourhoodarea(madeunderthePlanningandCompulsory
Purchase Act 2004).Neighbourhood Plans
A spatial concept focused on the economic influence of Oxford and
Cambridge. TheaimofthisistopromoteandacceleratethedevelopmentOxford/Cambridge
corridor
of the unique set of educational, research and business assets and
activities.
Advanced manufacturing / high performance engineering encompass
activitieswhicharehighininnovationandtheapplicationofleadingedgePerformance Engineering
technology, and which form a network of businesses which support,
compete with and learn from each other.
ThisActamendedtheTown&CountryPlanningAct1990.ThePlanning
and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 introduced a new statutory systemPlanning & Compulsory
Purchase Act 2004
ofregionalandlocalplanningandhassincebeenamendedbytheLocalism
Act 2011.
TheGovernmentbodyresponsibleforprovidingindependentinspectors
for planning inquiries and for examinations of development plan
documents.Planning Inspectorate
FormerlyproducedbycentralGovernmentsettingoutnationalplanning
policy. These have been replaced by the NPPF.Planning Policy Statement
(PPS)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 300Appendix 4 Glossary
Definition Phrase
Maps of the local planning authority's area which must be reproduced
from, or based on, an Ordnance Survey map; include an explanation ofPolicies Map
any symbol or notation which it uses; and illustrate geographically the
application of the policies in the adopted development plan. Where the
adopted policies map consists of text and maps, the text prevails if the
map and text conflict.
The economic, social and environmental renewal and improvement of
rural and urban areas.Regeneration
This means “The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England)
Regulations 2012 as amended” unless indicated otherwise. Planning
authorities must follow these when preparing Local Plans.Regulations
Policiesinhistoricdevelopmentplansthathavebeenformally'saved'and
which continue to be used until replaced by a new Local Plan.Saved Policies
Sitespecificproposalsforspecificormixedusesordevelopment.Policies
will identify any specific requirements for individual proposals.Site Specific Allocations
One of the former Regional Spatial Strategies revoked by Government.
TheSouthEastPlanwasapprovedinMay2009andsetoutthelongtermSouth East Plan (SEP)
(now revoked)
spatialplanningframeworkfortheregionfortheyears2006-2026.Itwas
revoked by the Government in March 2013 with the exception of two
policies.
Spatialplanninggoesbeyondtraditionallanduseplanningtobringtogether
and integrate policies for the development and use of land with otherSpatial Planning
policies and programmes and stake holders which influence the nature
of places and how they function.
A SAC is an area which has been given special protection under the
European Union's Habitats Directive.Special Areas of
Conservation (SAC)
The SCI sets out standards to be achieved by the local authority in
relation to involving the community in the preparation, alteration and
continuing review of all LDDs and in development control decisions.Statement of Community
Involvment (SCI)
An assessment of the environmental effects of policies, plans and
programmes, required by European legislation, which will be part of the
public consultation on the policies.Strategic Environmental
Assement (SEA)
Anassessmentcarriedoutbylocalauthoritiestoinformtheirknowledge
of flooding, refine the information on the Flood Map and determine theStrategic Flood Risk
Assessment (SRA)
variationsinfloodriskfromallsourcesoffloodingacrossandfromtheir
area.
301 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 4 Glossary
Definition Phrase
AnassessmentofthelandcapacityacrosstheDistrictwiththepotential
for housing.Strategic Housing Land
Availability Assessment
(SHLAA)
SHMAsarestudiesrequiredbyGovernmentoflocalplanningauthorities
toidentifyhousingmarkets,andtheircharacteristics,thatstraddleDistrictStrategic Housing Market
Assessment (SHMA)
boundaries. Their purpose is to inform Local Plans in terms of housing
targets, housing need, demand, migration and commuting patterns and
the development of planning and housing policy.
ThestageatwhichaDevelopmentPlanDocumentissenttotheSecretary
of State for independent examination.Submission
Documents which provide guidance to supplement the policies and
proposals in Development Plan Documents.Supplementary Planning
Documents (SPDs)
SuDS seek to manage surface water as close to the source as possible,
mimicking surface water flows arising from a site prior to the proposedSustainable Drainage
Systems (SuDS)
development. Typically SuDS involve a move away from piped systems
to softer engineering solutions inspired by natural drainage processes.
The processof assessingthe economic,socialand environmentaleffects
of a proposed plan. This process implements the requirements of the
SEA Directive. Required to be undertaken for all DPDs.Sustainability Appraisal
(SA)
Setsanoverallstrategicdirectionandlong-termvisionfortheeconomic,
social and environmental wellbeing of an area.Sustainable Community
Strategy (SCS)
A widely used definition drawn up by the World Commission on
Environment and Development in 1987: "development that meets theSustainable Development
needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs".
Membersofagrouporganisedforthepurposesofholdingfairs,circuses
orshows(whetherornottravellingtogetherassuch).ThisincludessuchTravelling Showpeople
personswhoonthegroundsoftheirownortheirfamily’sordependants’
morelocalisedpatternoftrading,educationalorhealthneedsoroldage
have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excludes Gypsies
and Travellers as defined above.
Unidentified sites that are approved for development. Windfalls
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 302Appendix 4 Glossary
Appendix 5 Maps
5.1 Cherwell District Policies Map
5.2 Key Policies Map: Bicester
5.3 Key Policies Map: Banbury
5.4 Key Policies Map: Kidlington
Bicester InsetMaps
Policy Bicester 1: North West Bicester Eco-Town
Policy Bicester 2: Graven Hill
Policy Bicester 3: South West Bicester Phase 2
Policy Bicester 4: Bicester Business Park
Policy Bicester 5: Strengthening Bicester Town Centre
Policy Bicester 6: Bure Place Town Centre Regeneration Phase 2
Policy Bicester 8: Former RAF Bicester
Policy Bicester 10: Bicester Gateway
Policy Bicester 11: Employment Land at North East Bicester
Policy Bicester 12: South East Bicester
Policy Bicester 13: Gavray Drive
Banbury InsetMaps
Policy Banbury 1: Banbury Canalside
Policy Banbury 2: Hardwick Farm, Southam Road (East and West)
Policy Banbury 3: West of Bretch Hill
Policy Banbury 4: Bankside Phase 2
Policy Banbury 5: North of Hanwell Fields
Policy Banbury 6: Employment Land West of M40
303 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 5 Maps
Policy Banbury 7: Strengthening Banbury Town Centre
Policy Banbury 8: Bolton Road Development Area
Policy Banbury 9: Spiceball Development Area
Policy Banbury 10: Bretch Hill Regeneration Area
Policy Banbury 12: Land for the Relocation of Banbury United FC
Policy Banbury 14: Cherwell Country Park
Policy Banbury 15: Employment Land North East of Junction 11
Policy Banbury 16: South of Salt Way - West
Policy Banbury 17: South of Salt Way - East
Policy Banbury 18: Land at Drayton Lodge Farm
Policy Banbury 19: Land at Higham Way
Kidlington InsetMaps
PolicyKidlington1A:AccommodatingHighValueEmploymentNeeds-LangfordLane/London
Oxford Airport
Policy Kidlington 1B: Accommodating High Value Employment Needs - Begbroke Science
Park
Policy Kidlington 2: Strengthening Kidlington Village Centre
OurVillages andRuralAreasInsetMaps
Policy Villages 5: Former RAF Upper Heyford
Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Biodiversity
Theme Map - Community Facilities
Theme Map - Economy
Theme Map - Green Infrastructure
Theme Map - Historic Environment
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 304Appendix 5 Maps
Theme Map - Landscape
Theme Map - Renewable & Low Carbon Energy
Theme Map - Retail
305 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 5 Maps
Key to maps
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 306Appendix 5 Maps
5.1 Cherwell District Policies
Map
307 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 15.1 Cherwell District Policies Map
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 3085.1 Cherwell District Policies Map
5.1 Cherwell District Policies Map
¯
© Crown Copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504BANBURY
BICESTER
KIDLINGTONSouth Northamptonshire DistrictDaventry District
West Oxfordshire District
Oxford City
Vale of Whie
Horse DistrictAylesbury
Vale
District
South Oxfordshire DistrictStratford-on-Avon District
309 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 15.1 Cherwell District Policies Map
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 3105.1 Cherwell District Policies Map
5.2 Key Policies Map: Bicester
311 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 15.2 Key Policies Map: Bicester
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 3125.2 Key Policies Map: Bicester
5.2 Key Policies Map: Bicester
Bicester 12Bicester 13Former DLO Caversfield
(Approved)
Land South 
of T alisman Road
(Approved)Bicester 8
Bicester 6
Bicester 5Bicester 1
Bicester 2Bicester 
3South-West 
Bicester 
Phase 1 
(Approved)
Bicester 4
Bicester 
10Bicester 
11
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504Key:
Primary Shopping Frontage
Tourism Development
Bure Place Redevelopment
Existing Town Centre
Town Centre Extension (Area of Search)
Existing Retail Parks (Indicative)
Approved Housing Sites
Mixed Use (Housing and Employment)
Strategic Housing Sites
Existing Strategic Employment Sites (Indicative)
Approved Employment Sites
New Employment Sites
Existing Green Space
Conservation Target Areas
Conservation Areas
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
Scheduled Ancient Monument
Neighbouring Authority
Strategic Developments:
1 North-West Bicester: Eco-Town2 Graven Hill3 South-West Bicester Phase 24 Bicester Business Park
5 Strengthening Bicester Town Centre
6 Land at Bure Place Car Park8 Former RAF Bicester10 Bicester Gateway Business Park11 Employment Land at North-East Bicester
12 South East Bicester
13 Gavray Drive
0 1,000 2,000 500 Metres¯
313 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 15.2 Key Policies Map: Bicester
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 3145.2 Key Policies Map: Bicester
5.3 Key Policies Map: Banbury
315 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 15.3 Key Policies Map: Banbury
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 3165.3 Key Policies Map: Banbury
5.3 Key Policies Map: Banbury
Banbury 10
Banbury 
6Banbury 
15
Banbury 17Banbury 
16West of 
Warwick Road
(Approved)Banbury 
18
Banbury 
19Banbury 5Banbury 2
(Approved)
Banbury 
4Banbury 
3
Bankside 
Phase 1 
(Approved)Banbury 
1
Banbury 
12Banbury 7Banbury 
14
Banbury 8Banbury 9
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504Key" "" "" "" " "Town Centre Shopping Area (Extended)#########Town Centre Commercial Area
Primary Shopping Frontage
Banbury Circular Walk/Oxford Canal Trail
Existing Strategic Employment Sites (Indicative)
New Employment Sites
Approved Employment Sites
Town Centre Extension (Area of Search)
Mixed Use (Housing and Employment)
Bolton Road Development Area
Spiceball Development Area
Expanded Town Centre
Existing Retail Parks
Strategic Housing Sites
Approved Housing Sites
New Green Space and Parks
Outdoor Sports Provision
Bretch Hill Regeneration Area (Indicative boundary)
Existing Green Space
Conservation Target Areas
Conservation Areas
Historic Parks and Gardens
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
Neighbouring Authority
Strategic Developments:
1 Banbury Canalside
2 Hardwick Farm, Southam Road East and West (Approved)3 West of Bretch Hill
4 Land at Bankside Phase 2
5 North of Hanwell Fields6 Employment land west of M40
7 Strengthening Banbury Town Centre
8 Bolton Road Development Area9 Spiceball Development Area
10 Bretch Hill regeneration area
12 Proposed Banbury United FC relocation14 Cherwell Country Park
15 Employment Land North East of Junction 11
16 South of Salt Way - West17 South of Salt Way - East
18 Land at Drayton Lodge Farm
19 Higham Way
0 1,000 2,000 500 Metres¯
317 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 15.3 Key Policies Map: Banbury
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 3185.3 Key Policies Map: Banbury
5.4KeyPoliciesMap:Kidlington
319 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 15.4 Key Policies Map: Kidlington
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 3205.4 Key Policies Map: Kidlington
5.4 Key Policies Map: Kidlington
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504Key
Oxford Canal Trail
Existing Village Centre
Strengthened and extended Village Centre
Indicative Location of Limited Green Belt Review
Existing Green Space
Green Belt
Conservation Target Areas
Conservation Areas
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
Neighbouring Authorities
Strategic Developments:
1. Accomodating Employment Needs (Area of
Search):Kidlington 1A - Langford Lane/Oxford
Technology Park/London Oxford Airport
Kidlington 1B - Begbroke Science Park
2. Strengthened and Extended Kidlington
Village Centre
0 500 1,000 250 MetresKidlington 1A
Kidlington 
2
Kidlington
1B¯
321 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 15.4 Key Policies Map: Kidlington
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 3225.4 Key Policies Map: Kidlington
Bicester Inset Maps
323 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 1: North West Bicester Eco-Town
Bicester 1
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 500 1,000 250 Metres¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 324Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 2: Graven Hill
Bicester 2
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 400 800 200 Metres¯
325 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 3: South West Bicester Phase 2
Bicester 
10(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 250 500 125 Metres¯
Bicester 3
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 326Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 4: Bicester Business Park
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 Metres¯
Bicester 4
327 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 5: Strengthening Bicester Town Centre
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 150 300 75 MetresBicester 5¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 328Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 6: Bure Place Town Centre Redevelopment Phase 2
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 50 100 25 Metres¯
Bicester 6
329 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 8: Former RAF Bicester
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 400 800 200 Metres¯
Bicester 8
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 330Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 10: Bicester Gateway
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 150 300 75 Metres¯
Bicester 10
331 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 11: Employment Land at North East Bicester
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 100 200 50 Metres¯
Bicester 11
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 332Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 12: South East Bicester
Bicester 2
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 250 500 125 Metres¯
Bicester 12
333 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Bicester Inset Maps
Policy Bicester 13: Gavray Drive
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 150 300 75 Metres¯
Bicester 13
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 334Bicester Inset Maps
Banbury Inset Maps
335 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 1: Banbury Canalside
Banbury 1Banbury 8
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 150 300 75 Metres¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 336Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 2: Hardwick Farm, Southam Road (East and West)
Banbury 2
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 Metres¯
337 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 3: West of Bretch Hill
Banbury 10Banbury
3
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 Metres¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 338Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 4: Bankside Phase 2
Banbury 4
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 Metres¯
339 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 5: North of Hanwell Fields
Banbury 5
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 150 300 75 Metres¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 340Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 6: Employment Land West of M40
Banbury 
6Banbury 9
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 Metres¯
341 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Picture 1 Policy Banbury 7: Strengthening Banbury Town Centre
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 MetresBanbury 7¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 342Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 8: Bolton Road Development Area
Banbury 8
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 50 100 25 Metres¯
343 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 9: Spiceball Development Area
Banbury 9
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 50 100 25 Metres¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 344Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 10: Bretch Hill Regeneration Area
Banbury 10
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 250 500 125 Metres¯
345 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 12: Land for the Relocation of Banbury United FC
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 150 300 75 Metres¯
Banbury 12
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 346Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 14: Cherwell Country Park
Banbury 
14
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 Metres¯
347 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 15: Employment Land North East of Junction 11
Banbury 
15
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 Metres¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 348Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 16: South of Salt Way - West
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 100 200 50 Metres¯
Banbury 
16
349 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 17: South of Salt Way - East
Banbury 10
Bankside 
Phase 1 
(Approved)Banbury 7
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 400 800 200 Metres¯
Banbury 17
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 350Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 18: Land at Drayton Lodge Farm
Banbury 18
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 100 200 50 Metres¯
351 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Banbury Inset Maps
Policy Banbury 19: Land at Higham Way
Banbury 19
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 100 200 50 Metres¯
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 352Banbury Inset Maps
Kidlington Inset Maps
353 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Kidlington Inset Maps
Policy Kidlington 1A: Accommodating High Value Employment Needs - Langford
Lane/Oxford Technology Park/London Oxford Airport
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 200 400 100 Metres¯
Kidlington 
1A
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 354Kidlington Inset Maps
PolicyKidlington1B:AccommodatingHighValueEmploymentNeeds-BegbrokeScience
Park
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 150 300 75 Metres¯
Kidlington 1B
355 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Kidlington Inset Maps
Policy Kidlington 2: Strengthening Kidlington Village Centre
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 100 200 50 Metres¯
Kidlington 2
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 356Kidlington Inset Maps
Our Village and Rural Areas
Inset Maps
357 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Our Village and Rural Areas Inset Maps
Policy Villages 5 - Former RAF Upper Heyford
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 1000185040 1,000 2,000 500 Metres¯
Former RAF
Upper HeyfordAreas with potential for additional development identified under Policy Villages 5
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 358Our Village and Rural Areas Inset Maps
Thematic Maps
359 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Biodiversity
Key:
Cherwell District
Special Areas of Conservation
Conservation Target Areas
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
Local Geological Sites Polygons
Ancient Woodland 
Local Nature Reserve
Local Wildlife Sites
Proposed Extensions to Local Wildlife Sites
Proposed New Local Wildlife Sites
BAP Habitat
Banbury Ornithological Society Reserves
Berks Bucks and Oxon Wildlife Trust Reserves
Woodland Trust Sites
(C) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504¯
BANBURY
BRACKLEY
BICESTER
KIDLINGTON
OXFORD0 5,000 10,000 2,500 Metres
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 360Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Community Facilities
kjkj
kjkj;
;
;;^
^^!R
!R
!R!RXW
XWXW
XW
XWI$
I$I$
I$
I$I$
I$
I$I$I$I$
I$
I$I$I$I$I$
I$I$
I$I$I$
I$I$I$I$I$I$
I$
I$I$I$
I$I$I$I$I$
I$I$I$I$
I$I$I$I$ I$
I$I$
I$I$®v®v
$+
$+$+
$+$+
$+$+
$+$+
$+$+$+$+
$+
$+
$+$+
$+$+$+
$+$+
$+
$+$+
$+
$+
$+$+
$+
$+$+$+ $+
$+$+
$+$+
$+
$+
$+$+$+$+
$+$+
$+$+$+
$+
$+$+$+
$+$+
$+$+$+
$+$+
$+$+$+$+
$+
$+$+
$+
IHIHIH
IH
IHIHIH¾Ý
¾Ý¾Ý¾Ý
¾Ý¾Ý
¾Ý¾Ý¾Ý
¾Ý¾Ý
¾Ý
¾Ý
¾Ý¾Ý¾Ý¾Ý
¾Ý¾Ý
¾Ý
¾Ý
¾Ý
¾Ý ¾Ý¾Ý¾Ý
¾Ý¾Ý¾Ý
¾Ý¾Ý
#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*#*
#*
#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*
#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*
#* #*#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*
#*
#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*¯
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504Key:
Cherwell District
#*Halls and Community Centres
¾ÝPost Offices
IHLibraries
$+Schools
®vHospitals
I$GP Surgeries
I$Pharmacies
XWFire Stations
!RPolice Station
^Arts
;Museums
kjLeisure Centres
Allotments
Amenity Green Space
Cemeteries and Churchyards
Civic Space
Outdoor Sports Facilities
Open Space for Children and Young PeopleBANBURY
BICESTER
OXFORDKIDLINGTONBRACKLEY0 5,000 10,000 2,500 Metres
361 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Economy
![![
![
![!(
!(!(!(
!(
!(!(
!(
!(!(
!(!()
))!.
!.
!.!.
!.!.
!.
!.&-&-
&-;
;
;;I2
I2
I2
I2I2I2
I2
I2I0®q%,%,%,
%,
%,%,%,
%,%,%,
%,%,%,
%,
%,%,%,%,%, %,
%,%,%,
%,%,
%,%,
%,¯
(C) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504London
1 hour 20 minutes by roadBirmingham50 minutes by road
Birmingham45 minutes by train
London Marylebone50 minutes by trainBANBURY
BICESTER
KIDLINGTON
London Paddington50 minutes by trainKey:
%, Hotels
®qAirport
I0Park and Ride
I2Railway Stations
;Museums
&- Tourist Information
!. Visitor Attractions
)Arts
!( College
!( Secondary Schools
![ Innovation Centres
Cherwell District
M40
A Roads
B Roads
Railway Lines
Proposed High Speed Rail Link
Category 'A' Village
Main Urban Area BoundariesJ11
J10
J9
OXFORDBRACKLEY
0 5,000 10,000 2,500 Metres
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 362Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Green Infrastructure
Key:
Cherwell District
Oxford Canal
Public Footpath
Public Bridleway
Restricted Byways
Byway Open to all Traffic
National Cycle Routes
Traffic Free
On Road
Registered Common Land
Conservation Target Areas
Allotments
Amenity Green Space
Cemeteries and Churchyards
Civic Space
Natural and Semi Natural Greenspace
Outdoor Sports Facilities
Parks and Gardens
Provision for Children and Young People
(C) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504¯
BANBURY
BICESTER
KIDLINGTON
OXFORDBRACKLEY0 5,000 10,000 2,500 Metres
National and Regional Cycle Network:
363 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Historic Environment
Key:
Cherwell District
Historic Parks and Gardens
Scheduled Monuments
Conservation Areas
Registered Battlefields
(C) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504¯
BANBURY
KIDLINGTONBICESTER
OXFORDBRACKLEY0 5,000 10,000 2,500 Metres
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 364Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Landscape
Key:
Cherwell District
Oxford Canal
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Green Belt
Alluivial Lowlands
Chalk Downland & Slopes
Clay Vale
Estate Farmlands
Farmland Hills
Farmland Plateau
Farmland Slopes & Valley Sides
Lowland Village Farmlands
Pasture Hills
River Meadowlands
Rolling Clayland
Rolling Farmland
Rolling Village Pastures
Settled Ancient Pastures
Terrace Farmland
Upstanding Village Farmlands
Vale Farmland
Wooded Downlands
Wooded Estatelands
Wooded Estate Slopes & Valley Sides
Wooded Farmland
Wooded Hills
Wooded Pasture Valleys & Slopes
Wooded Plateau (C) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504¯
0 5,000 10,000 2,500 Metres
BANBURY
BRACKLEY
BICESTER
OXFORDKIDLINGTON
365 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Renewable & Low Carbon Energy
%%
%%%%
%%
%%%%%%
%%%
%%
%%
%%
%
%%%
%%
%
%%å
åå
åå
åå
åå
åååå
å
å
åå
ååå
åå
å
ååå
å
åå
å
åååå
åå
åå
å
å
åååå
åå
ååå
å
ååå
åå
ååå
åå
å ååå
å
åå
å
@!R
!R
!R!R^
^^ñ
ñ
ññ
ùù
ùù
ooo
o
ooo
ooo
ooo
o
ooooo o
ooo
oo
oo
o®v®vX
XX
X
XI2
I2
I2
I2I2I2
I2
I2D!k!k!k
!k!k
Key:
Cherwell District
DPermitted Wind Farm
!kPermitted Solar Farm
Proposed District Heating Scheme
Potential Heat Source
Cherwell District Council Offices
I2Railway Stations
X Fire Stations
GP Surgeries
®vHospitals
oHotels
ù Leisure Centres
ñMuseums
^Arts Locations
!R Police Stations
@ Prisons
åSchools/Colleges
% Supermarkets and Superstores
Village Categories:
Category A
Category B
Existing Strategic Employment Sites (indicative)
Main Urban Area Boundaries
M40
Oxford Canal
Railway Lines
(C) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504¯
BANBURY
BICESTER
KIDLINGTON
OXFORDBRACKLEYKey:
Percentage of dwellings off mains gas network
0%
Under 25%
Between 25%-50%
Between 51% and 75%
Between 76% and 90%
Over 90%
100%
0 5,000 10,000 2,500 Metres
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 366Thematic Maps
Theme Map - Retail
kj¯
(c) Crown copyright and database right 2015. Ordnance Survey 100018504Key:
Cherwell District
kjBicester Village Retail Outlet
Local Centres and Shopping Parades
Convenience Stores
Supermarkets
Superstores
Railway Lines
Motorways
A Roads
B Roads
Main Urban Area Boundaries
KIDLINGTON
OXFORDBICESTERBRACKLEYBANBURY0 5,000 10,000 2,500 Metres
367 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Thematic Maps
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 368Thematic Maps
Appendix 6 Monitoring
Framework
The tables below set out the monitoring
framework referred to in Section E. The
tableslisttheindicatorsandtargetsthatwill
be used to measure the effectiveness of the
Local Plan policies. Reporting arrangements
and delivery mechanisms are presented inSection E. This monitoring framework will
beusedalongsidetheSustainabilityAppraisal
monitoring framework, as set out in the SA
Report, which sets out the indicators
required to monitor the ‘significant effects’
of the plan’s policies.
A Strategy for Development in
Cherwell
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
Monitoring of PSD1 is
undertaken by
Sustainability IndicatorsMonitoring of PSD1 is
undertakenbySustainability
IndicatorsPresumption in favour
of Sustainable
DevelopmentPSD 1
Policies for Development in
Cherwell
Theme One: Policies for
Developing a Sustainable Local
Economy
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
100%takeupofallocations
by the end of the plan
periodEmployment commitments and
completions on allocated
employment land per sub areaEmployment
DevelopmentSLE 1
(Banbury, Bicester, Kidlington,
Rural Areas)
Yearly increase in
employment use classEmployment commitments and
completions on non-allocatedEmployment
DevelopmentSLE 1
commitments and
completionsemployment land per sub area
(Banbury, Bicester, Kidlington,
Rural Areas)
369 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
No overall net loss of
employment landCompletions resulting in a loss
of employment use to nonEmployment
DevelopmentSLE 1
employment use per sub area
(Banbury, Bicester, Kidlington,
Rural Areas)
Nonetlossoftowncentre
usefloorspacewithintown
centresTowncentreuse(includinguse
classes A1-A5, B1a, D2)
completionswithinandoutside
of each of the town centresSecuring Dynamic
Town CentresSLE 2
100% of applications over
the thresholds set out in
Policy SLE2No.ofretailimpactassessments
submitted with planning
applicationsSecuring Dynamic
Town CentresSLE 2
An annual increase in
completed tourism
developmentsovertheplan
periodCompleted tourism
developments (including D use
class uses, Sui Generis uses)Supporting
Tourism GrowthSLE 3
Anannualincreaseoverthe
plan periodNumber of visitors to tourist
attractions in the DistrictSupporting
Tourism GrowthSLE 3
Anannualincreaseoverthe
plan periodNumber of visitors to tourist
attractions in the DistrictSupporting
Tourism GrowthSLE 3
Timely provision of
transport infrastructure inCompleted transport
improvement schemesImproved
Transport and
ConnectionsSLE 4
accordance with strategic
site delivery and as set out
in the IDP
To meet development
needs,assetoutintheIDPDeveloper contributions to
transport infrastructureImproved
Transport and
ConnectionsSLE 4
Respond to all relevant
Government consultations
on HS2Level of Council involvement
with the proposed High Speed
Rail LinkHigh Speed Rail 2
– London to
BirminghamSLE 5
Respond to all planning
applicationsrelatingtoHS2.
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 370Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
ThemeTwo:PoliciesforBuilding
Sustainable Communities
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
As set out in Policy BSC1 Housing commitments and
completions per sub areaDistrict Wide
Housing distributionBSC 1
(Banbury, Bicester,
Kidlington, rural areas)
As set out in Policy BSC2 % of residential completions
onpreviouslydevelopedlandThe Effective and
Efficient Use of LandBSC 2
As set out in Policy BSC2 Net housing density of
completionsThe Effective and
Efficient Use of LandBSC 2
As set out in Policy BSC3 Net affordable housing
completions/acquisitions per
tenureAffordable Housing BSC 3
An annual increase in the
number of self-build
completionsNo.ofself-buildcompletions Affordable Housing BSC 3
As set out in Policy BSC4 Number of completed
dwellings per number of
bedroomsHousing Mix BSC 4
As set out in Policy BSC4 Number of 'extra care'
completionsHousing Mix BSC 4
Improvements in levels of
deprivation in the DistrictCompleteddevelopmentper
type in the 'area of renewal'Area Renewal BSC 5
Positive trends across all
theProgramme’sindicatorsThe ‘Brighter Futures in
Banbury’ Performance
Measures Package ReportsArea Renewal BSC 5
Provision for new pitches
to meet identified shortfall
as set out in Policy BSC6Completed/Lost Gypsy &
Traveller Plots/Travelling
Showpeople Pitches, byTravelling
CommunitiesBSC 6
location (location criteria as
set out in Policy BSC6)
371 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
Timely provision of
education infrastructureinCompleted education
infrastructureMeeting Education
NeedsBSC 7
accordance with strategic
site delivery and as set out
in the IDP
To meet development
needs,assetoutintheIDPDeveloper contributions to
education infrastructureMeeting Education
NeedsBSC 7
Timely provision of health
infrastructure in
accordance with strategic
site delivery and as set out
in the IDPCompleted health care
infrastructureSecuring Health and
Well BeingBSC 8
To meet development
needs,assetoutintheIDPDeveloper contributions to
health care infrastructureSecuring Health and
Well BeingBSC 8
Replacement of Bicester
CommunityHospitalwithin
the plan periodCompletions at Bicester
Community HospitalSecuring Health and
Well BeingBSC 8
Timely provision of public
services/utilitiesCompleted public
services/utilities
infrastructurePublic Services and
UtilitiesBSC 9
infrastructure in
accordance with strategic
site delivery and as set out
in the IDP
To meet development
needs,assetoutintheIDPDeveloper contributions to
public services/utilitiesPublic Services and
UtilitiesBSC 9
No net loss of open
space/outdoor
sport/recreation sitesAmount,typeandlocationof
open space/sport/recreation
facilitiesOpen Space,
Outdoor Sport &
RecreationProvisionBSC 10
Annualimprovementsover
the plan periodAreas deficient in recreation
provisionbytypeandamountOpen Space,
Outdoor Sport &
RecreationProvisionBSC 10
No net loss of open
space/outdoor
sport/recreation sitesCompletedbuiltdevelopment
on (former) sites of open
space, outdoor sport and
recreationOpen Space,
Outdoor Sport &
RecreationProvisionBSC 10
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 372Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
A yearly improvement in
thequalityofsites/facilitiesOpen spaces in the District
meeting quality standardsOpen Space,
Outdoor Sport &
RecreationProvisionBSC 10
As set out in policy BSC11 Developer contributions to
open space/sport/recreation
facilities per typologyLocal Standards of
Provision - Outdoor
RecreationBSC 11
As set out in policy BSC12 Developer contributions to
open space/sport/recreation
facilities per typologyIndoor Sport,
Recreation and
CommunityFacilitiesBSC 12
As set out in policy BSC12 Completed community
facilities infrastructureIndoor Sport,
Recreation and
CommunityFacilitiesBSC 12
Theme Three: Policies for
Ensuring Sustainable
Development
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
Reductions over the
plan periodCarbonemissionsin the Districtper
capitaMitigating and
Adapting to
Climate ChangeESD 1
No permissions
granted contrary toPermissions granted contrary to
EnvironmentAgencyadviceonFlood
Risk groundsMitigating and
Adapting to
Climate ChangeESD 1
EAadviceonfloodrisk
grounds
Improvementoverthe
plan period, linked toAccess to services and facilities by
public transport, walking and cyclingMitigating and
Adapting to
Climate ChangeESD 1
Oxfordshire LAA
target (National
Indicator 175)
As set out in Policy
ESD2 i.e. required for
all major applicationsNumber of Energy Statements
submittedEnergy Hierarchy ESD 2
373 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
As set out in Policy
ESD3% of new dwellings completed
achieving water use below 110
litres/person/daySustainable
ConstructionESD 3
As set out in Policy
ESD3Completed non residential
developmentachievingBREEAMVery
Good, BREEAM ExcellentSustainable
ConstructionESD 3
As set out in Policy
ESD4 i.e. required forNumberofDistrictHeatingFeasibility
Assessments submittedDecentralised
Energy SystemsESD 4
allapplicationsfor100
dwellings or more
Increase over the plan
periodNumberofpermittedDistrictheating
schemes in the DistrictDecentralised
Energy SystemsESD 4
Increase over the plan
periodPermittedrenewableenergycapacity
per typeRenewableEnergy ESD 5
No permissions
granted contrary toPermissions granted contrary to
EnvironmentAgencyadviceonflood
risk groundsSustainable Flood
Risk ManagementESD 6
EAadviceonfloodrisk
grounds
As set out in Policy
ESD6 i.e. required forFloodRiskAssessmentsreceivedfor
developmentproposalswithinFloodSustainable Flood
Risk ManagementESD 6
all proposals meeting
the locational criteriaZones 2 & 3, within 1 ha of Flood
Zone 1, or 9m of any watercourse
Annual increase over
the plan periodCompleted SuDS schemes in the
DistrictSustainable
DrainageSystems
(SuDS)ESD 7
No permissions
granted contrary toNumber of permissions granted
contrary to Environment Agency
advice on water quality groundsWaterResources ESD 8
EA advice on water
quality grounds
No permissions
granted contrary toNumber of permissions granted
contrary to consultee (EnvironmentProtection of the
OxfordMeadows
SACESD 9
consultee (EA, Agency, BBOWT, CDC/OCC etc)
BBOWT, CDC/OCC advice on water quality grounds
within the SAC catchment etc) advice on water
quality grounds within
the SAC catchment
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 374Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
A net gain in total
areas of biodiversityTotal LWS/LGS area Protection and
Enhancement ofESD 10
importance in the
DistrictBiodiversity and
the Natural
Environment
An annual increase
over the plan periodChanges in priority habitats by
number & typeProtection and
Enhancement ofESD 10
Biodiversity and
the Natural
Environment
A net gain in priority
speciesbynumberand
typeChanges in priority species by
number & typeProtection and
Enhancement of
Biodiversity andESD 10
the Natural
Environment
100% of SSSI units in
favourable orEcological condition of SSSIs Protection and
Enhancement ofESD 10
unfavourable
recovering conditionBiodiversity and
the Natural
Environment
A yearly increase in
the District index of
farmlandbirdpresenceDistribution and status of farmland
birdsProtection and
Enhancement of
Biodiversity andESD 10
the Natural
Environment
A yearly increase in
the presence of water
volesDistributionandstatusofwatervoles Protection and
Enhancement of
Biodiversity andESD 10
the Natural
Environment
No permissions
granted contrary to
tree officer advicePermissionsgrantedcontrarytotree
officer adviceProtection and
Enhancement of
Biodiversity andESD 10
the Natural
Environment
No permissions
granted contrary toPermissions granted contrary to
biodiversity consultee adviceProtection and
Enhancement ofESD 10
375 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
biodiversity consultee
adviceBiodiversity and
the Natural
Environment
Ecological Surveys to
accompanyallplanningNumber of Ecological Surveys
submitted with applicationsProtection and
Enhancement ofESD 10
applicationswhichmay Biodiversity and
affect a site, habitat or the Natural
Environment species of known or
potential ecological
value
A net gain in Local
Sites in PositiveLocal Sites in Positive Conservation
ManagementProtection and
Enhancement ofESD 10
Conservation
ManagementBiodiversity and
the Natural
Environment
A net gain of relevant
NERC Act Habitats inTotalamountofNaturalEnvironment
and Rural Communities(NERC) Act
s41 Habitats of Principal Importance
within active Conservation Target
Areas (CTAs)Conservation
Target AreasESD 11
activeCTAswithinthe
District
No permissions
granted inPermissionsgrantedinConservation
TargetAreascontrarytobiodiversity
consultee adviceConservation
Target AreasESD 11
Conservation Target
Areas contrary to
biodiversity consultee
advice
No major
developmentinAONBBuilt development permitted in the
AONBCotswolds
AONBESD 12
No permissions
granted contrary toPermissions granted contrary to the
advice of the AONB Management
BoardCotswolds
AONBESD 12
the advice of the
AONB Management
Board
An annual increase
over the plan periodNumberandlocationofurbanfringe
restoration/improvement schemes
completedLocal Landscape
Protection and
EnhancementESD 13
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 376Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
No permissions
granted contrary toPermissions granted contrary to
Landscape Officer adviceLocal Landscape
Protection and
EnhancementESD 13
Landscape Officer
advice
All development in
Green Belt to comply
with Policy ESD14Completed development (per type)
in the Green BeltOxford Green
BeltESD 14
All development
impacting on nonPermissions granted contrary to the
advice of English Heritage/consultee
advice on heritage groundsThe Character of
the Built
EnvironmentESD15
designated/designated
heritage assets to
comply with ESD15
No permissions
granted contrary toPermissions granted contrary to
design consultee advice on design
groundsThe Character of
the Built
EnvironmentESD15
design consultee
advice on design
grounds
All new developments
to complete a Design
and Access Statement% of permitted and completed
developments with Design and
Access Statements (that address the
criteria of policy ESD15).The Character of
the Built
EnvironmentESD15
Review 6
Conservation Areas
annuallyNumber of new (and reviews of)
conservation area appraisalsThe Character of
the Built
EnvironmentESD15
Increase over the plan
periodCompleted
transport/recreation/leisure/tourism
useswithin1kmoftheOxfordCanalThe Oxford
CanalESD16
No permissions
granted contrary toPermissions granted contrary to
consulteeadviceonheritagegroundsThe Oxford
CanalESD16
consultee advice on
heritage grounds
A net gain in green
infrastructureCompleted green infrastructure
schemesGreen
InfrastructureESD17
provisionovertheplan
period
377 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
Tomeetdevelopment
needsandasidentifiedDeveloper contributions to green
infrastructureGreen
InfrastructureESD17
in IDP/Green
InfrastructureStrategy
Policies for Cherwell’s Places
Bicester
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
As set out in policy Bicester
1 (and agreedHousing, infrastructure,
employmentcompletionsat
North West BicesterNorth West
Bicester Eco-TownBicester 1
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in policy Bicester
1Environmental standards of
completed development at
NW BicesterNorth West
Bicester Eco-TownBicester 1
As set out in policy Bicester
1Embodied impacts of
construction to beNorth West
Bicester Eco-TownBicester 1
monitored, managed and
minimised
As set out in policy Bicester
1Sustainability metrics to be
agreed and monitoredNorth West
Bicester Eco-TownBicester 1
As set out in policy Bicester
2 (and agreedHousing,infrastructure,and
employmentcompletionsat
Graven HillGraven Hill Bicester 2
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in policy Bicester
3 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completions at South West
Bicester Phase 2South West
Bicester Phase 2Bicester 3
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 378Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
As set out in policy Bicester
4 (and agreedCompleted employment
development at Bicester
Business ParkBicester Business
ParkBicester 4
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
No residential floorspace
permitted at ground floor
levelPermitted residential
developmentatgroundfloor
level in Bicester Town
CentreStrengthening
Bicester Town
CentreBicester 5
No increase in vacancy rates
over the plan periodTown centre vacancies Strengthening
Bicester Town
CentreBicester 5
Maintain or improve the
balance of uses within theDiversity of uses Strengthening
Bicester Town
CentreBicester 5
town centre over the plan
period
No net loss of town centre
use floorspace within
Bicester Town CentreCompleted town centre
uses (including use classes
A1-A5, B1a, D2) within andStrengthening
Bicester Town
CentreBicester 5
outside of Bicester Town
Centre
Developmenttoaccordwith
Policy BIC6 and agreedCompletions (plot level) at
BicesterTownCentrePhase
1 & 2Bure Place Town
Centre
Redevelopment
Phase 2Bicester 6
masterplan/detailed planning
documents for the site
An annual increase in such
schemesovertheplanperiodUrbanedgeparkschemesin
BicesterMeeting the Need
for Open Space,
Sport & RecreationBicester 7
An annual increase in
provision over the plan
periodCommunity woodland
provision in BicesterMeeting the Need
for Open Space,
Sport & RecreationBicester 7
Inaccordancewithaplanning
consentType of
permitted/completedMeeting the Need
for Open Space,
Sport & RecreationBicester 7
development at Stratton
Audley Quarry
Developmenttoaccordwith
any agreedCompleted development at
former RAF BicesterFormer RAF
BicesterBicester 8
379 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
masterplan/detailed planning
documents
Tomeetneedsandassetout
in IDPDevelopercontributionsfor
Burial Site in BicesterBurialSiteProvision
in BicesterBicester 9
As set out in Policy Bicester
10 (and agreedEmployment and
infrastructure completions
at Bicester Gateway siteBicester Gateway Bicester 10
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in Policy Bicester
11 (and agreedEmployment and
infrastructure completionsEmploymentLandat
NorthEastBicesterBicester 11
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)at Employment Land at
North East Bicester
As set out in Policy Bicester
12 (and agreedEmployment, housing and
infrastructure completions
at South East BicesterSouth East Bicester Bicester 12
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in policy Bicester
13 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completionsatGavrayDriveGavray Drive Bicester 13
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
Banbury
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
As set out in Policy Banbury
1 and Canalside SPD (i.e.Employment, housing and
infrastructure completions
at CanalsideBanbury Canalside Banbury 1
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in an up to date
Local Development SchemeProgress on completing the
Canalside Supplementary
Planning DocumentBanbury Canalside Banbury 1
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 380Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
As set out in Policy Banbury
2 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completions at Southam
RoadHardwick Farm,
Southam Road
(East and West)Banbury 2
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in Policy Banbury
3 (and agreedEmployment, housing and
infrastructure completions
at West of Bretch HillWestofBretchHill Banbury 3
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in Policy Banbury
4 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completions at Bankside
Phase 2Bankside Phase 2 Banbury 4
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in Policy Banbury
5 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completions at Land North
of Hanwell FieldsLand North of
Hanwell FieldsBanbury 5
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in policy Banbury
6 (and agreedEmployment and
infrastructure completions
at Land West of the M40Employment Land
West of the M40Banbury 6
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
No residential floorspace
permitted at ground floor
levelPermitted residential
developmentatgroundfloor
level in Banbury Town
CentreStrengthening
Banbury Town
CentreBanbury 7
No increase in vacancy rates
over the plan periodTown centre vacancies Strengthening
Banbury Town
CentreBanbury 7
Maintain or improve the
balance of uses over the plan
periodDiversity of uses Strengthening
Banbury Town
CentreBanbury 7
No net loss of town centre
usefloorspacewithinBanbury
Town CentreCompleted town centre
uses (including use classes
A1-A5, B1a, D2) within andStrengthening
Banbury Town
CentreBanbury 7
outside of Banbury Town
Centre
381 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
In accordance with Policy
Banbury 8 and theHousing, Retail and Leisure
Completions on the Bolton
Road siteBolton Road
DevelopmentAreaBanbury 8
Masterplan/detailed planning
documents for the site
In accordance with Policy
Banbury 9 and theCompletionsattheSpiceball
Development AreaSpiceball
DevelopmentAreaBanbury 9
Masterplan/detailed planning
documents for the site
Increaseovertheplanperiod Completed development in
theBretchHillRegeneration
Area by typeBretch Hill
Regeneration AreaBanbury 10
As set out in Policy BSC10
and BSC11Completed open
space/sport/recreationMeeting the Need
for Open Space,
Sport&RecreationBanbury 11
facility provision within
Banbury
As set out in policy Banbury
12, to be achieved over the
plan periodCompletions at the
relocation site for Banbury
United FCMeeting the Need
for Open Space,
Sport&RecreationBanbury 12
Tomeetneedsandassetout
in the IDPDevelopercontributionsfor
Burial Site in BanburyBurial Site
Provision in
BanburyBanbury 13
As set out in Policy Banbury
11Progress on delivering the
Cherwell Country ParkCherwell Country
ParkBanbury 14
As set out in policy Banbury
15 (and agreedEmployment and
infrastructure completionsEmployment Land
North East of
Junction 11Banbury 15
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)at Employment Land North
East of Junction 11
As set out in policy Banbury
16 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completionsatLandatSouth
of Salt Way: WestLand South of Salt
Way: WestBanbury 16
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in policy Banbury
17 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completionsatLandatSouth
of Salt Way: EastLand South of Salt
Way: EastBanbury 17
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 382Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
As set out in policy Banbury
18 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completions at Land at
Drayton Lodge FarmLand at Drayton
Lodge Farm:Banbury 18
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
As set out in policy Banbury
19 (and agreedHousing and infrastructure
completions at Land at
Higham WayLand at Higham
WayBanbury 19
masterplan/detailed planning
documents)
Kidlington
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
An annual increase over
the plan periodEmployment completions in
Kidlington (at a. LangfordAccommodating High
Value Employment
NeedsKidlington1
Lane/London-OxfordAirport
andb.BegbrokeSciencePark)
To accord with Policy
ESD14Completed employment
development on Green BeltAccommodating High
Value Employment
NeedsKidlington1
land in Kidlington beyond
review areas
Noresidentialfloorspace
permittedatgroundfloor
levelPermitted residential
development at ground floor
level in Kidlington Village
CentreStrengthening
Kidlington Village
CentreKidlington2
No increase in vacancy
rates over the plan
periodVillage centre vacancies Strengthening
Kidlington Village
CentreKidlington2
Maintain or improve the
balanceofuseswithintheDiversity of uses Strengthening
Kidlington Village
CentreKidlington2
town centre over the
plan period
383 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
No net loss of town
centre use floorspaceCompletedtowncentreuses
(including use classes A1-A5,Strengthening
Kidlington Village
CentreKidlington2
within Kidlington Village
CentreB1a, D2) within and outside
of Kidlington Village Centre
Our Villages and Rural Areas
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
AssetoutinpolicyVillages
1Completed development
pervillagecategoryandsizeVillageCategorisation Villages 1
of scheme (number of
dwellings)
AssetoutinpolicyVillages
2 and to be set out in the
Local Plan Part 2.Landallocationsmadeinthe
rural areasDistributing Growth
Across the Rural
AreasVillages 2
100%takeupofallocations
over the plan periodCompletions on allocated
sites in rural areasDistributing Growth
Across the Rural
AreasVillages 2
As set out in the criteria in
policy Villages 1 and 2Completions on
non-allocated sites in rural
areasDistributing Growth
Across the Rural
AreasVillages 2
To meet needs as per
Policy Villages 3Completions on rural
exception sitesRural Exception Sites Villages 3
As set out in policy BSC11
and BSC12 and the
InfrastructureDeliveryPlanDeveloper contributions to
openspace/sport/recreation
facilities in the rural areasMeeting the Need for
Open Space, Sport &
RecreationVillages 4
AssetoutinpolicyVillages
4, BSC11, BSC12 and the
InfrastructureDeliveryPlanOpen
space/sport/recreation
facilitiescreatedintherural
areasMeeting the Need for
Open Space, Sport &
RecreationVillages 4
AssetoutinpolicyVillages
5, and agreedHousing, employment and
infrastructure completionsFormer RAF Upper
HeyfordVillages 5
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 384Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
masterplan/detailed
planning documentsat Former RAF Upper
Heyford
The Infrastructure Delivery Plan
Target Local Plan Indicators Policy Title Policy
Reference
Key infrastructure to be
delivered in accordance withProjects provided to date in
the Infrastructure Delivery
PlanInfrastructure INF 1
the Infrastructure Delivery
Plan
Duty to Cooperate
Target Local Plan Indicators Title Reference
Adoption of a Partial Review
of the Cherwell Local PlanMeet milestones for Partial
Review of the CherwellDutytocooperate
–PartialReviewofDTC 1
2011-31 Part 1 addressing Local Plan Part 1 as set out theCherwellLocal
Plan Part 1 wider unmet need within the in the Local Development
Scheme (Nov 2014) housing market area within 2
years of Local Plan Part 1
adoption.
385 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 386Appendix 6 Monitoring Framework
Appendix7ListofReplacedand
Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
Saved Policies of the Cherwell Local Plan 1996
Yes ESD 14 replaced Development in the Green Belt GB1
- retained Outdoor Recreation in the Green
BeltGB2
- retained Major Development Sites in the
Green BeltGB3
Yes
(exceptBSC 1 replaced Allocation of sites for housing H1
BSC1 and
Villages 2)Bicester 1
Bicester 2
Bicester 3
Bicester 12
Bicester 13
Banbury 1
Banbury 2
Banbury 3
Banbury 4
Banbury 5
Banbury 8
Banbury 16
387 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
Banbury 17
Banbury 18
Banbury 19
Villages 2
Villages 5
No BSC 4 replaced Housingschemesfortheelderlyand
disabledH4
No BSC 3 replaced Affordable Housing H5
No Villages 3 replaced Rural Exception Sites H6
No Villages 1 replaced Housing in the rural areas H12
Villages 2
Villages 3
No Villages 1 replaced Residentialdevelopmentincategory
1 settlementsH13
No Villages 1 replaced Residentialdevelopmentincategory
2 settlementsH14
No Villages 1 replaced Residentialdevelopmentincategory
3 settlementsH15
- retained White land at Yarnton H16
- retained Replacement dwellings H17
- retained New dwellings in the countryside H18
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 388Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
- retained Conversion of buildings in the
countrysideH19
- retained Conversion of farmstead buildings H20
- retained Conversion of buildings in
settlementsH21
- retained Residential Caravans H23
No BSC6 replaced Sites for travelling showpeople H25
- retained Residential canal moorings H26
Yes SLE 1 part replaced Allocation of sites for employment
generating developmentEMP1
Bicester 1 sites replaced
at Bicester,
Banbury and
KidlingtonBicester 2
Bicester 4
Rural sites
retained Bicester 10
Bicester 11
Bicester 12
Banbury 1
Banbury 6
Banbury 15
Kidlington 1
Villages 5
389 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
No SLE1 replaced Employmentgeneratingdevelopment
atKidlington,YarntonandBegbroke
(East)EMP3
No SLE1 replaced Employmentgeneratingdevelopment
in the rural areasEMP4
Yes SLE 2 replaced Proposals for retail development in
the shopping centre and town
centre, BanburyS2
Banbury 7
Yes Banbury 7 replaced Primaryshoppingfrontages,Banbury S3
Yes Banbury 1 replaced Redevelopment of land north of
Bridge Street and east of the innerS8
reliefroad,Banburyforrecreational
or cultural use
Yes Banbury 7 replaced Changeofuseofresidentialbuildings
in Banbury town centreS9
Yes Banbury 7 replaced Development in Banbury
commercial areasS10
Yes SLE 2
Bicester 5replaced Development proposals in Bicester
town centreS12
Yes Bicester 5 replaced Primaryshoppingfrontages,Bicester S13
Yes Bicester 6 replaced RedevelopmentoflandatFranklin’s
Yard, BicesterS15
Yes SLE 2 replaced DevelopmentinKidlingtonshopping
centreS21
Kidlington 2
- retained Provision of rear servicing,
KidlingtonS22
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 390Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
No SLE2 replaced Retaildevelopmentintheruralareas S25
- retained Small scale ancillary retail outlets in
the rural areasS26
- retained Garden centres in the rural areas S27
- retained Proposals for small shops and
extensionstoexistingshopsoutsideS28
Banbury, Bicester and Kidlington
shopping centres
- retained Loss of existing village services S29
- retained Transportation funding TR1
- retained Development attracting traffic on
minor roadsTR7
- retained Commercial facilities for the
motoristTR8
- retained Heavy Goods vehicles TR10
- retained Oxford Canal TR11
- retained Formation of new accesses to the
inner relief road and Hennef Way,
BanburyTR14
- retained AccessImprovementsinthevicinity
of Banbury Railway StationTR16
Yes SLE 4 replaced Reservation of land for road
schemes at BicesterTR20
- retained Reservation of land for road
schemes in the countrysideTR22
Yes Bicester 13 part replaced Allocationoflandforrecreationuse R1
391 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
- retained Use of redundant railway lines and
disused quarries for recreation
purposesR5
No ESD 16 replaced Protection and enhancement of the
recreational roles of the Oxford
Canal and River CherwellR7
No ESD 16 replaced Facilities for canal users R9
No BSC 11 replaced Provision of public open space in
association with new residential
developmentR12
No BSC 12 replaced Reservation of land for community
buildingsinassociationwithhousingR14
developments at Hanwell Fields,
Banbury and Slade Farm, Bicester
- retained Proposals for hotels, motels, guest
houses and restaurants within
settlementsT2
- retained Land reserved for hotel and
associated tourist or leisure basedT3
development, in vicinity of junction
11 of the M40, Banbury
- retained Proposals for new hotels, motels,
guesthouses and restaurants in the
countrysideT5
- retained Conversion of buildings beyond
settlements to self-catering holiday
accommodationT7
- retained Construction of farm buildings AG2
- retained Siting of new or extension to
existing intensive livestock and
poultry unitsAG3
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 392Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
- retained Waste disposal from intensive
livestock and poultry unitsAG4
- retained Development involving horses AG5
Yes ESD 10 replaced Protection of sites of nature
conservation valueC1
No ESD 10 replaced Development affecting protected
speciesC2
ESD 11
No ESD 10 replaced Creation of new habitats C4
- retained Protection of ecological value and
rural character of specified features
of value in the DistrictC5
- retained Developmentproposalsadjacentto
the River ThamesC6
No ESD 13 replaced Landscape conservation C7
- retained Sporadic development in the open
countrysideC8
No ESD 13 replaced Scale of development compatible
with a rural locationC9
Yes ESD 13 replaced Historic landscapes, parks and
gardens and historic battlefieldsC10
ESD 15
- retained Protection of the vista and setting
of Rousham ParkC11
Yes ESD 12 replaced DevelopmentintheCotswoldArea
of Outstanding Natural BeautyC12
Yes ESD 13 replaced Areas of High Landscape Value C13
393 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
- retained Countryside Management Projects C14
- retained Prevention of coalescence of
settlementsC15
Yes ESD 13 replaced Enhancement of the urban fringe
throughtreeandwoodlandplantingC17
- retained Development proposals affecting a
listed buildingC18
- retained Proposals for re-use of a listed
buildingC21
- retained Retention of features contributing
to character or appearance of a
conservation areaC23
- retained Development affecting the site or
setting of a schedule ancient
monumentC25
No ESD 15 replaced Development in villages to respect
historic settlement patternC27
- retained Layout, design and external
appearance of new developmentC28
- retained Appearanceofdevelopmentadjacent
to the Oxford CanalC29
- retained Design Control C30
- retained Compatibility of proposals in
residential areasC31
- retained Provision of facilities for disabled
peopleC32
- retained Protection of important gaps of
undeveloped landC33
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 394Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
- retained Protection of views of St Mary’s
Church, BanburyC34
- retained Satellitedishesinconservationareas
and on listed buildingsC38
- retained Telecommunication masts and
structuresC39
- retained Development likely to cause
detrimental levels of pollutionENV1
- retained Redevelopment of sites causing
serious detriment to local amenityENV2
- retained Development at Oxford Airport,
Kidlington likely to increase noise
nuisanceENV6
No ESD 8 replaced Developmentaffectingwaterquality ENV7
- retained Development proposals likely to
damageorbeatriskfromhazardous
installationsENV10
- retained Proposals for installations handling
hazardous substancesENV11
- retained Developmentoncontaminatedland ENV12
- retained Protection of land at Yarnton Road
Recreation ground, Kidlington for a
new primary schoolOA2
Yes ESD 14 replaced Saved Policy of the Central
Oxfordshire Local Plan (Cherwell)GB1
1992 - Development in the Green
Belt
395 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Does this
Affectthe
Adopted
Proposals
Map
1996?Replacement
PolicyReplaced or
RetainedDescription Policy
Number
Yes Villages 5 replaced Saved Policy of the Oxfordshire
Structure Plan 2005 - Upper
HeyfordH2
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 396Appendix 7 List of Replaced and Retained Saved Policies
Appendix 8 Infrastructure
Delivery Plan (IDP)
Please see separate document
397 Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1Appendix 8 Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)
Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 398Appendix 8 Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)
