5 Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan
5 Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies
6 Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies
6 Other documents
9 Appraisals and assessments
10 1 Cheshire West and Chester profile
14 2 Vision
15 3 Strategic objectives
17 4 Key diagram
18 5 Spatial strategy
21 STRAT 1 Sustainable development
23 STRAT 2 Strategic development
26 STRAT 3 Chester
28 STRAT 4 Ellesmere Port
32 STRAT 5 Northwich
35 STRAT 6 Winsford
37 STRAT 7 Middlewich
38 STRAT 8 Rural area
41 STRAT 9 Green Belt and countryside
44 STRAT 10 Transport and accessibility
49 STRAT 11 Infrastructure
52 6 Economic
53 ECON 1 Economic growth, employment and enterprise
56 ECON 2 Town centres
64 ECON 3 Visitor economy
66 7 Social
67 SOC 1 Delivering affordable housing
Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSOC 2 Rural exception sites 69
71 SOC 3 Housing mix and type
73 SOC 4 Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpersons accommodation
75 SOC 5 Health and well-being
78 SOC 6 Open space, sport and recreation
81 8 Environmental
82 ENV 1 Flood risk and water management
85 ENV 2 Landscape
87 ENV 3 Green infrastructure
89 ENV 4 Biodiversity and geodiversity
92 ENV 5 Historic environment
94 ENV 6 High quality design and sustainable construction
97 ENV 7 Alternative energy supplies
100 ENV 8 Managing waste
108 ENV 9 Minerals supply and safeguarding
Appendices
111 A Retained policies
111 Chester District Local Plan
123 Ellesmere Port and Neston Borough Local Plan
129 Vale Royal Borough Local Plan
142 Cheshire Replacement Minerals Local Plan
145 Cheshire Replacement Waste Local Plan
147 B Changes to Policies Map
206 C Sustainable Community Strategy
208 D Policy development
211 E Evidence base
Contents
Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesF Housing trajectory 214
216 G Glossary
220 H Monitoring framework
Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesContents
Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesCheshire West and Chester Local Plan
The Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan was adopted on the 29thJanuary 2015 and forms part of
the statutory development plan for the borough. The Local Plan will be developed in two parts, Part
One Strategic Policies and Part Two Land Allocations and Detailed Policies.
Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies
The Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies is the first local development
documenttobeproducedbyCheshireWestandChesterCouncil. ThepurposeofthisPlanistoprovide
the overall vision, strategic objectives, spatial strategy and strategic planning policies for the borough
to 2030. The Local Plan (Part One) will be the starting point when considering planning applications
and will be supported by the Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and
Detailed Policies Plan in due course.
The Local Plan (Part One) includes policies that have been informed by a suite of evidence base
documents prepared to support the Plan to ensure that the policies reflect locally determined priorities
for new homes, jobs, the environment and infrastructure development.
The Local Plan (Part One) includes:
Overall vision for the borough
Strategic objectives for new development in the borough
Spatial strategy for the location of new development including the identification of key sites
Strategic economic, social and environmental policies to support the spatial strategy
Schedule of proposed retained policies from the currently adopted Local Plans
The Local Plan (Part One) is supported by a wide range of background documents including:
Sustainability Appraisal
Habitats Regulations Assessment Screening Report
Monitoring, Implementation and Viability
Key Sites Background Paper
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment 2013
Employment Land Study Update (2013)
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)
Strategic Housing Market Assessment Viability Study
Cheshire West and Chester Retail Study Update (Interim) 2013
Stage Two of the Chester Green Belt Study: Technical Site Assessment
Strategy and Housing Background Paper
Key Service Centre Background Paper
Infrastructure Delivery Plan
5 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesLocal Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies
The Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies local
development document will provide further detailed policies which will support the strategic objectives
and policies set out in the Local Plan (Part One), including a review of a number of allocations in the
currently adopted Local Plans.
Other documents
Adopted policies
WhilstthepolicieswithintheLocalPlan(PartOne)willreplacesomeofthosecontainedinthecurrently
adopteddevelopmentplanfortheborough,someextantpolicieswillberetaineduntilsuchtimeasthey
are replaced by policies within the Local Plan (Part Two). A schedule of policies which the Council
proposestoretainisincludedinAppendixA'Retainedpolicies'. Changestotheadoptedpoliciesmaps
are set out in Appendix B 'Changes to Policies Map', which includes new allocations.
The adopted development plan policies for the borough are set out in the following documents:
Ellesmere PortandNestonBorough LocalPlanwas adopted in 2002 and the policies contained within
this document (with the exception of Policy H8) were saved in 2007.
Chester DistrictLocalPlanwas adopted in 2006 and the policies contained within this document (with
the exception of policy HO1) were saved in May 2009.
ValeRoyalBorough LocalPlanwas adopted in 2006. The policies within this document (with the
exception of policy GS1 and H1) were saved in 2009.
Cheshire Replacement Minerals LocalPlanwas adopted in 1999. The policies contained within this
document were saved in 2007.
Cheshire Replacement WasteLocalPlanwas adopted in July 2007. The Policies contained within this
document were saved in 2010.
Supporting documents
The Local Plan is accompanied by:
LocalDevelopmentScheme(LDS)-whichsetsouttheprogrammeforthepreparationoftheLocal
Plan documents and Supplementary Planning Documents, including the Local Plan (Part Two)
Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan
StatementofCommunityInvolvement(SCI)-thissetsouthowtheCouncilwillinvolvethecommunity
and stakeholders in the preparation and review of the Local Plan, Supplementary Planning
Documents and development management decisions
Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan
6 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesAnnual Monitoring Report - this will assess the progress of the delivery of the Local Plan and its
supporting documents and review policy effectiveness
TheLocalPlanisalsosupportedbyasetofevidencebasedocumentswhichprovideacomprehensive
and robust set of background information. This has been used to inform the preparation of the policies
in the Local Plan. A list of all evidence base documents is provided in Appendix E 'Evidence base'.
Relationship to Neighbourhood Plans
Neighbourhoodplansarecommunity-ledframeworksforguidinghowfuturedevelopmentwilltakeplace
in an area. Neighbourhood plans must be in general conformity with the strategic policies in the Local
Plan. There are currently in the order of 20 communities within the borough that are preparing
neighbourhoodplansandanothertencommunitiesconsideringpreparinganeighbourhoodplan. Once
the process of preparing a neighbourhood plan is successfully completed for a community, the policies
within it will form part of the development plan for that area.
Relationship to other Council plans and strategies
The Local Plan is a key Council document. It is the spatial expression of the borough's priorities and
developmentneedsgoingforward. Itprovidestheplanningframeworktosupporttheprioritiesidentified
in other Council plans and programmes including the Council's Corporate Plan (Altogether Better, the
Council Plan 2011 - 2015), the Sustainable Community Strategy and other Council strategies covering
regeneration, housing, climate change, environment and waste.
ThefirstSustainableCommunityStrategy(SCS)forCheshireWestandChesterwaspreparedin2010
(Together we can aim high, Sustainable Community Strategy 2010-2026) and was refreshed in July
2012 (Altogether Better: An interim partnership plan, July 2012). The Interim Partnership Plan was
prepared jointly by the Local Strategic Partnership (West Cheshire Together) and the Health and
WellbeingBoardforCheshireWestandChester. ThedocumentbuildsuponthefirstSCSandsetsout
how to make a real difference to the well-being of our communities over the period to 2017.
TheCouncilanditspartnersarealsoworkingasoneoftheGovernment'spilotareastodeliverawhole
place community budget, Altogether Better West Cheshire. The vision is to deliver the highest quality
oflifeintheUKtoWestCheshireresidents,creatingmoreoutcomefocusedservicesforourcustomers
and delivering the right services, in the right place at the right time.
7 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesCheshire West and Chester partnerships framework
 LOCAL STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP  
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY STRATEGY  
Including supporting strategies e.g. Local Plan  
Children ’s 
Trust Safer & Stronger 
Communities  Business, 
Enterprise & 
Culture Health & Well -
being Environmental 
Sustainability  
Priority programmes and strategies  
Area Partnership Board  
Area Partnership Board  Area Partnership Board  
Area Partnership Board  Area Partnership Board  
Area Partnership Boards  
Local Members, Town and Parish Councils , other public sector 
organisations, private sector, voluntary , community and faith sector, 
etc. 
Town and Parish Councils  Voluntary, Community and 
Faith sectors  
Neighbourhood 
partnerships / community 
groups Others, e.g. market town 
partnerships  
Community Forums  
Neighbourhood Partnerships  Communication  
Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan
8 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesDuty to Co-operate
Section 33A of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, as inserted by s110 of the Localism
Act 2011, has introduced a duty to co-operate in relation to the planning of sustainable development.
This came into effect in November 2011.
This requires the Council to co-operate with other local planning authorities and bodies prescribed in
regulation 4(1) of The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 to
maximise the effectiveness of the preparation of the Core Strategy and supporting activities so far as
it relates to a strategic matter.
TheCouncilandothersarerequiredtoengageconstructively,activelyandonanongoingbasis.Regard
must also be had, under section 33A(9) and regulation 4(2), to the activities of the Local Enterprise
Partnership as they relate to the Local Plan and supporting activities.
The Council has carried out continuous engagement with other local planning authorities and bodies
throughout the preparation of the Local Plan.
Appraisals and assessments
The Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies has been subject to assessment under the EU Habitats
Directives and a Sustainability Appraisal, which has incorporated the requirements of the EU Strategic
Environmental Assessment Directive, rural proofing, health impact assessment and equality analysis.
Thishasbeenaniterativeprocessandtheassessmentshavebeencarriedoutalongsidethepreparation
of the Local Plan (Part One) and the findings of the assessments fed directly into the development of
the policies.
ThefindingsoftheSustainabilityAppraisalaresetoutintheSustainabilityAppraisalreportaccompanying
theLocalPlan(PartOne).Thissetsoutthelikelysignificantenvironmental,socialandeconomiceffects
of the proposed policies in the Plan and how these can be mitigated and controlled.
TheHabitatsRegulationScreeningReportsetsoutthefindingsoftheHabitatsRegulationAssessment
of the Local Plan (Part One) policies. This concluded that the Local Plan (Part One) can be screened
out as not leading to a likely significant effect on European sites and comprises a sufficient policy
frameworktoenablethesubsequentdeliveryofnecessarymeasurestoavoidormitigateadverseeffects
on the integrity of European sites.
9 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies1 Cheshire West and Chester profile
1.1Cheshire West and Chester is a highly desirable place to live, work and visit and is one of the
most affluent areas in the North West.
1.2The borough was formed in 2009 with the creation of a new unitary authority through the
amalgamation of Chester City, Ellesmere Port and Neston and Vale Royal Councils with the western
part of Cheshire County Council. Cheshire West and Chester covers a large geographic and
demographically diverse area and is the fourth largest authority in the North West. The north western
partoftheboroughhasparticularlystronglinkswithnortheastWalesandMerseysidewhichisreflected
inlevelsofcross-commuting. TotheeasttheboroughbordersCheshireEastandhasparticularlystrong
links with the town of Middlewich that is surrounded on three sides by Cheshire West and Chester.
There are also links to Warrington, Greater Manchester and Shropshire.
1.3Over 329,000 people live in Cheshire West with over 160,000 people working in the borough.
Theareaischaracterisedbyattractivecountryside,variedlandscapesanddiversesettlementsranging
fromthehistoriccityofChestertosmallruralhamlets. Chester,EllesmerePortandNorthwichdominate
thenorthernpartoftheboroughandsitwithinoradjoiningtheNorthCheshireGreenBeltwhichcovers
42 percent of the borough's land area. Three of the larger rural settlements, Neston, Frodsham and
Helsby, are also located in the Green Belt in the more urbanised north of the borough.
1.4The borough benefits from a high quality natural environment with a number of internationally
and nationally important sites for wildlife, including the Dee and Mersey estuaries, as well as having a
rich architectural heritage with a high number of conservation areas, listed buildings and scheduled
monuments. Ease of access to the countryside provides a significant recreational resource as does
the access to the borough's waterways and leisure facilities. A key priority is to deliver development to
meetfuturehousingandemploymentneedswhilstprotectingthequalityofthenaturalenvironmentthat
gives Cheshire West and Chester its special and valued character.
1.5Cheshire West and Chester is part of the Cheshire and Warrington Local Enterprise Partnership
andtheMerseyDeeAlliance,buttheboroughdoesnotcoverasingleeconomicgeography. Ineconomic
and geographic terms, the borough lies between the urban centres of Manchester and Liverpool and
the boundary of the spheres of influence of these economic centres runs through the area. The view
thatCheshireWestandChesterisnotatthecentreofitsowneconomicgeographyissupportedbythe
fact that residents can, on average, earn more by out-commuting than working within the borough.
1.6The key long term economic issue for Cheshire West and Chester is an ageing population and
adeclineintheworkingagepopulation. Asincreasingnumbersofresidentsreachretirementagethere
willbeimplicationsfortotaldisposableincome,retailandservicesectorvitalityandfuturelaboursupply
which may deter future investment.
1.7The population has high levels of economic activity, strong skills and is likely to be employed in
managerialandprofessionalemploymentalthoughtherearesomeareasofdeprivationintheborough.
There are pockets of deprivation concentrated in Ellesmere Port, Chester, Winsford and Northwich.
1 Cheshire West and Chester profile
10 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesWhere there is unemployment, the age profile of those affected,the duration of unemployment and the
level of vacancy rates compare favourably to national averages.
1.8IncomparisontothewiderNorthWestarea,CheshireWestandChesterisanareawherehouse
prices are high and when considered alongside income levels are relatively unaffordable. Given that
workplaceearningsarenotparticularlyhighcomparedtoneighbouringauthorities,itislikelythataverage
housepricesarebeingmaintainedbythosewhovaluethelivingenvironmentandeducationopportunities
offered within the area but who out-commute for employment.
1.9The distribution of employment opportunities across Cheshire West and Chester leads to a high
proportion of car use for commuter journeys across the area. There is a low level of public transport
useinsomecommunitiesandthereisastrongcorrelationbetweenpublictransportuseandthoseareas
where deprivation is highest. Partly influenced by the use of private cars, and perhaps influenced by
the scale of the economy and concentration of industry in Ellesmere Port, the area has a poor record
in CO2emissions with an Air Quality Management Area in place at A5032 Whitby Road/Station Road
area.
1.10Cheshire West and Chester has considerable minerals resources and a significant salt mining
history. The area's mineral resources are supplied to both the local and wider national markets. In
particular salt extraction is essential for both the local and national economies and forms the basis for
a substantial part of the borough's chemical industry. Sand extraction is also very important to the
construction industry supplying sand for concrete, mortar and as general fill material.
1.11Whilst recycling levels for household waste have increased dramatically, a large proportion of
Cheshire West and Chester’s waste continues to be landfilled. With only one landfill site operating and
legislative and fiscal charges requiring the diversion of waste away from landfill, new types of waste
management facilities will be required. Hazardous waste facilities already operating in the borough
serve a national market area.
Chester
1.12The city of Chester is the borough’s largest settlement with over 81,000 residents and is a key
centreforemployment,retail,educationandtourismaswellasbeingamaintransportinterchangeand
gateway, with direct routes to London, Manchester, Merseyside and North Wales. The city is
internationally renowned as a historic city with unique heritage assets particularly Roman remains, the
City Walls and medieval Rows. The role of the city as a destination for shoppers has weakened due to
increased competition not only from larger centres such as Liverpool but at a local level from the
significant expansion and changing retail offer from out of centre retail parks and out of town shopping
centres, in particular Cheshire Oaks.
1.13Chesteristheonlypartoftheboroughwithasignificantlevelofin-commutingwhichreflectsthe
job opportunities available in the city particularly at the successful Chester Business Park. There is a
strong financial service sector in the city as well as a high level of service sector jobs linked to leisure
and tourism. However, many of the higher earning Chester residents in higher managerial and
professional occupations commute to jobs outside Cheshire West and Chester.
11 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies1.14The city has a successful university and Further Education establishment at the University of
Chester and West Cheshire College. Both establishments provide both learning and employment
opportunities,althoughaccommodatingandintegratingstudentaccommodationinthecityhaspresented
challenges.
Ellesmere Port
1.15Ellesmere Port is the second largest settlement with over 60,000 residents and the most
industrialised part of the borough and was a major centre for manufacturing. The town has suffered a
sharp decline in employment and there has been a 50 percent reduction in manufacturing employment
leaving a legacy of derelict brownfield sites and some contamination issues. The industrial legacy and
thepresenceoftheM53motorwaycuttingthroughthetownhasledtoimageandperceptionproblems.
1.16However,theareaprovidesamajoremploymentlandresourcefortheboroughandhasbecome
increasingly successful in attracting new employment opportunities. Wages are higher than in the rest
oftheborough,albeitworkersratherthanresidentsarethebeneficiariesreflectingthepresenceofhigh
value manufacturing in automotives and chemicals. There are pockets of high deprivation particularly
innorthernpartsofthetown.ThepresenceoftheManchesterShipCanal,easeofaccesstothenational
motorwaynetworkandavailabilityoflandprovidesconsiderableopportunitiesforimprovingtheeconomy
of the town and the borough as a whole.
1.17Ellesmere Port town centre serves as a local shopping centre and provides access to wider
facilities and services.
Northwich
1.18The town of Northwich and adjoining settlements of Anderton, Barnton, Davenham, Hartford,
LostockGralam,LowerMarston,LowerWincham,RudheathandWeaverhamcombinetoformthethird
biggest urban area in Cheshire West and Chester. The area has benefited from the stabilisation of
former salt mines that had prevented large areas of the town coming forward for redevelopment. In
particular, land stabilisation has enabled proposals to come forward that will significantly improve the
town centre of Northwich and help enhance the town's role as a major retail and leisure destination.
1.19Northwich has good links to the wider countryside and significant heritage assets, including the
distinctive black and white buildings of the town centre. The waterways of Northwich are a particular
assetalthoughpartsofthetownhavefloodingissues. Thepresenceofchemicalindustriesinthetown
has reduced, leaving a significant brownfield land resource. There are however, a high proportion of
service sector jobs. Northwich has net out-commuting which reflects its central location to other urban
areas and access to the mid-Cheshire railway line that serves Greater Manchester and Chester.
Winsford
1.20The smallest of the four key urban areas with a population of 30,000, Winsford is nationally
renowned for the mining of rock salt. Winsford was expanded as an ‘overspill’ town in the 1960s, with
new residents arriving from Manchester and Liverpool. More recently, Winsford and the surrounding
1 Cheshire West and Chester profile
12 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesarea has seen new housing development and dedicated employment sites being created in the town,
includingWinsfordIndustrialEstateandWoodfordPark,whichhaveattractednewindustryandbusiness
tothearea.Whilstthetownhasagoodsupplyofindustrialanddistributionland,thereisnoestablished
office market, reducing the range of employment opportunities available.
1.21The town faces challenges associated with a declining town centre and poor transport links
between employment and residential areas as well as between the railway station and the rest of the
town. There are pockets of deprivation in the town where average household incomes are amongst
the lowest in the borough. There are relatively high unemployment rates which has led to the town
having a poorer perception than other areas. House prices are generally more affordable for first time
buyers and the town has the potential to improve on access and links to the River Weaver, the Flashes
and surrounding countryside.
Rural area
1.22A third of the borough’s residents live in the rural area that runs from Neston in the north, which
bordersWirral,totheboundarywithShropshireinthesouth.Theruralareainthesouthismoresparsely
populated and many of the settlements, especially in the north, are effectively dormitory settlements
that are dependent on larger towns for employment opportunities. Car use is generally very high and
isolationandaccesstoservicesisanissueforsomeruralresidents.Theruralareaisgenerallyaffluent
with higher than average household incomes and higher levels of academic qualifications.
1.23Althoughagricultureemploysfewpeople,itmakesaverysignificantcontributiontothecharacter
of the borough, habitats and the environment. The character of the rural area is also defined by the
network of settlements that provide rural residents with services and facilities. The population in the
rural area is generally older than other parts of Cheshire West and house prices are higher.
13 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies2 Vision
2.1By 2030 Cheshire West and Chester will be a desirable and attractive place to live, work, learn
andvisitwithvibranttownsandruralvillages,reflectingthevisionoftheSustainableCommunityStrategy.
Developmentwillreflectthecharacteroflocalareas,conserving,managingandenhancingthevaluable
natural and historical environments, resources and assets.
2.2New housing and employment opportunities in sustainable and accessible locations will have
enabled the borough to attract inward investment and business growth and enabled skills and jobs to
be retained locally.
2.3Residentswillhaveaccesstoarangeofhighqualitymarketandaffordablehomesandtheneeds
of all our communities, in particular those of an ageing population, will be provided for. Opportunities
for healthier lifestyles will be delivered through the provision of sport, recreation and social facilities.
2.4Positive adaptation to climate change will continue to be promoted and communities will be
supportedintakingpositiveactiontowardssustainableliving. Sustainableuseofresourcesandimproved
energy efficiency will achieve a reduction in greenhouse gases and our carbon footprint. Waste will be
managed in the most sustainable way and will be utilised as a valuable resource.
2.5Chesterwillcontinueitsdevelopmentasaprosperoussub-regionalemploymentlocation,shopping
andinternationaltouristdestination. Thecitywillbeakeyassettotheboroughwithathrivingbusiness,
retail and tourism economy and as a centre for learning. The setting and special character of Chester
will be maintained.
2.6EllesmerePortwillbeaconfidentindustrialarea,ahubforhighqualityindustriesandtechnologies
includingthegreenenergyandwastesector,attractinginwardinvestment. Perceptionsofthetownwill
be enhanced as a result of improvements to the image of the town as a prosperous area.
2.7Northwich will have a vibrant town centre based around the regeneration and development of
newretail,leisureandhousingdevelopmentopportunities. Thewaterwaysandsurroundingcountryside
will provide an important resource for the recreational needs of local residents and visitors.
2.8Winsfordwillbeintegraltotheimprovedprosperityoftheboroughparticularlythroughdevelopment
tomeettheneedsoflocalcommunities,whilstprotectingthecharacteroftheCheshirecountrysideand
individual identity of rural settlements. The market towns and villages identified as key service centres
will remain viable settlements and will fulfil their role and function in providing access to services and
facilities for their local and surrounding communities.
2 Vision
14 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies3 Strategic objectives
Economic
Develop the role of Chester as a sub-regional city, promote regeneration and
development in the towns of Ellesmere Port, Northwich and Winsford and enableSO1
appropriatelevelsofdevelopmentinthekeyservicecentrestosupportsustainablerural
communities.
Support a vibrant, diverse and competitive local economy that provides a range of job
opportunities to support sustainable communities.SO2
Inruralareas,supportfarming,agricultureanddiversificationoftheruraleconomywhilst
ensuring development is of an appropriate scale and character.SO3
Provideanddevelopreliable,efficienttransportnetworksthatsupportsustainablegrowth
and improve accessibility to jobs and services.SO4
Ensure all development is supported by the necessary provision of, or improvements
to infrastructure, services and facilities in an effective and timely manner to make
development sustainable and minimise its effect upon existing communities.SO5
Social
Promotemixedandbalancedcommunitiesthroughtheprovisionofarangeofhousing
to meet market, affordable and specialist housing needs.SO6
Support education and skills and ensure that deprived communities have access to
services and employment.SO7
Create stronger, safer and healthier communities by enabling access to leisure,
recreational and community facilities and promoting walking and cycling.SO8
Environmental
Support sustainable development and urban regeneration by supporting the use of
suitably located previously developed land and buildings and by locating the majority
ofdevelopmentwithinandontheedgeofthemainurbanareasandkeyservicecentres.SO9
ProtecttheenvironmentalqualityandcharacterofCheshireWestandChesterthrough
maintaining the general extent and character of the North Cheshire Green Belt and
Cheshire countryside.SO10
Ensure new development does not create an unacceptable impact, either individually
or cumulatively, on the amenity and health of residents.SO11
15 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesEnsurenewdevelopmentisofsustainableandhighqualitydesignthatrespectsheritage
assets, local distinctiveness and the character and appearance of the landscape and
townscape.SO12
Manage,expandandimprovegreeninfrastructureandwaterwaysnetworks,recognising
theirimportanceindeliveringlocalenvironmental,social,economicandhealthbenefits.SO13
Mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change by addressing flood risk and water
management and support the development of new buildings and infrastructure that
are resilient, resistant and adapted to the effects of climate change.SO14
Take action on climate change by promoting energy efficiency and energy generation
from low carbon and renewable resources.SO15
Achieve sustainable waste management, using sustainable modes of transport and
travel and the prudent use of our natural resources including water and mineral
reserves.SO16
3 Strategic objectives
16 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies4 Key diagram
17 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5 Spatial strategy
5.1ThevisionandstrategicobjectivesoftheLocalPlanhavebeentranslatedintothefollowingspatial
strategy that aims to ensure the sustainable development of the borough to 2030. The Local Plan sets
out the Council's ambitions for growth and development and how this will be distributed across the
borough.Thekeycomponentsofthestrategyaremeetingfuturehousingneedsandsupportingeconomic
growth and the Plan seeks to support a level of growth that is higher than that required to meet local
needs.ThekeyelementsoftheCouncil'sstrategyarethedeliveryofintheregionof22,000newhomes
and to support an additional 14,000 people in employment.
Levels of new development
5.2The Preferred Policy Directions (PPD) outlined the Council's preferred option for growth which
would deliver 1,050 new homes per annum (21,000 over the Plan period). This figure would be a
mid-range figure between 2008 based household projections and the housing requirement set out in
the revoked Regional Spatial Strategy. The figure also equated to past completions between 1996 and
2011,althoughthisinitselfwasnotintendedasthebasisforobjectivelyassessedneed.Sincepreparation
ofthePPDtheCouncilhasupdateditsevidencebasetotakeaccountofCensusinformationandrevised
Government household projections and has prepared a new Strategic Housing Market Assessment
based on an updated household survey.
5.3The Government's 2011 based interim household projections that run to 2021 identify that the
number of additional households forming in Cheshire West would be around 500 per annum. Whilst
thesefiguresrepresentabaselineformeetingobjectivelyassessedhousingneed,theyshouldbeseen
as a starting point and will not necessarily address the issues facing the borough. Meeting around
10,000 new dwellings over the Plan period will potentially hamper future economic growth through
restrictinglaboursupplyandwouldnotmeettheneedforaffordablehousing.Asdemonstratedthrough
theStrategicHousingMarketAssessment(SHMA)thereisaneedfor714affordablehousesperannum.
5.4There are a number of economic strategies that the borough has prepared itself or with partners
that express a variety of ambitious targets for economic growth and housing delivery. The Cheshire
and Warrington Local Economic Partnership produced ‘Unleashing the Potential of Cheshire and
Warrington'(draftJuly2011). Thedocumentoutlinedthesub-regionshouldaimtoincreasethepopulation
by 100,000 people, provide 22,000 new jobs and 71,000 new dwellings by 2030. In 2013 the Council
published the 'Altogether Better for Business: An economic growth strategy for West Cheshire' that
aspires to facilitate an additional 5,000 new jobs, 7,300 homes and £500m worth of private sector
investment by 2018. These economic strategies have been considered through the preparation of the
Local Plan (Part One) and where appropriate their aspirations reflected through the Plan's policies.
5.5The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) states that plans should be aspirational but
realisticanditisrecognisedthatinrecentyearshousingcompletionshavebeenataverylowleveldue
tothewidereconomicclimate.ThePlanhastriedtoaddressthisproblemthroughsignificantlyboosting
the supply of land for new housing and supporting a mix of housing land (greenfield and brownfield) in
a variety of locations.
5 Spatial strategy
18 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.6The housing requirement and land for business development is slightly higher than that set out
inthePPDbutwillmeettheCouncil'seconomicgrowthaspirationsandhelpaddressaffordablehousing
needs.
Spatial Areas and approach to accommodating growth
5.7The borough has been split into five areas (Chester, Ellesmere Port, Northwich, Winsford and
rural area) which broadly reflect how regeneration is delivered in the borough. Key teams and projects
supporting regeneration in the borough include Chester Renaissance, Weaver Valley Partnership,
Ellesmere Port Development Board and Rural Regeneration Board.
5.8The Chester Renaissance programme focuses on the area in and around the wider city centre.
The 'Chester One City Plan' is a 15 year strategy to guide economic regeneration in the city.
5.9The Ellesmere Port Development Board, supported by the Council, has prepared a regeneration
framework to support investment and regeneration in the town over the next 10 to 15 years.
5.10TheruralandmarkettownsaresupportedbyaRuralRegenerationBoardwhichin2011produced
a 'Rural Regeneration and Rural Housing Strategy'.
5.11Whilst regeneration strategies and projects have been considered through the Local Plan (Part
One)itisimportanttonotethatnoneoftheregenerationstrategiesconstituteplansorprogrammesthat
have been assessed through the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) process.
5.12ThecityofChesterandtownsofEllesmerePort,NorthwichandWinsfordwillbethemainfocus
for development. This will enable the best use of previously developed land and allow the integration
of homes, jobs, services and facilities in the most accessible locations. Policies have been set in the
rural area to enable a significant number of new homes and support economic development and rural
businesses. The approach taken to the rural area is to locate development in the most sustainable
settlementswhilstenablingcommunitiestobringforwardadditionaldevelopmentthroughneighbourhood
plans. The Council has strongly supported local communities bringing forward neighbourhood plans
andenablinglocalcommunitiestoshapetheirownfuture.ThecountrysideofWestCheshireisrecognised
as a key feature of the borough in terms of making it an attractive place to live, work and visit and the
Plan seeks to protect this asset.
Approach to Green Belt release and Chester
5.13Since its designation, the North Cheshire Green Belt has played an important role in protecting
the character of the north of the borough where development pressures are the greatest. At both a
regional and local scale the designation has assisted urban regeneration, checked urban sprawl,
protected the identity of settlements and safeguarded the countryside. In relation to Chester and its
surrounding network of villages the Green Belt has assisted in preserving the setting and special
characterofChester.GiventheimportanceofGreenBelt,thePlanseekstomaintainthegeneralextent
oftheNorthCheshireGreenBeltasthedevelopmentidentifiedcanbemetwithoutGreenBeltrelease,
except that for Chester.
19 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.14Chester is the borough’s largest settlement, a focus for economic development and acts as a
sub-regional centre for shopping, leisure and tourism. Chester is the only part of the borough with
significant levels of in-commuting with an excess of 16,000 jobs over economically active residents. It
is accepted that Chester has good public transport links and its proximity to Wales will invariably mean
a high level of cross border commuting. However, as outlined in the SHMA there is a high affordable
housingandfamilyhousingneedinthecityandtheSHLAAhasidentifiedadecliningsupplyofbrownfield
sites. The changing student accommodation offer in the city has also reduced the supply of sites
availableforgeneralhousingalthoughitisacceptedstudentaccommodationdoescontributetomeeting
widerhousingneeds. Whilstfuturehousingdevelopmentcouldbeaccommodatedinotherpartsofthe
borough it is considered that exceptional circumstances exist for targeted Green Belt release exists
aroundthecity,takingaccountoftheneedtopromotesustainablepatternsofdevelopment. Additional
detail and justification for the approach of Green Belt release is set out in the 'Strategy and Housing
Background Paper'.
5.15Key factors in the approach to the location of development was to maintain the strategic gap
between Chester and Ellesmere Port, maintain the separation and distinct character between Chester
andthesurroundingvillagesandensurethatGreenBeltboundarychangerespectstheneedtosafeguard
thesettingandspecialcharacterofthecity. Giventhathousingandemploymentneedsfortheborough
as a whole were not dependent on Green Belt release it was possible to take a cautious approach that
shouldthereleaseofGreenBeltharmthesettingandcharacterofChesterthendevelopmentcouldbe
accommodated elsewhere in the borough, albeit less sustainably. Work to review Green Belt in the
vicinity of Chester paid high regard to preserving the special setting and historic character of the city.
The Stage Two of the Chester Green Belt Study (2013), building on previous work, identified that for
the most part the city’s periphery were considered unsuitable for Green Belt release due to potential
harm to the purposes of Green Belt.
5.16The following policies identify levels and locations for development as well as growth in the five
spatial areas.
5 Spatial strategy
20 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 1 Sustainable development
STRAT 1
Sustainable development
The Local Plan seeks to enable development that improves and meets the economic, social and
environmental objectives of the borough in line with the presumption in favour of sustainable
development. Proposals that are in accordance with relevant policies in the Plan and support the
following sustainable development principles will be approved without delay, unless material
considerations indicate otherwise:
Mitigateandadapttotheeffectsofclimatechange,ensuringdevelopmentmakesthebestuse
of opportunities for renewable energy use and generation.
Provide for mixed-use developments which seek to provide access to homes, employment,
retail, leisure, sport and other facilities, promoting healthy and inclusive communities whilst
reducing the need to travel.
Locate new housing, with good accessibility to existing or proposed local shops, community
facilities and primary schools and with good connections to public transport
Protect, enhance and improve the natural and historic environment whilst enhancing and
restoring degraded and despoiled land, seeking opportunities for habitat creation.
Encouragetheuseandredevelopmentofpreviouslydevelopedlandandbuildingsinsustainable
locations that are not of high environmental value.
Minimise the loss of greenfield land and high grade agricultural land.
Support regeneration in the most deprived areas of the borough and ensure those reliant on
non-car modes of transport can access jobs and services.
Ensure the prudent use of our natural finite resources whilst promoting the re-use, recovery
and recycling of materials.
The Council will always work proactively with applicants where proposals are not in accordance
with the Plan to find solutions which mean that proposals can be made sustainable and approved
wherever possible. However, proposals that fundamentally conflict with the above principles or
policies within the Local Plan will be refused.
Where there are no Local Plan policies relevant to the application or relevant policies are out of
date at the time of making the decision, the Council will grant permission unless material
considerations indicate otherwise, taking into account whether any adverse impacts of granting
permissionwouldsignificantlyanddemonstrablyoutweighthebenefitswhenassessedagainstthe
NationalPlanningPolicyFramework,orspecificpoliciesintheFrameworkindicatethatdevelopment
should be refused.
21 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesExplanation
5.17The sustainable development principles reflect the Council's shared sustainability objectives
and priorities set out within the Council's Sustainable Communities Strategy as updated by 'Altogether
Better: An interim partnership plan, July 2012' and Council Plan 'Altogether better, the Council Plan
2011-15'.
5.18PolicySTRAT1reflectsthepresumptioninfavourofsustainabledevelopmentwhichisseenas
agoldenthreadrunningthroughbothplanmakinganddecisiontaking,assetoutintheNationalPlanning
Policy Framework (NPPF). Sustainable development is at the heart of the Local Plan (Part One). The
Council must ensure that development, regeneration and growth in the borough is sustainable.
5.19The policy provides a framework of locally specific sustainability principles which provide the
basis upon which other policies within this Plan and the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and
Detailed Policies Plan will shape development in the borough over the plan period. The policy seeks
to facilitate and encourage opportunities to meet the economic, social and environmental needs of the
borough without undue delay in the planning process. The Local Plan for Cheshire West and Chester
is the principal planning policy document for the borough and as such follows the approach set out in
theNPPFwhichensuresdevelopmentwhichissustainableisapprovedwithoutdelay. TheCouncilwill
support applications which meet the relevant sustainability principles outlined above alongside the
policies within the Local Plan and work with applicants to find solutions where an application is not in
accordance with the above policy or other policies within the Local Plan.
5 Spatial strategy
22 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 2 Strategic development
STRAT 2
Strategic development
TheLocalPlanwillpromotestrong,prosperousandsustainablecommunitiesbydeliveringambitious
development targets whilst protecting the high quality environment that contributes to the
attractiveness and success of Cheshire West and Chester as a place to live and work.
Over the period of 2010 to 2030 the Plan will deliver at least:
22,000 new dwellings
365 hectares of land for employment development to meet a range of types and sizes of site
Development will be brought forward in line with the following settlement hierarchy:
1. The majority of new development will be located within or on the edge of the city of Chester
and towns of Ellesmere Port, Northwich and Winsford to maximise the use of existing
infrastructure and resources and allow homes, jobs and other facilities to be located close to
each other and accessible by public transport.
2. To maintain the vitality and viability of rural areas, an appropriate level of new development
will be brought forward to support new homes and economic and social development.
DevelopmentwillbefocusedinthekeyservicecentresofCuddingtonandSandiway,Farndon,
Frodsham, Helsby, Kelsall, Malpas, Neston and Parkgate, Tarporley, Tattenhall and Tarvin,
which represent the most sustainable rural locations.
3. An appropriate level of development will also be brought forward in smaller rural settlements
whichhaveadequateservicesandfacilitiesandaccesstopublictransport. Theselocalservice
centres will be identified in the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies
Plan.
Todeliverthelevelsofdevelopmentoutlinedanumberofkeysiteshavebeenidentifiedandfurther
sites will be identified through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies
Plan and/or neighbourhood plans.
Explanation
5.20AkeypurposeoftheLocalPlanistosetoutthelevelsandlocationofnewdevelopmenttomeet
futureneedsaswellasessentialinfrastructuretosupportthisgrowthandcreatesustainablecommunities.
The Plan aims to balance housing and jobs and to ensure that a range of deliverable employment land
23 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesisavailablebothforindigenousfirmsandinwardinvestment.WiththerevocationoftheRegionalSpatial
Strategy it is for the Local Plan to identify levels of growth to meet objectively assessed needs. The
starting point for assessing need has been the production of up to date demographic forecasts that
looked at a series of scenarios to assess future housing need up to 2030. It is not the intention of the
policytolimithigherlevelsofdevelopmentwheresitescomeforwardonsustainablylocatedpreviously
developed land and where no infrastructure issues would arise.
5.21As set out previously the level of new housing is higher than that proposed at the Preferred
Policy Directions stage. It is recognised that 22,000 new dwellings to 2030 is an ambitious figure given
continued economic uncertainty and that average completions of 1,100 per annum have not been
achieved in the recent past. The Local Plan has been prepared positively and this level of growth will
enableasignificantboostinhousingsupplyinlinewiththeNationalPlanningPolicyFramework. From
2010theeconomicuncertaintyandissuessurroundingmortgageanddevelopmentfinancehavesubdued
the housing market. Although the Council has granted a significant number of housing permissions
and taken a pro-active stance regards delivery of sites, the Plan relies on house builders to build out
sites. TheCheshire,HaltonandWarringtonEconomicModel(CHWEM)forecastsanimprovingeconomy
as the plan period progresses, therefore it is considered any backlog during more difficult times should
be made up over the lifetime of the Plan. The housing requirement of at least 22,000 new dwellings
(1,100 dwellings per annum) is a net figure. If recent trends continue it could be anticipated that up to
approximately50dwellingsperyearmaybelosttootherusesordemolished.Onthisbasisthenumber
ofhousingcompletionsthatwouldbeneededtomeetthenetrequirementof1,100dwellingsperannum
would equate to a gross average of 1,150 dwellings per annum and the overall supply of housing land
will need to reflect this.
5.22Locatingmostnew developmentwithinand on theedge oftheborough’s main urban areas and
ruralkeyservicecentreswillenablethemaximumuseofexistinginfrastructureandresourcesandallow
homes,jobsandotherfacilitiestobelocatedclosetoeachother.Thishasthepotentialtoenablepeople
not to be reliant on travel by car and can support existing public transport modes. Whilst the Plan aims
to maximise the use of brownfield land with over 60 percent of new housing anticipated to be delivered
on previously developed land, the release of greenfield sites will be required especially within the rural
area.
5.23The Local Economic Assessment identifies that there is not a single economic geography for
the borough. The economic mix is extremely diverse and as such there is a need to plan for a range of
different sizes and types of employment sites. The Local Plan policy aims to provide employment land
of various scales and types across the borough alongside new housing development, enabling people
to work close to where they live, ensuring this is attractive to indigenous and inward investors.
5.24The 'Employment Land Study Update' (2013) has been produced to assess the supply and
demandforemploymentlandandpremisesintheborough(fallingwithintheBuseclasses).Thepolicy
takesaccountoftherecommendationsfromthestudyandhasbeeninformedbytheNationalPlanning
Policy Framework, a review of sub-regional and local economic growth and regeneration strategies,
primaryresearchwithbusinessesandpropertymarketstakeholdersandrecentpropertymarkettrends.
It considers the likely demand for future employment land based on a review of the borough’s
5 Spatial strategy
24 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesundeveloped employment land supply, the historic development of employment land and population
and economic forecasting. The policy aims to respond positively to wider opportunities for growth.
25 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 3 Chester
STRAT 3
Chester
Chester is the key economic driver for the borough and will deliver at least 5,200 new dwellings of
which in the region of 1,300 dwellings will be provided through Green Belt release.
Development will enhance the city’s role as a sub-regional shopping and leisure destination and
support its role as an international tourism destination. Key retail and leisure proposals are:
the comprehensively planned development of the Northgate area for major leisure and retail
uses.
a new theatre in the city centre to sustainably enhance the city's cultural offer.
LandatWrexhamRoadisidentifiedonthePolicyMaptoberemovedfromtheGreenBelttofacilitate
the provision of around 1,300 new homes providing for a range and mix of housing types including
affordablehousinginlinewithPolicy 'SOC1Deliveringaffordablehousing',togetherwithessential
community infrastructure including the provision of a new primary school. Development should be
broughtforwardinlinewithanagreeddevelopmentbriefforthesitetoensurethedeliveryofahigh
quality urban extension and neighbourhood to Chester.
The Chester Business Quarter is identified as a broad location for mixed use, employment led
regenerationtotheeastofthecitycentre.Thiswillincludeintheregionof44,000m2ofhighquality
office floorspace adjacent to Chester Railway Station.
To meet a range of sizes and types of business needs, employment land and premises will be
protected from alternative forms of development within the following areas:
Chester Business Park: land at Chester Business Park is protected for high quality office
development (B1 use class) in a parkland setting.
ChesterWestEmploymentParkandSealandIndustrialEstate:existingemploymentlandand
premises are retained and protected for employment use. Qualitative improvements within
these areas will be supported.
In recognition of the national and international importance of Chester as a historic walled city, any
development within or on the periphery of the city centre or within or on the edge of the urban area
should be compatible with the conservation or enhancement of the city centre and the character
and setting of the city.
5 Spatial strategy
26 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesExplanation
5.25Chester has the largest population in the borough with over 81,000 people (25 percent of the
populationoftheborough)andactsasasub-regionalcentreforemployment,shopping,leisure,culture,
tourism and other facilities. Chester is the only part of the borough that has significant in-commuting
with a large imbalance between number of jobs and residents. Given the potential of Chester to drive
economicgrowthandtheneedtomeetthecity'shousingrequirementsitisconsidered5,200dwellings
should be accommodated during the Plan period.
5.26As set out in further detail in Policy 'ECON 2 Town centres', a major retail and leisure scheme
is to be brought forward through the Northgate city centre redevelopment as identified on the Policy
Map. The Council is committed to bringing forward a new theatre complex within the city Centre to
improve the cultural and leisure offer of the city as supported through the 'Chester One City Plan'.
5.27The level of development proposed for Chester will require Green Belt release. The Council
hastakenaccountofthe'ARUPGreenBeltStudy(2013)'inidentifyingthemostsuitablelandforGreen
Belt release . The study has looked at the purposes of Green Belt around the city especially relating to
impact on the setting and special character of the city.
5.28ThelandremovedfromtheGreenBeltatWrexhamRoadtothesouthofChesterwouldrepresent
a logical extension to Chester with good access to public transport and major employment areas and
willmeettheneedforbothmarketandaffordablehousing,especiallylargerfamilyhomes. Therelease
of Green Belt land will be taken forward in a planned way to ensure the urban extension at Wrexham
Roaddeliverstheappropriatemixofdevelopment,includingcommunityfacilities,todeliverahighquality
and sustainable development.
5.29The'EmploymentLand StudyUpdate'(2013) identifiesthatthereis limitedland available within
Chester for future employment development. Chester Business Park is identified as a flagship location
fornewoffices,althoughthisisnowsubstantiallydevelopeditremainsakeylocationforexistingbusiness
and office space. The study also identifies a lack of space for large, modern office premises above
1,000m2floorspace. As a successor to the Business Park, the 'Chester One City Plan' identifies the
potentialoftheChesterBusinessQuartertodeliveramixeduseschemethatwillbringfutureemployment
activitythroughsmall,mediumandlargeenterprises.Withinthisarea,ChesterCentralBusinessDistrict
is a major regeneration initiative in the north east of the city, adjacent to the railway station. There is
the potential to deliver high quality new office space, approximately 44,000m2, to drive Chester’s
commercialofferandfutureeconomicgrowth.ChesterWestIndustrialEstate,includingareasofSealand
Road Industrial Estate, are identified as being important to meet local needs for industrial premises to
the west of the city. The Plan recognises the need to protect employment land and premises in this
location and encourage qualitative improvements.
5.30There is one Air Quality Management Area in Boughton, therefore the policy takes account of
the need to mitigate any adverse impacts on air quality arising from development proposals in line with
policies 'STRAT 1 Sustainable development' and 'SOC 5 Health and well-being'.
27 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 4 Ellesmere Port
STRAT 4
Ellesmere Port
Development in Ellesmere Port has the potential to deliver substantial economic growth through
the availability of significant sites for industrial, manufacturing and distribution purposes. Further
housing is planned to complement the town’s role as a key employment location.
The Local Plan makes provision for at least 4,800 new dwellings in Ellesmere Port. To meet this
requirement the following land is identified:
LedshamRoadisidentifiedonthePoliciesMapforupto2,000dwellingsprovidingforarange
and mix of housing types, including affordable housing in line with Policy 'SOC 1 Delivering
affordablehousing',togetherwithessentialcommunityinfrastructureincludingtheprovisionof
a new primary school. Development should be brought forward in line with an agreed
development brief for the site to ensure the delivery of a high quality urban extension to
Ellesmere Port.
The Council will maintain a portfolio of employment land and premises available within Ellesmere
Port and the surrounding area, to meet a range of sizes and types of business needs to 2030 and
contribute to the overall employment land requirement.
Key sites with considerable potential to achieve future economic growth are identified as follows:
A. New Bridge Road: land to the east of the Shropshire Union Canal and west of New Bridge
Road is a regeneration priority area and has the potential for industrial and business
development.
B. Stanlow: this area remains important for the petrochemical and related industries. Further
assessmentoftheavailabilityandsuitabilityofemploymentlandforfuturedevelopmentinthis
locationwillbeundertakenthroughthepreparationoftheLocalPlan(PartTwo)LandAllocations
and Detailed Policies Plan.
C. Ince Park: The land is safeguarded as a multi-modal resource recovery park and energy from
waste facility for use in connection with the recycling, recovery and reprocessing of waste
materials in line with Policy 'ENV 8 Managing waste'.
5 Spatial strategy
28 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesThe detailed nature and extent of employment land allocations will be reviewed through the Local
Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan.
The Council will look to facilitate the development of land for employment uses in this area, and
will make provision for transport and other infrastructure improvements required to unlock the
development potential of some sites.
Land at Hooton Park is identified as an important sub-regional employment location and is
safeguarded for continued office, industrial and warehousing use. Any opportunities for new
employmentdevelopmentinconnectionwiththeautomotiveorrelatedindustrieswillbesupported.
Opportunities for freight transport on the rail network or via the Manchester Ship Canal should be
maximised. New links to these networks will be encouraged where appropriate.
Proposals to enhance the historic canal port as a major tourism facilitywill be supported,providing
the development complements existing uses on site and the adjoining Conservation Area.
Explanation
5.31Ellesmere Port has the potential to deliver a significant amount of economic growth during the
Plan period. This policy is intended to guide the level and location of new development in Ellesmere
Port to 2030, primarily in relation to new housing and employment development. A high level of new
housing has been planned for the town to tie in with the potential to deliver employment opportunities,
particularly in the advanced manufacturing, environmental technologies and distribution sectors. The
focus will be on delivering new quality homes to enhance the range and choice of properties available
in the town, including family homes and homes for older people, to meet the needs of the existing
community and attract new residents to Ellesmere Port. Although Ellesmere Port does have a large
supply of brownfield sites, it is considered that greenfield land should also be released to provide for a
range of housing sites to ensure both market and affordable housing is delivered. The policy supports
the ambitions of the 'Ellesmere Port Vision and Strategic Regeneration Framework (SRF)'.
5.32Ledsham Road is a large greenfield site located on the western edge of Ellesmere Port and is
identified primarily for residential development. There is the potential to provide for a medium density
development of up to 2,000 homes including the conversion and reuse of the existing farm house and
barn, local shop, a new primary school, a community building, a linear park, playing fields and other
public open space and allotments. The area is predominantly in agricultural use (grade 3a agricultural
land quality) but was safeguarded to meet potential future development needs as identified through a
newLocalPlan. Althoughbrownfieldsiteshavethepotentialtomeetasignificantamountofthehousing
requirement for Ellesmere Port there is uncertainty about how quickly they will come forward. The
LedshamRoadsitewoulddeliverlowerdensitydevelopmentthanthatonlandwithinthetownandhave
thepotentialtoattractnewresidentstothearea.Acomprehensivelyplannedapproachwillberequired
for the development of the site in line with an agreed development brief.
29 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.33ThereistheopportunitytosupportthetouristofferwithlinkstotheWaterwaysMuseum,aswell
as the general offer for tourists visiting Ellesmere Port. The National Waterways Museum is located in
the Ellesmere Port Docks Conservation Area.
5.34TheLocalEconomicAssessmentidentifiesthatwagelevelsinEllesmerePortarehighcompared
to the regional average. It identifies that the area retains strengths in manufacturing even though half
of the workforce has been lost over the last decade. The policy supports ongoing employment growth
in Ellesmere Port. In line with the SRF, the policy identifies the potential for continued investment by
existing businesses and new developments in specific growth sectors of the economy, in particular
environmental technology and energy generation, specialist chemicals, automotive, retail, tourism and
leisure,portsandlogisticsandeducation.Proposalsfornewemploymentdevelopmentshouldoptimise
the use of ports and waterways, whilst at the same time protecting their integrity for biodiversity.
5.35TheSRFidentifieskeydevelopmentopportunitiesintheEasternEmploymentZone,comprising
the three key areas of New Bridge Road, Stanlow and Ince Park.
5.36TheNewBridgeRoadarearepresentsasignificantopportunityfornewemploymentdevelopment,
given there are a number of cleared sites ready for redevelopment. An Area Development Framework
hasbeenpreparedtoencouragefutureinvestmenttothearea.Itproposesa‘bufferzone’ofhighquality
employment development between the M53 to the west and the area of Stanlow to the east which is
more industrial in nature. Improvements to the highway network with a new link road to the A5117 set
out in Policy 'STRAT 10 Transport and accessibility' will assist the development of this area and
potentially unlock further development opportunities.
5.37WithinStanlow,theEssargrouphaverecentlyacquiredlandandproposetoinvestintheregion
of £300 million. The 'Employment Land Study Update' (2013) identified the need for a clearer
understanding of what land is available to accommodate new development. This will be taken forward
through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan.
5.38Ince Park is an extant planning commitment at Ince Marshes to the east of Ellesmere Port. The
sitehasaconsentfora95MWenergyfromwastefacilitytogetherwiththedevelopmentofamulti-modal
resource recovery park, comprising an integrated waste management facility and environmental
technologies complex. It is a regionally significant proposal for the development of the UK's largest
multi-modalResourceRecoveryParkandEnergyfromWastefacility.Thesitehasthepotentialtocreate
over 1,000 jobs and will deliver £500 million of investment in the North West of England. It will also
produce more than 110MW or renewable and low carbon heat and electricity. In relation to Ince Park
this policy should be read alongside policies 'ECON 1 Economic growth, employment and enterprise'
and 'ENV 8 Managing waste'.
5.39LandatHootonParkisastrategicemploymentsitelocatedbetweentheM53motorwayandthe
Manchester Ship Canal. It is the location of the GM Vauxhall Motor works. As such, the policy supports
the continued prosperity and competitiveness of the motor plant. It recognises the economic growth
potentialoftheareainconnectionwithadvancedmanufacturingandtheautomotiveindustry.Thepolicy
allows for individual development plots within this area to be developed for employment uses, which
would lead to the creation of new jobs and economic benefits for the borough and wider sub-region.
5 Spatial strategy
30 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.40Due to the proximity of Cheshire Oaks the town centre fulfils a local shopping function primarily
based on food shopping but has a range of other town centre uses. The 'Cheshire Retail Study' has
identified a limited need for additional food retailing that should be directed to the town centre in line
with policy 'ECON 2 Town centres' and schemes should assist the regeneration of the town centre.
5.41DevelopmentproposalsinEllesmerePortshouldincludemeasurestoaddressanyenvironmental
issues raised by development adjacent to the Mersey Estuary SPA/Ramsar site and on nationally and
internationallyimportantsites.Proposalsshouldnothaveanyunacceptableimpactonthearea'snational
and internationally designated sites, environmentally sensitive areas. This includes safeguarding of
supporting habitat for the bird species protected by international designations.
5.42Further modelling of the Ellesmere Port wastewater treatment facility will be required to assess
the impact of future development. Appropriate infrastructure improvements should be provided where
necessary to avoid any adverse impacts on water quality.
5.43Development in Ellesmere Port is not likely to be significantly affected by flood risk. However,
any development alongside the Manchester Ship Canal could be at risk if the structure were to fail.
There are also localised areas of flood risk around Stanlow and Ince. In line with the recommendations
from the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA), additional flood risk assessments may be required
for development proposals coming forward in this area. The impact of drainage from new development
on water quality should be carefully considered as proposals are brought forward. The Ellesmere Port
wastewatertreatmentfacilityhascapacityuntil2015.Furtherassessmentandmodellingwillberequired
to assess the impact of new development proposed to avoid any adverse impact on water quality.
5.44There is an existing Air Quality Management Area on the A5032 Whitby Road/Station Road in
Ellesmere Port. Increased transportation as a result of new development could exacerbate vehicular
emissionsinthisarea.Newdevelopmentshouldconsiderairqualityandfurtherindustrialdevelopment
which will be subject to strict controls to ensure that air quality is not a danger to public health under
other legislation.
5.45TheCouncilwillsupporttheidentificationofmorelocallyspecificpoliciesandproposalsthrough
the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan.
31 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 5 Northwich
STRAT 5
Northwich
Northwich will provide a key focus for development in the east of the borough.
Provision will be made for at least 4,300 new dwellings and 30ha of additional land for business
andindustrialdevelopment. TheGreenBeltaroundNorthwichwillbemaintainedandthecharacter
and individuality of the settlements that form the wider built up area of Northwich safeguarded.
Keyproposalsthatprovidesignificantpotentialfortheregenerationandreuseofpreviouslydeveloped
land are:
major housing led mixed-use development schemes at Winnington and Wincham Urban
Villages.
the retail led regeneration of Northwich town centre and riverside through the delivery of
Northwich Riverside projects, including most importantly the redevelopment of Barons Quay;
Key sites for business and industrial developments are:
Gadbrook Park will be retained and protected for continued employment purposes. Any
expansion of the employment park will be assessed through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land
Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan
AsitewillbeidentifiedthroughtheLocalPlan(PartTwo)LandAllocationsandDetailedPolicies
Plan to meet the need for logistics/warehousing and distribution.
DevelopmentwithinareasidentifiedatriskoffloodinginNorthwichwillberequiredtoprovideflood
mitigation measures to manage the flood risk associated with or caused by the development and
to ensure the development will be safe without increasing flood risk elsewhere.
Explanation
5.46Northwich is defined as the town of Northwich and adjacent settlements of Anderton, Barnton,
Davenham, Hartford, Lostock Gralam, Lower Marston, Lower Wincham, Rudheath and Weaverham.
5.47The level of development proposed reflects the potential of previously developed land to meet
future housing requirements and the transformational proposals for Northwich town centre bringing
about a step change improvement to the shopping and leisure offer. Development requirements can
be accommodated within the Northwich area without the need to release Green Belt.
5 Spatial strategy
32 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.48‘Northwich Riverside’ has been developed by Cheshire West and Chester Council and the
Weaver Valley Partnership to support the range of projects currently underway to regenerate the town
(formerly known as Northwich Vision). It encompasses all Council and Weaver Valley schemes such
as the Winnington and Wincham Urban Villages, Barons Quay redevelopment, the Memorial Court
entertainmentandleisurevenueandtheLionSaltWorksrestoration.TheRiversideprojectalsoincludes
public realm and highway improvements.
5.49The Barons Quay development site represents a significant opportunity for the regeneration of
NorthwichTownCentre,publicrealmandenvironmentalimprovementsandanimprovedandexpanded
retail offer within the town. Planning permission has been secured for Barons Quay which includes the
constructionofacomprehensiveleisureandretail-ledmixed-usedevelopmenttotallingupto40,000m2
with associated highways and public realm improvements.
5.50The Winnington Urban Village site is predominantly vacant, previously developed land which
lies to the west of Northwich Town Centre. The site consists of a number of parcels of land most of
which are vacant sites within a former industrial complex.
5.51The site has planning approval for 1,200 dwellings, commercial (B1, B2 and B8 uses) retail,
leisureandcommunityfacilities,primaryschool,openspace,landscapingandassociatedinfrastructure.
TheUrbanVillagedevelopmentoffersasignificantopportunityfortheregenerationandurbanrenaissance
of Northwich to complement the objectives of the Northwich Riverside project as well as remediation of
a derelict and redundant site.
5.52TheWinchamUrbanVillagesiteoffersanopportunitytocontributesignificantlytotheregeneration
of Northwich through the provision of a mixed land use scheme including up to 950 dwellings with
sustainabilitybenefitssuchasreducedrelianceonthecarthroughtheformationofpedestrianandcycle
links from the ‘village centre’, creation of pedestrian, cycle and bus links to the existing schools and
employment areas and to nearby retail centres and the removal of existing undesirable land uses and
remediation of contaminated land.
5.53The 'Employment Land Study Update' (2013) identifies that Northwich has a good balance of
employment sites and land suitable for a range of sectors. Gadbrook Business Park is an established
employmentareaprovidingfacilitiesforadiverserangeofbusinessusers.ItisdesignatedasaBusiness
Improvement District and various initiatives aim to enhance the quality and trading environment of the
site. Local Plan policy therefore protects the site for continued employment use.
5.54NorthwichbenefitsfromexcellenttransportlinksandproximitytotheM6andnationalmotorway
network. Proximity to Manchester and Liverpool John Lennon Airports also provide further economic
opportunities.The'EmploymentLandStudyUpdate'indicatesthatwhilsttheboroughhasagoodrange
of employment sites across most market segments, there are some sectors (e.g. warehousing and
distribution)wheresitesaremorelimited.ItsuggestswithintheNorthwicharea,thereisaneedfor30ha
of employment land allocations to 2030 to support economic growth in the medium to long term for a
range of office, industrial and warehousing/distribution uses. Sites for new employment development
will be identified through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan or
neighbourhood plan.
33 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.55Northwich has been identified specifically through the outcomes of the West Cheshire Strategic
Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) as an area that is both at risk of flooding and part of a large scale
regeneration programme. An Area Flood Risk Assessment (AFRA) for Northwich Town Centre was
finalisedinFebruary2009.InadditiontoguidanceprovidedwithinnationalpolicyandtheWestCheshire
SFRA,theAFRAshouldbeusedtoprovideastrategicandholisticapproachtomanagingthefloodrisk
in Northwich town centre.
5 Spatial strategy
34 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 6 Winsford
STRAT 6
Winsford
Winsford will provide a key focus for development in the east of the borough and development
proposals will help to support the continued regeneration in the town.
Provision will be made for at least 3,500 new dwellings and 35ha of additional land for business
and industrial development.
Key proposals are:
The Station Quarter Urban Extension as identified on the Policies Map to include mixed-use
development of in the region of 1000 new dwellings (775 in the plan period), new open space
linked to the Flashes, a local neighbourhood centre, primary school, leisure, social and
community facilities. This should be achieved through a comprehensively planned approach
in line with an agreed development brief.
Re-modelling of the town centre to provide enhanced local shopping and leisure facilities to
meet identified future needs, including the provision of a new foodstore.
Safeguard Winsford Industrial Estate and Woodford Park to provide business and industrial
development to support local employment opportunities.
Significant improvements to playing pitches, green space and leisure facilities with enhanced
access to the Flashes and River Weaver.
The potential for expansion of Winsford Industrial Estate and Woodford Park Industrial Estate will
be considered and assessed through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed
Policies Plan or neighbourhood plan.
Explanation
5.56The level of new housing in Winsford will help to support regeneration, especially of the town
centrethathasbeenindecline.TheWinsfordNeighbourhoodPlanisatanadvancedstageofpreparation
andthelocalcommunityhavehighlightedthatthekeyissueisthecreationofastrongandvibranttown
centre.
5.57Winsford town centre is under-performing and has an increasing number of vacant retail units
which threaten to further reduce the performance and attractiveness of the town centre. In order to
reverse the decline, improvements to the town centre are needed to ensure it offers retailers a modern
environment in which to operate and visitors an attractive environment in which to shop. The Cheshire
Retail Study Update identified an immediate need for a new supermarket in the town and there is the
opportunity for this to act as a catalyst for town centre improvements. It is vital that this investment in
35 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesfurtherconveniencefloorspacetakesplacewithinthetowncentretosupportitsregenerationandfuture
vitality and viability.
5.58The Station Quarter Urban Extension offers the opportunity to deliver 1000 high quality new
homesinasustainablelocationwithinwalkingdistanceofthetowncentreandkeyservicesandfacilities.
Development of the site can also facilitate improvements to the railway station and potentially increase
publicaccessbetweenthestationandthetowncentrebypublictransport,cycleandwalking.InWinsford,
the regeneration of the waterfront, making better use of the Flashes as a recreational resource and
addressing the decline of the town centre continue to be priorities which have been incorporated within
the policies of the draft Winsford Neighbourhood Plan. Public access to the Flashes in the form of new
openspace,leisureroutesforpedestriansandcyclistsandplayfacilitieswillbesignificantlyincreased.
Deliveryofthesitealsooffersthepotentialforanewlocalcentreandintegrationwithexistingcommunities
by providing physical linkages and shared facilities. The site is also identified as a potential housing
allocation in the emerging Winsford Neighbourhood Development Plan.
5.59WinsfordIndustrialEstateemploysapproximately3,000peopleinover120businessesoperating
in a range of sectors including logistics and warehousing, automotive, pharmaceuticals, chemicals,
energy, environmental technology and professional services. The industrial estate is designated a
BusinessImprovementDistrict.The'EmploymentLand Study'identifiesthatthereis a good balance of
land/sites in Winsford to meet office and industrial needs. It suggests that to meet employment needs
duringthePlanperiod,thereisaneedforanadditional35haofemploymentlandallocations.Thepolicy
recognises the need to protect these successful sites, and allows for further expansion to meet the
additional employment land need. The expansion of Woodford Park Industrial Estate will be assessed
through the Neighbourhood Plan or the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies
Plan.
5.60Winsford has been identified specifically through the outcomes of the 'West Cheshire Strategic
Flood Risk Assessment' (SFRA) as an area that is both at risk of flooding and part of a waterfront
regenerationprogramme. AnAreaFloodRiskAssessment(AFRA)fortheWaterfronthasbeenprepared.
In addition to guidance provided within national policy and the West Cheshire SFRA, the AFRA should
beusedtoprovideastrategicandholisticapproachtomanagingthefloodriskonsitesalongtheFlashes,
River Weaver and Weaver Navigation.
5 Spatial strategy
36 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 7 Middlewich
STRAT 7
Middlewich
CheshireWestandChesterCouncilwillcontinuetoworkcloselyandeffectivelywithCheshireEast
CounciltoplanforsustainabledevelopmentinandaroundthetownofMiddlewich.Thiswillinclude,
if justified, allocating land in Cheshire West on the edge of the town through the Local Plan (Part
Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan.
The councils will also investigate the longer term potential for further sustainable growth in the
mid-CheshiretownsofNorthwich,WinsfordandMiddlewichcoupledwithjourneytimeimprovements
along the A54 between Junction 18 of the M6 and Winsford, particularly around Middlewich.
Explanation
5.61Middlewich falls within Cheshire East but its built up area is tightly enclosed to the east, west
and north by the borough boundary with Cheshire West and Chester. Land which lies within Cheshire
WestandChesteradjoiningthebuiltupextentofMiddlewichcouldaccommodatedevelopmentconsistent
with the town's sustainable development.
5.62CheshireEastCouncil’sDraftLocalPlan(December2012)identifiedMiddlewichasakeyservice
centre. Some future development may be justified on land within Cheshire West and Chester. The
policy therefore provides a reciprocal policy in Cheshire West and Chester's Local Plan. It builds upon
ongoing close and effective cross-boundary working between the two councils, including through the
Weaver Valley Regeneration Board, established to drive forward the regeneration and sustainable
growth of the mid-Cheshire towns of Northwich, Winsford and Middlewich.
5.63The development envisaged could include both housing and employment-related uses.
5.64TheA54betweenM6Junction18andWinsfordsuffersfrompeak-timecongestionandtherefore,
inexploringopportunitiesforlonger-termsustainablegrowthwithinandaroundthemid-Cheshiretowns,
improvements to this route will need to be investigated. Any longer-term development opportunities
would be considered and tested through the next full iteration of the Council’s Local Plan. This policy
provides a clear commitment to ongoing positive co-operation between the two councils in planning for
this area.
37 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 8 Rural area
STRAT 8
Rural Area
Within the rural area the Council will support development that serves local needs in the most
accessible and sustainable locations to sustain vibrant rural communities.
Withinthe rural area provision will be made for at least 4,200 new dwellings and 10ha of additional
land for employment development.
Development should be appropriate in scale and design to conserve each settlement’s character
and setting.
The settlements listed below are identified as key service centres for surrounding areas which
provide a good range of facilities and services and will be the focus for new development in the
ruralarea. Thekeyservicecentreswillaccommodateatleasttheamountofresidentialdevelopment
set out below.
200 dwellings Cuddington and Sandiway
200 dwellings Farndon
250 dwellings Frodsham
300 dwellings Helsby
200 dwellings Kelsall
200 dwellings Malpas
200 dwellings Neston (including Parkgate)
200 dwellings Tarvin
250 dwellings Tattenhall
300 dwellings Tarporley
5 Spatial strategy
38 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesNewdevelopmentwillalsobeaccommodatedatlocalservicecentres.Theselocalservicecentres
will be identified through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan.
The amount of development in each local service centre will reflect the scale and character of the
settlement concerned and the availability of services, facilities and public transport.
At least 10ha of land for business and industrial development in the rural area will enable small
scale expansion of existing employment sites, and new sites within or on the edge of key service
centres outside of Green Belt locations.
The retention of rural shops and community facilities, and the provision of new facilities at an
appropriate scale to the settlement, will be supported.
Development should not exceed the capacity of existing services and infrastructure unless the
required improvements can be made.
Explanation
5.65Theboroughhasanextensiveruralareawithnumeroussettlementsrangingfrommarkettowns
to small hamlets. The network of distinct rural settlements and the countryside in between contributes
heavily to the attractiveness of the borough as a whole. Many rural residents find employment in towns
and cities both within Cheshire West and beyond. Issues identified by the Council include the rural
population ageing faster than in the urban areas and rural housing being relatively unaffordable.
5.66The Plan aims to support thriving rural communities whilst protecting the intrinsic character and
beauty of the countryside. Delivery of new development in particular housing, will be directed to the
most sustainable locations in the rural area identified as key service centres. The level of housing
developmentinakeyservicecentrereflectstherangeofservices,facilities,constraintsandopportunities
forfurtherdevelopmentofthesettlement(see'KeyServiceCentresBackgroundPaper'). Whereakey
servicecentreisconstrainedbyGreenBeltthelevelofdevelopmentreflectstheabilityofthesettlement
to accommodate new development without Green Belt release. The housing targets and policies for
key and local service centres are not intended to constrain any infill (the filling of a small gap, up to two
dwellings,inanotherwisebuiltupfrontageinarecognisedsettlement)orredevelopmentopportunities.
The approach of the Plan to development in the rural area aims to strike a balance between allowing
for the managed growth of rural towns and key settlements whilst taking account of the overall Plan
strategy to concentrate most new development in the borough's four urban areas.
5.67Beyond the key service centres in the remainder of the rural area there are many smaller
settlements,manyofthemwashedoverbyGreenBelt,whichhavealowerlevelofservicesandaccess
topublictransportbutcouldacceptablyaccommodatesomesmall-scaledevelopment. Thesesettlements
act as local service centres and will be identified through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations
and Detailed Policies Plan. The Plan does not intend to impose levels of development on these local
service centres as it is considered that the local community is best placed to understand the needs of
its communities in terms of supporting local services or meeting a specific housing need through
39 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesneighbourhood plans and other mechanism including Community Right to Build Orders and rural
exception housing. It is not the intention of the policy to allow development in unsustainable locations
therefore for a settlement to be identified as a local service centre there will need to be an adequate
level of existing services and some access to public transport.
5.68The Policy makes provision for at least 4,200 dwellings in the rural area, of which 2,300 will be
in the key service centres. Housing completions and commitments as at 1 April 2014 are as follows:
Table 5.1
Total Commitments (1 April
2014)Completions 2010 –
2014
2,655 2,224 431 Key service centres
1,520 1,076 444 Rest of the rural area
4,175 3,300 875 Rural total
5.69Completionsandcommitmentsforthewholeoftheruralareaamountto4,175dwellings,therefore
there is only a very limited amount of additional housing to be provided. The Council anticipates a
housing capacity of 682 dwellings from small sites and a further potential capacity identified through
the SHLAA of 404 dwellings which will mean there will be little if any need for additional allocations to
be made in the rural area.
5.70Developmentinruralsettlements,particularlyextensionstothebuiltformofasettlement,should
be of a scale and design that respects the character and rural setting of a settlement. Communities,
through neighbourhood plans and Village Design Statements, will be encouraged to identify those
features that contribute to character.
5.71Tohelpsupporttheruraleconomyandsustainablecommunitiestheretentionanddevelopment
of local services and community facilities, such as village halls and public houses will be supported.
5.72The'RuralWorkspaceStudy'(BEGroup2009)identifiedalackofavailableindustrialunitsacross
the rural area and small scale workshops. The 'Employment Land Study Update' identifies a limited
amount of land remaining for employment development in the rural area for local office/industrial use,
primarily at Chowley Oak, Tattenhall and Hampton Heath, Malpas. It proposes there is a need for an
additional 10ha of employment land to 2030. The policy therefore allows for the small scale expansion
of existing employment sites within or on the edge of key service centres that is of a complimentary
scale and type consistent with the character of the rural location. These sites will be identified through
theLocalPlan(PartTwo)LandAllocationsandDetailedPoliciesPlanorthroughneighbourhoodplans.
5 Spatial strategy
40 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 9 Green Belt and countryside
STRAT 9
Green Belt and countryside
The intrinsic character and beauty of the Cheshire countryside will be protected by restricting
development to that which requires a countryside location and cannot be accommodated within
identified settlements.
Within the countryside the following types of development will be permitted;
Development that has an operational need for a countryside location such as for agricultural
or forestry operations.
Replacement buildings.
Smallscaleandlowimpactrural/farmdiversificationschemesappropriatetothesite,location
and setting of the area.
The reuse of existing rural buildings, particularly for economic purposes, where buildings are
of permanent construction and can be reused without major reconstruction.
The expansion of existing buildings to facilitate the growth of established businesses
proportionate to the nature and scale of the site and its setting.
Development must be of an appropriate scale and design to not harm the character of the
countryside.
The general extent of the North Cheshire Green Belt will be maintained. Policy 'STRAT 3 Chester'
sets out the proposed release of Green Belt to meet the development needs of Chester. In
settlements and areas of the countryside that are within the Green Belt, additional restrictions will
apply to development in line with the National Planning Policy Framework.
Explanation
5.73TheruralareaofCheshireWestandChesterandthehighqualityofitslandscapeandenvironment
is recognised as a key asset and is highly valued by the borough’s residents The quality of the
environment enables Cheshire West and Chester to attract a highly skilled workforce, businesses and
visitors. The policy restricts new development to that which requires a rural location. The Council will
identify settlement boundaries for the four urban areas, key service centres and local service centres
through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan. Where there is a need
to accommodate development on the edge of a settlement then the boundary will be drawn to reflect
this. Land beyond these settlement boundaries will be classed as countryside and subject to the
requirementsofPolicySTRAT9. UntiltheLocalPlan(PartTwo)LandAllocationsandDetailedPolicies
Plan has been adopted the retained policies in the Chester District Local Plan, Ellesmere Port and
41 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesNestonLocalPlanandValeRoyalLocalPlanrelatingtosettlementboundariesanddevelopmentbeyond
the existing built form of settlements will continue to operate.
5.74The policy seeks to support farming and forestry operations as well as rural diversification that
is sensitive to its rural location. The Council will encourage the re-use of rural buildings particularly for
economic purposes such as rural offices or tourism accommodation. There are many existing rural
businesseswhomayseektoexpandtheirpremisesandsensitiveexpansionschemeswillbesupported.
Additionalguidanceonthetypesofdevelopmentpermittedinthecountrysidewillbeprovidedin ofthe
Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan.
5.75Forty-two percent of the borough is classified as Green Belt with Chester, Ellesmere Port and
NorthwicheitherencompassedoradjoiningtheGreenBelt.ThekeyservicecentresofCuddingtonand
Sandiway, Frodsham, Helsby and Neston and Parkgate are inset within the Green Belt although there
are a large number of the smaller rural settlements that are washed over by Green Belt. There are a
number of smaller settlements and employment sites that are currently inset in the Green Belt and this
positionwillbereassessedintheLocalPlan(PartTwo)LandAllocationsandDetailedPoliciesPlan.The
extent of Green Belt in Cheshire West and Chester is shown on the Key Diagram and any changes
have been identified through changes to the Policies Map in Appendix B 'Changes to Policies Map'.
5.76National planning policy allows for amendments to Green Belt boundaries through Local Plans
in exceptional circumstances. A key focus of the Plan’s strategy is to channel the majority of new
development towards the main urban areas. In order to meet future development needs to 2030 and
to promote sustainable patterns of development, it has been identified that only in the case of Chester
are there exceptional circumstances to amend the Green Belt boundary.
5.77In line with national planning policy, inappropriate development is by definition, harmful to the
Green Belt and should not be allowed except in very special circumstances. The construction of new
buildings within the Green Belt is considered inappropriate, however exceptions to this are identified in
theNationalPlanningPolicyFramework.Exceptionsallowforthefollowingdevelopment,providingthey
preserve the openness of land and purposes of including it within the Green Belt;
Buildings for agriculture/forestry
Outdoor sport and recreation
Replacement buildings
Limited infilling in villages
Limited affordable housing for local community needs
Limited infilling or partial redevelopment of previously developed land
Mineral development
Engineering operations
Local transport infrastructure
Re-use of buildings that are of a permanent and substantial construction
Development brought forward under a Community Right to Build Order.
5 Spatial strategy
42 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.78AcrosstheboroughthereareanumberoflargeoperationsthatareidentifiedasMajorDeveloped
SitesintheGreenBeltincludingtheCountessofChesterHealthPark,UrencoCapenhurst,MarleyTile
Works,DelamereandChesterZoo.TheNPPFnolongerusesthistermbutsetsoutthatlimitedinfilling
or the partial or complete redevelopment of all brownfield land (excluding temporary buildings) can be
considered appropriate where there is no greater impact on the openness. Policies relating to Major
Developed Sites will be reviewed through the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed
Policies Plan.
43 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 10 Transport and accessibility
STRAT 10
Transport and Accessibility
In accordance with the key priorities for transport set out in the Local Transport Plan, development
and associated transport infrastructure should:
Provideanddevelopreliableandefficienttransportnetworksthatsupportsustainableeconomic
growth in the borough and the surrounding area
Reducecarbonemissionsfromtransportandtakestepstoadaptourtransportnetworkstothe
effects of climate change
Contribute to safer and secure transport and promote forms of transport that are beneficial to
health
Improveaccessibilitytojobsandkeyserviceswhichhelpsupportgreaterequalityofopportunity
Ensure that transport helps improve quality of life and enhances the local environment
In order to minimise the need for travel, proposals for new development should be located so as
they are accessible to local services and facilities by a range of transport modes.
New development will be required to demonstrate that:
Additionaltrafficcanbeaccommodatedsafelyandsatisfactorilywithintheexisting,orproposed,
highway network
Satisfactory arrangements can be made to accommodate the additional traffic before the
development is brought into use
Appropriate provision is made for access to public transport and other alternative means of
transport to the car
Measures have been incorporated to improve physical accessibility and remove barriers to
mobility,especiallyfordisabledandolderpeople. Thesafetyofallroadusersshouldbetaken
into account in the design and layout of new developments.
Opportunitiestoimprovepublictransportfacilitieswillbetakenwhereverpossible,throughimproved
services, interchange facilities and parking at railway stations.
5 Spatial strategy
44 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesDevelopments that would generate significant amounts of movement should be accompanied by
a Transport Assessment and Travel Plan, in accordance with Council guidance.
New developments will be expected to provide adequate levels of car and cycle parking in
accordance with the Council’s parking standards, taking account of:
The accessibility of the development
The type, mix and use of the development
The availability of, and opportunities for, public transport
Local car ownership levels
Parking provision should support the viability of town centres whilst minimising traffic congestion.
Proposals should seek to maximise use of sustainable (low carbon) modes of transport, by
incorporatinghighqualityfacilitiesforpedestrians,cyclistsandpublictransportandwhereappropriate
charging points for electric vehicles.
Opportunities will be sought to extend and improve access to local footpath and cycle networks,
including greenways, canal towpaths and the Public Rights of Way networks.
Proposals for new industrial and warehousing development should maximise opportunities to
transport products by non-road modes of transport. Sites alongside the Manchester Ship Canal,
Weaver Navigation and rail network may be particularly suitable for freight use and these
opportunitiesshouldbeintegratedintodevelopmentproposalswherefeasible. Existingorpotential
freightmovementopportunitieswillbesafeguardedfromdevelopmentwhichcouldprecludecontinued
or future freight use.
Current and disused transport corridors and infrastructure, including roads, railway lines, sidings
and stations, will be safeguarded from development which would preclude their future transport
use.
Improvements to the Transport Network
Improvementstothetransportnetworkwillbesupportedthroughschemesandstrategiesincluding
the following:
Chester Transport Strategy (Phase 1)
Chester Bus Interchange as shown on the Policies Map
New Bridge Road / A5117 link, Ellesmere Port as shown on the Policies Map
45 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesExplanation
5.79The Cheshire West and Chester Local Transport Plan sets out the integrated transport strategy
for the borough. It includes the Council's objectives, policies and priorities for transport, and the Local
Plan is a key tool in helping to achieve these. The Local Transport Plan identifies a number of priority
goals and objectives for transport, many of which form key objectives for the Local Plan.
5.80TheLocalPlanwillplayanimportantroleindeliveringandpromotingsustainabletravelchoices
and encouraging journeys to be made in more sustainable ways wherever possible, recognising that
transport choices will vary between our rural and urban areas. The policies in the Plan directs
developmenttoaccessibleplacesthatcanbenefitfromexistingtransportnetworks,servicesandfacilities,
helping to reduce the need for travel. Reducing travel distances and encouraging walking and cycling
will also promote healthy communities and help to reduce transport congestion and emissions.
5.81The Council has guidance on thresholds for travel plans, transport assessments and transport
statements.Transportassessmentswillberequiredinalldevelopmentsthatgeneratesignificantamounts
of movement. In the case of smaller scale developments for which a transport assessment is not
required, it may be necessary to produce a transport statement alongside a planning application.
Information on when assessments will be required and what they should contain can be found in the
Department for Transport document 'Guidance on Transport Assessment' (2007).
5.82Where new development generates the need for enhancements to the local transport network,
planning obligations will be sought to fund the necessary works. Larger scale infrastructure which is
identified as being required through the Council's Infrastructure Delivery Plan may be funded through
the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL).
5.83Developments should ensure that footpaths and cycle ways are included as an integral part of
the design. Safe and convenient routes should be provided which link between main buildings and the
surrounding local area and facilities. Measures to ensure safety of pedestrians include crossings,
lighting and good overlooking of footways.
5.84Requirements for parking in relation to new development are set out in the Council's parking
standards. These standards are currently applied across the whole of the borough, with the exception
oftheurbanareaofChester,wheretheSupplementaryPlanningGuidancedocument'ParkingProvision
within Developments in Chester' is applied. The Council will prepare a single supplementary planning
document for the borough which brings together the requirements for different areas, in due course.
5.85TheCyclingStrategysetsouttheCouncil'splansandproposalstomakecyclingeasier,cheaper,
safer, attractive and more convenient over the next 15 years. It sets out standards for cycle parking in
new developments. An aim of the strategy is to ensure that all new development and housing that is
built close to our existing cycle networks is linked to the network, and that new buildings have suitable
cycle facilities. In line with actions set out in the Council’s Cycling Strategy, planning obligations and
conditions will be used to extend and improve access to local cycle and pedestrian networks and to
make sure that new developments possess a high standard of facilities for cyclists.
5 Spatial strategy
46 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.86Disused transport corridors will be safeguarded for future transport use, including rail and other
guided public transport, busway, cycleway, footway or an all-purpose road. In the interim, recreational
and other uses may be allowed provided they do not preclude eventual re-use for transport purposes.
Thispolicyappliestositesofformerrailwaystations,sidingsetc,aswellastothealignmentoftheline.
Suchareascanprovideessentialspaceforinterchanges,carparking,orotherfacilitiesassociatedwith
thenewtransportroute.Tocopewiththeanticipatedgrowthinrailfreight,formerrailwaylandalongside
operational rail lines may be needed to accommodate new sidings and transshipment facilities.
5.87As part of the background work on the Local Plan, transport modelling and assessments have
beenundertakentohelppredictthepotentialimpactofproposeddevelopmentonthetransportnetwork.
Thisworkwillhelptoidentifywhereadditionalinfrastructurewillberequired,andisfeedingintobroader
transport studies, such as Chester Transport Strategy. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan will include a
list of required transport interventions which will be subject to periodic review.
5.88The policy identifies a number of transport schemes that will be brought forward by the Council.
TheChesterTransportStrategywillincludeamulti-modalandintegratedpackageofschemestoimprove
accessibilitytothecitycentre. AnewbusinterchangeatGorseStacksisidentifiedonthePoliciesMap.
The Transport Strategy will support improvements to park and ride facilities around the city. A longer
term project is the Chester Western Relief Road, the route of which is safeguarded. Discussions are
ongoingwithbodiesinNorthEastWalesastohowthisschemecouldfitintowiderproposalstoimprove
access around Broughton in Flintshire through a Hawarden Airport Eastern Link Road.
5.89TheNewBridgeRoad/A5117linkroad,asshownonthePoliciesMap,willsignificantlyimprove
accessandenableemploymenttocomeforwardfordevelopment.Thiswillhelptodelivertheaspirations
set out in Policy 'STRAT 4 Ellesmere Port' in terms of delivering substantial economic growth in the
Ellesmere Port area.
5.90Funding for major transport schemes will come from a variety of sources including developer
contributions/CIL and, for major schemes, the Cheshire and Warrington Local Enterprise Partnership
(LEP). A Cheshire and Warrington Local Transport Body (LTB) has been established to assess and
prioritise major schemes for the sub region, to provide a basis for prioritising and allocating devolved
Department for Transport major transport scheme funding.
5.91Improving connectivity between West Cheshire and surrounding areas is a goal of the LTP.
Cheshire West and Chester has strong links with neighbouring areas, in particular Liverpool, Wirral,
Manchester, North East Wales and Cheshire East. Links to Manchester and Liverpool Airports, Port
of Liverpool and major rail gateways such as Crewe and Chester stations are very important to the
borough. There are a number of planned or proposed schemes to improve transport linkages in the
widerareathatareeitheroutoftheboroughorbeyondthecontroloftheCouncilthathavethepotential
to directly benefit people who live, work, and visit the borough, and as such will be supported:
M53 motorway and M56 improvements
A54 – M6 corridor
A55 / A483 improvements
47 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesNorth East Wales Area Based Transport Strategy and A55 / A494 corridor improvements
Improved rail access to Manchester Airport
Reinstatement of the Halton Curve for passenger services
Northern Hub rail improvements
Crewe – Holyhead Electrification
Electrification of Chester – Warrington/Manchester railway line
Electrification of Wrexham – Bidston railway line
Re-doubling of the Wrexham – Chester railway line
Re-opening of Sandbach to Northwich line to passenger traffic including re-opening Middlewich
Station.
5.92As currently proposed, the line of High Speed 2 (HS2) passes through the borough. HS2 could
have significant benefits for the sub region in terms of improved linkages to London and beyond, both
directlyandthroughfreeingupcapacityontheWestCoastMainLine. Potentialbenefitsfortheborough
could include the opportunity to create better rail links to Manchester airport.
5.93More locally, funding has been secured through the Government’s Local Sustainable Transport
Fund for the ‘Connect to Jobs’ scheme. This is a package of measures aimed at improving access to
key travel to work corridors where there are both existing and future job opportunities. By making best
use of existing rail, bus and cycle networks and improving access to these through a package of
interventions,theaimistoencourageareductionincardependencyandamoresustainableapproach
to journeys to work and training opportunities. This will have the added advantage of benefiting our
visitor economy.
5.94The key travel to work corridors covered by the scheme are:
the Chester – Ellesmere Port – Wirral – Merseyside corridor (to include the Wirral Merseyrail line).
links between Chester and Ellesmere Port and the Deeside Enterprise Zone in Flintshire.
5 Spatial strategy
48 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 11 Infrastructure
STRAT 11
Infrastructure
To ensure the delivery of infrastructure improvements, to secure the future of sustainable
communities throughout Cheshire West and Chester, and meet the wider sustainability objectives
of the borough, the Council will:
supporttheprovisionofappropriatenewinfrastructure,includingschemesintendedto mitigate
andadapttoclimatechangeandanycrossboundaryschemesnecessarytodeliverthepriorities
of the Local Plan where this will have no significant adverse impact upon recognised
environmental assets.
support measures to protect, enhance or improve access to existing facilities, services and
amenities that contribute to the quality of life of residents, businesses and visitors, including
access to information and communication technologies (ICT).
facilitatethetimelyprovisionofadditionalfacilities,servicesandinfrastructuretomeetidentified
needs, whether arising from new developments or existing community need, in locations that
are appropriate and accessible.
To facilitate the delivery of the above, new development will, where appropriate, be required to
contributetowardstheCouncil'sidentifiedinfrastructureprioritiesinaccordancewithCircular5/2005,
Community Infrastructure Levy regulations or successor regulations/guidance.
Otherplanningobligationswillbedirectlyrelatedtothenatureandpotentialimpactofadevelopment
taking into account material considerations including viability of a development.
The timing of provision of infrastructureand facilitieswill be carefully considered in order to ensure
that appropriate provision is in place before development is occupied.
Explanation
5.95Cheshire West and Chester Council supports investment in new infrastructure, be that at a
strategic level which serves the whole of the borough and beyond or at a local level serving our
communities. It adopts a positive approach towards the provision of new infrastructure facilities and
services which may be required to deal with planned future growth as well as the development of
alternative delivery methods, changing expectations and technologies; and recognises that in some
instances this will require collaborative cross boundary working to deliver improvements.
49 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.96Theprotectionandenhancementofexistingfacilitiesalsohasanimportantroletoplayparticularly
in rural areas where the loss of, its post offices, schools, pubs, village shops etc or failure to invest in
improvedfacilitiesandnewtechnologiessuchashighspeedbroadbandcanhaveadirectimpactupon
the quality of life of residents.
5.97To assist with the delivery of infrastructure improvements the Council aims to ensure that new
development provides for the infrastructure, facilities, amenities and other planning benefits which are
necessary to support and serve it, and to mitigate any direct loss or impact to the local area which may
result from the development.
5.98Such contributions will be secured through a variety of means, including by planning conditions
andsection106legalagreements,inparticularthoserequiringlocalmitigationbasedonadirectimpact.
Such provision will normally be expected to be provided by the developer through on-site works or the
design of the development, but on occasion it may be necessary for developers to contribute to off-site
works either directly or in the form of a financial contribution. Appropriate planning conditions may be
used to secure the delivery of any infrastructure requirements in a timely manner.
5.99Contributions may also be secured by means of a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) which
the Council is proposing to introduce, where contributions from a number of developments may be
pooledtoaddressacumulativeimpact.Whilstitisintendedthatthecostandburdenofnewinfrastructure
in the borough will be shared by all new developments in proportion to their scale, CIL will be set at a
level which recognises the difference in economic viability of different types of development and in
different locations to avoid prejudicing future development across the borough.
5.100AlistofinfrastructureprojectswillbeidentifiedintheCouncil'sInfrastructureDeliveryPlanand
projectsprioritisedtoensurethedeliveryofcriticalinfrastructureinthefirstinstanceiethatwhichwould
berequiredbyregulationwithoutwhichdevelopmentwouldnotbepossible,usuallytoensureadequate
provision of essential utilities, facilities, water management and safe access for the development. The
Infrastructure Delivery Plan will be updated on a regular basis and provide the mechanism by which
infrastructurerequirementsandtheirrelativepriorityareidentifiedbyCheshireWestandChesterCouncil
in association with local communities and delivery partners.
5 Spatial strategy
50 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies5.101 The definition of infrastructure, facilities and services is wide ranging and listed below is an
indication of the type of uses covered. This list is not intended to be exhaustive, and will not all be
delivered through CIL:
renewable energy sources
including decentralised
inlandwaterwaynetwork
 affordable housing
climate change mitigation /
adaptationnatural environment
assets including green renewableorlowcarbonenergy
installations, combined heat infrastructure and open
space
communityfacilitiesincluding
pubs, village shops, post
offices, village halls,and power and district heating
schemes etc
 parking facilities
safety and security
improvementscommunity centres, cultural
and youth facilities
pedestrian and cycling
facilities
sportandrecreationalprovision
 cultural and other heritage
assets including public art
police and emergency
services
 training and employment
initiatives: traffic management,
 healthandwellbeingfacilities
 protection or
enhancement of
environmental valuesustainable transport and
disabled people's access
high speed broadband and
other telecommunication
improvements
 utilities,surfacewaterdrainage
and flood alleviation
public transport
highway improvements
 public realm
improvements
 waste management
51 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies6 Economic
6.1The National Planning Policy Framework requires the planning system to perform an economic
role 'contributing to building a strong, responsive and competitive economy'. A key ambition of the
Council's Sustainable Community Strategy is for our workforce to have relevant skills for our future
economy. The Local Plan must seek to deliver the education and job opportunities needed to achieve
this ambition.
6.2The policies in the Local Plan have been developed during a period of economic uncertainty and
therefore must be flexible and resilient to deliver the economic development required in a recovering
economicclimate. Thepoliciesarebasedontheunderstandingoftheborough'skeyeconomicstrengths
and seek to positively and proactively deliver the sustainable economic growth over the Plan period
through Policies 'ECON 1 Economic growth, employment and enterprise', 'ECON 2 Town centres',
and 'ECON 3 Visitor economy'.
6 Economic
52 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesECON 1 Economic growth, employment and enterprise
ECON 1
Economic growth, employment and enterprise
The Council will promote sustainable economic growth in the borough and wider sub-region,
supportingexistingbusinesses,encouragingindigenousbusinessgrowthandattractingnewinward
investment. The creation of new job opportunities across a range of sectors will be supported.
The Council will promote competitive town centre environments and bring forward sites to meet a
range of town centre uses including commercial, retail, leisure, culture and office uses.
A flexible supply of land for industrial and business use (falling within use classes B1, B2 and B8)
will be provided to meet a range of types and sizes of site in locations across the borough. This
supply will be met through existing planning commitmentsand new sites allocated for employment
use.
In reviewing the continued suitability of existing employment allocations and in releasing new sites
to meet future economic development needs, the following will be considered:
Proposals having the potential to support the growth and expansion of key business sectors
as identified in sub-regional and local economic growth strategies.
Proposals supporting the delivery of major regeneration programmes in Cheshire West and
Chester.
Proposals should be in accessible locations by a range of transport modes and compatible
with neighbouring land uses.
Where sustainable and viable town centre sites for new office uses are not available, suitable
edge of centre sites will be brought forward that are well connected to town centres and by
public transport.
There should be a reasonable prospect of the site being developed for employment (B1, B2
and B8 use) within the Plan period.
53 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesKeyemploymentlocationsareidentifiedandsafeguardedasessentialtomeetingthefutureeconomic
growth in the area:
Chester Business Quarter
Chester Business Park
Hooton Park
Ince Park
New Bridge Road
Stanlow
Therefurbishmentandenhancementofexistingsitesandpremisesforcontinuedemploymentuse
will be supported. Redevelopment to non-employment uses will be permitted where the proposed
use is compatible with existing retained employment uses in the locality and where:
the proposal would not limit the range, choice and quality of employment sites available to
meet future employment needs; or
itcanbedemonstratedthatthecontinueduseofthepremisesforemploymentuseisnolonger
commercially viable or environmentally acceptable.
The Council will support initiatives and accessibility to further/higher education facilities in the
borough including the University of Chester, West Cheshire College and Mid-Cheshire College,
improving skills and links to main employers.
The Council will support the delivery of high speed broadband infrastructure across the borough,
particularly in the rural area, and the provision of adequate telecommunications.
Explanation
6.3CheshireWestandChester,andtheUKeconomyasawhole,arefacingthesignificantchallenges
ofrecoveringfromthecurrentrecessionandworkingtowardssustainableeconomicgrowthinthelonger
term. The Council aims to respond positively to these challenges through the growth of new business
opportunities and the creation of a thriving and varied economy. To achieve this there is a need to
encourage more business start up activity whilst at the same time supporting existing businesses to
survive and grow to reach their full potential. Small to medium enterprises make up 99 percent of the
economyandarekeytofuturejobcreation.Inaddition,largescaleinwardinvestmentprojectswillhave
asignificantimpactonprivatesectorjobsandeconomicoutput.WestCheshirehashistoricallybenefited
from successful investment from major employers such as General Motors, Bank of America, Essar
and Quinn Glass. The borough has particular strengths in advanced manufacturing, automotive,
aerospace(giventheproximitytoDeeside),environmentaltechnologies,oilandchemicalsandfinancial
and professional services. Some sectors such as ICT, software and creative industries are
under-represented in the borough and could offer opportunities for future growth and development.
6 Economic
54 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies6.4For West Cheshire to remain competitive and to be a location of choice for inward investors, the
Council needs to create the right conditions to encourage growth. Supportive and flexible planning
policies can drive sustainable economic growth by identifying sites for new business and industrial
development in the borough. The approach within the Local Plan is to provide a range of sizes and
types of site borough wide, to meet anticipated economic needs to 2030. Existing undeveloped
employment land allocations will be reviewed to ensure they remain fit for purpose, are capable of
meeting the borough's economic growth aspirations and can be developed within the Plan period. It is
essential that there is a sufficient quantity of sites to meet future employment needs. The quality of
employment land and sites; their sustainability, accessibility to major transport networks, infrastructure
provision and the environmental setting, will be key factors in attracting new investment in the future.
6.5Therearesomekeyemploymentlocationswithintheboroughthathavethepotentialtogenerate
growth that would benefit the wider sub-region. The borough is located between the major urban
conurbations of Liverpool and Manchester and on the border with North East Wales. The policy aims
to complement existing economic growth strategies for the area including those of the Cheshire and
Warrington Local Enterprise Partnership and the Mersey Dee Alliance. Major sites critical to meeting
these sub-regional ambitions are identified. It also aims to support the local economic objectives
identified in the borough’s regeneration programmes.
6.6Theboroughalreadyhasexistingbusinessparksandindustrialestateswhichwillremainimportant
inmaintainingthemixandlevelofprovisionofsitesandpremisesinthefuture.TheCouncilwilltherefore
resist any proposals that would harmfully impact on the quantity, range and choice of employment land
and premises available in the area.
55 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesECON 2 Town centres
ECON 2
Town Centres - Retail, leisure and other town centre uses
Centre hierarchy
To ensure the long-term vitality and viability of the borough's town centres, the Council will apply
a town centre first approach to proposals for retail, leisure and other main town centre uses.
Development should be of an appropriate scale that reflects the size and role of each centre and
should not have an unacceptable impact on centres in the catchment area of the proposal.
The town centre hierarchy and key proposals for the borough’s town centres is as follows:
Sub-regional centre:
Chester
Retaildevelopmentmustbefocusedinthecitycentretosupportitssub-regionalroleasashopping,
leisure and international tourism destination. A comprehensive, retail-led, mixed-use scheme will
be supported on land between Hunter Street and Princess Street (known as Northgate) as shown
onthePoliciesMap.Itwillincludeasubstantialelementofnewcomparisonretailfloorspace.Leisure,
residential and office uses will also be permitted within the site, complimentary to its primary retail
offer.
To facilitatethe Northgatescheme the following should be provided for where they are required for
redevelopment:
The retention or replacement of the city's market and central library
New bus interchange facilities in the city centre
The Northgate scheme should provide for high quality public realm and integration with the rest of
the city centre.
Within the Northgate area as identified on the Policies Map proposals, either individually or
cumulatively, that are likely to prejudice the delivery of a comprehensively planned Northgate
schemeorproposalsthatwouldcomposepiecemealdevelopmentandthreatentheabilitytodeliver
a comprehensive scheme will not be supported.
6 Economic
56 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesStrategic centre:
Northwich
The first priority for retail and leisure investment is the Barons Quay scheme. Within the Barons
QuayareaasidentifiedonthePoliciesMapproposalsforretailandleisuredevelopmentthatwould
jeopardise the comprehensive delivery of this critical scheme, necessary to secure the long-term
vitality and viability of the town centre, will not be allowed. Mixed-use development, including
residential uses that support the overall vision and health of the town centre will be supported.
Town centres:
Ellesmere Port
To improve its retail and leisure offer and attractiveness, retail development will continue to be
focused in Ellesmere Port town centre along with other main town centre uses, particularly new
leisure and cultural development.
Winsford
Acomprehensiveapproachtowardstheregenerationofthetowncentrewillbesupported,enabled
by investment in a new food store. The food store should be located within the town centre to
optimise footfall through it and the town centre as a whole.
New cultural and leisure development should be located within the town centre and on suitable
sitesthatenhancethewaterfront.Residentialdevelopmentinthetownshouldsupportandenhance
links with the town centre.
Frodsham
To ensure that Frodsham maintains its important role as a retail and service centre for the local
population including its strong independent retail sector, proposals should retain and enhance the
existing range of shopping uses, including independent shops, whilst promoting choice and
competition.
Neston
ProposalsshouldsupportNestoninmeetinglocalshoppingandserviceneeds,enablingittoremain
a healthy, competitive centre.
57 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesLocal centres:
Shops and other community facilities within smaller district and local centres should be retained
wheretheyremainviableandnewusesallowedwheretheyareimportantinmeetingtheday-to-day
needs of the local community.
Development outside town centres
A sequential test will be applied to planning applications for main town centre uses that are not in
an existing centre. Town centre uses should be located in town centres and then in edge of centre
locations and only if suitable sites are not available will out of centre sites be considered. In terms
of edge and out of centre proposals, preference will be given to accessible sites that are well
connected to the town centre.
When considering planning applications for main town centre uses outside of existing centres,
which are not in accordance with the development plan, the Council will require an impact
assessment in accordance with the following local thresholds depending upon which centre the
development applies to:
Chestersub-regionalcentre:Developmentproposalsprovidinggreaterthan1,000m2grossfloorspace
for town centre uses in an edge or out of centre location.
Northwichstrategiccentre:Developmentproposalsprovidinggreaterthan1,000m2grossfloorspace
for town centre uses in an edge or out of centre location.
Ellesmere Port, Winsford, Frodsham and Neston town centres: Development proposals providing
greater than 500m2gross floorspace for town centre uses in an edge or out of centre location.
Local centres: Development proposals providing greater than 200m2gross floorspace for town
centre uses in an edge or out of centre location.
This should include an assessment of the:
Impact of the proposal on existing, committed and planned public and private investment in
Chester city centre, and other relevant town, district and local centres in the catchment area
of the proposed development; and
Individual and cumulative impact of the proposal on Chester city centre's vitality and viability
including local consumer choice and trade in the city centre and other relevant town centres
in the catchment of the proposed development up to five years from the time the application
is made.
6 Economic
58 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesCreating a strong evening economy
Proposals that positively contribute towards creating attractive, vibrant and safe centres that offer
adiversemixofusesandextendthetimewhencentresareactivewillbesupportedsubjecttotheir
impact on local amenity.
Explanation
6.7The National Planning Policy Framework promotes town centres as the preferred location for
main town centre uses. Cheshire West and Chester has an extensive network of centres, ranging from
the city centre of Chester with its regionally significant retail, heritage and cultural assets, to small rural
centresservingthedaytodayneedsoflocalcommunities.Ourcentresarevitalinsupportingsustainable
communities and are the preferred location for town centre uses, including retail, commercial, office,
leisure and community facilities. However, they face increasing challenges and if they are to survive
andprospertheymustbeabletoadaptandchange.Changingretailtrendsandlifestylespresentserious
challenges for the high street. Supporting town centre led development and enabling centres to have
flexibility to modernise and innovate will better enable them to compete and remain a focal point for a
diverse mix of uses.
6.8Maintowncentreusesaredefinedasretaildevelopment(includingwarehouseclubsandfactory
outlet centres), leisure, entertainment facilities, the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including
cinemas,restaurants,drive-throughrestaurants,barsandpubs,nightclubs,casinos,healthandfitness
centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls), offices, and arts, culture and tourism development
(including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities). For the
purposes of this policy community facilities are defined as local shops, meeting places, sports venues,
cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship.
6.9The retail hierarchy sets out the network of town centres in the borough based on their role and
is confirmed by the 'Cheshire West and Chester Retail StudyUpdate 2013'.Itensures thattown centre
usesaredirectedtoappropriatelocations,tohelpourcentresremaincompetitiveandattractivetoboth
businessesandvisitors.Ensuringproposalswithincentresremainproportionateinscaletotheroleand
size of the centre will help to reduce detrimental impacts on neighbouring centres and discourage
unsustainable shopping and travel patterns.
6.10The 'Retail Study Update 2013' also deals with the future need and requirements for retail
floorspace within the borough and where this should be located. This is based on the most up to date
population and expenditure forecasts. It is very difficult to forecast retail requirements as far ahead as
2030, so longer term forecasts should be treated with caution, as a guide to the level of future retail
floorspace.Inaddition,thefloorspacerequirementssetoutdonottakeintoaccountextantretailplanning
permissionswhichareyettobeimplemented.TheCouncilwillthereforeneedtoreviewtheretailstudy
periodically up to 2030 to take account of changing circumstances.
59 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesTable 6.1 Amount of additional retail floorspace required in Cheshire West and Chester
Non-food retail
(comparison)
requirementFood
retail(convenience)
requirementSource: CWAC Retail Study Update 2013
All figures Sq.m net
Max Min Max Min Timeframe Centre Hierarchy position
-3,500 -2,100 4,100 2,000 by 2015 Chester Sub-regional centre
6,200 3,700 6,000 2,900 by 2021
24,900 15,000 7,800 3,800 by 2026
40,100 24,000 9,000 4,500 by 2030
-500 -300 17,000 8,300 by 2015 Northwich Strategic centre
2,600 1,500 18,800 9,200 by 2021
8,600 5,100 20,500 10,100 by 2026
13,400 8,000 21,700 10,700 by 2030
-12,400 -7,400 900 400 by 2015 Ellesmere
PortTown centre
-9,800 -5,900 2,700 1,300 by 2021
-4,800 -2,900 4,400 2,100 by 2026
-500 -300 5,600 2,700 by 2030
0 0 9,200 4,500 by 2015 Winsford
900 600 10,500 5,200 by 2021
2,700 1,600 11,700 5,800 by 2026
4,200 2,500 12,600 6,200 by 2030
0 0 -3,000 -1,500 by 2015 Frodsham
100 100 -2,700 -1,300 by 2021
300 200 -2,500 -1,200 by 2026
500 300 -2,300 -1,100 by 2030
6 Economic
60 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesNon-food retail
(comparison)
requirementFood
retail(convenience)
requirementSource: CWAC Retail Study Update 2013
All figures Sq.m net
Max Min Max Min Timeframe Centre Hierarchy position
-500 -300 -1,200 -600 by 2015 Neston
-300 -200 -1,100 -500 by 2021
-100 -100 -900 -400 by 2026
100 100 -700 -400 by 2030
6.11The 'Retail Study Update 2013' shows there is a considerable level of non-food (comparison)
retailexpenditureavailableinChesterupto2030.Thiswillbeaddressedthroughthedeliveryofsignificant
new non-food (comparison) retail floorspace as part of the Northgate scheme within the city centre
which has an extant planning permission.
6.12A major concern for the Council is the steady loss of non-food (comparison) retailing from the
city centre, which if allowed to continue unchecked will damage the long term health of the city centre.
The'RetailStudyUpdate2013'confirmsthatChestercitycentrehasbeendeclininginthenationalretail
rankings over an extended period of time, experiencing a fall of 13 places in its overall Venuescore
ranking since 2006. This decline is the result of the difficulties of delivering a major city centre
redevelopment in a historic setting combined with the increased competition from other competing
centres, including Cheshire Oaks (which has seen its Venuescore ranking improve 71 places since
2006) and the expansion and changing nature of the retail offer in the city’s satellite retail parks.
6.13Itisthereforecrucial,andakeyaimoftheCouncil,toensurethatadditionalnon-food(comparison)
floorspace in Chester is delivered within the city centre through the Northgate scheme, providing
substantialnewfloorspacewhichisconducivetomodernretailoperatorsinordertostemfurtherdecline
of the city centre over the Plan period. This improved retail offer is likely to lead to Chester city centre
increasing its market share of comparison goods expenditure with a greater amount of expenditure
surplus available to support additional floorspace in the city centre. This position is supported by the
key findings from the 'Retail Study Update 2013'. In light of existing planning commitments there is
currently no requirement for additional food (convenience) retail floorspace in Chester.
6.14The priority for Northwich is the delivery of the Barons Quay scheme, which has an extant
planningpermissionandwillprovidesignificantfood(convenience)andnon-food(comparison)floorspace
to meet an identified capacity shortfall. This scheme is crucial in delivering a step change for the town
centre,withamuchimprovedretailandleisureexperiencetoaddressseriousvitalityandviabilityissues
currently being experienced in the town centre. The Barons Quay scheme along with other already
consented development will meet all identified capacity for non-food (comparison) retailing in the town
61 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesupto2030.Therecentapprovaloftwonewfoodstoresinthetownwillalsoimprovethequalitativefood
(convenience) retail provision in the town and absorb the majority of identified capacity. Therefore, no
additional food store sites are required in Northwich at this time.
6.15Ellesmere Port town centre will continue to offer a range of shopping and services for the local
population. It faces significant competition from nearby Cheshire Oaks and the Coliseum Retail Park,
which serve as both a local retail destination and major employer in the area. There is no identified
capacity for further non-food (comparison) retail floorspace in the town and only marginal capacity for
food (convenience) retail floorspace. However, improvements to Ellesmere Port will be encouraged
when opportunities arise in the town centre.
6.16An improved town centre for Winsford is vital for the town’s long term aspirations and to meet
the needs of a growing population. The 'Retail Study Update 2013' confirms that there is an immediate
needforanewfoodstoreinWinsford.Thisshouldbelocatedwithinthetowncentreandactasacatalyst
for further investment in the town centre, enabling it to offer a modern retail experience, attract more
visitors and retain more expenditure within the town. A high quality design, which improves the visual
appearance of the town centre will be sought.
6.17Frodshamisawellperformingtowncentre,whichisbothvitalandviableandisunderpinnedby
a strong independent sector. However, it faces competition from out of centre facilities, particularly in
respect of food (convenience) retail. Therefore, promotion of the facilities in centre, including the
independent sector, will help Frodsham to maintain its role as a strongly performing town centre.
6.18Nestonprovidesvaluablelocalshoppingandserviceprovision.Therecentintroductionofanew
food store has addressed previous overtrading and therefore no additional food (convenience) retail
floorspace is envisaged in the town over the Plan period. Opportunities to enhance and improve the
retailexperiencewithinthecentre,particularlyinrespectofnon-food(comparison)retail,maybejustified
where they are of an appropriate scale relative to Neston’s role and function.
6.19Tosuccessfullypromoteandimplementredevelopmentwithinourtowncentres,includingaround
Northgate in Chester and Barons Quay in Northwich, the Council must control the level of out of centre
floorspace that is delivered. It is therefore appropriate to set local thresholds for the scale of edge of
centre and out of centre development which should be subject to an impact assessment.
6.20To ensure developments are not considered in isolation, the individual and cumulative impact
of edge of centre and out of centre proposals for town centre uses should be considered.
6.21The proposed thresholds for each of the main centres reflect the relative size of each centre,
acknowledging the small size of some of the centres at the lower end of the retail hierarchy and their
potential susceptibility to alternative out of centre provision.
6.22Neighbourhood plans and their local focus means they are well placed to highlight the valuable
roleoflocalcentresandcommunityfacilitiesandcanidentifydeficienciesintheprovisionofcommunity
facilities and help to safeguard existing ones.
6 Economic
62 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies6.23TheLocalPlan(PartTwo)LandAllocationsandDetailedPoliciesPlanwillidentifyrevisedprimary
and secondary shopping areas as well as district and local Centres.
63 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesECON 3 Visitor economy
ECON 3
Visitor economy
The expansion of existing tourism assets or the creation of new tourism opportunities will be
supported where this would enhance the existing tourism offer, benefit the local economy and be
of a suitable scale and type for its location.
Majorleisure,tourism,culturaldevelopmentproposalsandvisitoraccommodation,whichwillattract
a significant number of visitors, should be located within or accessible to Chester, Northwich,
Ellesmere Port and Winsford town centres. Smaller scale development will preferably be located
in urban areas, key service centres or local service centres or in the countryside where proposals
are of a suitable scale, type and protect the character of the countryside.
Development proposals will be assessed against the following criteria, subject to any additional
controls that will apply in the Green Belt:
TheproposalwouldenhancetheroleofChesterasaninternationaltouristandvisitordestination.
It would support the vitality of the borough’s other town centres through encouraging greater
visitor numbers.
Itwouldbringregenerationbenefitsparticularlythroughtheredevelopmentofbrownfieldland.
It would be accessible by sustainable modes of transport and / or proximity to major visitor
attractions.
It has the potential to improve access to rights of way, green infrastructure and the use of the
borough’s waterways in particular the canal network.
It would support agricultural diversification that is of an appropriate scale and type in rural
areas, and would support the continued viability of rural businesses.
Camping and caravan sites will be supported where there is an unmet need. Proposals should be
small in scale to limit impact on landscape and amenity and utilise or be well related to existing
rural buildings.
Explanation
6.24Cheshire as a whole attracts approximately 25 million visitors a year and benefits from good
transport connections and proximity to Liverpool and Manchester airports. Evidence indicates that the
visitor economy in Cheshire West and Chester is worth £1.2 billion and supports 14,000 jobs, which
accounts for 9.7 percent of all jobs in the borough. This is made up of the following activities: hotels,
camping sites, restaurants, bars, activities of travel agencies, libraries, archives, museums, sporting
activities and other recreational activities. Chester city centre is the commercial and tourism centre of
6 Economic
64 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesthe sub-region and attracts approximately 9 million visitors a year. Visitors are attracted to Chester’s
heritage assets including the cathedral, roman amphitheatre and historic shopping Rows.
6.25The borough’s historic towns and rural settlements attract a wide range of visitors. Cheshire
Oaks is a significant visitor destination for retail and leisure. Policy ECON 2 'Town Centres - Retail,
leisure and other town centre uses' sets out the Council’s planning policies for maintaining the vitality
and viability of existing centres and the approach towards the provision of new leisure and cultural
facilities. The borough already has some significant tourism attractions including Chester Zoo, the
National Waterways Museum, Oulton Park and the Salt Museum. In the rural area, there are a wide
range of natural assets including Delamere Forest, the Sandstone Trail, wildlife sites such as Burton
Mere Wetlands, coastal areas and Cheshire ‘gardens of distinction’. There are a wide network of
footpaths, cycleways, bridlepaths, canals and public rights of way that provide excellent leisure and
recreational opportunities.
6.26Major sporting events in the borough (including Chester Racecourse and Oulton Park) attract a
wide range of visitors, participants and spectators. Policies SOC 5 'Health and well-being', and SOC 6
'Open space, sport and recreation' also relate to the provision of new leisure facilities for sport and
recreation.
6.27Chester Zoo is a major tourism asset located in the Green Belt. Development that provides
enhanced visitor opportunities whilst respecting the open character of the Zoo will be supported.
Development ancillary to the main function of the Zoo, such as visitor accommodation, should not be
of a scale as to undermine the role of Chester city centre.
6.28Thepolicycontinuestosupportexistingandnewtourismfacilitieswhereappropriate.Itrecognises
the valuable contribution that these industries make to the local economy. The provision of visitor
accommodation though new-build, conversion or expansion will be supported in appropriate locations.
Proposals in the rural area should meet Policy STRAT 8 'Rural Area'. Within the Green Belt proposals
willhavetomeetPolicySTRAT9'GreenBeltandcountryside'andreasonsforveryspecialcircumstances
will relate to why a development could not be located outside the Green Belt. Camping and caravan
sites are considered as tourism development not outdoor recreation.
65 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies7 Social
7.1The delivery of housing in the current market represents a significant challenge, including the
provisionofadditionalaffordablehomes.TheNationalPlanningPolicyFrameworkrequirestheplanning
system to provide for the supply of housing required to meet the needs of our present and future
generations. BoththeSustainableCommunitiesStrategyandtheCouncilPlanprioritisetheimprovement
ofaccesstogoodqualityandaffordablehomesintheborough.TheLocalPlanseekstoprovideadditional
housing and affordable homes needed in the borough through Policies 'SOC 1 Delivering affordable
housing', 'SOC2Ruralexceptionsites', 'SOC3Housingmixandtype'and 'SOC4GypsyandTraveller
and Travelling Showpersons accommodation'.
7.2Ensuring the long-term health, social and well-being of our communities is an essential role of
the planning system. Reducing health inequalities is one of the key priorities of the Sustainable
CommunitiesStrategy.TheLocalPlanseekstoenablethedeliveryofimprovedhealthcareandleisure
opportunities and facilities across the borough through Policies 'SOC 5 Health and well-being' and
'SOC 6 Open space, sport and recreation'.
7 Social
66 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSOC 1 Delivering affordable housing
SOC 1
Delivering affordable housing
Affordable homes will be sought within all new residential development, including as part of mixed
use schemes on sites that:
intheurbanareashaveacapacityfortenormoredwellingsorcompriseanareaof0.3hectares
or more; and
intheruralareashaveacapacityofthreeormoredwellingsorcompriseanareaof0.1hectares
or more.
Affordable housing provision will be sought on site unless there are exceptional circumstances
which can be demonstrated to justify off site contributions.
The Council will seek to maximise the proportion of affordable housing provided up to a target of
30%. Within this target, the proportion, type, tenure and size of affordable housing sought in each
casewilldependonsitespecificcircumstancesandtheoveralleffectontheviabilityofthescheme
and will take account of the most up to date assessment of affordable housing needs.
Whereschemeviabilitymaybeaffectedandwhereproposalsdonotmeettheidentifiedproportion,
mix and type of affordable housing, then applicants will be expected to justify any alternative
proposals through the submission of a full open book viability appraisal.
Affordable housing must be dispersed throughout the site unless there are specific circumstances
orbenefitsthatwarrantotherwise.Marketandaffordablehomesonsitesshouldbeindistinguishable
and achieve the same high quality design.
Affordablehousingshouldincludeprovisionstoremainatanaffordablepriceforfuturehouseholds
or for the subsidy to be recycled to enable the delivery of new or additional affordable housing.
New and innovative ways to provide affordable housing will be encouraged, along with the re-use
of long term empty homes.
Explanation
7.3Providing affordable housing directly supports the Council Plan key priority for ‘housing which
meets the needs of our residents'. The Cheshire Sub-Regional Housing Strategy 2009-2012 has four
priorities–thefirstofwhichis‘toincreasethesupplyofaffordablehousingtosupporteconomicgrowth
anddevelopment’. ThedefinitionofaffordablehousingissetoutintheNPPFandincludessocialrented
housing, affordable rented and intermediate affordable housing.
67 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies7.4The policy takes into account the most up to date evidence of need from the Strategic Housing
Market Assessment (SHMA). It aims to give certainty to landowners, developers, local communities,
andprovideguidanceforthepreparationofneighbourhoodplans. Thepolicywillhelpcreatebalanced
and mixed communities and help deliver much needed affordable housing. The policy needs to reflect
changing market conditions over time. It is recognised that the quantity of new affordable housing
developmentwilloften,inpractice,bedeterminedasmuchbythefinancialviabilityofnewprovisionas
bythelevelofneed. Thepolicyisthereforeconsideredflexibleenoughtotakeintoaccounttheviability
of each site and not be so restrictive as to unnecessarily prevent development.
7.5In seeking to negotiate the maximum level of affordable housing on each site, the Council will
haveregardtotheeconomicviabilityofsitedevelopment,likelycosts,marketconditions,theavailability
of public subsidy and the aim of achieving a mixed, balanced and sustainable community. Developers
will be expected to demonstrate the validity of such viability factors, providing supporting evidence.
7.6The latest Cheshire West and Chester SHMA was undertaken in 2013. The SHMA highlights
that between 1996 and 2013, house prices in the borough increased by 190.3 percent. The SHMA
shows an annual net shortfall of 714 affordable homes each year across Cheshire West and Chester
for the five year period 2013/2014 to 2017/2018. This demonstrates the degree of imbalance between
supply and demand for affordable housing, rather than being specific targets for affordable housing,
and highlights that there is clear justification for an affordable housing policy across the borough.
7.7The Economic Viability Assessment which accompanies the SHMA recommends a target of up
to 30 percent provision of affordable housing on all sites, applied across the borough. The Economic
Viability Assessment suggests the targets be applied across the borough, including in urban and rural
areas. Thedwellingtype,tenureandsizemustbereflectiveofthemostuptodateSHMAandhousing
needs information.
7.8Where it is proposed to phase developments, sub-divide sites or where recent sub-division has
taken place, or where there is a reasonable prospect of adjoining land being developed for residential
development in tandem, the whole site will be considered for the purpose of determining whether the
scheme falls above or below the site thresholds for the provision of affordable housing.
7.9UrbanareasaredefinedasChester,EllesmerePort,NorthwichandWinsford,withtheremainder
of the borough being defined as rural.
7 Social
68 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSOC 2 Rural exception sites
SOC 2
Rural exception sites
Where necessary to meet local affordable housing needs, schemes for 100% affordable housing
may be permitted on small sites which would otherwise not be appropriate for housing adjacent to
keyservicecentresandlocalservicecentresincludingthoseintheGreenBelt. Whereitisessential
to enable the delivery of affordable housing to meet local needs, a small, subsidiary element of
market housing may be permitted on such sites.
Thetenuresplitandhousingmixmustbereflectiveofthemostuptodatehousingneedsinformation.
Schemes will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that the properties will remain
affordable in perpetuity.
Schemes must be modest and in keeping with the form and character of the settlement and local
landscape setting.
Schemes must be supported by an up to date housing needs survey.
Schemes will be encouraged to come forward through the neighbourhood planning process.
Explanation
7.10The 'Strategic Housing Market Assessment' (SHMA) highlights the need for affordable housing
throughout the borough. As planning policies are generally more restrictive in the rural areas, this can
mean that fewer affordable homes are built in these locations, particularly within the Green Belt.
7.11The'RuralHousingStrategy'visionistosupportcommunitiesintheruralareas,intermsoftheir
housing needs and aspirations, to 'retain the qualities that make Cheshire West and Chester’s rural
housingmarketsmarketsofchoice,whilstensuringthatallcurrentandfutureresidentshavethechoice
to live locally'. The strategy recognises the affordable housing need in the borough’s rural areas, and
the effect that this can have on local communities and the rural economy. The strategy considers that
innovative approaches to providing affordable housing will be necessary.
7.12Itisrecognisedthatruralexceptionsitesareanimportantpolicytooltodeliveraffordablehousing
tosmallersettlements,whichcanhelptomaintainthesustainabilityofruralcommunities,includinglocal
service centres. However, in some instances the viability of schemes is becoming an issue. The
availability of Government funding for affordable homes through the Homes and Communities Agency
(HCA) has been significantly reduced. This has resulted in viability issues for registered providers, and
has meant that in some limited circumstances it may be appropriate to allow a small element of market
69 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policieshousing as ‘cross subsidy’ in order to allow for the development of affordable housing to go ahead
particularly where this meets a local housing need.
7.13Thispolicywilldeliver100percentaffordableexceptionsitesandsiteswhereitcanbesatisfactorily
proven that a subsidiary element of market housing will facilitate the delivery of an identified local
affordable housing need, subject to the proposals fulfilling the other policy requirements. Proposals
containing an element of market housing must be supported by a viability assessment, which will be
reviewed internally to ensure that the proportion of market housing provided is no greater than that
required to deliver the agreed amount of affordable housing without the need for public subsidy. The
market units must at all times be subsidiary to the affordable housing element.
7.14Proposals must be well related and in sympathy with the scale, form and character of the
settlementandthelocalityandshouldpayparticularattentiontothelocaldistinctivenessofthesettlement
andthesurroundingarea.Environmentalconsiderationsincludinglandscapeandheritagemattersand
other constraints, including the impact on the openness of the Green Belt will determine the number of
dwellings considered to be acceptable.
7.15Where neighbourhood plans are not in place, developers are advised that the identification of
appropriatesitesanddesignprincipleswillbebestachievedthroughanappraisalofthewholesettlements
concerned and must include engagement with the relevant communities/parishes. Where proposals
includeanelementofmarkethousing,thedesignofthesiteandindividualunitsshouldensureintegration
with the affordable housing.
7.16Development proposals should be consistent with the local need identified by an up to date
housingneedsurvey. Occupancywillgenerallyberestrictedtopersonswithalocalconnectionincluding
living in, working in or having close family connection to the community or parish in the first instance,
with a geographical cascade approach thereafter. The locality to which this applies will be agreed with
the Council when a planning application is submitted.
7 Social
70 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSOC 3 Housing mix and type
SOC 3
Housing mix and type
In order to support mixed, balanced and sustainable communities, the Council will seek to provide
a mix of housing types, tenures and sizes of both market and affordable housing. Proposals for
new housing should take account of the needs of that particular area and especially of:
the provision of small family homes to assist households into home ownership and for older
people who may wish to downsize.
theprovisionofarangeofaccommodationtypestomeetthelongtermneedsofolderpeople.
This could include the provision of Lifetime Homes, bungalows and extra care housing.
The Council will support the provision of specialised student accommodation within Chester in
appropriate, accessible locations, convenient for the facilities at the University of Chester.
TheCouncilwillworkwithorganisationssuchasCommunityLandTruststohelpbringforwardland
and schemes for self-build groups and individuals.
Explanation
7.17Providing an appropriate supply of housing directly supports the Council Plan key priority for
‘housing which meets the needs of our residents.’ The 'Cheshire Sub-Regional Housing Strategy' has
four priorities – including increasing the supply of affordable housing; meeting housing and
accommodation related support needs of the sub region’s most vulnerable residents; and increasing
the supply of market housing to support continued economic growth and regeneration to meet local
housing needs.
7.18The'StrategicHousingMarketAssessment'(SHMA)2013highlightstheneedforfamilyhousing.
TheSHMAstatesthathousesremainthemostpopularchoiceofmosthouseholds,particularlydetached
and semi-detached properties, with three bedroom properties most popular overall. It is considered
appropriate to encourage the provision of smaller family homes of two to three bedrooms in order to
enable new households to get on the housing ladder, and for older households to downsize.
7.19It is recognised that the borough has an ageing population which will lead to specific
accommodationneeds.Providingawiderrangeofolderpersons'accommodationalsohasthepotential
to free up family accommodation.The SHMAhighlights thatthe number and proportion of older people
is increasing. In particular, the number of residents aged 75 or over is expected to increase by 79.6
percent, from 28,000 in 2010 to 50,300 by 2030. The SHMA recommends that the range of housing
optionsavailabletoolderpeopleshouldbediversified,forexamplewiththedevelopmentofopenmarket
71 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policieshousing marketed to older people, and the development of extra care accommodation and co-housing
(your own home in a small community which shares facilities such as laundry).
7.20The policy also provides for the development of further student accommodation within Chester.
In areas close to the University of Chester, such as the Garden Quarter, there are a high concentration
ofHousesinMultipleOccupation(HMOs). Thiscanleadtospecificproblemssuchasnegativeimpacts
on the physical and environmental street scene, problems with disposal of waste, the deterioration of
properties, and rises in anti social behaviour, crime, noise and nuisance. Where there are particularly
high instances of HMOs, mixed communities are not being sustained. It is therefore considered vital
to effectively manage HMOs and, where necessary, implement Article 4 Directions.
7.21The'StudentAccommodationinChesterStudy'(NevinLeatherAssociate,January2012)reveals
how 77 percent of the 805 properties with student exemptions in Chester are located within half a mile
of the main University of Chester campus. The report also sets out that by 2010, out of the 1,422
properties in the Garden Quarter area, 482 (34 percent) were occupied exclusively by students, with
additional rented properties occupied by non-student households or mixed student/non-student
households.Inordertohelpredressthisimbalanceandprovideforexistingandfutureneed,theprovision
of specialised student accommodation in appropriate and sustainable locations will be supported.
7.22The SHMA 2013 household survey identified a strong interest in self-build from households
planningtomove(13percentofrespondentswereinterested).Self-buildpropertiescanallowmembers
of the community to get a foothold on the housing ladder, and can add to the diversity and character of
an area. Community Land Trusts can assist in the provision of land for self-build through the receipt of
public land at little or no cost, purchase of a rural exception sites or through accessing funding.
7.23Neighbourhood planning can be an excellent tool for undertaking local need surveys and for
determiningthespecificrequirementsandneedsofacommunity,determininglevelsandtypesofneed
and demand, and detailing specific design or density requirements for housing developments.
7 Social
72 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSOC 4 Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpersons accommodation
SOC 4
Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpersons accommodation
The Council will work with its partners to ensure appropriate provision for Gypsies, Travellers and
Travelling Showpersons accommodation needs.
Development proposals will be permitted for private and public Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling
Showpersons accommodation provided that they meet the following criteria. Proposals should:
not be affected by pollution, contamination, flooding or other environmental factors that would
result in unacceptable living conditions
not have unacceptable environmental effects
be well located in relation to the highway network with adequate vehicular and pedestrian
access, and have provision for parking and circulation
be accessible to local services and facilities by walking and/or public transport
be supplied with essential services such as water, sewerage, electricity, drainage and waste
disposal
be well related to existing settlements, and have regard to residential amenity
not be disproportionate to the scale of the existing settlement whether singly or cumulatively
with other sites in the area
be located outside the Green Belt except in very special circumstances
with regard to sites for Travelling Showpersons, the development should include appropriate
provision for the safe storage and maintenance of equipment
The above criteria will be used to guide the site allocation process.
There will be a presumption against the loss of existing permanent consented Gypsy, Traveller or
Travelling Showpersons sites leading to, or exacerbating an identified shortfall unless suitable
replacement provision of equal or enhanced value are provided.
Explanation
7.24There is a recognised need to provide accommodation for members of the Gypsy and Traveller
andTravellingShowpersonscommunitieswithinCheshireWestandChester.Nationalguidancestates
that a criteria based policy to address the needs of these communities should be included within the
Local Plan. Providing accommodation will address any shortfall and will also help to limit the number
of unauthorised encampments and developments throughout the borough. Providing sites directly
supports the Council Plan key priority for ‘housing which meets the needs of our residents.’
73 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies7.25The level of need for Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpersons accommodation within
Cheshire West and Chester has been identified up to 2028 through the Cheshire Gypsy, Traveller and
Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) March 2014. It identifies a need for 15
further permanent Gypsy and Traveller pitches 2013-2018, 15 in years 2018-2023, and 16 from
2023-2028. From2013-2018theneedisidentifiedfor11TravellingShowpersonsplots,1plotbetween
2018-2023, and 1 plot between 2023-2028. The GTAA also recommends that Cheshire West and
Chester provides a transit site of between 5-10 pitches.
7.26The Council is committed to ensuring that suitable sites are provided for at least the level of
need identified in the GTAA. The GTAA provides the basis for the allocation of sites in the Local Plan
(Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan. The criteria set out in the policy will be used
to inform the allocation of sites and to determine planning applications, ensuring that proposed sites
are suitable and capable of providing an appropriate living environment, whilst protecting the amenity
and character of the surrounding area.
7 Social
74 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSOC 5 Health and well-being
SOC 5
Health and well-being
In order to meet the health and well-being needs of our residents proposals will be supported that:
provideneworimprovedhealthfacilitiesacrosstheborough,particularlyinareasofrecognised
need
support improved links to healthcare in rural areas
promote safe and accessible environments and developments with good access by walking,
cycling and public transport
support opportunities to widen and strengthen the borough’s cultural, sport, recreation and
leisure offer
consider the specific requirements of different groups in the community (e.g. families with
children, older people, people with disabilities, service families) in all relevant development
work to reduce poverty and deprivation across the borough, particularly in areas of identified
need
promote high quality greenspace, and access to this across the borough, particularly in areas
of recognised need.
Development that gives rise to significant adverse impacts on health and quality of life (e.g. soil,
noise, water, air or light pollution, and land instability, etc) including residential amenity, will not be
allowed.
Explanation
7.27The health and well-being of our residents is a prime concern of the Council. The promotion of
healthandwell-beingisakeythreadrunningthroughthisPlanandisinfluencedbymanyofthepolicies
and objectives within it, and within the Sustainable Community Strategy including promoting diversity,
feeling safe, addressing community safety, health inequalities and reducing deprivation.
7.28Asstatedin'DevelopingaHealthandWellbeingStrategy/RefreshingtheSustainableCommunity
Strategy for Cheshire West and Chester' 'Our well-being is affected by the nature of our physical
environment;livinginpoorhousing,inaneighbourhoodwithalackofaccesstogreenspaces,impacts
negativelyonourphysicalandmentalwellbeing.Poorhousingconditionsincludinghomelessnessand
overcrowdingarearisktoarangeofhealthconditionssuchasaccidentsandpoormentalhealth.Living
in cold conditions and fuel poverty can contribute to excess winter mortality amongst older people'.
75 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies7.29Healthandwell-beingiscloselylinkedtodeprivation,withareasofsignificantdeprivationhaving
residentswithpoorerhealthandwell-being.TheCouncilwillworktoimproveeducationandemployment
in these areas, and across the borough, and will also help to deliver physical improvements to the
neighbourhoods themselves. Rural areas are particularly identified as needing improved access to
services and facilities.
7.30Fuelpovertyisafurtherconcernandisaparticularissueinruralareas,butcanhappenanywhere
across the borough. The Council will support the increased energy efficiency of new development,
including refurbishment.
7.31The diverse needs of residents within the borough, including the increasing proportion of older
people,willrequiredifferentapproachestohealthandwell-being. The'JointStrategicNeedAssessment'
(JSNA)isastatementonthehealthandsocialcareneedsofpeoplelivinginCheshireWestandChester,
intended to be used to develop and improve services. The JSNA identifies the health and well-being
needsofthelocalpopulation,identifiesanygroupswhoseneedsarenotbeingmet,providesinformation
to be used in the planning, development and delivery of health services, and helps to reduce health
inequalities.
7.32The document 'Developing a Health and Well-being Strategy/Refreshing the Sustainable
Community Strategy for Cheshire West and Chester' identified the following issues for Cheshire West
and Chester:
Life expectancy compares well to the national average. However, life expectancy for women is
lower than the national average in Winsford and Rural East and Ellesmere Port, and whilst life
expectancyforallresidentsisimproving,thisrateofimprovementisslowerinmoredeprivedareas.
AveragelifeexpectancyishighestintheareaoftheRuralWestAreaPartnershipBoardandlowest
among men in Ellesmere Port and amongst women in Winsford and Rural East.
Although life expectancy has been improving across the borough, this has been slower in more
deprived areas.
16 percent of children grow up in poverty, with particular areas of concern in west Winsford and
parts of Ellesmere Port and Chester.
35,000 households (24.7 percent of the total) are in fuel poverty.
Between 2009 and 2019, the number of people aged 65-84 will increase by 13,000 (25 percent),
and the number of those aged 85 or over will increase by 3,000 (39 percent).
7.33Responsesto'OurCommunitySurvey2010'rankedhealthservicesasthesecondmostimportant
factor in having a good place to live.
7.34The 'Strategic Leisure Stock Review' was produced in order to ‘identify the strategic needs for
leisure provision in Cheshire West and Chester in order to identify what replacement, refurbished and
new facilities are required to meet changing demands, based on demographic change and a desire to
increase participation, over the next 25 years'. Generally, it identified that the current leisure facilities
are of poor quality. Replacement facilities at Northwich and Ellesmere Port are to be prioritised, which
will contribute to improve health and well-being in those areas.
7 Social
76 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies7.35The 'Open Space Audit' identifies the existing amount of open space, sport and recreational
facilities and sets out appropriate standards of provision to which new development could contribute,
with the aim of ensuring that all households can access a broad range of high quality and accessible
facilities. Similarly, the 'Green Infrastructure Framework for North East Wales, Cheshire and Wirral
2011',setsoutthefuturedevelopmentforgreeninfrastructurelinkagesandprovisionacrosstheborough,
and the 'Playing Pitch Strategy' guides the delivery of playing fields. It is important to ensure that
recreation land, particularly for outdoor recreation, is retained and kept in use.
77 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSOC 6 Open space, sport and recreation
SOC 6
Open space, sport and recreation
The Council will seek to protect, manage and enhance existing open spaces, sport and recreation
facilities to provide a network of diverse, multi-functional open spaces.
Proposals will be supported that:
Improvethequalityandquantityofaccessibleopenspace,sportandrecreationfacilitiesinthe
local area
Provide innovative solutions to improving the network of existing open spaces, increase
accessibility to green corridors, and enhance biodiversity
Improve access to open space for disabled people, pedestrians and children's play facilities
Proposals on existing open space, sport and recreation facilities will only be permitted where:
A. Equivalent or better replacement quality and quantity open space, sport or recreation facilities
will be provided in a suitable location; or
B.Anassessmenthasclearlydemonstratedthesitetobesurplusforitscurrentopenspace,sport
or recreation function;
And
C. It could not fulfil other unsatisfied open space, sport or recreation needs;
And
D. In circumstances where the open space, sport or recreation facility has been demonstrated to
be surplus to need for that function in accordance with part C of this policy any proposed
replacementwillremedyadeficiencyinanothertypeofopenspace,sportorrecreationfacility
in the local area; or
E. The development will be incidental to the use of the open space, sport or recreation facility.
Development will be required to incorporate or contribute towards the provision of an appropriate
level and quality of open space, sport and recreation provision.
7 Social
78 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesExplanation
7.36The above policy will be supported by the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed
PoliciesPlan. Thegeneralexpectationwillbethatproposalsonexistingopenspacewillincludeprovision
for equivalent or better open space, sport or recreation facilities.
7.37The 'Open Space Audit and Assessment of Need' provides an audit of public and private open
space areas and identifies local needs and aspirations through consultation with the public. A series of
standards of provision have been established and will be monitored and regularly updated. It is the
application of these standards that will underpin future decisions around existing and proposed new
openspaces,sportandrecreationfacilitiesacrosstheboroughtogetherwiththe'PlayingPitchStrategy'.
7.38TheCouncilwillseektodevelopconsistencyofprovisionacrosstheborough,meetingshortfalls
ordevelopinginnovativeapproachestoredressthebalance,includingenhancinglinkstoexistinggreen
corridors and networks. There will be a strong focus on improving the quality of existing open space in
particular where there are higher levels of existing provision.
7.39Theprovisionofpublicopenspaceinassociationwithnewdevelopmentsprovidesanimportant
linktoGreenInfrastructureprovision,andalsohelpstoprovideagoodqualityoflife.Newdevelopments
which require open space provision will be expected to create new open spaces on site in accordance
with the standards, as set out in both the 'Open Space Audit and Assessment of Need' and 'Playing
Pitch Strategy'. They will determine the amount of additional demand that will be generated by new
development.
7.40Further policy guidance on the factors to be taken into account when providing open space will
be set out in the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan.
7.41Openspaceincludesformalmanagedopenspacesuchasparks,sportsgrounds,amenitygreen
space, play areas, allotments, cemeteries and church yards. It also includes natural and semi-natural
open space, which is less intensively managed with more attention given to natural habitats of value to
wildlife.Manyoftheseareasformgreenwaylinksbetweenthecountrysideandurbanareas.Enhancing
the recreational role of open spaces, together with appropriate management will assist in diverting
pressure away from these sensitive areas.
7.42For the purposes of the Local Plan, types of open space, sport and recreation facilities are
defined as:
Parks and Gardens – including urban parks and formal gardens.
Amenity Green Space – including informal recreation green spaces, and green spaces in and
around housing.
Outdoor Sports Facilities – including natural or artificial surfaces either publicly or privately owned
for sport and recreation, formal playing fields, golf courses and school playing fields.
Other outdoor sports areas.
Natural and semi-natural green spaces – including woodlands, scrub, grassland, heath or moor,
wetlands, open and running water and bare rock habitats.
79 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesGreenCorridors–includingriversandcanalbanks,roadandrailcorridors,cyclingroutes,pedestrian
paths, and public rights of way.
Other – including allotments, community gardens, cemeteries and churchyards.
7 Social
80 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8 Environmental
8.1The principle of sustainable development is at the heart of planning policy. The need to protect
and enhance our natural, historic and built environments is central to sustainable development. The
planning system plays an essential role in ensuring the prudent use of our natural resources and
minimisationofwastearisingsandpollution. Alongsidethistheplanningsystemsupportsthemitigation
and adaptation to the effects of climate change whilst seeking the development of renewable and low
carbon energy. The Local Plan must also seek to protect our natural and historic environments by
seeking the highest quality design and sustainable construction. The Local Plan seeks to meet these
requirements through the following policies.
'ENV 1 Flood risk and water management'
'ENV 2 Landscape'
'ENV 3 Green infrastructure'
'ENV 4 Biodiversity and geodiversity'
'ENV 5 Historic environment'
'ENV 6 High quality design and sustainable construction'
'ENV 7 Alternative energy supplies'
'ENV 8 Managing waste'
'ENV 9 Minerals supply and safeguarding'
81 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 1 Flood risk and water management
ENV 1
Flood risk and water management
The Local Plan will seek to reduce flood risk, promote water efficiency measures, and protect and
enhance water quality through the following mechanisms:
All development must follow the sequential approach to determining the suitability of land for
development, directing new development to areas at the lowest risk of flooding and where
necessary apply the exception test, as outlined in national planning policy.
Developers will be required to demonstrate, where necessary, through an appropriate Flood
RiskAssessment(FRA)attheplanningapplicationstage,thatdevelopmentproposalswillnot
increase flood risk on site or elsewhere, and should seek to reduce the risk of flooding. New
development will be required to include or contribute to flood mitigation, compensation and/or
protectionmeasures,wherenecessary,tomanagefloodriskassociatedwithorcausedbythe
development.
Development proposals should comply with the Water Framework Directive by contributing to
the North West River Basin Management Plan and Dee River Basin Management Plan
objectives, unless it can be demonstrated that this would not be technically feasible.
The drainage of new development shall be designed to reduce surface water run-off rates to
include the implementation of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS) unless it can be
demonstrated that it is not technically feasible or viable.
Proposals within areas of infrastructure capacity and/or water supply constraint should
demonstrate that there is adequate wastewater infrastructure and water supply capacity to
serve the development or adequate provision can be made available.
Explanation
8.2The National Planning Policy Framework states that local plans should take account of climate
change over the longer term, including factors such as flood risk, coastal change, water supply and
changes to biodiversity and landscape.
8.3Inappropriatedevelopmentinareasatriskoffloodingshouldbeavoidedbydirectingdevelopment
awayfromareasathighestrisk,butwheredevelopmentisnecessary,makingitsafewithoutincreasing
flood risk elsewhere.
8 Environmental
82 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.4Cheshire West and Chester Council are required to prepare and implement a planning strategy
that will help to deliver sustainable development by appraising, managing and reducing flood risk. As
Lead Local Flood Authority, Cheshire West and Chester also has a duty to fulfil their requirements
throughthe'FloodRiskRegulations2009'andthe'FloodandWaterManagementAct2010'tomanage
flood risk and water management.
8.5Thepolicyseekstoensurethatdevelopmentisdirectedawayfromareasathighestriskofflooding,
especially development that includes key infrastructure and major utilities. It also seeks to make sure
that surface water created by new developments is mitigated, thereby reducing surface water run-off
impacts of new development on downstream areas in terms of quantity and run-off rates. This will also
assist in meeting the requirements of the Water Framework Directive (WFD) and will help to mitigate
any adverse effects on water quality. The WFD is designed to:
enhancethestatusandpreventfurtherdeteriorationofaquaticecosystemsandassociatedwetlands
which depend on the aquatic ecosystems
promote the sustainable use of water
reduce pollution of water, especially by ‘priority’ and ‘priority hazardous’ substances
ensure progressive reduction of groundwater pollution
protect the ecology of surface waters by correctly managing their hydrology and geomorphology.
8.6National legislation, including the 'Flood and Water Management Act 2010' seeks to address the
riskoffloodingandwaterscarcity,bothofwhichareexpectedtoincreaseasaresultofclimatechange.
The Act will help local authorities to tackle flood risk in partnership with the Environment Agency and
other stakeholders. This will build on earlier legislation, including the 'Flood Risk Regulations 2009'
which councils used to develop Preliminary Flood Risk Assessments (PFRAs). The Council's PFRA
report was approved by the Environment Agency in November 2011. The Act also requires the use of
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS) by removing the automatic right to connect new development
to sewers and providing for local authorities to adopt SUDS.
8.7Developmentswillberequiredtointegratemeasuresforsustainablewatermanagementtoreduce
flood risk, avoid adverse impact on water quality and quantity within Cheshire West and Chester,
includinggroundwaterresources,andprovideopportunitiestoenhancebiodiversity,healthandrecreation.
8.8Guidance on the preparation of site specific flood risk assessments is provided at Paragraph 9
of NPPF Technical Guidance which directs applicants for planning permission and local planning
authorities to the Environment Agency Standing Advice.
8.9The Council will develop a Local Flood Risk Management Strategy which will set out the local
organisationswithresponsibilityforfloodriskinthearea,introducepartnershiparrangementstoensure
co-ordinationbetweentheseorganisationsandcarryoutanassessmentofthefloodriskandplansand
actions for managing the risk.
83 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.10To appraise flood risks, national policy requires councils to undertake Strategic Flood Risk
Assessments (SFRAs), which provide information at the local (but not site specific) level regarding
floodingissueswhichaffectthearea.The'WestCheshireSFRA'wasproducedin2008whichidentified
areas of flood risk from all sources across the borough.
8.11The 'West Cheshire SFRA' concludes that the main source of flooding in the borough is rivers
and streams. Affected properties are generally on low lying land in the rivers' natural floodplain. Parts
of Chester and Farndon are at risk of flooding from the River Dee, including the Sealand Basin area of
Chester.
8.12In the Ellesmere Port area, small isolated areas are subject to flood risk from drainage
infrastructure and minor watercourses such as Rivacre Brook. The Stanlow industrial area is at risk of
tidal flooding, although risk of direct flooding from the River Mersey is significantly reduced due to the
presence of the Manchester Ship Canal. The Ince Marshes area is also considered to be at high risk
of flooding. Some properties within Frodsham are considered to be under threat of flooding from the
River Weaver, however it is mainly agricultural land at risk of flooding in this area.
8.13InNorthwichthemostsignificantfloodriskiscausedbytheWeaver,DaneandPeoverEyeriver
catchments converging. The main flood risk is to properties to the south of the town centre and in
Winnington, an industrial area to the north east of Northwich. Some regeneration sites in the centre of
Northwich are at risk of flooding and work has been undertaken to understand the nature of this risk
including the 'Northwich Area Flood Risk Assessment' (AFRA).
8.14Winsford has been identified as an area that is at risk of flooding. The 'Winsford AFRA' looks at
the flood risk to Winsford’s proposed development areas and provides a guide to possible mitigation
and design methods to address any risk of flooding.
8.15The 'Cheshire West and Chester Water Cycle Strategy' was produced in partnership with the
EnvironmentAgencyandthethreewatercompanieswhooperateintheborough–UnitedUtilities,Dee
ValleyWaterandWelshWater.Thestrategyassessestheimplicationsofproposedhousingdevelopment
on water supplies, wastewater facilities and on the risk of flooding. It also considers the impacts of
increased water use and sewage discharge on important natural habitats such as the Dee and Mersey
estuaries.
8 Environmental
84 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 2 Landscape
ENV 2
Landscape
The Local Plan will protect and, wherever possible, enhance landscape character and local
distinctiveness. This will be achieved by:
The identification of key gaps in the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed
Policies Plan between settlements outside the Green Belt that serve to protect and maintain
their character
Supporting the designation of Local Green Space
Protecting the character of the borough's estuaries and undeveloped coast.
Development should:
Take full account of the characteristics of the development site, its relationship with its
surroundings and where appropriate views into, over and out of the site.
Recognise, retain and incorporate features of landscape quality into the design.
Explanation
8.16The National Planning Policy Framework states that 'the planning system should contribute to
andenhancethenaturalandlocalenvironmentbyprotectingandenhancingvaluedlandscapes'. High
quality design can make a positive contribution to the protection and enhancement of landscape value
and as such is encouraged by the Local Plan.
8.17Where appropriate, the designation of Local Green Space will provide communities with the
opportunity to safeguard green areas which are of particular significance to the local community.
8.18The 'Cheshire Landscape Character Assessment 2009' classified and described the landscape
types across the borough. These character areas, coupled with conservation area appraisals, Village
Design Statements, and neighbourhood plans, seek to define the character and local distinctiveness
which will be protected and, wherever possible, enhanced across the borough.
8.19The quality of local distinctiveness in the borough is an essential landscape asset. In order to
protect local distinctiveness the Council will identify key gaps between settlements outside the Green
Belt which will maintain and preserve their individual character.
85 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.20Landscapescaleassessmentshavebeenaconsiderationofthe'GreenInfrastructureFramework'.
This identifies areas where investment in environmental enhancement, rural enterprise, access and
biodiversity will bring particular benefits to landscape value in the form of improved water resource
management, tourism, climatic resilience and wildlife.
8.21Development proposals should take account of both the 'Green Infrastructure Framework' and
the 'Cheshire Landscape Character Assessment' in ensuring features of local landscape significance
are incorporated into designs.
8.22The borough's coastline includes the edge of the Dee and Mersey Estuaries, which form an
integralpartoftheborough'slandscapeandnaturalhabitatassets. Developmentshouldimprovepublic
access to the shoreline and enhance the landscape character of the borough's coastline.
8 Environmental
86 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 3 Green infrastructure
ENV 3
Green Infrastructure
The Local Plan will support the creation, enhancement, protection and management of a network
of high quality multi-functional Green Infrastructure. This will be achieved by:
Developmentincorporatingnewand/orenhancedGreenInfrastructureofanappropriatetype,
standard and size or contributing to alternative provision elsewhere.
Increased planting of trees and woodlands, particularly in urban areas and the urban fringe.
Explanation
8.23Green Infrastructure is the network of green spaces, water bodies, biodiversity habitats, and
othernaturalelementsthatsurround,passthrough,andlinkthesettlementsandlandscapes,connecting
the cities, towns and villages in the borough.
8.24The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) sets out that local plans should set out a
strategic approach, ‘planning positively for the creation, protection, enhancement and management of
networksofbiodiversityandgreeninfrastructure’.ThisapproachissupportedbytheCouncil'sSustainable
Community Strategy.
8.25The NPPF also sets out that Green Infrastructure should be used to help mitigate the effects of
climate change in vulnerable areas. Alongside this, Green Infrastructure can deliver a broad range of
functionsandprovidevitalsocio-economicandculturalbenefitsthatunderpinindividualandcommunity
healthandwell-being.The'GreenInfrastructureFrameworkforNorthEastWales,CheshireandWirral
2011' states that Green Infrastructure can help:
unlock the economic potential of development sites and attract investment in green employment
address health inequalities and create a high quality of life for communities across the area
underpin the economy with a healthy and biodiverse landscape fabric that provides the setting for
living and working whilst enabling wildlife to thrive and adapt to environmental change
climate proof our settlements and our rural economy
8.26Individual trees, groups of trees and hedgerows make a significant contribution to both the built
andruralenvironment. Theirvisualamenityhelpsdefinethecharacteroftheborough,andtheirpresence
amelioratestheadverseenvironmentalandclimaticeffectsoftheurbanenvironment;helpstohumanise
space and; provides important habitats for wildlife.
87 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.27The projected reduction in tree cover and the reduction in the size of street trees is a significant
factor which the Council seeks to address. In addition to protecting significant healthy trees and
woodlandswheretheyareunderthreatfromdevelopment,itwilluseitspowerstoissueTreePreservation
Orders(TPOs). Similarlywhereimportanthedgerowscontributetothehistoriclandscapeandbiodiversity,
the Council will encourage their retention.
8.28The Green Infrastructure approach is useful at multiple levels, from the national to the
neighbourhood, as the benefits and functions it provides are applicable at all geographical scales. The
'Green Infrastructure Framework' identifies the strategic links across the sub-region, whilst the Action
Plans identified under this process, as well as the Council’s 'Open Space Assessment', 'Biodiversity
Audit','PlayingPitchStrategy',and'PublicRightsofWayImprovementPlan'addfurtherdetailatalocal
level.
8.29ThelevelofgrowthproposedinthisplanprovidesanopportunitytocreateastrengthenedGreen
Infrastructure network serving the needs of both rural and urban communities and deepening the links
between them.
8.30The provision of Green Infrastructure contributes to the enhancement of landscape character,
amenity,recreation,floodmitigation,waterquality,sustainabletransport,LocalTransportPlanpriorities,
cycling strategy, health and welfare of residents, biodiversity, geological and historical conservation,
ecosystem services, tourism and the economic regeneration of the borough.
8.31TheHabitatsRegulationsAssessmentundertakenfortheLocalPlanconcludedthattheincrease
inpopulationasaresultofthelevelofdevelopmentproposedinCheshireWestandChestercouldlead
to recreational impacts on internationally-designated habitat sites within and beyond the borough
boundary. It has suggested that Green Infrastructure in the borough can be used to avoid negative
impacts by providing alternative recreational open space which may help to attract recreational users
away from sensitive European sites, and reduce additional pressure on them.
8 Environmental
88 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 4 Biodiversity and geodiversity
ENV 4
Biodiversity and geodiversity
The Local Plan will safeguard and enhance biodiversity and geodiversity through the identification
and protection of sites and/or features of international, national and local importance.
Sites will be protected from loss or damage taking account of:
The hierarchy of designations of international, national and local importance
Theirreplaceabilityofhabitats,sitesand/orfeaturesandcontributiontotheborough'secological
network of sites and features
Impact on priority habitats and protected/priority species
Development should not result in any net loss of natural assets, and should seek to provide net
gains. Where there is unavoidable loss or damage to habitats, sites or features because of
exceptionaloverridingcircumstances,mitigationandcompensationwillberequiredtoensurethere
is no net loss of environmental value.
Explanation
8.32The National Planning Policy Framework requires the planning system to contribute to and
enhance the natural and local environment.
8.33Biodiversityandgeodiversitysupportthevitalecosystemservices,suchasfertilesoil,cleanair,
and growing food, as well as contributing to a higher quality of life. Biodiversity is protected at a range
of levels, from international to local, with many of these designations overlapping. Some designated
areas are statutory requirements for the Council to protect, others are designated for local importance.
8.34Theboroughcontainsvarioussitesandspecieswhichareprotectedasinternationally,nationally
and locally important. Statutorily protected biodiversity (generally under international or national
designations)areaffordedthehighestlevelofprotection.Developmentsoutsidebutadjacenttostatutory
sites or within their catchments may have an adverse impact on them. Local designations identify
importantsourcesofenvironmental,socialandeconomicbenefitatthecommunitylevelandcontribute
to functioning ecological networks.
8.35In addition to conservation, it is important to enhance biodiversity and geodiversity wherever
possible. This will involve restoring and increasing the total area of natural habitats and landscape
features. The policy seek to strengthen the resilience of the borough’s biodiversity by linking up areas
of high value habitat to create ecological ‘stepping stones’ and wildlife corridors.
89 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.36Biodiversity does not just occur on greenfield, undisturbed sites – many brownfield sites can
havebiodiversityvalue,andmanysitesrequiremanagementtoretaintheirimportance.Wherepossible,
these areas will be enhanced and integrated into the functional network.
8.37Irreplaceablehabitatsarevitalduetotheirrarity,vulnerability,ageorcomplexity,forwhichthere
can be no adequate substitute. Irreplaceable habitats include ancient woodland, veteran trees, meres
and mosses.
8.38National and international designations include:
Special Protection Areas (SPAs)
Special Areas of Conservation (SACs)
Ramsar sites
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)
National Nature Reserves (NNR)
AnycandidateSpecialProtectionAreas(SPAs),SpecialAreasofConservations(SACs)orRamsar
Sites, Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)
Sites identified or required, as compensatory measures for adverse effects on European sites,
potentialSpecialProtectionAreas,possibleSpecialAreasofConservation,andlistedorproposed
Ramsar sites.
8.39The Council will need to be satisfied that the implementation of proposals will not have an
unacceptableimpactonthearea'senvironmentallysensitiveareas,includingsafeguardingofsupporting
habitat for bird species protected by international designations. Development proposals which may
haveanadverseimpactwillneedtobesubjecttoaHabitatsRegulationAssessmentattheprojectlevel
to ensure that any likely significant effects have been assessed and measures to avoid these effects
havebeenidentifiedandaredeliverable. Allnewdevelopmentwhichwillhaveanadverseimpactupon
a site with one or more international designations will not be permitted.
8.40Local or regional designations, habitats or species include:
Nature Improvement Areas
Local Nature Reserves
Sites of Biological Interest (SBI) or Local Wildlife Sites
Regional Important Geological and Geomorphological Sites (RIGGS)
Habitats and species within the Cheshire Biodiversity Action Plan
Priority Habitats and species within the UK Biodiversity Action Plan
Habitats and species listed in respect of Section 41 of the Natural Environment and Rural
Communities Act 2006
Legally protected species
Semi Natural Woodland
8 Environmental
90 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.41TheCouncilwill,whereappropriate,workinpartnershipwithotherlocalauthoritiesandrelevant
bodies, to avoid and manage cumulative, and in combination, impacts of development on these sites.
The Habitats Regulation Assessment highlighted the issue of recreational pressure as a result of
increased population on the Mersey Estuary/Dee Estuary SPA/SAC and Ramsar sites. The Council
will need to work with other local authorities and organisations to monitor the progress of ongoing
assessmentsandrecreationalmanagementstudiesbeingundertakenonthesesites. Thedetermination
of development proposals will need to take account of the evidence and recommendations in this
research.
91 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 5 Historic environment
ENV 5
Historic environment
TheLocalPlanwillprotecttheborough'suniqueandsignificantheritageassetsthroughtheprotection
and identification of designated and non-designated heritage assets* and their settings.
Development should safeguard or enhance both designated and non-designated heritage assets
and the character and setting of areas of acknowledged significance. The degree of protection
afforded to a heritage asset will reflect its position within the hierarchy of designations.
Development will be required to respect and respond positively to designated heritage assets and
their settings, avoiding loss or harm to their significance. Proposals that involve securing a viable
future use or improvement to an asset on the Heritage at Risk register will be supported.
Development which is likely to have a significant adverse impact on designated heritage assets
andtheirsettingswhichcannotbeavoidedorwheretheheritageassetcannotbepreservedinsitu
will not be permitted.
Where fully justified and assessed, the Council may consent to the minimal level of enabling
development consistent with securing a building’s future in an appropriate viable use.
Development in Chester should ensure the city's unique archaeological and historic character is
protected or enhanced.
*Heritage assets are defined as a building, monument, site, place, structure, area or landscape
identifiedashavingadegreeofsignificancemeritingconsiderationinplanningdecisions,because
of its heritage interest. Heritage assets include designated heritage assets and non-designated
heritage assets identified in the Cheshire Historic Environment Record, including local assets.
Explanation
8.42Cheshire West and Chester has a unique and significant historic legacy which is recognised
throughout the policies of the Local Plan. Heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource which must
be protected, conserved, managed and enhanced. To secure the future of such assets, the Council
willencouragetheretentionoftheirexistinguses,consideringfavourablyappropriatenewusesthatdo
not harm the assets significance.
8.43The historic environment adds value to regeneration and attracts businesses to the borough,
acting as a stimulus for local economic growth. The borough’s heritage also strengthens local
distinctiveness and sense of place for the borough's residents and provides enjoyment for visitors.
8 Environmental
92 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.44Cheshire West and Chester has a rich and diverse archaeological and built heritage, including
prehistoric burial sites and hillforts, well preserved medieval agricultural landscapes with moated sites
and motte and bailey castles, the distinctive 'black and white' architecture and industrial heritage of
Northwich, the historic waterway environment and the wealth of Georgian and Victorian buildings and
high quality modern development.
8.45A key priority of the Council's Sustainable Community Strategy is valuing and promoting West
Cheshire’s unique and diverse natural and built environments, and supporting the development of rich
cultural opportunities. The vision emphasises the importance of the historic environment of Cheshire
WestandChester,stating'everybodywillbeproudofourvariedanduniquelocaldistinctiveness,culture
and heritage, with a strong sense of civic pride'.
8.46Thepolicyoutlinestheimportanceofmanagingdevelopmentwithrespecttoallheritageassets.
This is in accordance with national planning policy and best practice advice from Government advisory
bodies such as English Heritage and the Design Council, which seek to ensure that protection and
restoration of historic areas is seen as a key contribution to sustainable regeneration.
8.47TheCounciliscommittedtotheprotectionandenhancementofhistoricassets.Onlyinexceptional
circumstanceswhereadevelopercandemonstratethattheneedforthedevelopmentclearlyoutweighs
theneedtoretainaparticularfeatureandwhereappropriatemitigationand/orcompensatorymeasures
can be provided will permission be granted.
93 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 6 High quality design and sustainable construction
ENV 6
High quality design and sustainable construction
The Local Plan will promote sustainable, high quality design and construction.
Development should, where appropriate:
Respect local character and achieve a sense of place through appropriate layout and design
Provide high quality public realm
Be sympathetic to heritage, environmental and landscape assets
Ensure ease of movement and legibility, with priority for pedestrians and cyclists
Promote safe, secure environments and access routes
Make the best use of high quality materials
Provide for the sustainable management of waste
Promote diversity and a mix of uses
Incorporate energy efficiency measures and provide for renewable energy generation either
on site or through carbon offsetting measures
Mitigate and adapt to the predicted effects of climate change
Meet applicable nationally described standards for design and construction
Explanation
High quality design
8.48As set out in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), the Government attaches great
importancetothedesignandqualityofthebuiltenvironment,statingthat‘itisimportanttoplanpositively
fortheachievementofhighqualityandinclusivedesignforalldevelopment,includingindividualbuildings,
public and private spaces and wider area development schemes’.
8.49Gooddesignfacilitates,andcontributestolocaldistinctiveness,asenseofplace,andcivicpride.
It improves and enhances the existing environment and helps to attract people, businesses and
investment. The quality of architecture and design are both significant to the impact of development in
urban and rural areas, with good development requiring an understanding of the context in which it
takes place.
8.50High standards of design and local distinctiveness, which build on the existing character of
communities, are important not only for the appearance of the area, but also for the creation of safer
and more sustainable environments.
8 Environmental
94 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.51New development will be required to demonstrate that it is appropriate to the character and
contextofthelocalandsurroundingenvironment. Thiswillrequireconsiderationoftheprevailinglayout,
urban grain, legibility, landscape, amenity, density and mix of uses, scale and height, massing,
appearance,importantviews,historicroutesandmaterials.Relevantandappropriatedesignstandards
and guidance should be used to help guide development across the borough including:
Lifetime Home Standards
Building For Life 12
By Design: Better Places to Live
Secured by Design
The Manual for Streets
Buildings in Context
8.52The Council will also look to the use of allowable solutions or carbon offsetting as part of local
mechanisms to set standards for low or zero carbon development and deliver energy saving and
renewables projects. The proposed framework for zero carbon development is yet to be confirmed by
the Government and is currently being developed at the national level. Allowable solutions are likely
tobeanidentifiedsetofon,offandnear-siteoptionsorprojectsthatwillbeusedtooffsettheremaining
carbon emissions of a proposal. The Council will use the national prescribed scheme once in place or
look to establish local mechanisms if the national scheme is not introduced as planned.
8.53The One City Plan sets out a growth framework for Chester which includes a design manifesto.
Village Design Statements (VDS), and increasingly neighbourhood plans, also set out the character of
communities against which planning applications can be assessed.
Sustainable construction
8.54Highqualitydesignandconstructionarekeyaspectsofsustainabledevelopment. Development
proposalsshouldminimisewasteincludingduringconstruction,maximiseopportunitiesfortherecycling
and composting of waste, include the sustainable use of materials, contribute to the reduction of CO2
emissions and mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change.
8.55TheCouncilwillsupporttheredevelopmentofexistingbuildingsfornewuses,whereappropriate.
This redevelopment must be mindful of the heritage value of the existing building and should refer to
PolicyENV5Historicenvironment.Thebenefitsofreusingexistingbuildingsincludestheconservation
oftheembodiedenergyinherentintheexistingbuilding,butalsothefactthatmanyolderbuildingshave
designfeaturesthatsitwellwiththemodernsustainabilityagenda,andthereductionofcarbonemissions.
8.56NPPFsetsoutthatthecouncilshould'adoptproactivestrategiestomitigateandadapttoclimate
change'. Mitigation relates to the causes of climate change, and is primarily addressed through the
control of greenhouse gases, and carbon dioxide in particular. Adaptation relates to the consequences
of climate change, and is primarily addressed through design, behavioural changes, and land use
controls. Early adaptation will cost less money and will mean the borough will be better equipped to
deal with future impacts.
95 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.57The NPPF recommends that any proposals for sustainable buildings use nationally described
standards. The Government's preferred standards are the Code for Sustainable Homes (CSH), and
BREEAM,althoughthesearenottheonlyavailableandrecognisedstandardsthatwouldbeacceptable
under this policy.
8.58The 'Low Carbon and Renewable Energy Study' projects that future energy consumption in the
borough will be higher in 2030 than it is now. To help address this, sustainable design and construction
techniques, adaptive reuse, and energy efficiency measures, in both new and existing development,
should be used.
8 Environmental
96 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 7 Alternative energy supplies
ENV 7
Alternative energy supplies
The Local Plan will support renewable and low carbon energy proposals where there are no
unacceptable impacts on:
Landscape, visual or residential amenity
Noise, air, water, highways or health
Biodiversity, the natural or historic environment
Radar, telecommunications or the safety of aircraft operations
Proposals should be accompanied by appropriate arrangements for decommissioning and
reinstatement of the site when its operational lifespan has ended.
Development proposals that could feasibly supply or connect into a district heating network will be
encouraged to do so.
Proposalstoexploittheborough’salternativehydrocarbonresourceswillbesupportedinaccordance
with the above criteria and all other policies within the Local Plan.
Explanation
8.59Generating energy from renewable and low-carbon sources is an important part of the
Government’s strategy to develop a low-carbon economy, tackle climate change and create a secure,
safe and affordable energy system. The UK has agreed ambitious national targets for increasing the
proportion of the country’s energy that comes from renewable sources and reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.
Tosupply15percentofourenergyfromrenewablesourcesby2020inthemostcosteffectiveway,
whilst there is scope for renewable energy to account for 30-45 percent of all energy consumed in
the UK by 2030.
To reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 34 percent by 2020 and 80 percent by 2050,
below a 1990 baseline.
8.60TheLocalPlanwillmakeakeycontributiontothesenationaldrivers. Thispolicyreflectsguidance
set out in the National Planning Policy Framework and recognises the important role planning plays in
supporting the delivery of renewable and low carbon energy generation.
97 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.61The '2012 Cheshire West and Chester Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study' provides a
technical assessment of the potential for renewable and low carbon energy generation in the borough.
It suggests that renewable and low carbon energy resources could collectively provide 4.2 percent of
the borough’s energy requirements saving 280,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions by 2030.
8.62The'RenewableandLowCarbonEnergyStudy'highlightsthemajorityoftheborough’srenewable
and low carbon energy resources are likely to be used across the authority area in small, scattered
developments,withfewstrategiclargescaleopportunitiestorequirespecificlocaltargetsorformalarea
designations. Acriteria-basedpolicyapproachisconsideredtobeanappropriatemechanismtomanage
these and other suitable large, small and community scale opportunities and supporting infrastructure
that may come forward.
8.63The 'Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study' identifies where some of Cheshire West and
Chester’srenewableandlowcarbonenergyresourcescouldbeharnessed. Applicantsareencouraged
to refer to the study for a fuller understanding of these and other opportunities to use renewable and
low carbon energy in the borough, noting that additional site specific work may be required to fully
understand the feasibility and policy acceptability of a proposal.
8.64ThereareparticularspatialopportunitiestoemploydistrictheatinginpartsofChester,Ellesmere
Port, Northwich and Winsford and to supply new development of a sufficient scale or heat load. The
Council will encourage development proposals that could feasibly deliver district heating infrastructure
within these areas to do so unless this would not be viable. This includes proposals that could anchor,
supply,connecttoorbeco-locatedtoprovidedistrictheatingopportunities.TheCouncilwillencourage
developerstoachieveanynationalorlocalrequirementforenergyfromrenewableorlowcarbonsources
through district heating where feasible.
8.65It is currently anticipated that building regulations and standards will increasingly lead the
requirement for small scale renewable and low carbon sources in new developments over the coming
years to achieve the Government’s zero carbon development programme. This is therefore supported
in line with this policy. In the event that changes to national requirements are not brought into effect as
planned the Council may look to introduce local mechanisms to encourage small scale renewable and
low carbon energy generation in future developments.
8.66The Governmenthas outlined its ambitions for residential and non-domestic development to be
delivered to a zero carbon standard by 2016 and 2019 respectively. It is anticipated that zero carbon
development will be realised predominantly through energy efficiency measures and the use of on-site
low or zero carbon energy and connected heat. However, it is recognised that it will be difficult to
deliverallofthecarbonsavingsnecessarytomeetzerocarbonstandardsonsitethroughthesemeasures
alone. Allowablesolutionswillbeusedtoabatetheseremainingemissionsandaresupportedbyother
policies within the Local Plan as set out in Policy 'ENV 6 High quality design and sustainable
construction'.
8.67Unconventional hydrocarbons such as coalbed methane and shale gas could represent an
importantalternativetotraditionalfuelsupplies.ThepolicyalongsideotherpolicieswithintheLocalPlan
seek to manage any adverse impacts that may be associated with the exploration, appraisal and
8 Environmental
98 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesproduction of alternative hydrocarbon energy fuels that could be exploited in the borough. Fuel derived
fromhydrocarbonsisneitherrenewableorlowcarbon. AccordinglytheCouncilwillencouragedevelopers
to explore highly energy efficient end-uses for fuel that will achieve carbon reductions, for example
combined heat and power energy generation. The potential for on-site capture and use for energy
production is recognised.
8.68A habitats regulation assessment will be required to assess the impacts associated with the
design,location,construction,operationanddecommissioningforstandalonerenewableenergyschemes
likely to have an unacceptable impact on internationally protected species and habitats.
99 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 8 Managing waste
ENV 8
Managing waste
The waste management needs in the borough will be met by:
managing waste as a resource
promoting waste minimisation and increasing waste awareness
delivering sustainable waste management
providing waste management infrastructure
This will be achieved by:
the identification of sufficient land to meet predicted waste requirements for the borough up to
2030
ensuringproposalsforwastemanagementfacilitiesareconsistentwiththewastehierarchyof
prevention
preparation for reuse
recycling and composting
other recovery/energy generation
disposal as a last resort.
ensuringproposalsforwastemanagementareconsistentwiththeprinciplesofnationalpolicy
andlocalwastestrategies,includingnetselfsufficiency,allowingforcrossboundaryflowsand
managing waste at one of the most appropriate installations
supporting the co-location of waste facilities and the integration of new waste facilities into the
existing network of waste management sites in the borough
safeguarding the following sites with planning permission for waste uses against alternative
development
Ince Park, Ellesmere Port
Lostock Works, Northwich
Kinderton Lodge, near Middlewich
8 Environmental
100 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesregular review through monitoring of sites with planning consent, but not yet operational, to
ensure there is sufficient land available to support new waste development in the borough
safeguarding existing landfill capacity and built waste management facilities from alternative
usesandagainsttheencroachmentofincompatibleuseswheretheyareinlocationsconsistent
withthesiteidentificationcriteriafornewwastefacilitiesassetoutinPlanningPolicyStatement
10. These sites are identified within the Waste Need Assessment.
the identification of specific sites in the Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Document to
deliver Household Waste Recycling Centres at suitable locations to replace current sites at
Frodsham, Chester and Tattenhall.
only supporting other proposals for sustainable waste management facilities after the sites
with planning permission but not yet operational, have either:
been brought into operational use;
are demonstrated as no longer deliverable; or
wherethenewproposalcanbeshowntodelivergreaterresourceefficiencyforcommunities
and businesses
supportingthedevelopmentoffarmscaleanaerobicdigestionfacilitiesformaterialsgenerated
on the farm unit.
Explanation
8.69This policy makes provision for Cheshire West and Chester to deal with all types of waste
generated in the borough. National policy requires the management of waste as a resource and in
accordance with the waste hierarchy. This policy supports the provision of sites for new waste
management facilities, whilst safeguarding existing landfill capacity and waste management facilities
inappropriatelocations.Theapproachrecognisesthattherearecrossboundaryflowsofwasteinboth
directionsbetweenCheshireWestandChesterandneighbouringareasandfromfurtherafield. However,
theboroughdoesnotdependheavilyonanysinglefacilityorareaoutsideitsboundarytoprovidewaste
management facilities.
8.70TheLocalPlansupportsEuropeanandnationalwastepolicyassetoutintheWasteFramework
Directive and Planning Policy Statement 10. It also supports the delivery of facilities to assist with the
implementationoftheCouncil'smunicipalwastemanagementstrategy,recyclinganddisposalcontracts.
Itrecognisesthattheboroughishometoexistingwastemanagementfacilitiesthatareofsubregional,
regional and national significance.
8.71Thelocationalstrategyforwastefacilitiesisbasedontheuseofexistingoperationalsitesinthe
boroughandthreelocationsatInceParknearEllesmerePort,LostockWorks,NorthwichandKinderton
Lodge near Middlewich. These all benefit from planning consent for waste uses, and although at the
101 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiescurrenttimearenotoperational,arelocatedinproximitytothelargestconurbationsintheboroughand
have the potential for the co-location of waste management facilities.
Capacity requirements
8.72In preparing the policy an assessment has been made of the capacity requirements for the
sustainable management of the following wastes: local authority collected; commercial and industrial;
construction and demolition; low level radioactive waste; agricultural waste; hazardous; and sewage
sludge.Theresultsofthisassessmentaresetoutinthewasteneedsassessmentupdate2013including
theborough'spositioninrelationtoexistingandplannedwastemanagementfacilities. Thewasteneeds
assessment will be updated annually in line with the guidance for local planning authorities on
implementing the planning requirements of the EU Waste Framework Directive.
8.73Theoverallrequiredcapacityalongwiththecurrentandplannedcapacityofwastemanagement
facilities in the borough is shown in the table below.
Table 8.1 Existing and planned capacity by waste management type 2012
Need for
additional
facilitiesConsented capacity
but not yet
operational (tonnes
per annum)Existing operational
capacity (tonnes per
annum)inEnvironment
Agency licenceWaste management method
None 336,800 442,500 Materials transfer and recycling
None 10,500open windrow 100,000 Composting
190,000 in vessel
None 16,000 61,000 Metal recycling and recovery
None 650,000 388,000 Recycling-processing
None 75,000 0 Recycling-inert
None650,000(1) 0 Treatment-non hazardous
None 1,573,000 0 Energy from waste
None until
20242,300,000m3(total) 2,100,000m3(total) Landfill - non hazardous
None 0 1,900,000m3Landfill - hazardous
8 Environmental
102 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesNeed for
additional
facilitiesConsented capacity
but not yet
operational (tonnes
per annum)Existing operational
capacity (tonnes per
annum)inEnvironment
Agency licenceWaste management method
None 00(2) Landfill - inert
None 100,000 325,000 Hazardous treatment- including
incineration and WEEE
1. This includes 200,000 tonnes of capacity subject to Section 106 agreement.
2. Some sites exist which are exempt from waste management licencing. In Cheshire West and Chester these tend to
be short term windfall developments.
8.74The waste needs assessment update 2012 demonstrates that there is sufficient capacity in
existing and planned facilities to meet the waste requirements of the borough for all key waste streams
up to 2030.
8.75There are several waste management sites with planning consent for recycling, treatment and
disposal in the borough that are not yet operational as indicated in Table 8.2. The consented capacity
is concentrated at three key locations in the borough at Kinderton Lodge near Middlewich; Ince Park
andenergyfromwasteplantandLostockWorks,Northwich.KindertonLodgehasplanningpermission
forclayextractionwithrestorationthroughthelandfillingofwaste.Thesitealsohaspermissionforopen
windrow composting and a materials recycling facility connected to the landfill operations. Ince Park
has consent as a multimodal resource recovery park and energy from waste facility with development
plots to support the waste, energy and environmental technologies sectors. Within Ince Park the
consented waste uses comprise a 95MW energy from waste facility; soil treatment facility; wood and
timberrecycling;incineratorbottomashaggregatefacilityintegratedwastemanagementfacility;plastics
recycling village and biomass renewable energy plant. Alternative development of these sites may be
considered acceptable provided equivalent capacity is provided elsewhere within Ince Park. Any
alternativedevelopmentonthesesitesshouldbeinconformitywiththeconceptofamulti-modalresource
recovery park, energy from waste facility and environmental technologies complex as consented. At
Lostock Works there are several planning permissions in place for waste uses including recycling;
recoveryandenergyfromwaste.PolicyENV8safeguardsthesepermissionsfromalternativeusesand
supportsthesesitesbeingbroughtforwardaspermitted.TheyprovidetheCouncilwithlandtomeetits
waste management needs and its responsibilities in delivery of sustainable waste management as set
out in Planning Policy Statement 10.
8.76Together these sites potentiallywould provide the borough with a large amount of recycling and
treatmentcapacityifallwerebuiltandoperational.However,whilstpolicyENV8safeguardsconsented
capacity going forward it also recognises that consents cannot be wholly relied upon to deliver the
requiredcapacity.Planningconsentisthefirststageinthedeliveryofnewwastemanagementfacilities
andtherearemanyhurdlestoovercomefromplanningconsenttobecomingoperational. Theposition
103 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policiesof sites with planning consent but not operational will be kept under regular review through annual
monitoringtoensurethereissufficientlandavailabletosupportnewwastedevelopmentintheborough.
Should this monitoring indicate that any of the consented recycling, treatment or disposal capacity is
unlikely to become available or significantly restricted this would trigger the need for a review of waste
policy in the Local Plan to ensure the identification of sufficient land for waste development in the
borough. The monitoring section sets this out in more detail.
8.77Toensurethatthepolicyapproachisnotoverlyrestrictivethepolicydoesallowsforotherwaste
proposalstocomeforwardsubjecttothecriteriasetoutinpolicyoverandabovetheconsentedcapacity.
8.78ThereisoneoperationallandfillsiteintheboroughinChester(TheGowy). Theconsentedvoid
space is safeguarded and extensions of time will be viewed favourably where this will ensure the site
is restored to the required standard as set out in the planning permission. Permission for a new landfill
facilitywasgrantedin2007,atKindertonLodgenearMiddlewich,whichwhilstimplemented,iscurrently
non operational and dependent on prior mineral extraction to create the void for future landfill. The
amount of available landfill void in Cheshire West and Chester is declining. The potential for identifying
new landfill sites is limited by environmental constraints. However, given that less waste is being
landfilled,existingavailableandconsentedcapacityisexpectedtolastbeyond2024whentheestimated
short fall in capacity is predicated. Therefore the Local Plan does not identify any additional sites for
landfillbutthesituationwillbesubjecttoregularmonitoring.Shouldmonitoringindicatethatthesituation
attheGowyand/orKindertonLodgehaschangedsignificantlythiswillbeaddressedbyareviewofthe
waste policy in the Local Plan.
8.79Despite Cheshire West and Chester having nationally significant facilities for the treatment and
disposal of hazardous waste, including the long term storage (Winsford Rock Salt Mine) and a high
temperature incinerator (Ellesmere Port), the majority of the borough's hazardous waste is exported to
other hazardous waste facilities for treatment or disposal. However, the borough is a net importer of
hazardous waste given the two nationally significant facilities in the borough. This reflects that the
treatment of hazardous waste operates in a national market and each hazardous waste facility has a
nationalcatchmentareaandwillspecialiseinaparticulartypeoftreatmentordisposal. Thetwofacilities
within Cheshire West and Chester are safeguarded and no additional facilities are proposed for the
disposal of hazardous wastes.
8.80WhilstCheshireWestandChesterhasasite(Capenhurst)producingintermediatelevelradioactive
waste,verylowlevelradioactivewastecanbeproducedfrommanynonnuclearindustrialsitesincluding
hospitals, universities, research facilities and the oil and gas industries. This policy does not cover
radioactive wastes that arise in Cheshire West and Chester as the detailed waste management plan of
the Capenhurst facility provides for all of its arisings. The volumes created at the other facilities whilst
uncertain,areverysmallandindicationsarethatitishandledinthemostappropriateway. Government
policy on low level radioactive waste has recently changed and revised regulation allows more high
volumeverylowlevelwastetobedisposedofbycontrolledburialstotakeplaceatlandfillsites.Although
Cheshire West and Chester will be consulted on any applications to dispose of radioactive waste to
landfill, the Environment Agency are the regulatory/determining authority.
8 Environmental
104 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.81Waste policy has a supporting role to identify sufficient land to allow the water utility companies
todischargetheirresponsibilitiesshouldanyadditionalinfrastructureberequired.Intheplanningprocess
the water companies take into account development proposals and potential applications to design
growthneedsintotheirfutureassetmanagementplans.Whilstthecompanieshaveindicatedthatthere
may be a need for quality improvements to the works, there has been no indication that additional land
is required for the management of sewage sludge. This policy is therefore based upon no additional
sites being required to deal with sewage sludge during the plan period.
8.82There may be a need to identify a number of additional sites in the Local Plan (Part Two) Land
Allocation and Detailed Policies Plan for specific uses. This is likely to include sites to replace the
Household Waste Recycling Centres in Frodsham, Chester and Tattenhall. This would not be new
capacitybutreplacementforexistingsites.Environmentallyacceptablefacilitiesatnewlocationswhich
would improve accessibility to these facilities will be supported. Sites will be selected in accordance
with the site identification criteria set out in Annex E of Planning Policy Statement 10.
8.83This policy also encourages the development of on farm anaerobic digestion plants for the
management of agricultural waste on farm units. This supports current practise for the management of
agricultural waste in the borough, where a large amount of agricultural waste is produced but very little
leaves the farm for management.
Table 8.2 Waste management facilities with planning permission but not yet operational
Site location Planned capacity
per annumType of facility
Composting
Ince Park (Plot 5) 40,000 In vessel composting
Lostock Works Northwich 150,000 In vessel composting
Kinderton Lodge Middlewich 10,500 Open windrow composting
200,500 Total composting
Materials reception and transfer (recycling)
Lostock Works Northwich 150,000 Materials recycling facility
Kinderton Lodge Middlewich 26,000 Materials recycling facility
Ince Park (Plot 5) 60,000 Materials recycling facility
105 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSite location Planned capacity
per annumType of facility
Ince Park (Plot 8) 100,000 Materials recycling facility
800 Waste transfer station
336,800 Total reception and transfer
Recycling
Ince Park (Plot 3) 150,000 Timber recycling facility
Ince Park (Plot 4) 150,000 Wood processing facility
Ince Park (Plot 3) 250,000 WEEE facility
Ince Park (Plot 6) 100,000 Plastics village
650,000 Total recycling
Treatment
Ince Park (Plot 5) 100,000 Mechanical biological treatment with
anaerobic digestion
Ince Park (Plot 2) 100,000 Soil treatment plant
Ince Park (Plot 4) 250,000 Incinerator bottom ash facility
Ince Park (Plot 9) 250,000 Bio-ethanol facility
Ellesmere Port 15,000 Researchanddevelopmentwithmaterials
processing
715,000 Total treatment
Energy recovery
Lostock Works Northwich 600,000 Energy from waste plant
8 Environmental
106 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSite location Planned capacity
per annumType of facility
Ince Park (Plot 8) 600,000 Energy from waste plant
Ince Park (Plot 9) 123,500Biomass renewable energy plant(1)
Lostock Works Northwich 200,000 Bio energy plant
1,523,500 Total energy recovery
Disposal
Kinderton Lodge, Middlewich 300,000 Non hazardous landfill
2,300,000 Total landfill
1. Total capacity at this site is 175,000 tonnes to treat 70 per cent waste wood and 30 per cent virgin timber
8.84Policy ENV8 works alongside the other policies in the Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies
and policies to be retained in the Cheshire Replacement Waste Local Plan for the determination of
planning applications,until such time these are replaced by the Local Plan (PartTwo) Land Allocations
and Detailed Policies Plan.
107 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 9 Minerals supply and safeguarding
ENV 9
Minerals supply and safeguarding
Cheshire West and Chester will make provision for the adequate, steady and sustainable supply
of sand, gravel, salt and brine, contributing to the sub-national guidelines for aggregate land-won
sand and gravel, whilst ensuring the prudent use of our important natural finite resources.
This will be achieved by:
maintainingaminimumsevenyearlandbankforaggregateland-wonsandandgravel,making
provisionforasteadyandadequatesupplyoverthePlanperiodinlinewithnationalpolicyand
Local Aggregate Assessments, providing a flexible approach to the location of future minerals
development to ensure a diversity of supply for the market. Specificsites and preferred areas
will be identified within the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan
forthefutureextractionofaggregateland-wonsandandgravelaseitherextensionstoexisting
sites or new sites
safeguarding Cheshire West and Chester's extent of finite natural resources and associated
infrastructure from incompatible development by delineating Mineral Safeguarding Areas for
sand and gravel, salt and shallow coal, as shown on the Policies Map, together with existing
and potential sites for minerals infrastructure
supporting proposals which enable the use of secondary and recycled mineral resources,
reducing the reliance on primary aggregate extraction where appropriate
supporting the retention of and proposals for fixed construction, demolition and excavation
waste recycling sites in appropriate locations across the borough
supporting environmentally acceptable proposals which enable the use of locally sourced
building stone for architectural and heritage purposes
ensuring the sustainable and prudent use of all natural mineral resources, including salt and
brine, whilst having regard to the need to contribute to the provision of nationally significant
gas storage capacity
requiringallproposalsformineralsdevelopmenttoincludehighqualityrestorationandaftercare
proposals in keeping with surrounding land uses.
8 Environmental
108 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesExplanation
8.85Mineralresourcesarekeytothedeliveryofsustainableeconomicgrowthandenablethedelivery
ofthenecessaryinfrastructureourcommunitiesneed. TheNationalPlanningPolicyFramework(NPPF)
requires all Mineral Planning Authorities to plan for and maintain a minimum seven year landbank for
aggregate land-won sand and gravel. Current sub-national guidelines, apportioned by the North West
Aggregate Working Party as shown in North West AWP aggregate apportionment requirements
2005-2020 (million tonnes), require Cheshire West and Chester to contribute 0.80mt of aggregate
land-won sand and gravel per annum to meet demand between 2005-2020. This apportionment has
beenrolledforwardtotheendofthePlanperiodtocalculateaminimumrequirementof16milliontonnes
for the period 2010-2030. This requirement will be reviewed annually in light of the results of the Local
Aggregate Assessment and any revised sub-national apportionment figures being established, having
regard to the environmental acceptability of any changes.
Table 8.3 North West AWP aggregate apportionment requirements 2005-2020 (million tonnes)
Annualcrushed
rock
requirementCrushed rock
2005-2020Annualsandand
gravel
requirementLand-won sand
and gravel
2005-2020Area
0.04 0.66 0.71 11.36 Cheshire East
N/A N/A 0.80 12.8 Cheshire West and
Chester
4.02 64.4 0.88 14.1Cumbria(1)
1.32 67.9 0.43 7.04 Greater Manchester,
Merseyside and
Warrington
4.24 21.1 0.44 6.86 Lancashire
9.63 154.0 3.26 52.0 Total
1. It should be noted that Cumbria did not agree to the revised apportionments which were taken forward by the AWP
on a majority vote basis.
8.86The Minerals Audit 2011(1)provided reserve and production data for aggregate land-won sand
and gravel up to December 2010. The information collected during the audit provided an overview of
availableresourcesasatDecember2010andtheexpecteddepletiondatesforeachoftheactivesand
andgravelsiteswithintheborough. ThisdatahasnowbeenupdatedthroughtheInterimLocalAggregate
Assessment2013whichcollatesreserveandproductiondatafortheperiod1Januaryto31December
2012 and provides an overview of sales patterns over the previous ten year period.
1 'Minerals Audit: Sand and gravel sites', Cheshire West and Chester Council, July 2011
109 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies8.87The Interim Local Aggregate Assessment 2013 provided a ten year average sales figure of
0.72mt per annum. Ten year average sales take account of periods of high sales and steep declines
as experienced in the UK during the past ten year period. The average sales figure has been used,
alongside the apportionment requirement, to provide up to date landbank data for the borough.
Table 8.4 Aggregate landbank figures as at 31 December 2012
Landbank(years) Reserves as at
31.12.2012 (mt)Annual
apportionment
(mt)Tenyearsales
(mt)Method
12.9 years 9.3mt 0.72mt Tenyearaveragesales
11.63 years 9.3 0.80mt Annual apportionment
figure
8.88Table7.4showsthatunderbothmethodologiestheboroughhasanadequatelandbankforsand
and gravel in excess of the minimum seven years as outlined in the NPPF. However, as per advice set
out in the Guidance on the Managed Aggregate Supply System a landbank in excess of the minimum
seven years should not be seen as a reason to restrict further release of aggregate reserves.
8.89Local Aggregate Assessments will provide an up-to-date appraisal of demand for and supply of
aggregate in Cheshire West and Chester. It is anticipated that these assessments will indicate any fall
in available resources or indeed any surplus.
8.90The Council will identify specific sites and preferred areas for mineral extraction in the Local
Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies Plan for the determination of planning
applications. PolicyENV9worksalongsideotherpoliciesintheLocalPlan(PartOne)StrategicPolicies,
retained policies in the Cheshire Replacement Minerals Local Plan and Planning Practice Guidance to
theNationalPlanningPolicyFramework,toassessandmanagetheimpactsofmineralsproposalsuntil
such time as they are replaced by the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies
Plan.
8 Environmental
110 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesA Retained policies
WhilstthepolicieswithintheLocalPlan(PartOne)willreplacesomeofthosecontainedinthecurrently
adopteddevelopmentplanfortheborough,someextantpolicieswillberetaineduntilsuchtimeasthey
are replaced by policies within the Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Details Policies Plan.
The following schedules set out those policies which the Council will retain.
Where policies are identified for deletion, a reason for the deletion and details of any changes to the
adopted policies map are included within the schedules.
Chester District Local Plan
Chester District Local Plan
General Policies Guiding All Development Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete General GE1
'ENV 6 High quality design and
sustainable construction'Delete Accessibility GE2
'SOC 5 Health and well-being' Delete Impact on residential amenity GE3
'ENV 1 Flood risk and water
management'Delete Availability of utility services GE4
Delete Protection of water resources GE5
Delete Development and Flood Risk GE6
'ENV 6 High quality design and
sustainable construction'Delete Local distinctiveness GE7
Environment Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete General ENV1
'ENV 6 High quality design and
sustainable construction'Delete Local setting and context ENV2
111 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
'SOC 6 Open space, sport and
recreation'Delete Public spaces and squares ENV3
'ENV 6 High quality design and
sustainable construction'Delete Facades of development ENV4
Retain Accessibility/permeability ENV5
Retain Accessibility/permeability ENV6
'ENV 5 Historic environment' Delete Accessibility/permeability ENV7
Retain Views, viewpoints and landmarks ENV8
'ENV 6 High quality design and
sustainable construction'Delete Materials ENV9
Retain Parking ENV10
'ENV 6 High quality design and
sustainable construction'Delete Safety and Security ENV11
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'
Retain Inner ring road corridor ENV12
Retain City Corridors ENV13
Retain District lighting strategy ENV14
Retain Strategic open space ENV15
Retain Development adjacent to strategic
open spacesENV16
Retain Other greenspace ENV17
'SOC 6 Open space, sport and
recreation'Delete Amenity open space ENV18
Retain Urban Corridors ENV19
'SOC 6 Open space, sport and
recreation'Delete Greenspace improvements ENV20
A Retained policies
112 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
'ENV 3 Green infrastructure'
Retain Trees, hedgerows and woodland ENV21
Retain Landscape and development ENV22
Retain Provision and maintenance of open
space in new developmentENV23
'STRAT 8 Rural area' Delete Rural (general) ENV24
'ENV 2 Landscape'
Retain Areas of Special County Value ENV25
Retain Green Network in Chester District ENV26
Retain Nature conservation strategy ENV27
Retain General ENV28
Retain Features of local importance ENV29
Retain Strategic wildlife corridors ENV30
Retain Sites of national importance ENV31
Retain Evaluation of archaeological sites ENV32
Retain Sites of regional or county
importanceENV33
Retain District and Local importance ENV34
Retain Demolition in Conservation Areas ENV35
Retain Recording ENV36
Retain New development in conservation
areasENV37
Retain Views ENV38
Retain City Centre Conservation Area ENV39
113 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
Retain City Centre Conservation Area ENV40
Retain City Centre Conservation Area ENV41
Retain City Centre Conservation Area ENV42
Retain City Centre Conservation Area ENV43
Retain River and Canal Corridors ENV44
Retain Protection of Listed Buildings ENV45
Retain Changes of use ENV46
Retain Locallistofbuildingsofarchitectural
or historic interestENV47
Retain Historic Parks and Gardens and
Historic BattlefieldsENV48
Retain Design and location of advets ENV49
Retain Means of illumination ENV50
Retain Row signage ENV51
Retain Advance signs ENV52
Retain Shop front design ENV53
Retain Blinds, canopies and awnings ENV54
Retain Security shutters ENV55
'ENV 7 Alternative energy
supplies'Delete Generation of renewable energy ENV56
'ENV 6 High quality design and
sustainable construction'Delete Energy efficient building design and
site layoutENV57
'ENV 7 Alternative energy
supplies'
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Energy efficient building design and
site layoutENV58
A Retained policies
114 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
'ENV 7 Alternative energy
supplies'
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Pollution in the plan area ENV59
'ENV 1 Flood risk and water
management'
Retain New or extended hazardous
installationsENV60
Retain Development in the vicinity of
hazardous installationsENV61
'ENV 9 Minerals supply and
safeguarding'Delete After uses ENV62
'STRAT 9 Green Belt and
countryside'Delete Green Belt ENV63
'STRAT 9 Green Belt and
countryside'Delete Agriculture and Forestry ENV64
National Planning Policy
Framework
Delete Recreationandotheropenlanduses ENV65
Retain Limited extensions, alterations or
replacement dwellingsENV66
'STRAT 9 Green Belt and
countryside'Delete Low Cost' housing in settlements in
the Green BeltENV67
'SOC 2 Rural exception sites'
Retain Countess of Chester Health Park ENV68
Retain Countess of Chester Health Park ENV69
Retain Chester zoo ENV70
115 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
Retain Dale Camp ENV71
Retain BNFL/URENCO ENV72
Retain BNFL/URENCO ENV73
Retain Huntington water treatment works
andEPwastewatertreatmentworksENV74
Retain Siting of telecommunications
developmentENV75
Retain Satellite dishes and antennas ENV76
Retain Satellite dishes and antennas ENV77
Transport Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete General TR1
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'Delete Pedestrians TR2
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'Delete Pedestrians TR3
Retain Pedestrians TR4
Retain Cycling TR5
Retain Cycling TR6
Retain Major transport improvements TR7
Out of date Delete Public Transport - Buses TR8
'STRAT 3 Chester' Delete Public Transport - Buses TR9
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'
Retain Coaches TR10
A Retained policies
116 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
Retain Public Transport - Rail TR11
Retain Public Transport - Rail TR12
Retain Parking TR13
Retain Parking TR14
Retain Parking TR15
Not required Delete Residents parking schemes TR16
Retain Safety and Environment TR17
Completed Delete Highway improvements TR18
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete New developments TR19
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'
Retain New developments TR20
Retain New developments TR21
Retain Motorway/Roadside facilities TR22
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Car free housing TR23
Economy Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Out of date Delete Scale of provision of employment EC1
Retain Allocations for Employment Land EC2
Retain Areas allocated for a range of
employment usesEC3
Retain Chester Business Park EC4
'ECON 1 Economic growth,
employment and enterprise'Delete Protection of sites allocated for
employmentEC5
117 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
Retain Protection of existing employment
land and buildingsEC6
Retain Stanlow complex EC7
Retain Ince Power Stations EC8
'ECON 1 Economic growth,
employment and enterprise'Delete Unallocated employment
developmentEC9
Covered in all other policies Delete Extensions to existing business
premisesEC10
Retain Re-use of rural buildings EC11
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Homeworking,includingteleworking EC12
Not required Delete Downgrade or unneighbourly uses EC13
Retain Tourism EC14
'ECON 1 Economic growth,
employment and enterprise'Delete Tourist accommodation EC15
Delete Tourist accommodation EC16
Retain Beeston sand quarry EC17
Retain Camping and caravaning sites EC18
'ECON 2 Town centres' Delete Conference facilities EC19
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Agricultural land EC20
Retain Agricultural diversification EC21
Retain New agricultural buildings EC22
Retain Agriculturalworkersdwellingsinthe
Open Countryside and Green BeltEC23
Covered in all other policies Delete Agricultural service industries EC24
A Retained policies
118 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
Retail Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'STRAT 3 Chester' Delete The City Centre RET1
Retain Primary Shopping Streets RET2
Retain Secondary Shopping Streets RET3
'ECON 2 Town centres' Delete The Market RET4
Delete Allocations for retail development RET5
Not required Delete Protectionofsitesallocatedforretail RET6
Retain Assessment of proposals for retail
development in the City CentreRET7
Retain Assessmentofproposalsinthearea
immediately adjacent to the city
centreRET8
Retain Assessmentofproposalsoutsidethe
city centreRET9
Retain Suburban shopping centres RET10
Retain Suburban shopping centres RET11
Retain Village shops RET12
National Planning Policy
Framework and all other policiesDelete Village shops RET13
Retain Shopping development in the OC RET14
Retain Control over future use of large out
of centre shopsRET15
Housing Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Already deleted Scale of housing provision HO1
119 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
Part
RetainAllocationsforhousingdevelopment HO2
'SOC 1 Delivering affordable
housing'Delete Affordable housing HO3
Retain Infill housing development HO4
Retain Criteria for assessing proposals for
residential sites not allocatedHO5
Retain Infill development in washed over
villages in the GBHO6
Retain Housing in the open countryside HO7
Retain Extensions to existing dwellings HO8
Retain Conversion of non-residential
properties to residential useHO9
Retain Re-use of rural buildings HO10
Retain Replacement dwellings HO11
'SOC 1 Delivering affordable
housing'Delete Low cost housing in the rural area HO12
'SOC 2 Rural exception sites'
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Protection of existing dwellings HO13
Retain Protection of land allocated for
housing developmentHO14
Retain Residential accommodation for
homeless persons in the
community...HO15
Retain HMO's HO16
Retain Student Accommodation HO17
Retain Granny flats HO18
A Retained policies
120 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
Retain Day nurseries HO19
Out of date Delete Improvement of older housing HO20
'SOC 4 Gypsy and Traveller and
Travelling Showpersons
accommodation'Delete Gypsy Caravan Sites HO21
'ENV 6 High quality design and
sustainable construction'Delete Non-residential uses in
predominantly residential areasHO22
Community Facilities Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Built Delete Schools CF1
Retain University of Chester CF2
Retain Re-useofsurpluslandandbuildings CF3
Sport and Recreation Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Retain Assessmentofpublicopenspacein
urban areaSR1
'SOC 6 Open space, sport and
recreation'Delete Assessmentofpublicopenspacein
urban areaSR2
Retain Meeting the shortfall in provision SR3
'SOC 6 Open space, sport and
recreation'Delete Meeting the shortfall in provision SR4
Retain Guidelines for provision in new
housing developmentsSR5
Retain Playing pitches SR6
Retain Amenity open space SR7
Retain Indoor sports provision SR8
Retain Golf SR9
121 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesChester District Local Plan
Retain Athletics Tracks SR10
Retain Water recreation SR11
Retain Water recreation SR12
Retain Noisy Environmentally intrusive
recreationSR13
Retain Countryside recreation SR14
'ECON 3 Visitor economy' Delete Countryside recreation SR15
Retain Carden Park SR16
Retain Footpaths,bridlewaysandcycleways SR17
Culture and Leisure Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Retain Cultural buildings CU1
'ECON 2 Town centres' Delete Cultural buildings CU2
Retain Cultural areas and historic sites CU3
Retain Street Events CU4
Urban Renaissance Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Retain Urban Renaissance URBREN1
Retain Urban Renaissance URBREN2
Monitoring and Implementation Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'STRAT 11 Infrastructure' Delete Provision of services and
infrastructureMI1
Retain Sealand Road MI2
A Retained policies
122 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesEllesmere Port and Neston Borough Local Plan
Ellesmere Port and Neston Borough Local Plan
General Policies Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete General development criteria GEN1
Out of date Delete Allocation of sites GEN2
Out of date Delete Safeguarded land GEN3
'ENV 6 High quality design
and sustainable
construction'Delete Noise GEN4
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Crime prevention GEN5
'SOC 6 Open space, sport
and recreation'Delete Access for everyone GEN6
Retain Telecommunications
developmentGEN7
Retain Telecommunications
developmentGEN8
Out of date Delete Art GEN9
Retain Power stations GEN10
'ENV 7 Alternative energy
supplies'Delete Renewable energy GEN11
Out of date Delete Overhead power lines GEN12
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Developmentonagriculturalland GEN13
123 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesEllesmere Port and Neston Borough Local Plan
Housing Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Part Retain Allocation of land for housing
developmentH1
'SOC 1 Delivering
affordable housing'Delete Affordable housing H2
'STRAT 2 Strategic
development'Delete Housing needs H3
'SOC 6 Open space, sport
and recreation'Delete Housing in urban areas H4
Retain Conversion to flats H5
Retain House extensions H6
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'Delete Transport and access provision H7
Already deleted School site H8
Employment Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Part Retain Sites for employment
developmentEMP1
Retain Stanlow special policy area EMP2
Retain Hooton Park strategic site EMP3
Retain Ince Marshes EMP4
Developed Delete Cheshire Oaks EMP5A
Developed Delete Cheshire Oaks EMP5B
Retain Cheshire Oaks EMP5C
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Established industrial areas EMP6
A Retained policies
124 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesEllesmere Port and Neston Borough Local Plan
Retain Ince Power Station site EMP7
Retain Land at Station Road EMP8
Green Belt Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'STRAT 9 Green Belt and
countryside'Delete Green Belt area GB1
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Green Belt policy GB2
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Re-use of buildings GB3
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Housing development in the
Green BeltGB4
Retain Extensions and alterations to
dwellings in GBGB5
Retain Willaston village inset GB6
Retain Roften area major development
siteGB7
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Stables and field shelters GB8
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Largestablesandridingfacilities GB9
Out of date Delete Golf courses GB10
Natural and Built Environment Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'ENV 4 Biodiversity and
geodiversity'Delete Nature conservation sites
(international)ENV1
'ENV 4 Biodiversity and
geodiversity'Delete National sites of nature
conservationENV2
125 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesEllesmere Port and Neston Borough Local Plan
'ENV 4 Biodiversity and
geodiversity'Delete Nature conservation sites
(regional and local)ENV3
Retain SNCVs ENV4
Retain Ecological interest ENV5
Retain ASCVs ENV6
Retain Agricultural buildings ENV7
Retain Urban green network ENV8
Retain Landscape and habitat features ENV9
Retain The Mersey Forest ENV10
Retain M53/Shropshire Union Canal
CorridorENV11
Retain Coastal zones ENV12
Retain Development in conservation
areasENV13
Retain Parkgate conservation area ENV14
Retain Conservation oflistedbuildings ENV15
Retain Non listed buildings and
structuresENV16
Retain Sites of special archaeological
interestENV17
Hazard and Pollution Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
National Planning Policy
Framework/HSEDelete New of extended hazardous
installationsHAZ1
National Planning Policy
Framework/HSEDelete Development in vicinity of
hazadous installationsHAZ2
A Retained policies
126 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesEllesmere Port and Neston Borough Local Plan
Retain Potentially pulluting
developmentHAZ3
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Contaminated land HAZ4
Recreation and Tourism Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'SOC 6 Open space, sport
and recreation'Delete Sports fields, play areas and
parksREC1
Retain Open space provision REC2
'SOC 6 Open space, sport
and recreation'Delete Indoorsportsandsocialfacilities REC3
'SOC 6 Open space, sport
and recreation'Delete Amenity open space in
residential areasREC4
'SOC 6 Open space, sport
and recreation'Delete Allotments REC5
Developed Delete Siteforpotentiallynoisyoutdoor
sportsREC6
Retain Recreational routeways REC7
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Tourist accommodation REC8
Retain Historic canal port REC9
Town Centre and Shopping Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Retain Primary shopping areas SHOP1
Retain Local shopping centres SHOP2
Retain Small shopping centres SHOP3
'ECON 2 Town centres' Delete Retail development SHOP4
127 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesEllesmere Port and Neston Borough Local Plan
National Planning Policy
FrameworkDelete Food and drink establishments SHOP5
Retain Shop fronts SHOP6
Retain Cromwell Road SHOP7
Transport Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'Delete Access to developments TRANS1
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'Delete Highway network TRANS2
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'Delete Freight Transport TRANS3
'STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility'Delete Provision for cyclists TRANS4
Retain Car parking in residential areas TRANS5
Retain Car parking standards TRANS6
A Retained policies
128 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Vale Royal Borough Local Plan
General Strategy Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
Already deleted Selection of Sites GS1
'STRAT 2 Strategic
development'Delete New Development in the Borough GS2
'STRAT 9 Green Belt
and countryside'Delete North Cheshire Green Belt GS3
'STRAT 9 Green Belt
and countryside'Delete Changes to the North Cheshire Green
BeltGS4
Retain The Open Countryside GS5
Retain Change of Use/Conversion of Rural
BuildingsGS6
Retain Areas Affected by Former Underground
Rock Salt Mining in NorthwichGS7
Completed Delete ProposalsforNewDevelopmentforMain
Town Centre UsesGS8
Retain General Urban Design Principles for
DevelopmentinNorthwichTownCentreGS9
Retain Barons Quay Development Area GS9A
Retain Weaver Shopping Centre Extension
Development AreaGS9B
Retain Land North of Leicester Street GS9C
Retain Northwich Market GS9D
Completed Delete Marina Development Area GS9E
Retain County Council Offices Site GS9F
129 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Closed Delete Magistrates' Court Site GS9G
Retain British Waterways Site GS9H
See Plan Part Retain Lock Street Site GS9I
Developed Delete Memorial Hall Site GS9J
Retain Land West of Old Warrington Road GS9K
Retain Land West of Queen Street GS9L
Part developed Delete Land Adjacent to Victoria Bridge GS9M
See Plan Part Retain Northwich Vision Transportation
SchemesGS9N
Retain Developer Contributions to Transport
and Public Realm ImprovementsGS9P
Retain Winsford Gateway GS10
Out of date Delete Weaver Valley Regional Park Project GS11
Natural Environment Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
Retain Protection of the Nature Conservation
ResourceNE1
Retain Designated Sites of International and
National Nature Conservation
ImportanceNE2
'ENV4Biodiversityand
geodiversity'Delete Designated Sites of Local and Regional
Nature Conservation and Geological
importanceNE3
'ENV4Biodiversityand
geodiversity'Delete Threatened and Priority Habitats NE4
'ENV4Biodiversityand
geodiversity'Delete Endangered Species NE5
A Retained policies
130 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Retain Wildlife Corridors and Green Wedges NE6
Retain Protection and Enhancement of
Landscape FeaturesNE7
Retain Provision and Enhancement of
Landscape in New DevelopmentNE8
Retain Trees and Woodland NE9
Retain ProposalsfortheEstablishmentofAreas
of Multipurpose Woodland on Derelict
and Under Used LandNE10
Retain Areas of Special County Value NE11
Retain AreasofSignificantLocalEnvironmental
ValueNE12
Retain River Corridors NE13
Retain Dane Valley NE14
'ENV 1 Flood risk and
water management'Delete Protection of the Floodplain NE15
'ENV 1 Flood risk and
water management'Delete Surface Water Run Off NE16
'ENV 1 Flood risk and
water management'Delete Watercourses NE17
Retain Mersey Estuary Zone NE18
Built Environment Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
Retain SafeguardingandImprovingtheQuality
of the EnvironmentBE1
'ENV 1 Flood risk and
water management'Delete Sewerage Infrastructure BE2
131 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
'ENV 1 Flood risk and
water management'Delete Water Supply BE3
Retain Planning Obligations BE4
Retain Historic Environment - Listed Buildings BE5
Retain Alteration/ExtensionstoListedBuildings BE6
Retain Changes of Use to Listed Buildings BE7
Retain Listed Buildings and Archaeology BE8
Retain Demolition Control of Listed Buildings BE9
Retain Historic Environment - Conservation
AreasBE10
Retain Development of Sites Outside the
Conservation AreaBE11
Retain Northwich Conservation Area BE12
Retain AncientMonuments/ArchaeologicalSites BE13
Retain OtherSitesofArchaeologicalImportance BE14
Retain Historic Parks and Gardens BE15
Retain Advertisements and Signs BE16
Retain Advance Directional Advertisements BE17
Retain Telecommunications Development BE18
Retain Domestic Radio, Masts, Aerials and
Satellite DishesBE19
Retain Jodrell Bank BE20
Part Retain Renewable Energy BE21
Retain Locally Important Buildings BE22
Retain Conservation Area Appraisals BE23
A Retained policies
132 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Housing Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
Out of date Already Deleted The Supply of Housing Land H1
Retain Housing Allocations H2
Out of date Delete Phasing H3
Out of date Delete Housing Development Hierarchy H4
Out of date Delete Windfall Sites H5
Out of date Delete Change of Use/Conversion H6
Out of date Delete Sub-Division of Existing Dwellings into
Self-Contained Residential UnitsH7
Retain Extensions/Alterations to Dwellings H8
Retain Extensions to Dwellings that have been
Created Through the Conversion of a
Rural BuildingH9
Retain Rebuilding/Replacement of Dwellings H10
Retain Extensions to Residential Curtilages in
the Open Countryside and the Green
BeltH11
Delete Density H12
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Mixed Communities H13
'SOC 1 Delivering
affordable housing'Delete Sites for Affordable Housing on
Residential DevelopmentsH14
Delete Sites for Affordable Housing within the
Settlement Policy Boundaries of
Frodsham, Helsby and Tier 1 LocationsH15
'SOC 1 Delivering
affordable housing'Delete SitesforAffordableHousingintheGreen
Belt/Open CountrysideH16
133 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
'SOC2Ruralexception
sites'
'SOC 4 Gypsy and
TravellerandTravellingDelete Gypsy and Traveller Sites H17
Showpersons
accommodation'
'SOC 4 Gypsy and
TravellerandTravellingDelete Transit Gypsy Sites H18
Showpersons
accommodation'
'SOC 4 Gypsy and
TravellerandTravellingDelete Show Person's Sites H19
Showpersons
accommodation'
Employment Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
Delete paragraph iv Part Retain General Requirements for Employment
UseE1
Out of date Delete Existing Non-Conforming Uses E2
Retain RedevelopmentofEmploymentLandfor
Employment PurposesE3
Retain Redevelopment of Existing and
Proposed Employment Land for
Non-Employment PurposesE4
Part Retain Employment Land Allocations E5
Retain Lostock Triangle, Lostock Gralam E6
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Northwich and Winsford Town E7
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Villages E8
A Retained policies
134 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Employment Uses in the Open
Countryside Outside the Green BeltE9
Retain Employment Uses in the Green Belt
Including Washed Over Green Belt
VillagesE10
Recreation and Tourism Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
All other policies in the
PlanDelete General Requirements for
Recreation/Tourism DevelopmentsRT1
Retain Sports Facilities and Open Spaces -
AllocationsRT2
Retain Recreation and Open Space in New
Developments – Space standardsRT3
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Existing Formal and Informal Open
Spaces and Recreational FacilitiesRT4
'SOC 6 Open space,
sport and recreation'Delete Allotments RT5
Retain Village Facilities RT6
Retain TouristAccommodationwithintheTowns
of Northwich and Winsford and the
VillagesRT7
Retain TouristAccommodationwithintheOpen
Countryside and the Green BeltRT8
Retain Chalet Type Development RT9
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete The Use of Farmhouses for B&B
Accommodation within the GB and OCRT10
Retain Extensions to Existing Facilities RT11
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Small Extensions to Existing Hotels,
Guest Houses and Other TouristRT12
135 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Accommodation within the Green Belt
and Open Countryside
Retain Touring Recreational Caravan and
Camping SitesRT13
Retain Static Recreational Caravan Sites RT14
Retain Golf Courses RT15
Retain Driving Ranges RT16
Delete paragraph iv Part Retain Noisy Sports RT17
Delete paragraph i Part Retain Motor Sports RT18
Retain Tourist/Recreation Related Facilities -
AllocationsRT19
Retain Mooring Facilities RT20
Delete first sentence Part Retain The Weaver and Dane Valleys RT21
Retain The Winsford Flashes – Site specific
policyRT22
Retain TheWhitegateWay–Sitespecificpolicy RT23
Retain Delamere Forest – Site specific policy RT24
Retain Oulton Park Motor Racing Venue – Site
specific policyRT25
Transportation Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
'STRAT 10 Transport
and accessibility'Delete General Requirements T1
'STRAT 10 Transport
and accessibility'Delete Transportation Assessments T2
Retain Public Transport T3
A Retained policies
136 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Retain Railways T4
Retain Railway Stations T5
Retain Northwich-Middlewich-SandbachRail
Line – safeguarded routeT6
Retain Safeguarded Rail Lines – safeguarded
routeT7
'STRAT 10 Transport
and accessibility'Delete Pedestrians and Walking T8
'STRAT 10 Transport
and accessibility'Delete Cycling T9
Out of date Delete National Cycle Network T10
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Freight T11
Retain Development of Land Adjacent to the
River Weaver for Water Based Freight
FacilitiesT12
Retain Car Parking T13
Retain CarParkinginTownandVillageCentres T14
Retain Provision of Access for People with
DisabilitiesT15
Retain Roadside Facilities T16
Retain Lorry Parks T17
Retain General Highways Policies –
Safeguarded routeT18
Not used Delete Appropriate Traffic Calming Measures T19
Retain Travel Plans T20
137 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Shopping and Town Centre Development Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
Retain General Policy STC1
Retain Northwich Town Centre – Allocations STC2
Retain Winsford Town Centre STC3
Retain Use of Upper Floors STC4
'ENV 6 High quality
design and sustainable
construction'Delete Design STC5
Retain Design-Installation of Shutters STC6
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Proposals for Key Town Centre
Development in Edge-of-Centre and
Out-of-Centre LocationsSTC7
Out of date Delete DefinedTownandLargeVillageCentres STC8
Out of date Delete Defined Town and Large Village
CentresSTC9
Out of date Delete LossofExistingGroundandUpperFloor
Residential UsesSTC10
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete LargeProposalsinLargeVillageCentres STC11
Retain LocalCentresinWinsfordandNorthwich STC12
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete All Smaller Villages With or Without
Defined Policy BoundariesSTC13
Retain All Smaller Villages With or Without
Defined Policy BoundariesSTC14
Retain Changes of Use That Would Result in
the Loss of a Public House or Other
Service Serving a Rural CommunitySTC15
A Retained policies
138 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Retain Farm Shops STC16
Public Services Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
Out of date Delete Public Services Development in the
Open CountrysidePS1
Completed Delete Redundant Institutions in the Open
Countryside/Green BeltPS2
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Child Care facilities PS3
Pollution, Hazards and Contaminated Land Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
'SOC 5 Health and
well-being'Delete Air Pollution P1
'SOC 5 Health and
well-being'Delete New Development which is Sensitive to
Air PollutionP2
'SOC 5 Health and
well-being'Delete Noise Pollution P3
'SOC 5 Health and
well-being'Delete Light Pollution P4
'ENV 1 Flood risk and
water management'Delete Groundwater P5
HSE Delete Hazardous Installations P6
HSE Delete Development of a Non-Hazardous
Nature in the Vicinity of Non-Hazardous
InstallationsP7
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Contaminated and Derelict Land P8
139 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
Retain Aerodrome Safeguarding - Liverpool
John Lennon Airport – Site specificP9
Rural Enterprises Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
'STRAT 1 Sustainable
development'Delete Agricultural Land RE1
Out of date Delete Where Development is Allowed Which
Involves the Loss of Agricultural LandRE2
Retain New Agricultural Buildings RE3
'ENV 6 High quality
design and sustainable
construction'Delete Proposals for New Buildings and Other
Structures Associated with LivestockRE4
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete ChangeofUseofAgriculturalandOther
Rural BuildingsRE5
National Planning
Policy FrameworkDelete Withdrawal of Agricultural Permitted
DevelopmentRightsFollowingaChange
of UseRE6
Retain Agricultural workers' Dwellings RE7
Retain Removal of an Agricultural or Forestry
Occupancy ConditionRE8
Retain Equestrian Development RE9
Retain Kennels and Catteries RE10
Out of date Delete Private Airstrips RE11
Retain Farm Diversification RE12
A Retained policies
140 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesVale Royal Borough Local Plan
After Use of Mineral Workings Chapter:
Replaced by: Outcome Policy Title Policy
Number
'ENV9Mineralssupply
and safeguarding'Delete General Considerations MW1
'ENV9Mineralssupply
and safeguarding'Delete Consultation on County Matters MW2
Retain After Uses – Site specific MW3
'ENV9Mineralssupply
and safeguarding'Delete Ancillary Development MW4
141 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesCheshire Replacement Minerals Local Plan
It is proposed that all policies, apart from those indicated in the table below, are deleted and replaced
by Policy 'ENV 9 Minerals supply and safeguarding'.
Outcome Policy Title Policy Number
Delete Sustainability 1
Delete Need 2
Delete Aggregate reserves 3
Delete Alternative sources of aggregate 4
Delete Safeguarding high quality material 5
Delete Prior extraction 6
Delete Mineral conservation areas 7
Delete Review 8
Retain Planning applications 9
Delete Geological content of planning applications 10
Delete Pre-application discussions 11
Retain Conditions 12
Retain Planning obligations/legal agreements 13
Delete ASCV 14
Retain Landscape 15
Retain Plant and buildings 16
Retain Visual amenity 17
Delete Jodrell Bank zone 18
Delete Archaeology 19
Delete Archaeology 20
Delete Archaeology 21
A Retained policies
142 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesOutcome Policy Title Policy Number
Delete Nature conservation 22
Delete Nature conservation 23
Delete Built heritage and historic environment 24
Delete Ground water/surface water/flood protection 25
Delete Noise 26
Delete Noise 27
Retain Dust 28
Delete Agricultural land 29
Delete Agricultural land - silica sand 30
Delete Cumulative impact 31
Delete Advance planting 32
Delete Public rights of way 33
Delete Highways 34
Delete Alternative forms of transport 35
Delete Secondary operations 36
Retain Hours of operation 37
Delete Blasting 38
Delete Stability and support 39
Delete Mine waste disposal 40
Delete Restoration 41
Delete Aftercare 42
Retain Liaison committees 43
Delete Opencast coal 44
Delete Sand and gravel landbank 45
143 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesOutcome Policy Title Policy Number
Delete Future sand and gravel extraction 46
Retain Sand and gravel area of search 47
Delete Hydrocarbons 48
Delete Peat 49
Delete Natural brine pumping 50
Retain Future rock salt extraction 51
Retain Future controlled brine extraction 52
Delete Crushed rock landbank 53
Delete Future silica sand extraction 54
A Retained policies
144 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesCheshire Replacement Waste Local Plan
It is proposed that all policies within the Cheshire Replacement Waste Local Plan, apart from those
indicated in the table below, are deleted and replaced by Policy 'ENV 8 Managing waste'.
Outcome Policy Title PolicyNumber
Delete Sustainable waste management 1
Delete Need for waste management facilities 2
Delete Phasing of sites for landfill/landraise and/or thermal
treatment3
Delete Preferred sites for waste management facilities 4
Delete Other sites for waste management facilities 5
Delete Built waste management facilities of a national/regional
scale6
Delete Sites for open air windrow composting facilities 7
Delete Wastewater treatment works 8
Delete Preferred sites for non-hazardous landfill/landraise 9
Delete Minimising waste during construction and development 10
Delete Development and waste recycling 11a and 11b
Retain Impact of development proposals 12
Delete ASCV 13
Delete Landscape 14
Delete Green Belt 15
Delete Historic environment 16
Delete Natural environment 17
Delete Water resource protection and flood risk 18
Delete Agricultural land quality 19
Delete Public rights of way 20
145 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesOutcome Policy Title PolicyNumber
Delete Jodrell Bank 21
Retain Aircraft safety 22
Delete Noise 23
Delete Air pollution: air emissions including dust 24
Delete Litter 25
Delete Air pollution: odour 26
Delete Sustainable transport of waste and waste derived
materials27
Delete Highways 28
Delete Hours of operation 29
Delete Hours of operation for HWRC 30
Delete Ancillary development at a landfill/landraise site and/or
open windrow composting site31
Delete Reclamation 32
Retain Liaison committees 33
Delete Energy recovery 34
Retain Underground hazardous waste storage/containment 35
Delete Design 36
A Retained policies
146 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
InlinewiththerequirementsoftheTownandCountryPlanning(LocalPlanning)(England)Regulations
2012theadoptedProposalsMapwillberenamedasthePoliciesMap. Therearetwotypesofchanges
to the adopted Policies Map:
1. Deletions from the adopted Policies Map
2. Additions to the Policies Map
Maps 1 to 50 are deletions, maps 51 to 61 are additions to the Policies Map.
147 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
148 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies149 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
150 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies151 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
152 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies153 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
154 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies155 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
156 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies157 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
158 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies159 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
160 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies161 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
162 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies163 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
164 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies165 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
166 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies167 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
168 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies169 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
170 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies171 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
172 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies173 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
174 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies175 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
176 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies177 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
178 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies179 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
180 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies181 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
182 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies183 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
184 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies185 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
186 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies187 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
188 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies189 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
190 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies191 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
192 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies193 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
194 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies195 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
196 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies197 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
198 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies199 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
200 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies201 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
202 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies203 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesB Changes to Policies Map
204 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies205 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesC Sustainable Community Strategy
Table C.1 Sustainable Community StrategyECON3
ECON2
ECON1
STRAT11
STRAT10
STRAT9
STAT8
STRAT7
STRAT6
STRAT5
STRAT4
STRAT3
STRAT2
STRAT1
Giving every child the best start in life
Enable all to feel safe and maximise their
capabilitiesandhavecontrolovertheirlives
Have a thriving and strong economy and
create quality work and learningopportunities for all
Support all to have a healthy standard of
living and strengthen ill-health prevention
CreatesustainableplacesandcommunitiesEnable older people to lead healthy and
fulfilling lives
Create a strong sense of community pride
in our area
Have sustainable health and social care
servicesthataredeliveredattherightplaceand the right time
C Sustainable Community Strategy
206 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesTable C.2 Sustainable Community StrategyENV9
ENV8
ENV7
ENV6
ENV5
ENV4
ENV3
ENV2
ENV1
SOC6
SOC5
SOC4
SOC3
SOC2
SOC1
Giving every child the best start in life
Enable all to feel safe and maximise
theircapabilitiesandhavecontrolovertheir lives
Have a thriving and strong economy
and create quality work and learningopportunities for all
Supportalltohaveahealthystandard
of living and strengthen ill-healthprevention
Create sustainable places and
communities
Enable older people to lead healthy
and fulfilling lives
Create a strong sense of community
pride in our area
Have sustainable health and social
careservicesthataredeliveredattheright place and the right time
207 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesD Policy development
The approach in the Local Plan has been developed following Issues and Options and Preferred Policy Directions
consultations. TableC.1illustratestherelationshipbetweenthepolicyapproachidentifiedinthePreferredPolicyDirectionsand the draft Local Plan policy.
Table D.1 Local Plan policy development
PD12PD11PD10PD09PD08PD07PD06PD05PD04PD03PD02PD01
Spatial Strategy
STRAT 1 Sustainable
development
STRAT 2 Strategic
development
STRAT 3 ChesterSTRAT 4 Ellesmere PortSTRAT 5 NorthwichSTRAT 6 WinsfordSTRAT 7 MiddlewichSTRAT 8 Rural areaSTRAT 9 Green Belt and
open countryside
STRAT 10 Transport and
accessibility
STRAT 11 Infrastructure
D Policy development
208 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesPD12PD11PD10PD09PD08PD07PD06PD05PD04PD03PD02PD01
Economic
ECON1Economicgrowth,
employmentandenterprise
ECON 2 Town centresECON 3 Visitor economySocialSOC 1 Delivering
affordable housing
SOC 2 Rural exception
sites
SOC 3 Housing mix and
type
SOC 4 Gypsy and
Traveller and TravellingShowpersonsaccommodation
SOC 5 Health and
well-being
SOC 6 Open space, sport
and recreation
EnvironmentalENV 1 Flood risk and
water management
ENV 2 Landscape
209 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesPD12PD11PD10PD09PD08PD07PD06PD05PD04PD03PD02PD01
ENV3Greeninfrastructure
ENV 4 Biodiversity and
geodiversity
ENV 5 Historic
environment
ENV 6 High quality design
and sustainableconstruction
ENV 7 Alternative energy
supplies
ENV 8 Managing wasteENV9Mineralssupplyand
safeguarding
D Policy development
210 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesE Evidence base
Table E.1
Completion date Evidence base
July 2013 Strategic Housing Market Assessment Update (SHMA)
July 2013 StrategicHousingLandAvailability AssessmentUpdate(SHLAA)
July 2013 Key Service Centre Background Paper Publication Draft
July 2013 Strategy and Housing Background Paper
July 2013 Sustainability Appraisal
July 2013 Sustainability Appraisal Consultation Outcomes Report
July 2013 Habitats Regulations Assessment Screening Report
November 2010 Strategic Development Options
June 2009 Cheshire sub-regional housing strategy 2009 - 2012
May 2007 Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA)
May 2011 StudytoIdentifyGypsyandTravellerandTravellingShowperson
sites in Cheshire West and Chester
April 2013 Housing Land Monitor
September 2011 Rural Housing Strategy and Action Plan
September 2011 Rural Regeneration Strategy and Action Plan
June 2008 West Cheshire Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)
October 2012 Winsford Area Flood Risk Assessment (AFRA)
February 2009 Northwich Area Flood Risk Assessment
June 2010 Water Cycle Study
June 2011 Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment
October 2010 Hydro Capacity Study
May 2011 Nationalfloodandcoastalerosionriskmanagementstrategyfor
England
211 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesCompletion date Evidence base
July 2013 Employment Land Study Update 2013
July 2013 Cheshire West and Chester Retail Study Update (Interim)
December 2010 Local Economic Assessment (sub-regional)
December 2010 Local Economic Assessment (CWaC)
January 2011 Chester Prosperity Study
May 2012 Chester One City Plan
December 2010 Economic growth and its impact on the demand for housing in
Chester
June 2011 Chester Characterisation Study (Phase 1)
April 2012 Chester Characterisation Study (Phase 2)
July 2013 Chester Green Belt Study Part 1
July 2013 Chester Green Belt Study Part 2
September 2010 Chester Central Development Framework
January 2012 Audit of existing minerals sites
August 2012 Mineral Safeguarding Areas Outcomes Report
March 2013 Local Aggregate Assessment
October 2011 Waste Needs Assessment
March 2013 Revised Waste Needs Assessment
September 2012 Audit of waste management sites
August 2012 Audit of Recycled and Secondary Aggregate Sites
October 2010 Winsford Waterfront Development Brief
December 2012 Air Quality Study
March 2011 Green Infrastructure Framework
January 2012 Cheshire West and Chester Open Space Audit
E Evidence base
212 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesCompletion date Evidence base
December 2011 Biodiversity Audit and Local Wildlife Site Phase 1 Survey 2010
March 2011 GreenInfrastructureFrameworkforNorthEastWales,Cheshire
and Wirral
May 2012 Chester and Ellesmere Port Green Infrastructure
May 2012 Lower Dee Valley Green Infrastructure
July 2012 Playing Pitch Strategy
October 2011 National Land Use Database
April 2012 Local Brownfield Land Strategy
January 2010 Renewable Energy Study
May 2012 Low Carbon and Renewable Energy Study
July 2009 Integrated Transport Strategy (Phase 1) Baseline
December 2012 Integrated Transport Strategy (Phase 2)
December 2010 Chester Transport Model Update
September 2010 Ellesmere Port Transport Modelling
November 2011 Ellesmere Port Vision and Strategic Regeneration Framework
2011 AltogetherBetter:CheshireWestandChesterCouncilPlan2011
– 2015
December 2012 Annual Monitoring Report
213 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesF Housing trajectory
F Housing trajectory
214 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesTotal 29/30 28/29 27/28 26/27 25/26 24/25 23/24 22/23 21/22 20/21 19/20 18/19 17/18 16/17 15/16 14/15 13/14 12/13 11/12 10/11 YEAR
3,100 970 673 803 654 Past
Completions
13,562 0 0 264 350 380 425 642 763 859 991 1,174 1,548 1,632 1,552 1,560 1,422 Commitments1
1,950150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 150 0 0 0 Small siteallowance2
2,039171 171 171 181 206 206 131 131 131 131 131 131 119 28 0 0 StrategicSites3
614 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 247 245 122 0 0 SHLAA4
735 317 318 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Additionaldwellingstobeplanned
22,000638 639 685 681 736 781 923 1,044 1,140 1,272 1,455 2,076 2,146 1,702 1,560 1,422970 673 803 654 Totalcompletions
The table shows the annual projected net completions by individual source for the Plan period (2010 - 2030). The residual requirement when completions and commitments are taken into account is 735
dwellings. The identified supply from SHLAA (beyond the first five years) is 4,653 dwellings, or 12,675 dwellings when including greenfield extensions.
Average annual net requirement is 1,100 dwellings
1Sites with extant planning permission, including sites subject to the signing of a s106 legal agreement
2Sites below 0.4ha or sites having a yield of 9 or fewer
3Sites identified in the Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies key to the delivery of the Plan currently without planning permission
4Sites over 0.4ha or 10 dwellings which are not commitments but identified as deliverable/developable through the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment
215 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesG Glossary
Affordable housing – Includes social rented and intermediate housing, provided to specified eligible
households whose needs are not met by the market. Affordable housing should: meet the needs of
eligiblehouseholdsincludingavailabilityatacostlowenoughforthemtoafford,determinedwithregard
to local incomes and local house prices; and include provision for the home to remain at an affordable
price for future eligible households or, if these restrictions are lifted, for the subsidy to be recycled for
alternative affordable housing provision.
Aggregate - Sand, gravel, crushed rock and other bulk materials used in the construction industry for
purposes such as the making of concrete, mortar, asphalt or for roadstone, drainage or bulk filling
materials
Allocated land/sites - Land which is defined in the development plan as being acceptable in principle
for development for a particular purpose and which is not already in use for that purpose.
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) - Assesses the implementation of the Local Development Scheme
andtheextenttowhichpoliciesinLocalDevelopmentDocumentsarebeingsuccessfullyimplemented.
Apportionment - A specified amount of aggregates to be produced annually on a sub-regional basis.
AppropriateAssessment- UndertakenaspartofaHabitatsRegulationsAssessmenttoestablishthe
impacts a Local Development Document will have on a range of European designated sites.
Area of Search - A technique used to identify areas of land which are considered to contain mineral
resources and which are generally free from major mappable constraints
Biodiversity - A measure of the number and range of species and their relative abundance in a
community.
Brownfield land - See previously developed land.
Coalbed Methane (CBM) -Natural gases produced during coal formation which are either adsorbed
onto
the coal or dispersed into pore spaces around the coal seam. Can be extracted and used as an
energy source.
Community facilities - Facilities providing for the health, welfare, social, educational, spiritual, leisure
and cultural needs of the community.
Community Infrastructure Levy - A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from owners or
developers of land undertaking new building projects in their area.
ConservationAreas -Areasofspecialarchitecturalorhistoricinterest,thecharacterorappearanceof
which it is desirable to preserve or enhance. Such areas are designated by Local Planning Authorities
under the Town and Country Planning Acts.
G Glossary
216 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesContaminated land - Land that is polluted by noxious or toxic substances.
Derelict land - Land so damaged by industrial or other development that it is incapable of beneficial
use without treatment.
Development brief - Document providing detailed information to guide developers on the type of
development,designandlayoutconstraintsandotherrequirementsforaparticular,usuallysubstantial,
site.
Economicdevelopment -Development,includingthosewithintheBUseClasses,publicandcommunity
uses and main town centre uses (but excluding housing development).
Edge of centre - For retail purposes, a location that is well connected and up to 300 metres of the
primary shopping area. For all other main town centre uses, a location within 300 metres of a town
centre boundary. For office development, this includes locations outside the town centre but within 500
metresofapublictransportinterchange.Indeterminingwhetherasitefallswithinthedefinitionofedge
of centre, account should be taken of local circumstances.
Employment land - Development of land falling within use classes B1, B2 and B8 or applicable sui
generis uses of the Use Classes Order 1987 as amended.
Exception sites - Small sites solely for affordable housing which would not otherwise be released for
general market housing.
Financial viability - An objective financial viability test of the ability of a development project to meet
its costs including cost of planning obligations, whilst ensuring an appropriate site value to the land
owner and a market risk adjustment return to the developer in delivering that project.
Green Belt - Area of land, largely rural in character, which is adjacent to the main urban areas and
which is protected from development by restrictions on building.
Greenfield -Landonwhichnodevelopmenthaspreviouslytakenplaceunlessthepreviousdevelopment
was for agriculture or forestry purpose or, the remains of any structure or activity have blended into the
landscape.
Housinglandsupply -Thenumberofadditionaldwellingsbecomingavailable,eitherunderconstruction
or on land with planning permissions, or allocated within a local plan.
Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) - Key source of evidence of deprivation at Lower Super Output
ArealevelacrossEngland. Itmeasuresdisadvantageandconsistsof7domains,income,employment,
health deprivation and disability, education, skills and training, barriers to housing and services, crime
and living environment.
Listed building - A building included in a list compiled by the Secretary of State for National Heritage
as being of special architectural or historic interest.
217 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesLocalDevelopmentDocument(LDD) -Thecollectivetermfordocumentspreparedbyalocalplanning
authority which contain statements and policies regarding the development and use of land and the
allocation of sites.
Local Development Framework (LDF) – A portfolio of local development documents which include
the Local Development Scheme, development plan documents, Supplementary Planning Documents,
the Statement of Community Involvement and the Annual Monitoring Report.
Local Development Scheme (LDS) - A public document setting out the Council’s programme for the
production of its Local Development Documents.
Local Plan - A plan setting the statutory planning framework for the area.
Local Planning Authority - The body responsible for carrying out the statutory planning functions.
LocalStrategicPartnership -Setupunderlegislationin2000,LSPsoperateacrossanauthorityarea
and are an overarching community partnership to help deliver change. Often led by the local council,
their membership should be representative of the local community.
Main town centre uses - Retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres);
leisure, entertainment facilities the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas,
restaurants,drive-through restaurants,bars and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres,
indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including
theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).
MSA - Minerals Safeguarding Area - Areas where proven mineral resources exist identified to alert
against potential sterilisation.
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) - Sets out the government's policies for Local Plans
and planning decisions.
North West of England Plan Regional Spatial Strategy to 2021 (RSS) - A document prepared by
theNorthWestRegionalAssemblyonbehalfoftheSecretaryofStatewhichsetaspatialdevelopment
framework for the region. It was adopted in September 2008 and was revoked on 20 May 2013.
Neighbourhood Development Order - An Order made by a local planning authority (under the Town
and Country Planning Act 1990) through which Parish Councils and neighbourhood forums can grant
planning permission for a specific development proposal or classes of development.
Neighbourhood Plan - A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a particular
neighbourhood area (made under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004).
Out of centre - A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre but not necessarily outside the
urban area.
Out of town - A location out of centre that is outside the existing urban area.
G Glossary
218 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesPreferredAreas- PreferredAreasaredefinedbytheGovernmentasareasofknownresourceswhere
planningpermissionmightreasonablybeanticipatedbyindustry.Theseareaswillcontainviablemineral
depositsandhavebeenassessedagainstplanningcriteriaastheleastenvironmentallydamagingsites.
Theyareareasoflandwithreasonableevidencefortheexistenceofcommerciallyextractableminerals,
which are largely unaffected by substantial planning constraints and which are adequate, collectively,
to meet the anticipated need for the mineral.
Previously Developed Land (PDL) – Land which is or has been occupied by a permanent
(non-agricultural)structureandassociatedinfrastructure,includingtheareaoflandattachedtoastructure
aswellasthestructureitself(e.g.residentialpropertyandgarden). Itexcludeslandandbuildingsused
for agricultural purposes, forest and woodland and urban open space such as parks, allotments and
recreation grounds. Also know as brownfield land.
Primary Aggregates/Minerals - Minerals that are extracted or won from where they naturally occur.
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) - An assessment of the housing land
supply and potential within a local authority area with the intention of demonstrating that sufficient
housing supply exists/likely to exist over different time bands.
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) - An assessment of a housing market produced by
authorities or partnership authorities.
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) - Guidance notes produced by the local authority, which
giveadviceonparticularaspectsofpoliciesindevelopmentplandocuments. Theycanprovideaguide
for developers. They do not form part of the development plan and are not subject to independent
examination.
SustainabilityAppraisal(SA) -Ameansofappraisingthesocial,environmentalandeconomiceffects
that policies and plans may have in the long term. Sustainability appraisals are required for each
developmentplandocumentandmustfullyincorporatetherequirementsoftheStrategicEnvironmental
Assessment Directive.
SustainableDrainageSystems(SuDS) -Asequenceofmanagementpracticesandcontrolstructure,
oftenreferredtoasSuDS,designedtodrainwaterinamoresustainablemannerthansomeconventional
techniques. Typically these are used to attenuate run-off from development sites.
219 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesH Monitoring framework
InadditiontotheLocalPlanPolicyindicatorssetoutinthefollowingmonitoringframework,additionalcontextualindicators
and significant effects indicators will be included within each Annual Monitoring Report. Contextual indicators measurechanges in the wider social, environmental and economic circumstances of the borough. ‘Significant effects indicators’measure the likely significanteffectsof the plan (positive and negative) as identifiedthrough the SustainabilityAppraisal.
Policy STRAT 1 Sustainable development is an overarching policy which provides the basis for development in the
borough. This policy will be monitored through the implementation and monitoring of other policies within the Plan andother contextual indicators included in each Annual Monitoring Report. Policy STRAT 7 Middlewich establishes theprincipleofcloseworkingwithCheshireEastCouncilforthepotential,ifjustified,considerationoflandallocationsinareasof Cheshire West and Chester adjoining Middlewich. Due to the nature of this policy it is not possible to include specificmonitoring indicators or targets within the monitoring framework.
STRAT 2 Strategic development
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
Projectedcompletionsforyearsetoutin housing trajectoryNumber of net dwellingcompletions in monitoring year
Projectedcompletionsforpreviousfiveyears set out in housing trajectoryNumber of net dwellingcompletions in previous fiveyears
3,100dwellingcompletionssince2010asat1April 2014Projectedcompletionssince2010setout in housing trajectoryNumber of net dwellingcompletions since 2010
Five year supply based on housingtrajectorySupply of deliverable housingsites
65 hectares of employment land developed2010 – 2013365 hectares Amount of employment landdeveloped 2010 – 2030
H Monitoring framework
220 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies65 hectares of employment land developed
2010 – 2013365 hectares Amount of employment landdeveloped since 2010 plusamount of employment landavailable in supply 315.7 hectares of employment land availablein supply as at 1 April 2013
STRAT 3 Chester
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
1,019 net dwelling completions 2010 – 2014 5,200 dwellings by 2030 Number of net dwellingcompletions in Chester spatialarea 2010 – 2030
0 dwellings completed 1,300 dwellings (1,264 by 2030) Number of net dwellingcompletionsonWrexhamRoadsite 2010 – 2030
Currentapplication14/02792/FULpendingforchange of use for part of development site(former cinema)Development completed by 2020 Delivery of Northgate leisureand retail scheme and newtheatre
A masterplan for the Chester Central officedevelopment is provided under planningpermission 12/04895/FUL which provides forDevelopment completed by 2027 Delivery of Chester BusinessQuarter
full permission for the first office building andoutline permission for further mixed usedevelopment on the remainder of the site
No loss Amountofemploymentlandandpremises lost to other uses atChesterBusinessPark,ChesterWest Employment Park andSealand Industrial Estate
221 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSTRAT 4 Ellesmere Port
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
710 net dwelling completions 2010 – 2014 4,800 dwellings by 2030 Number of net dwelling
completions in Ellesmere Portspatial area 2010-2030
12/03849/FUL - Planning permission grantedfor 145 dwellings, 13/04015/OUT – Outlineplanning permission granted subject to s1061,570dwellingsby2029(baseduponplanning application 13/04015/OUT)Number of net dwellingcompletions on Ledsham Roadsite 2010-2030
legal agreement (pending) for in the region of1,500dwellings(inclusiveof145dwellingswithextant planning permission)
STRAT 5 Northwich
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
355 net dwelling completions 2010 – 2014 4,300 dwellings by 2030 Number of net dwellingcompletionsinNorthwichspatialarea 2010 – 2030
BaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoringReport 2014/1530 hectares by 2030 Amount of additionalemploymentlandprovided2010– 2030
86 dwellings completed 2013 – 2014 Development completed by 2029 Delivery of Winnington urbanvillage scheme including up to1,200 dwellings
Outline planning permission grated subject tos106 legal agreement (pending)Development completed by 2030 Delivery of Wincham urbanvillage scheme including up to950 dwellings
12/05368/FUL – planning permission granted Development completed by 2017 DeliveryofNorthwichRiversideprojects including Barons Quay
Work due to commence Autumn 2014
H Monitoring framework
222 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesBaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoring
Report 2014/15No loss Amountofemploymentlandandpremises lost to other uses atGadbrook Park
STRAT 6 Winsford
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
141 net dwelling completions 2010 – 2014 3,500 dwellings by 2030 Number of net dwelling
completions in Winsford spatialarea 2010 – 2030
BaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoringReport 2014/1535 hectares Amount of additionalemployment land provided2010-2030
Current application for part of site awaitingdetermination1,000 new dwellings (775 by 2030) Number of net dwellingcompletions at Station Quartersite 2010 – 2030
SiteallocatedinDraftWinsfordNeighbourhoodPlan – awaiting referendum
BaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoring
Report 2014/15No loss Amountofemploymentlandandpremises lost to other uses atWinsford Industrial Estate andWoodford Park
Development completed by 2030 Delivery of new food store intown centre
STRAT 8 Rural area
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
875 dwellings completed 2013 – 2014 4,200 dwellings by 2030 Number of net dwelling
completionsinRuralArea2010– 2030
223 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies58 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Cuddington and Sandiway 200 by
2030Number of net dwellingcompletions in key servicecentres 2010 – 2030
9 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Farndon 200 by 2030
112dwellingscompleted2010–2014 Frodsham 250 by 2030
26 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Helsby 300 by 2030
20 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Kelsall 200 by 2030
46 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Malpas 200 by 2030
48 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Neston and Parkgate 200 by2030
42 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Tarporley 300 by 2030
54 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Tarvin 200 by 2030
16 dwellings completed 2010 – 2014 Tattenhall 250 by 2030
BaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoringReport 2014/1510 hectares by 2030 Amount of additionalemploymentlandprovided2010– 2030
STRAT 9 Green Belt and countryside
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
STRAT 10 Transport and accessibility
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
972.9ktCO2emissionsfromtransportsources
in 2010Reduce from 2010 baseline Carbon emissions from
transport
H Monitoring framework
224 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesFunding for scheme awarded DevelopmentcompletedbyJune2016 Delivery of Chester Bus
Interchange
Feasibility study completed Development completed by 2030 Delivery of New BrideRoad/A5117 link road
100 per cent Relevant planning applicationsdetermined in accordance withpolicy
STRAT 11 Infrastructure
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent of relevant schemes Provision of necessary
infrastructure/contributions aspart of development
ECON 1 Economic growth, employment and enterprise
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
Increase from 2010 baseline Numberofboroughresidentsin
employment
6.7 per cent unemployment 2010 Reduce from 2010 baseline Unemployment rate
11,630 businesses 2013 Increase from 2010 baseline Number of businesses
100 per cent Relevant planning applicationsdetermined in accordance withpolicy
ECON 2 Town centres
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
Currentapplication14/02792/FULpendingfor
change of use for part of development site(former cinema)Development completed by 2017 Delivery of Northgate leisureand retail scheme and newtheatre, Chester
225 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies12/05368/FUL – planning permission granted Development completed by 2017 Delivery of Barons Quay
scheme, Northwich
Work due to commence Autumn 2014
BaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoring
Report 2014/15Reduce from baseline Vacancy rates on primaryshopping streets
100 per cent Relevant planning applicationsdetermined in accordance withpolicy
ECON 3 Visitor economy
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
SOC 1 Delivering affordable housing and SOC 2 Rural exception sites
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
6,600 affordable homes by 2030
(based upon 30 per cent of housing22,000 net additional dwellings)Number of affordable housingcompletions in monitoring year
100 per cent affordable housing onrelevant rural exception schemes
SOC 3 Housing mix and type
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent of relevant schemes Provision of mix of housing aspart of developments
H Monitoring framework
226 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesSOC 4 Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpersons accommodation
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
Gypsy and Traveller pitches – 15
pitches2013–2018,15pitches2018– 2023 and 16 pitches 2023 – 2028ProvisionofsitesforGypsyandTraveller and TravellingShowpersons accommodation
Travelling Showpersons plots – 11plots2013–2018,1plot2018–2023and 1 plot 2023 – 2028
Transit site – 5-10 pitches by 2030
Five year supply based on above
needsSupply of deliverable sites
SOC 5 Health and well-being
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
SOC 6 Open space, sport and recreation
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
BaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoring
Report 2014/15At least maintain baseline amount Amount of open space
100 per cent Relevant planning applicationsdetermined in accordance withpolicy
227 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 1 Flood risk and water management
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
2010 – one permission granted contrary to
Environment Agency advice100 per cent Relevant planning applicationsdetermined in accordance withpolicy and/or EnvironmentAgency advice
ENV 2 Landscape
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
ENV 3 Green Infrastructure
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
ENV 4 Biodiversity and geodiversity
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
BaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoringReport 2014/15At least maintain baseline amount Number of sites recognised forbiodiversity or geodiversityimportance
H Monitoring framework
228 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic PoliciesENV 5 Historic environment
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
2010 Heritageatrisk register:Listedbuildings–10,ScheduleMonuments–22,ConservationAreas – 8Reduce from 2010 baseline Number of heritage assets atrisk
ENV 6 High quality design and sustainable construction
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
ENV 7 Alternative energy supplies
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
100 per cent Relevant planning applications
determined in accordance withpolicy
BaselinetobeestablishedinAnnualMonitoringReport 2014/15Increase from baseline Installed capacity fromrenewable energy sources
ENV 8 Managing waste
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
1,316,500 tonnes per annum capacity as at
2013(materialstransfer,recycling,composting,processing,energyfromwasteandhazardouswaste treatment)Sufficient capacity to meet identifiedneeds throughout the Plan periodCapacityofwastemanagementfacilities
229 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies4,000,000m3landfill (including hazardous)
capacity as at 2013
No loss Amountoflandsafeguardedfor
wastemanagementlosttootheruses at Ince Park, LostockWorks and Kinderton Lodge
100 per cent Relevant planning applicationsdetermined in accordance withpolicy
ENV 9 Minerals supply and safeguarding
Baseline where applicable Target Indicator
5.53 years as at 31.12.2010 Maintain at least 7 year landbank
throughout the Plan periodSupply of permitted reserves ofsand and gravel
100 per cent Relevant planning applicationsdetermined in accordance withpolicy
H Monitoring framework
230 Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies