   
 
   
  
 
 
Report to  the Central Lincolnshire Joint 
Strategic Planning Committee  
 
 
 
by Matthew Birkinshaw BA(Hons) Msc MRTPI and  
Clive Coyne BA(Hons) Dip TP MRTPI  
 
Inspector s appointed by the Secretary of State  
Date :  28 March 2023  
Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, In specto rs Report March 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report on the Examination of the Central 
Lincolnshire Local Plan Review  
 
 
 
The Plan was submitted for examination on 8 July 2022  
The examination hearings were held between  15 November and 16 December 2022  
 
File Ref: PINS/ M2515/429/5
   
 
   
 Contents  
Abbreviations used in this report  ................................ ................................ ................  3 
Non-Technical Summary  ................................ ................................ ............................  4 
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  5 
Context of the Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 6 
Public Sector Equality Duty  ................................ ................................ ........................  7 
Assessment of Duty to Co -operate ................................ ................................ .............  7 
Assessment of Other Aspects of Legal Compliance  ................................ ..................  8 
Assessment of Soundness  ................................ ................................ .......................  12 
Issue 1 – Housing Need and the Housing Requirement ................................ ...........  12 
Issue 2 – Settlement Hierarchy and Distribution of Development  ............................  14 
Issue 3 – Spatial Strategy  ................................ ................................ ........................  17 
Issue 4 – Residential Site Allocations ................................ ................................ ....... 20 
Issue 5 – Housing Land Supply  ................................ ................................ ................  34 
Issue 6 – Climate Change  ................................ ................................ ........................  36 
Issue 7 – Type and Mix of Housing  ................................ ................................ ..........  49 
Issue  8 – Job Growth and E mployment  ................................ ................................ .... 53 
Issue 9 – Green Wedges, Local Green Spaces and Important Open Spaces  ..........  60 
Issue 10 – Built and Natural Environment  ................................ ................................  62 
Issue 1 1 – Infrastructure and Transport  ................................ ................................ ... 63 
Overall Conclusion and Recommendation  ................................ ...............................  67 
Appendix - Schedule of Main Modifications  
 
  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
3 
 Abbreviations used in this report  
Committee    Central Lincolnshire Joint Strategic Planning Committee  
ENA    Economic Needs Assessment  Update  
GIS     Geographical Information System  
GLTM     Greater Lincoln Transport Model  
HRA     Habitats Regulations Assessment  
HNA     Housing Need Assessment  
IEEA     Important Established Employment Area  
LEA    Local Employment Area  
LGS    Local Green Space  
MM     Main Modification s 
MoD     Ministry of Defence  
PPG     Planning P ractice Guidance  
PPTS     Planning Policy for Traveller Sites  
PSA    Primary Shopping Area  
SA     Sustainability Appraisal  
SES    Strategic Employment Sites  
SPA     Special Protection Area  
SAC    Special Area of Conservation  
SUE    Sustainable Urban Extension  
WMS     Written Ministerial Statement  
 
 
 
  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
4 
 Non-Technical Summary  
This report concludes that the Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review provides an 
appropriate basis for the planning of the  City of Lincoln and the districts of North 
Kesteven and West Lindsey, provided that a number of main modifications are made 
to it.  The Central Lincolnshire Joint Strategic Planning Committee has specifically 
requested that  we recommend any main modificat ions necessary to enable the Plan 
to be adopted.  
 
Following the hearings, the Committee prepared a schedule of the proposed main 
modifications  and carried out a Sustainability Appraisal and Habitats Regulations 
Assessment of them where necessary.  The main  modifications were subject to 
public consultation over a six-week  period from 13 January to 24 February 2023 .  
We have recommended their inclusion in the Plan after considering all the 
representations made.  In summary , they:  
 
• Modify Policy S2 to state that the housing requirement is 1,102 dwellings per 
year. 
• Modify Policy S3 to include requirements for development proposals adjacent 
to the Lincoln Urban Area, the Main Towns and the Market Towns.   
• Modify Policy S7 to clarify  that meeting all of the sustai nable design and 
construction standards is unlikely to be viable in Sleaford, Gainsborough and 
on brownfield sites.  
• Make it clear that proposals for renewable energy generation will still need to 
consider potential impacts on heritage assets and the landscape  through 
modifications to Policy S1 4. 
• Delete Policy S19 and make consequential changes to the supporting text.  
• Modify Policy S22 to make it clear how First Homes will be considered.   
• Clarify the scale, type and mix of uses permitted at the Linco lnshire 
Showground in Policy S44.  
• Include a requirement to consider reviewing the Plan should one or more of 
the Sustainable Urban Extensions fail to deliver as expected.  
• Clarify the position regarding land at the Western Growth Corridor not covered 
by th e extant planning permission  in Policy S69 .  
• Provide flexibility for land at the South We st Quadrant to come forward in 
advance of the North Hykeham Relief Road , where justified.   
• Modify Policy S75 to require the redevelopment of RAF Scampton to come 
forward in accordance with a development plan document, such as through 
an Area Action Plan or a partial review of the Local Plan.  
• Delete housing sites at Carholme Road, Lincoln ( COL/CAR/005 ), land rear of 
Grantham Road Car Park, Sleaford ( NK/SLEA/018 ), Linwo od Road, Market 
Rasen ( WL/MARK/007 ) and Green Man Road, Navenby ( NK/NAV/007 ). 
• Clarify the need for gypsy and traveller and travelling showpeople 
accommodation and set out how these needs will be met.  
• Update the housing trajectories within the Plan.   
 
A number of other main modifications  are also recommended to ensure that the Plan 
is positively prepared, justified, effective and consistent with national planning policy.  
  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
5 
 Introduction  
1. This report contains our assessment of the  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Review in terms of Section 20(5) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004 (as amended).  It considers first whether the Plan’s preparation has 
complied with the duty to co -operate.  It then considers whether the Plan is 
compliant with the legal requiremen ts and whether it is sound.  Paragraph 35 of 
the National Planning Policy Framework ( ‘the Framework’) states  that in order to 
be sound, a Local Plan should be positively prepared, justified, effective and 
consistent with national policy.  
2. The starting poin t for the examination is the assumption that the Central 
Lincolnshire Joint Strategic Planning Committee (‘the Committee’) has 
submitted what it considers to be a sound plan.  The Central Lincolnshire Local 
Plan Review , submitted in July 2022 , is the basis  for our examination.  It is the 
same document as was published for consultation between 16 March and         
9 May 2022.   
3. The submitted Plan is a joint Local Plan which covers the local planning 
authority areas of the City of Lincoln Council, North Keste ven District Council 
and West Lindsey District Council.  It has been prepared by the Committee in a 
formal partnership between the three authorities and Lincolnshire County 
Council .   
Main Modifications  
4. In accordance with section 20(7C) of the 2004 Act the  Committee requested 
that we should recommend any main modifications (‘MMs ’) necessary to rectify 
matters that make the Plan unsound (and /or not legally compliant ) and thus 
incapable of being adopted.  Our Report explains why the recommended MMs 
are neces sary.  The MMs are referenced in bold in the report in the form MM1, 
MM2  etc, and are set out in full in  the Appendix  to this Report . 
5. Following the examination hearings, the Committee prepared a schedule of 
proposed MMs and, where necessary, carried out Sustainability Appraisal and 
Habitats Regulations Assessment of them .  The MM schedule was subject to 
public consultation for six weeks.  We have taken account of the consultation 
responses in coming to our conclusions in this Report and have made some 
amendments to the detailed wording of the MMs  where necessary for clarity.  
None of the amendments significantly alters the content of the modifications as 
published for consultation or undermines the participatory processes and 
Sustainability Appraisal  or Habitats Regulations Assessment that has been 
undertaken.  Where necessary we have highlighted these amendments in the 
Report.  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
6 
 Policies Map  
6. Each local planning authority must maintain an adopted policies map which 
illustrates geo graphically the application of the policies in the development plan.  
When submitting a local plan for examination, the Committee is required to 
provide a submission policies map showing the changes to the adopted policies 
map that would result from the pr oposals in the submitted plan.  In this case, the 
submission policies map comprises the set of plans identified as  “Central 
Lincolnshire Local Plan Regulation 19 Proposed Submission Policies Map”.   
7. The policies map is not defined in statute as a developme nt plan document and 
so we do not have the power to recommend MMs to it.  However, a number of 
the published MMs to the Plan’s policies require corresponding changes to be 
made to the policies map.   For example, the deletion of sites COL/CAR/005, 
NK/SLEA/018, WL/MARK/007 and NK/NAV/007.  There are also instances 
where the geographic illustration of policies is not justified and changes need to 
be made to ensure that the Plan is justified and effecti ve.  Examples include the 
boundaries to the LN6 Industrial Area, the Lincolnshire Showground and the 
South East Quadrant Sustainable Urban Extension (site NK/CAN/003).   
8. These further changes to the policies map were published for consultation 
alongside th e MMs.  When the Plan is adopted, in order to comply with the 
legislation and give effect to the Plan’s policies, the Committee will need to 
update the adopted policies map to include all the proposed changes .   
Context of the Plan  
9. The Central Lincolnshire  Local Plan was adopted in 2017 and provide s the 
basis for the planning of the City of Lincoln and the districts of North Kesteven 
and West Lindsey.  The joint Local Plan focussed growth towards the main 
urban areas of Lincoln, Gainsborough and Sleaford wi th an appropriate level of 
growth also directed to the towns and villages in the surrounding rural areas.   
10. The Local Plan Review continues with the same overarching spatial strategy.  
Sustainable Urban Extensions (‘SUE’s’) are allocated once more at the m ain 
settlements of Lincoln, Gainsborough and Sleaford and all the sites have made 
progress since 2017.  Beyond the main urban areas Central Lincolnshire is 
predominantly rural and is characterised by a dispersed pattern of villages, with 
smaller market tow ns at Caistor and Market Rasen.  Development is supported 
throughout the towns and villages by a combination of new and existing housing 
sites.  A similar strategy to the 2017 Local Plan is proposed and none of the 
settlements have boundaries defined on a plan.  However, one of the main 
differences in the Local Plan Review is the removal of the village growth levels, 
which previously allowed eit her a 10 or 15% increase in dwelling numbers.   Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
7 
 11. The three local planning authorities have also recognised an urgent need for 
action in response to climate change.  The Local Plan Review therefore 
includes five ‘themes’ to reduce energy consumption, increase renewable 
energy generation, prevent the loss of carbon sinks, facilitate the transition to a 
net-zero carbon lifestyle and adapt to climate change.  
12. Finally, o ne of the main reasons for the Local Plan R eview has been the 
impending clo sure and sale of land at RAF Scampton, a locally significant site 
previously home to the Royal Airforce Aerobatic Team.   The Plan therefore 
includes a policy aimed at managing its future reuse and redevelopment.   
Public Sector Equality Duty  
13. In examining t he Plan, we have had due regard to the aims expressed in 
S149(1) of the Equality Act 2010.  This has included our consideration of 
several matters including the provision of accommodation to meet the needs of 
gypsies and travellers and travelling showpeopl e, the needs of older people and 
those with disabilities.  These matters are discussed in more detail under our 
assessment of soundness that follows.  
Assessment of Duty to Co -operate  
14. Section  20(5)(c) of the 2004 Act requires that we consider whether the 
Committee has complied with any duty imposed on it by section 33A in respect 
of the Plan’s  preparation.  
15. Cooperation has taken place between the three local planning authorities and 
the County Council in the preparation of the Plan.  This includes strategic cross 
boundary matters such as the scale and distribution of development and the 
identification of regeneration and opportunity sites, such as RAF Scampton.  
The latest Statement of Common Ground1 also includes details of the 
engagement that took place be tween the Committee, neighbouring planning 
authorities and other prescribed bodies on strategic matters during the 
preparation of the Plan.  Amongst other things, this includes the agreement that 
Central Lincolnshire will meet all of its  housing and employ ment needs and is 
not tasked with meeting unmet needs from elsewhere.   
16. To the north of Lincoln, the A15 is a key transport corridor and provides 
connectivity to the M180.  Situated alongside the A15 is RAF Scampton, a site 
allocated in the Plan as a regen eration opportunity.  Prior to submission, North 
Lincolnshire Council raised concerns that redevelopment of RAF Scampton 
could have implications for the capacity of the A15 and that the necessary detail 
should not be deferred to a masterplan.  It was also suggested that work to 
 
1 Examination Documents EX008 and EX008A  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
8 
 produce a feasibility study into potential upgrades should be referenced in the 
Plan.  However, b oth these issues are soundness matters and relate to the 
effectiveness of the Plan in dealing with the issue of the site’s potential 
redevelopment.  As far as the Duty is concerned, the Statement of Common 
Ground adequately sets out the engagement that has  taken place and includes 
a commitment for ongoing dialogue as details for t he site emerge.   
17. To the west of Central Lincolnshire , a strategic logistics site of over 118 
hectares is proposed  in the Bassetlaw Local Plan at Apleyhead.  A standalone 
Statement  of Common Ground has been prepared with Bassetlaw District 
Council and is presented in Examination Document EX 023.  In summary, this 
sets out the agreement between both plan -making authorities that any 
additional housing need generated by the development will, in principle and 
subject to its own examination , be met in Bassetlaw.  The approach taken and 
engagement carried out is consistent with the aims and objectives of the Duty.   
18. We therefore conclude that where necessary the Committee has engaged 
constr uctively, actively and on an on -going basis in the preparation of the Plan 
and that the duty to co -operate has been met.  
Assessment of Other Aspects of Legal Compliance  
Sustainability Appraisal  
19. The Committee produced a Sustainability Appraisal (‘SA’) of th e Plan at each 
stage of its preparation, prepared a report of the findings and published each 
document for consultation.   
20. The Interim SA Report2 assessed different options for the scale of new housing, 
ranging from 1,086 dwellings per year (based on the local housing need 
calculation) to 1,325 dwellings per year (based on a jobs -led growth scenario).  
A further, higher figure of 2,960 dwellings per year was tested which reflects the 
amount of market housing required to meet affordable housing needs in ful l.  
The likely significant environmental effects were taken into account by the 
Committee, amongst other things (such as deliverability) , in determining the 
scale of development proposed in the Plan .  
21. Another option could  have been tested which sought to maximise affordable 
housing provision but without going as high as 2,960 dwellings per year.  
However, there was no evidential basis to suggest what that figure should be, or 
anything to suggest that the likely significant  environmental effects would be 
materially different.  The range of reasonable alternatives was fit for purpose .  
 
2 Core Documents STA004b and STA004d  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
9 
 22. As part of the Local Plan Review, the Committee re -assessed the spatial 
strategy to determine whether or not it was still appropriate for the area.  
Alternative options included new settlements and a more even distribution of 
growth across smaller towns and villages .  For the purposes of the SA, the 
Committee adequately considered a range of reasonable alternatives and 
provided reasons for the c hosen strategy .  
23. Where sites are concerned, the SA is part of the Committee’s decision -making 
process.  It does not identify which sites should be allocated or which sites are 
the “most sustainable” .  The start of the process involved a review of informati on 
held on existing known sites, in addition to those put forward as part of the 2019 
call for sites and initial stages of consultation.  Stage 2 then filtered sites by 
discounting those which conflicted with national planning policy (such as land in 
Flood  Zone 3) and land divorced from settlements.  Sites passing through this 
stage were taken forward as reasonable alternatives for the purposes of the SA.  
This is a reasonable and appropriate approach to take.  
24. In some cases, detailed evidence had been prov ided by site promoters  which 
was not used in the SA.  This was to ensure that all options were tested on an 
equal and consistent basis.  It was appropriate for the purposes of the SA.  
Evidence relating to mitigation was taken into account in the wider sit e selection 
process.   
25. Following submission of the Plan it became apparent to the Committee that 
some sites were omitted from the SA in error.  This was rectified by the SA 
Addendum Report which was published for consultation for 6 weeks between 
August and  October 2022.3  The additional work did not identify any significant 
likely effects that would require any modifications to the submitted Plan.   
26. In some limited cases, it has been suggested that the results of the SA (and the 
site selection methodology) include incorre ct factual information.  In response , 
the Committee has carried out a ‘fact check’ of relevant sites4 and confirms that 
the outcomes of the SA process remain the same.  The other main concerns 
with the SA are the consistency and level of detail provided in the summaries.  
Whilst it is accepted by the Committee that summaries could  have been more 
thorough, in our view the various iterations are adequate and proportionate t o 
the task in hand, which started at Stage 1 with over 800 potential housing sites.   
27. In conclusion therefore, the various iterations of the SA demonstrate that the 
Committee has identified, described and evaluated the likely significant effects 
on the env ironment of implementing the Plan, and considered reasonable 
alternatives taking into account its objectives and geographical scope .  The 
 
3 Examination Document EX005 and EX018  
4 Examination Documents EX022 and EX025  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
10 
 Committee has carried out an adequate SA of the Plan and reasonable 
alternatives have been considered to a sufficient degree.  
Habitats Regulations Assessment  
28. The Habitats Regulations Assessment (‘HRA’) Main Report and Technical 
Appendices5 confirms that there are no Special Protection Areas (‘SPA’s) or 
Special Areas of Conservation (‘SAC’s) within Central Lincolnshire.  The 
nearest is the Humber Estuary SPA and Ramsar site which is approximately 
5km away from Central Lincolnshire to the north.  It is designated for its ability to 
support mobile bird species including waterfowl, waders and birds of prey.  
Impacts on the Hu mber Estuary SAC, The Wash SPA and The Wash and North 
Norfolk Coast SAC are also considered.  
29. A distance of 8km has been used in the HRA to consider likely impacts on the 
Humber Estuary SPA and Ramsar site from increased recreational disturbance 
arising fr om allocations in the Plan.  This has been agreed with Natural 
England.  In summary, the Stage 2 Appropriate Assessment concludes that no 
significant adverse effects will arise due to the distance between proposed 
allocations and the designated sites , comb ined with other factors such as the 
availability of alternative recreational routes.  Similar conclusions are reached in 
respect of possible impacts on functionally linked land and in respect of 
atmospheric changes affecting the integrity of sites.  In the  event that windfall 
proposals come forward, including proposals for wind turbines, the Plan 
provides sufficient safeguards through Policies such as S60 and S14.   
30. We therefore conclude that the policies and allocations in the Plan will not have 
a signific ant adverse impact on the integrity of the Humber Estuary SPA and 
SAC, The Wash SPA or The Wash and North Norfolk Coast SAC.   
Climate Change  
31. Part of the Vision for the Local Plan Review is to ensure that new homes are 
efficient and  are located in the righ t places to  minimise the need to travel by car.  
Renewable energy development is also supported as Central Lincolnshire 
moves towards  becoming a carbon net -zero region.  This will be achieved by a 
combination of the spatial strategy, which seeks to direct the majority of new 
growth to the Lincoln Strategy Area, and through policies concerning the design 
of new buildings, reducing energy consumption, water efficiency, adaptable 
design and renewable energy.  
32. The soundness of these policies is considered below.   However, for the 
purposes of this assessment, w e are satisfied that, taken as a whole, the Plan 
 
5 Core Documents STA005.1a and STA005.1b  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
11 
 includes policies designed to secure that the development and use of land in the 
area contribute s towards  the mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change .  
Other Matters  
33. Consultation on the Plan and the MMs was carried out in compliance with the 
Commi ttee’s Statement of Community Involvement.6  Electronic copies of the 
Plan and all supporting documents were provided online, with paper copies of 
the Plan and the SA available for inspection at Council offices and libraries in 
Lincoln, Market Rasen, Gain sborough and Sleaford.  Press notices were also 
used to inform people of the consultation and those people who had previously 
been involved were contacted directly from the Committee’s database.   
34. Furthermore, at the Regulation 18 and 19 stages, Parish Councils were 
contacted 2 weeks prior to consultation starting.  This allowed Parish Councils 
to both consider the Plan and make representations on time, but also to 
distribute  information locally.  Whilst there was a difference in the methods used 
by Parish Councils to raise awareness, this was outside the Committee’s 
control.  Nevertheless , it serves to highlight the proactive ways in which the 
Committee sought to consult with local communities in rural areas.  We are 
satisfied that adequate public consultat ion was carried out in accordance with 
the Statement of Community Involvement and that people were made aware of 
the Plan and had sufficient opportunities to submit comments.  This is further 
evidenced by the representations received and participation in t he examination . 
35. The Development Plan, taken as a whole, includes policies to address the 
strategic priorities for the development and use of land in each of the three local 
planning authority area s.  The Plan was submitted for examination after the 
indicat ive dates given in the Local Development Scheme, but this was largely 
due to the Coronavirus pandemic.  The Plan area is logical given the 
administrative boundaries of Lincoln, North Kesteven  and West Lindsey .   
36. Paragraph 1.1.7 states that the Local Plan R eview replaces the Central 
Lincolnshire Local Plan , which was adopted in April 2017.  It has been clear to 
participants throughout the examination that the Local Plan Review is a full 
replacement of the existing development plan for the area.  For the avoi dance of 
doubt, the word “ all” could be added to the text at paragraph 1.1.7, but this 
would be a matter for the Committee.  In our view it was not a matter that 
required amending by way of a MM.  
37. The Plan complies with all other relevant legal requirements, including in the 
2004 Act (as amended) and the 2012 Regulations.  
 
6 Core Document STA003  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
12 
 Assessment of Soundness  
Main Issues  
38. Taking account of all the representations, the written evidence and the 
discussions that took place at the examination hearings, we have identified 11 
main issues upon which the soundness of th e Plan depends.  This Report deals 
with these main issues.  It does not respond to every point or issue raised by 
representors.  Nor does it refer to every policy, policy criterion or allocation in 
the Plan.  
Issue 1 – Whether the Plan is informed by a robust, objective 
assessment of housing need and whether the housin g requirement 
is justified and positively prepared to meet that need  
Local Housing Need Assessment  
39. To determine the minimum number of homes needed, paragraph 61 of the 
Framework states that strategic policies should be informed by a local housing 
need asse ssment, conducted using the standard method in national planning 
guidance, unless exceptional circumstances justify an alternative approach.   
40. At the time of the Plan’s preparation, the local housing need assessment 
identified a need for 1,060  net new dwel lings per year (or 23,320 over the plan 
period).  Using the latest affordability ratio result s in a slightly higher figure of 
1,102  dwellings per year (or 24,244 over the plan period).  To ensure that the 
Plan is positively prepared, justified and up to da te upon adoption, MM1 is 
required to update Policy S2 to incorporate the latest figures.   
Balancing Homes and Jobs  
41. The PPG advises that the standard method for assessing local housing need 
provides a minimum starting point in determining the number of new  homes 
needed in an area.  It does not attempt to predict other factors which might have 
an impact on demographic change, such as growth strategies or infrastructure 
improvements.   
42. As submitted, Policy S2 identifies the housing requirement for Central 
Lincolnshire as a range between 1,060 and 1,325 dwellings.  The lower end of 
the range was derived from the local housing need assessment .  The higher 
figure represent s a projected scale of housing needed to support the creation of 
24,000 new jobs over the pl an period.   Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
13 
 43. The use of a range is not precluded by the Framework.  It is also referred to in 
the PPG.7  However, the Committee accepts that it has caused confusion and 
we agree that , as submitted, it is not sufficiently clear what the housing 
requirement is.  Paragraph 16 of the Framework requires Local Plans to contain 
policies that are clearly written and unambiguous.  A MM is therefore needed in 
the interests of effectiveness.   
44. Having established that a MM is necessar y, the next question is whether  the 
housing requirement should be 1,102 (the updated local housing need 
assessment figure) or 1,3 25 (the ‘jobs growth’ figure).  The majority of 
participants at the hearing sessions favoured the higher figure , citing the nee d 
to plan positively and avoid situations where housing availability would constrain 
economic growth.   
45. The justification for the  ‘jobs growth ’ figure is found in the Central Lincolnshire 
Housing Needs Assessment8 and the Economic Needs Assessment Update9 
(‘ENA’) .  In summary, 1,083 dwellings (the original local housing need 
assessment figure) are expected to provide enough population to support 677 
jobs per year.  In contrast, the ENA predicts that 992 jobs will be created on 
average over the plan period  when taking into account past trends.  Supporting 
this level of job growth would require around 1,3 25 dwellings pe r year.   
46. However, the assessment of past trends is based on a period between 2012 
and 2018.  As the Committee points out, this reflected a p eriod of economic 
growth following the last major global recession.  Although the projection of 992 
jobs per year has been downgraded slightly, it must nonetheless be considered 
in that context.  There is nothing to suggest that such a high level of jobs g rowth  
would prevail over the plan period.  In contrast, Oxford Econometrics and 
Experian project growth levels of between 420 and 714 jobs per year.   
47. Furthermore , the ENA was p ublished in March 2020.  The authors therefore 
recognise that it has been produ ced during a period of “exceptional economic 
volatility”, coming only weeks after the UK formally leaving the EU in January 
2020 and at the  outset of the Coronavirus pandemic.  More recent global 
economic pressures are also now relevant , such as rising inflation driven by 
higher food and fuel costs .  Clearly , these factors were not known at the time of 
publication but  serve to demonstrate the cyclical nature of housing and 
employment markets.  
48. For these reasons, we find that the use of th e higher figure of 1,3 25 dwellings is 
not justified as the housing requirement.  Instead, MM1 is necessary to make it 
clear that the requirement is 1,102  dwellings per year, or 24,244 dwellings over 
 
7 Paragraph: 027 Reference ID: 68 -027-20190722  
8 Core Document HOU001  
9 Core Document ECO001  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
14 
 the plan period.  This is the minimum number of new homes  needed.  It has 
been calculated using the standard methodology as advocated by national 
planning policy.  It is therefore justified, robust and sound.  
49. Concerns have been expressed that this is a negative approach and will 
constrain business growth by lim iting housebuilding in Central Lincolnshire.  
However, in preparing the Plan, and allocating sites for housing, the Committee 
has not been bound by the minimum housing requirement.  This is evidenced by 
the total identified supply.  Based on completions si nce 2018, sites with 
planning permission and/or under construction , and sites allocated in the Plan, 
roughly 34,700 dwellings are projected to be built over the plan period.10  No 
persuasive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that basing the housing  
requirement on the local housing need figure would harmfully constrain growth, 
especially when also considering the permissive approach to windfall sites 
around the main settlements in Policy S3.  
Conclusion  
50. We therefore conclude that, subject to the reco mmend MMs, the Plan is 
informed by a robust, objective assessment of housing need and that the 
housing requirement is justified and positively prepared to meet that need.   
Issue 2 – Whether the settlement hierarchy and distribution of 
development is justi fied, positively prepared and consistent with 
national planning policy  
Settlement Hierarchy  – Policy S1  
51. The hierarchy in Policy S1 is based primarily on the size of each settlement , by 
total dwelling number, using a base -date of April 2018.  In considering the 
settlement hierarchy, no detailed assessment of services was carried out.  The 
level of service provision was used to determine the site allocations.   
52. For the purposes of ran king settlements, making a distinction based on size can 
be appropriate  for plan -making.  This is because, typically, larger settlements 
such as Lincoln, the Market Towns and the Main Towns have a greater ability to 
accommodate additional growth, from abso rbing  impacts on the character and 
appearance of the area to benefitting from services, facilities and public 
transport provision, thus limiting the need to travel.  It is the same approach that 
was used in the existing Local Plan and is justified and soun d.  
53. Dwelling numbers were not used for Lincoln , but the city is by far the largest 
settlement in the plan area and is the county town of Lincolnshire.  Its position at 
the top of the hierarchy is therefore justified.  Below Lincoln, Sleaford and 
 
10 CLJSPC Matter 9 Hea ring Statement  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
15 
 Gainsborou gh are the main settlements in West Lindsey and North Kesteven 
and are also noticeably larger than the Market Towns .  It is therefore 
appropriate to make a distinction from Caistor and Market Rasen  below them .  
54. Based on dwelling numbers alone, some Large Villages are actually bigger than 
the Market Towns .  But Caistor and Market Rasen are historic towns which 
serve and support their wider rural hinterland.  They are materially different to 
even some of the larges t villages such as Cherry Willingham, Branston and 
Skellingthorpe.  Their position in the hierarchy is therefore justified .  It also 
reflects the approach taken in the existing Local Plan.  
55. The threshold  for a Large Village is anything above 750 dwellings.   Medium 
Villages range from 250 -749 dwellings, with Small Villages between 50 and 249 
dwellings.  By using this approach there will inevitably be settlements on the 
cusp of each tier.  There will also be circumstances where planning permissions 
and/or dev elopments built since the base date of the survey mean that 
settlements are now larger.  But similar issues would arise with whatever the 
threshold used.  There also needs to be a cut -off point in the evidence base 
when assessing dwelling numbers in a vill age, which naturally change over 
time.  As a result, these factors do not undermine the approach taken and the 
distinction between villages is justified and sound.   
56. Settlements with between 15 and 49 dwellings are classed as Hamlets , 
provided that houses are clustered together to form a single developed footprint.  
This will require an element of professional judgement because Hamlets are not 
listed in the Plan by name.  However, this is a reasonable approach given the 
size and rural context of Lincolnshir e and the sheer number of possible 
Hamlets.   In our view , the Plan is sufficiently clear enough to be effective.  It 
also reflects the approach in the existing Local Plan and we have not been 
made aware of any instances which demonstrate that use of the hi erarchy has 
been ineffective.   
Distribution of Housing Development  – Policy S2  
57. Policy S2 aims to direct around 64% of development towards the Lincoln 
Strategy Area  through a combination of existing commitments and allocations in 
the Plan.  T he Lincoln Str ategy Area is different to the Lincoln Urban Area and 
includes surrounding villages such as Bassingham, Saxilby, Waddington, 
Welton and Dunholme.  The area is based on travel to work patterns and 
recognises the close physical and functional relationship be tween Lincoln and 
the surrounding rural villages.  
58. Directing the majority of growth to the Lincoln Strategy Area continues to be an 
appropriate and positively prepared strategy.  It reflects the  primary  role and 
function of Lincoln and seeks to direct sign ificant new development to places 
which are, or can be made, sustainable in accordance with paragraph 105 of Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
16 
 the Framework.  However, f or effectiveness, MM1 is needed to clarify that the 
totals include planned and committed developments.   
59. Below the Lincol n Strategy Area, Policy S2 directs 12% of growth to 
Gainsborough, Sleaford and ‘Elsewhere ’.  This also reflects the existing Local 
Plan but was reconsidered by the Committee during the Plan’s preparation.  
Other options that were considered  includ ed directing greater development to 
the rural areas, as evidenced by the SA and the Committee’s Matter 3 Hearing 
Statement.  In summary, a continuation of th e 64/12/12/12 split was considered 
to represent an appropriate strategy for Central Lincolnshire.  Based on the 
evidence provided, judgements around the percentage of growth directed to 
each location are reasonable and sound.   
60. In terms of housing numbers, the latest information11 shows a general alignment 
between planned housing growth and the percenta ges in Policy S2 since the 
start of the plan period.  In Gainsborough and Sleaford, the numbers are slightly 
below that anticipated by the Plan (9.5% and 10.5% respectively).  However, 
the differences are not significant.  In both locations the SUEs are al so still at a 
relatively early stage.  This will be a matter for the Committee to monitor .  
61. In the ‘Elsewhere’ category (which includes several rural villages) the latest 
information shows an anticipated supply of over 5,400 dwellings  over the plan 
period,  or nearly 17%.  This remains very broadly consistent with the 12% in 
Policy S2  and we are satisfied that the Plan will be effective in meeting the 
intended strategy.  It also demonstrates that rural communities beyond the 
Lincoln Strategy Area will contin ue to see a proportionate, and meaningful, 
amount of housing growth .   
62. The Plan does not apportion a percentage or amount of growth between 
individual settlements.  However, Central Lincolnshire is a large, predominantly 
rural area covering three districts  with a significant number of rural villages.  
Moreover, at a village -level, the amount of growth planned for is based on 
factors such as the availability of sites put forward, their suitability and a 
consideration of existing commitments.  The approach ta ken to the distribution 
of housing is therefore proportionate and sound.  It also ensures that the Plan is 
focused on growth towards the most sustainable locations within and around 
Lincoln , and at Gainsborough and Sleaford.   
Distribution of Employment  – Policies S2 and S28  
63. The distribution of employment development reflects the same principles around 
focussing significant new development in the most accessible locations which 
are, or can be made, sustainable.  For effectiveness, this is made clear by MM1.   
 
11 CLJSPC Matter 3 Hearing Statement  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
17 
 64. The employment allocations all reflect the spatial strategy and are located in 
Lincoln, Gainsborough and Sleaford.  The exceptions are Witham St Hughs and 
the extension to the Hemswell Cliff Business Park.  However, development is 
underway at Witham St Hughs and forms part of a new mixed -use community.  
Hemswell Cliff is also identified as an Enterprise Zone  and has been identified 
for new employment growth throughout the existing Local Plan.  Its inclusion 
remains justified.   
Conclusion  
65. Subject to the recommended MMs, we therefore conclude that the settlement 
hierarchy and distribution of development is justified, positively prepared and 
consistent with national planning policy.  
Issue 3 – Whether the Plan will be effective in achieving th e 
proposed spatial strategy and whether its policies will be effective 
for decision -making purposes  
Introduction  
66. As with the existing Local Plan , no settlement boundaries are proposed  in the 
Local Plan Review.   Instead, new d evelopment proposals are assessed against 
Policies S3, S4 or S5 depending on their location.   
67. The starting point is whether a proposal is within, adjacent to, or outside the 
‘developed footprint’ of a settlement.  A definition of ‘developed footprint’ is 
provided in the Plan and excludes locations such as gardens, paddocks and 
other undeveloped land where it relates more to the surrounding countryside 
than the built -up area of the settlement.  A s with the application of the policy in 
the existing Local Pla n, an element of professional judgement will be necessary 
to determine whether a proposal falls within the developed footprint.  
Circumstances between sites in the same settlement may also vary.  
Nevertheless , we are satisfied that the Plan is clear enough  to be effective . 
Housing in the Lincoln Urban Area, Main Towns and Market Towns  – Policy S3  
68. Development is supported in principle within  the developed footprint of Lincoln, 
Gainsborough, Sleaford, Market Rasen and Caistor.  The Plan is also intended 
to allow development in appropriate locations adjacent  to the developed 
footprint of the main urban areas.  In doing so, it i s positively prepared in 
seeking to increase the supply of housing in locations which are, or can be 
made, sustainable.  I n principle, t his is justified and consistent with paragraphs 
73 and 105 of the Framework.  
69. However, as submitted, th ese intentions are unclear.  For effectiveness, MM3 is 
therefore needed to confirm that proposals will be supported on sites Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
18 
 immediately adjacent to the developed footprint w here they meet certain criteria .  
For the same reasons the criteria  also need to be specified  in the policy.  This 
includes requiring  schemes to provide the requisite amount of affordable 
housing, avoid ing harmful landscape and townscape impacts, be ing adequately 
served by infrastructure, integrat ing successfully with the community they adjoin 
and be ing accessible by sustainable modes o f transport.  The criteria ensure 
that windfall housing sites on the edges of settlements will be considered on a 
transparent and consistent basis and lead to high quality developments.   
70. In order to be justified and effective, it is also necessary to incl ude a restriction 
on the size and scale of development s permitted by Policy S3.  Allowing windfall 
sites to come forward on the edges of settlements without any consideration of 
size could start to undermine the purpose of the plan -led system.  Requiring 
proposals to be subordinate in size to the community they adjoin will therefore 
strike an appropriate balance between providing a flexible, positively prepared 
strategy for windfall sites without undermining the role and function of the Plan.  
Alternative w ording was discussed during the hearing sessions, but we are 
satisfied that the text proposed by MM3  will be effective in allowing 
proportionate new development around the edges of the main urban areas.   
71. For the same reasons, it is necessary to make it cl ear that windfall proposals 
under Policy S3 must not compromise the delivery of other site allocations in the 
same settlement.  The changes in MM3 make this requirement clearer and are 
needed for effectiveness.  Consequential changes to the supporting text  are 
required by MM2, which also removes the erroneous reference to market 
saturation which would be difficult to prove and is neither justified  nor effective .   
Housing Development in or Adjacent to Villages  – Policy S4  
72. The principle of new residential de velopment is also supported within the 
developed footprint of Large, Medium and Small Villages.  However, unlike 
Lincoln, Gainsborough, Sleaford, Market Rasen and Caistor, a size restriction of 
up to 10 dwelling s is applied to Large and Medium Villages , with up to 5 
dwellings permitted in Small Villages.  
73. The primary reason for limiting the scale of development in villages is to provide 
certainty to local communities.  As part of the Local Plan  Review  process, the 
Committee has considered all sites put forward for 10 or more dwellings and 
allocated land where it was considered suitable  to do so.   The purpose of Pol icy 
S4 is to support smaller, windfall sites, with the intention for larger sites to be 
considered as part of the plan -led system, either through the preparation of 
Neighbourhood Plans or Local Plan Reviews (such as this one).  When also 
taking into accoun t the typical size of villages, and the fact that land availability 
will be far less than in places such as Lincoln, the  policy is  justified and sound.  
Moreover, in the event that a larger site was identified  in a village (such as a Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
19 
 large brownfield site for example), then Policy S4 includes an appropriately 
worded caveat to account for site specific circumstances.  
74. One of the main differences between the  existing Local Plan and the Local Plan 
Review is the restriction on development adjacent  to villages.  In the  existing  
Local Plan, Policy LP4 allows new housing on the edges of villages where the 
scheme has local support and does not result in growth of more than 10 or 15% 
depending on location.  In the submitted Plan, Policy S4 only allows new 
residential development within  villages, unless  it is a First Homes exception site 
or a rural exception site.  
75. For the reasons set out above, seeking to focus development towards the larger 
settlements of Lincoln, Gainsborough, Sleaford, Market Rasen and Caistor is 
entirely appropriate and sound.  Although the existing Local Plan allowed some 
development on the edges of villages, the Committee is not duty bound to stick 
with this strategy indefinitely.  In fact, one of the reasons for the Local Plan 
Review is to address  issues whereby perfectly acceptable schemes were 
prevented by the 10  or 15% limit s.  The approach is therefore consistent with 
paragraph 33 of the Framework, which requires policies to be reviewed at least 
once every five years and updated as necessary.  
76. Evidence in the Committee’s Matter 3 Hearing Statement shows that over 25% 
of housing expected to come forward in the plan period (from commitments and 
allocations) will take place in Large Villages.  This accounts for over 6,800 new 
homes.  Nearly 1,750 d wellings (or approximately 6.4%) of housing growth will 
take place in Medium Villages, with around 785 dwellings in Small Villages (or 
2.9%).  Whilst taking a slightly more restrictive approach to windfall housing 
sites, the Plan therefore still includes a substantial amount of growth in villages.  
Neighbourhood Plans also provide an appropriate mechanism to identify and 
allocate sites for housing until the next Local Plan Review.   
Development in the Countryside  – Policy S5  
77. Where a proposal is outside the developed footprint of a Hamlet or Village12, it 
falls within the ‘countryside’.  This is sufficiently clear to users of the Plan.  
Within the countryside, Policy S5 applies and lists the various types of 
development which are permitted.   
78. Explicit support  is given for rural enterprises, agricultural diversification schemes 
and the modernisation and adaptation of rural land -based developments (such 
as proposals to help mitigate the impacts of climate change).  The policy is 
therefore positively prepared and consistent with paragraph 84 of the 
 
12 *and is not adjacent to the Lincoln Urban Area, a Main Town or a Market Town under Policy S3  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
20 
 Framework which states that planning policies should enable the sustainable 
growth and expansion of businesses in the rural area.   
79. Where new residential development is concerned, the policy also reflects 
current national planning policy by restricting proposals to the re -use of existing 
buildings, replacement dwellings and accommodation for rural workers.  
Requiring residential conversion schemes to demonstrate that building s are  no 
longer suitabl e or required for commercial uses is a justified and proportionate 
way of promoting sustainable patterns of development  in a predominantly rural 
area.  It ensures that opportunities are  provided for rural businesses to grow, 
expand and diversi fy and seeks to limit the need for additional new development 
in the countryside  to situations where it is required .  The policy is not restrictive, 
and ultimately allows for the appropriate reuse of buildings.  In this regard it is 
consistent with the Framework.  Furt hermore, it would only apply to applications 
requiring planning permission, with conversions also permitted under the Town 
and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order.  
80. The Plan does not explicitly refer to brownfield sites which may become 
redundant in the countryside, and which cannot be reused for the purposes of 
Policy S5.  But this does not make the Plan unsound.  Given the context and 
history of Lincolnshire, the majority of brownfield sites in the countryside are 
Ministry of Defence (‘MoD’) sites which are covered by Policy S84.  
Neighbourhood Plans, future updates of the Local Plan and exceptions such as 
enabling development would also provide other opportunities to promote the 
suitable reuse and redevelopment of brownfield sites.  Mor eover, just because a 
site is previously developed does not justify wholesale policy support for what 
could be a significantly more intensive use in typically less accessible locations.  
The scope of Policy S5 as submitted is  appropriate and justified.   
Conclusion  
81. We therefore conclude that, subject to the recommended main modifications, 
the Plan will be effective in achieving the proposed spatial strategy and the 
relevant policies will be effective for decision -making purposes.   
Issue 4 – Whether the process for s electing residential site 
allocations was robust and whether they are justified, effective and 
consistent with national planning policy  
Methodology  
82. The Local Plan Review re-allocates sites which are included in the existing 
Local Plan (and have not yet com e forward) and allocates new sites.  A useful 
breakdown of the sites is provided in Core Document HOU007.  Where sites are 
currently allocated, they have previously been examined, found to be sound and 
adopted as part of the development plan.   Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
21 
 83. The startin g point for the Local Plan Review was to assess information  on 
existing allocations and sites submitted as part of the ‘call for sites’ process.  
This resulted in over 800 potential housing sites being identified.  The next 
stage was to sift out sites base d on their capacity (a minimum of 10 dwellings 
was required), whether land was within or adjacent to a named settlement, sites 
in Flood Zone 3 and land containing Scheduled Monuments.   
84. Requiring land to be within, or adjacent to , named settlements in the hierarchy 
is a reasonable and justified way of filtering out sites to determine suitable 
allocations in the Plan.  It ensures that the process is consistent, transparent 
and seeks to direct growth to existing towns and villages in accordance with the 
spatial s trategy.  Sites that were not well connected when considered in 
isolation, but which could be connected via another allocation were not 
discounted at this stage.  
85. The l evel of services and facilities in each settlement  was then assessed .  This 
process identified core facilities such as schools, healthcare, retail, employment, 
post offices, pharmacies and the frequency of bus and rail connections.   It also 
informed the ‘Village Profiles ’, which included a n overall summary, a  key 
constraints map , details of recent developments an d commentary on the 
relationship with any nearby settlements .  The Village Profiles were also sent to 
Parish Councils .  Any comments received were considered  and the Village 
Profiles then informed the Site Settlement Analysis Report13.  In turn this 
informed the selection process .  
86. All identified sites were then subject to further assessment and visits were 
undertaken by Officers.  A Geographic Information  System ( ‘GIS’) based 
desktop  constraint  assessment was also carried out with the results being 
categorised in a red /amber /green ( ‘RAG ’) scoring matrix.  External 
organisations were consulted  on the sieved sites  to further inform the 
assessment of their po tential suitability for housing.   This included the NHS.   
87. The likely capacity  of each potential housing site was calculated by using 
density zones.  Lincoln sites within 1km of the railway station were defined as 
higher density, with sites beyond the zone  classified as being in the ‘wider urban 
area’.   This approach was taken in order to promote sust ainable development 
by having higher density development in the city centre and around the 
transport hub of the station.   It is reasonable and justified in seeking to promote 
more sustainable patterns of development.  
88. In order to further inform site capaci ty, a range of schemes with extant planning 
permission were  used as comparisons.  For the likely developable areas some 
 
13 Core Document STA008  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
22 
 assumptions were required.  However, these are reasonable, such as the need 
for larger sites to require space for supporting infrastruct ure and open space.   
89. It has been pointed out that some factual errors were made in the evidence -
base  documents used to determine the site allocations.  However, the 
Committee has clarified these errors through Examination Document EX025 
and confirms that they are minor in nature and do not materially affect the 
assessment process or suitability of the sites.  Based on the information 
provided we have no reasons to find that the process was fundamentally flawed.   
90. In summary, the Committee’s site selection methodology ensured that sites 
were considered on a consistent and transparent basis  and followed a wide -
ranging and detailed assessment process.  Inevitably, there will be 
disagreements with the outcomes for some sites , but on the whole, we consider 
that the  process and any judgements made by Officers on which sites to 
allocate , were robust and justified.  
General Policy Requirements  
91. Policies S77 -S82 set out residential site allocations by tier of the settlement 
hierarchy.  In general, the approach taken was to list the allocations and provide 
an indicative dwelling capacity.  Only where it was considered necessary were 
site-specific requirements incl uded.  Because the Plan is read as a whole, and 
therefore other polic ies would apply to development proposals regardless, this 
approach is justified and sound.  However, to ensure that the Plan is effective 
and clear to decision -makers, the position is cla rified by MM41 .   
92. As submitted, allocations on the edges of villages have a generic requirement 
that the final design must be ‘low density’ and in keeping with local vernacular.  
Although the rationale for the policy is sensible , it does not automatically follow 
that sites must be ‘low density’ to reflect their rural context and surroundings.  
Additional flexibility is therefore needed for effectiveness and is achieved by 
MM55, MM56, MM57, MM58, MM60, MM61, MM64, MM65, MM67, MM70, 
MM71, MM73, MM74, MM75, MM 76, MM77, MM78, MM79, MM80, MM81, 
MM82, MM83, MM84, MM85, MM88, MM89  and MM91 .   
Sustainable Urban Extensions (‘SUE’s’) – Polic ies S68, S69 and S76 
93. Policy S76 lists the SUEs and provides an indicative dwelling capacity for each 
one.  This is based on detailed plans for each site and/or assumptions on 
density and dwelling capacity as set out in the Sustainable Urban Extensions 
Evidence Report s14. 
 
14 Core Documents EVR068 -EVR071  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
23 
 94. All the SUEs were assessed to consider whether it remained appropriate to 
allocate the sites in the Local Pl an Review.  They were not ‘automatically’ 
carried forward without prior consideration by Officers.  This consideration 
included factors such as progress made and whether any material changes in 
circumstances were relevant.  The principle of the SUEs and th eir part in the 
growth strategy for Central Lincolnshire has been established by the existing 
Local Plan  and remains an appropriate strategy for meeting housing needs.  
Several of the sites have made good progress and they are an integral part of 
the plan -led system in Central Lincolnshire.  Paragraph 73 of the Framework 
recognises that the supply of large numbers of new homes can often be best 
achieved through planning for larger scale developments, such as new 
settlements or significant extensions to town s and villages.   
95. The overarching requirements for all the SUEs are provided in Policy S68.  It 
sets out a need to approve matters such as phasing, the timely delivery of 
infrastructure and to consider an appropriate mix of uses.  The requirements are 
all justified in the interests of securing comprehensive and high -quality 
development.  They also recognise that due to their size, some of the SUEs will 
deliver beyond the plan period and therefore appropriate details around phasing 
and delivery need to be ag reed.   
96. One of the main changes from the existing Local Plan is the omission of a 
requirement to provide gypsy and traveller pitches on the SUEs.  As discussed 
below and evidenced by documents EX031 and HOU005, the identified needs 
for gypsy and traveller accommodation is likely to be met through other means.  
Therefore, it is not necessary to include specific pitch targets on the SUEs in the 
Local Plan Review at this moment in time.   
Lincoln SUEs  
97. In January 2022, a hybrid planning application was approved for a residential -
led mixed -use development comprising up to 3,200 new homes at the Lincoln 
Western Growth Corridor (COL/BOU/001)15.  The scale, amount and mix of 
uses on the site have therefore been established.   
98. Not all of the allocated site is  covered by the approved scheme.  Because this 
land could still come forward, in the interests of effectiveness it is necessary for 
the Plan to specify that any additional development proposals must address 
relevant site constraints, namely, flood risk, he ritage and access.  It is also 
necessary to require future proposals to integrate with the wider site to ensure 
that a coherent and comprehensive development is achieved.  Both soundness 
issues are resolved by MM36 .   
 
15 Ref 2019/0294/RG3  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
24 
 99. In December 2022, outline planning per mission was granted for part of the first 
phase of the  Lincoln  South East Quadrant  (NK/CAN/003) 16.  A resolution to 
grant permission for a nother application across the remainder of the first phase 
was passed in February 202 217.  These approvals provide confidence that the 
site is developable and both schemes are coming forward in accordance with 
the Lincoln South East Quadrant Broad Concept Plan and Design Code18.  
However, for effectiveness it is necessary to correct a cartogr aphical error and 
amend the site area in Policy S76 ( MM45 ).  A corresponding change to the  
policies maps will also be required by the Committee upon adoption of the Plan.   
100. Development is now underway on the first phase of the  Lincoln  North East 
Quadrant  (COL/ABB/001) .  Although planning permission has been granted , it is 
still necessary to include a policy in the Plan to guide future proposals and later 
phases  should details change.  
101. Development of the South West Quadrant (NK/NHYK/001) was intended to take  
place alongside the first phase of the Lincoln Southern Bypass (also referred to 
as the North Hykeham Relief Road).  However, in securing funding from the 
Department for Transport, Lincolnshire County Council presented a case for 
delivering the road in a single phase.  This was approved and funding secured.   
102. The delivery of the allocation linked to the construction of the relief road is 
therefore still justified, but there may be scope to provide some housing as part 
of earlier phases without prejudicing highway safety or the project as a whole.  
This is reflected in the supporting text to the Plan , but not in Policy S69.  For 
effectiveness, and to provide additional flexibility, MM36  therefore states that 
any proposals to deliver early phases in advance of the road completion will be 
supported, but only where it can be demonstrated that such proposals will not 
undermine the delivery of the relief road  and are informed by the necessary 
transport evidence.  The necessary amount of transport evidence  needed to 
support a proposal would be determined as part of the planning application 
process.   
103. As consulted upon, in error MM36  did not delete the words “in line with the 
agreed Broad Concept Plan” from Policy S69(d), as  shown in earlier drafts and 
discu ssed at the hearing sessions.  However, upon reflection, this text does not 
need to be deleted to make the Plan sound.  This is because even in the event 
that an early phase was proposed, in the interests of the comprehensive 
planning of the site and good design, it would still be necessary to show how the 
development (any necessary highways mitigation) tied in with the Broad 
Concept Plan.  It is therefore shown as retained text in the schedule of MMs in 
the Appendix to this Report.  We have also added the word s “any associated” 
 
16 Ref 16/1564/OUT  
17 Ref 20/0057/OUT  
18 Core Document HOU012  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
25 
 and “mitigati on”.  These are minor change s and simply reflect the fact that the 
mitigation will be associated with the scheme and the evidence supporting it.   
104. The southern site boundary of the  Lincoln South West Quadrant SUE is 
intended to follow the line of the bypass.  However, because the precise route of 
the bypass is currently unknown  here, there is a small discrepancy on the 
submission version policies maps.  For effectiveness , it is therefore necessary 
to state  in the Plan whe re the boundary of the site will be formed ( MM35 ).   
Gainsborough SUEs  
105. Progress has also been made with the SUEs at Gainsborough.  Development is 
underway on a first phase at the Gainsborough Southern  Neighbourhood19 
(WL/GAIN/015) and the second phase has a national housebuilder lined up to 
take the site forward.  A planning application is also before West Lindsey District 
Council for the remainder of the site.20  At the Northern Neighbourhood 
(WL/GAIN/001), detailed planning permission is in place for the first phase and 
development is expected to commence soon.  We are there fore satisfied that 
the allocations are developable  and the policy requirements are justified.  
Sleaford SUEs  
106. Land at Handley Chase (NK/SLEA/014) benefits from various planning 
permissions granted since adoption of the existing Local Plan and development 
is underway.  The S leaford  West Quadrant has lagged behind and despite a 
resolution to grant outline planning permission in 2017, no formal decision has 
been issued owing to an outstanding legal agreement.  There is no dispute 
regarding the suitability of t he site for the uses proposed (it is also in the existing 
Plan) but questions have been raised about the realistic prospect of its delivery.   
107. However, there is nothing to suggest that the SUE is not developable (at least in 
part) over the plan period, whi ch runs until 2040.  As an allocation in the Local 
Plan Review, it therefore remains justified.  Furthermore, in the event that the 
situation changes, and the Sleaford West Quadrant (or any other SUE for that 
matter) is no longer viable, then the option is  available to the Committee to carry 
out a review and update of the Plan as required.  This has always been the 
Committee’s intention.  For effectiveness (and recognising that the situation on 
sites may change in the first five years from adoption) MM34  is therefore 
necessary to include this commitment in the Plan.   
 
19 Ref 140081  
20 Ref 145239  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
26 
 Regeneration and Opportunity Areas – Policies NS7 2, NS7 3 and NS74  
108. Policies NS72 -NS74 identify Regeneration and Opportunity Areas throughout 
Lincoln, Gainsborough and Sleaford.  The purpose of t he policies is to provide 
in principle support for the redevelopment and regeneration of these areas .  The 
requirement to provide masterplans also seeks to ensure that a comprehensive 
approach is taken to development proposals.  Because of the uncertainty 
surrounding possible future uses, and the timescales for their delivery, they are 
not allocated in the same way as housing or employment sites.  This is a 
proportionate, reasonable and justified approach.   
109. At Gainsborough, no indication is given to the type of uses that will be 
permitted.  For effectiveness, this is rectified by MM37 .  The MM also states that 
proposals should not undermine the ambitions of the regeneration area which 
are set out in criterion  a) to g).  As consulted upon, the MM does not include any 
reference to existing uses, the improvement and expansion of which may 
contribute to wider regeneration aims and objectives.  We have therefore added 
the words “existing uses” to the schedule of MM s in the Appendix to this Report .  
Other policies in the Plan would ensure that appropriate separation and 
mitigation was provided between new residential uses and existing commercial 
operators (such as S53).   
110. A MM is also required for effectiveness to Policy NS74, stating that any 
redevelopment plans at the former hospital in Greylees must be part of a 
heritage -led landscape scheme, thus ensuring that appropriate consideration is 
given to the Registered Park an d Garden ( MM38 ).   
Housing Sites in the Lincoln Urban Area – Policy S77  
111. Policy S77  allocates 19 sites for residential development in the L incoln Urban 
Area that will provide around  1,500 dwellings .  It is necessary to delete one 
allocation (COL/CAR/005) as  the site is now coming forward for alternative uses 
and the policy as submitted is therefore no longer effective ( MM46 ).  A 
corresponding change to the policies maps will be required by the Committee 
upon adoption of the Plan.  
112. Land at Cathedral Quarry, Riseholme Road ( COL/MIN/005 ) includes 
requirements to retain the bunds around the site and the enhancement of 
biodiversity.  However, keeping the bunds is not the only way of achieving the 
necessary separation between existing and proposed new hous ing or of 
enhancing biodiversity on the site .  The bunds could  also be reused to help fill 
the former quarry and a new landscaping scheme could help ensure an overall 
net gain in biodiversity , potentially incl uding any existing wildlife corridors  and 
prote cted trees .  To ensure that the allocation is effective and justified, both 
requirements are therefore modified by MM47 .  For the same reasons, and to Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
27 
 reflect more detailed design work in the submitted planning application, the 
capacity also needs to be modified to 70 dwellings.  ( MM47 ) 
113. Land south of Station Road, Waddington Low Fields (NK/WAD/004 A) includes 
requirements to contribute towards the Lincoln Southern Bypass and towards 
primary school education and health.  But no justification has been provided to 
determine what these contributions are or demonstrate why they are necessary.  
When also t aking into account that other polic ies in the Plan will apply to future 
planning application s (and require the provision of infrastructure ) the criteri a are 
not justified and deleted by MM48 .  The remainder of the allocation is justified 
and will provide a  proportionate extension to the Lincoln Urban Area with shops, 
services and public transport provision all within walking distance.   
Housing Sites in the Main Towns – Policy S78  
114. The majority of allocations in the Main Towns either have planning permission  
or are under construction.  The principle of development has therefore already 
been established and the sites are justified.  At Grantham Road, Sleaford 
(NK/SLEA/018) development is now complete.  The allocation is no longer 
required and for effectiveness  is deleted by MM49 .  A corresponding change to 
the policies maps will be required by the Committee upon adoption of the Plan.  
Housing Sites in the Market Towns – Policy S79  
115. Around 1,000 dwellings are allocated across 13 sites in the Market Towns.   
Again,  several sites either benefit from planning permission or are under 
construction.  At Market Rasen, the allocated site on Linwood Road 
(WL/MARK/007) is coming forward for less than 10 dwellings.  To reflect the site 
selection methodology, maintain a consistent approach to allocations and 
ensure that the Plan is justified, the allocation is  therefore deleted by MM50 .  A 
corresponding change to the polic ies maps will be required by the Committee 
upon adoption of the Plan.  
116. At Legsby Road, Market Rasen  (WL/MARK/001) , around 1.84 hectares of land 
is identified for 55 new homes.  Whether or not additional land could have been 
included in the boundary, there i s nothing to suggest that the submitted site is 
unsound or requires additional land to facilitate the delivery of housing.   
Housing Sites in Large Villages – Policy S80  
117. A significant amount of time has been spent during the examination carefully 
consideri ng allocations at Welton.  Five sites are allocated, totalling around 750 
new dwellings.  We have therefore had due regard to the cumulative impact of 
development, especially on services such as health and education.  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
28 
 118. It is accepted by the Committee that W elton has ‘more’ development than some 
other villages of a similar size.  However, Welton is a Large Village within the 
Lincoln Strategy Area, which for the reasons set out above, is the focus for new 
development.  It also benefits from public transport co nnections into Lincoln and 
has a good range of services .  Moreover, the village has a close functional and 
physical relationship with neighbouring Dunholme, which contains additional 
services such as the local convenience store.  The  good range of services  and 
facilities in the two villages are set out in the Site Allocations Settlement 
Analysis Report  (STA008) .   
119. For these reasons, and when taking into account the size of the villages and the 
absence of any objections or compelling evidence from relevant c onsultees 
(such as  the County Council o r the NHS), we consider that the scale of 
development is proportionate and justified.  In the event that additional 
infrastructure was required, then other policies in the Plan (namely Policy S45) 
would apply .  When read as a whole the Plan includes sufficient policies to 
ensure that the provision of new, or contribution towards , existing infrastructure 
is secured where necessary.   
120. Site WL/WELT/001 A is to the west of the village.  As submitted, Policy S80 
states that access will be taken from Heath Lane.  This is an error and should 
refer to Cliff Road (which is the name of the main road adjacent to the site).  For 
effectiveness the error is corrected by MM66 .  No access is proposed from 
Prebend Lane, and as part of any future development pedestrian connectivity 
will be necessary.  The dev elopment requirements also introduce the need for a 
scheme to mitigate against on -site surface water drainage issues.   
121. To the north of the village are two allocations adjacent to one another.  Site s 
WL/WELT/011 and WL/WELT/007.  The larger of the two site s (WL/WELT/011) 
is allocated in the existing Local Plan for around 350 dwellings (site CL1491).   
That allocation reflected an outline planning permission for 278 dwellings and 
72 retirement units (350 in total).  Following adoption of the existing Local Pl an, 
reserved matters approval was granted for the houses, which are now under 
construction.  Approval for the retirement units has lapsed.   
122. The approved layout does not use the full extent of the allocated site.  An area 
of unused land remains within the site and is shown on the approved layout plan 
as ‘safeguarded for additional development’.  It is argued that a further 100 
houses could come forward and that the Plan should be modified accordingly.   
123. We agree that, as submitted, the Plan is unsound becau se the development 
coming forward does not reflect the allocat ion and will leave an undeveloped 
parcel of land which has, through both the existing Local Plan and the approved 
scheme, always been included in the site and identified for housing.  However, 
the amount of additional housing has not been properly tested having regard to Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
29 
 material planning considerations such as highways capacity, possible impacts 
on local services or impacts on the character and appearance of the area.  
Simply increasing the capa city of the site at this stage would not be justified.   
124. In order to rectify the soundness issue, MM69  therefore introduces text into 
Policy S80 which states that proposals for additional residential development on 
the area of land safeguarded for housing under the approved scheme will be 
supported in principle.  In doing so, it is therefore clear to decision -makers, 
developers and the local community that the parcel remains identified for new 
housing, but ensures that the type and amount of development wil l have to be 
justified at the planning application stage to address these issues accordingly.  
Because the amount of development will therefore be design and capacity led, 
there is no need to amend the dwelling capacity figure, which is only indicative.  
125. WL/WELT/007 is bounded to the north, east and south by a combination of 
existing development and the golf course.  Combined with its boundary 
landscaping, allocation of the site would provide additional housing whilst 
retaining the form and shape of the vil lage.  Subject to the preferred access 
being taken through the adjoining site, the allocation is justified.  
126. Site WL/WELT/003 is part of an existing allocation in the current Local Plan 
(CL1490).  That allocation has been partially built -out, leaving the a rea of land 
identified as WL/WELT/003.  The remaining parcel will not extend residential 
development any further north or east than the existing developed footprint of 
the village and its inclusion in the Local Plan Review is justified .   
127. Adjacent to the e astern boundary of the allocation is site WL/WELT/008A.  As 
submitted, Policy S80 states that access is preferred from site WL/WELT/003.  
If access from Eastfield Lane is taken, then the Plan states that road widening 
and a new footway may be required.   
128. Following submission of the Plan, the Committee put forward some “suggested 
modifications” in Examination Document EX011.  This included a suggestion to 
delete WL/WELT/008A because of concerns over access.  In summary, it was 
considered that the necessary w idening of Eastfield Lane could not be achieved 
and that access from WL/WELT/003 is undeliverable due to ownership issues.  
129. However, following discussions at the hearing sessions, and after receiving 
clarification from highways officers, the Committee changed their position on the 
Welton sites as set out in Examination Documents EX027 and EX028.  
Document EX027 states that following further consideration of the issues it is 
not necessary to delete the site on highways grounds.  For the reasons set out 
in our letter dated 11 January 202321, we agree.  The prev ious planning 
 
21 Examination Document EX034  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
30 
 application process did not  raise insurmountable highways objections, only that 
road widening and a new footway would be necessary in the event that access 
was taken from Eastfield Lane.  Based on the evidence provided and 
observations at our  site visits , we find nothing to suggest that these works 
cannot be carried out , or that allocation of the site would lead to severe residual 
impacts on the highway network.  The allocation is therefore justified, but for 
effectiveness, it is necessary to make it clear that the highway works will be 
required as part of the scheme. ( MM68 )   
130. As submitted, Policy S80 also requires site WL/WELT/008A to be “phased back” 
after other allocations in the village without planning permission.  However, no 
persuasive r easons have been given by the Committee to justify why this is 
necessary.  It is also unclear when and how the site will be “phased back”.  For 
example, the policy does not stipulate whether this should be until other 
developments have started, or have to wait until they are fully occupied.  Even if 
there was a justified reason why an allocation should be delayed, such as to 
await the provision of new infrastructure, then this could be adequately dealt 
with as part of the planning application process.  For these reasons, whilst 
noting the comments provided by West Lindsey District Council, the 
requirement is neither justified nor effective and is deleted by MM68 .   
131. At Billinghay, sites NK/BIL/002, NK/BIL/003, NK/BIL/004, NK/BIL/005 and 
NK/BIL/006a are adjace nt to one another.  Policy S80 contains requirements to 
provide connectivity across the sites, but this should also include vehicular 
access to ensure a comprehensive and well -planned extension to the village.  
The necessary changes are made by MM51, MM52,  MM53  and MM54  and are 
needed for effective ness .  With the exception of NK/BIL/006a, all the sites are 
already allocated in the existing Local Plan.  The additional land is justified and 
will effectively fill a gap between existing housing to the east and the 
development underway to the west off Mill Lane.  
132. Land at Top Farm, Gre en Road, Navenby has now been completed 
(NK/NAV/007).  As with other similar sites, for effectiveness it is therefore 
deleted by MM59.  A corresponding change to the policies maps will be required 
by the Committee upon adoption of the Plan.  At Keelby, bot h allocations are 
justified but it would not be appropriate to access WL/KEE/003 from Church 
Lane due to the width and layout of the road.  For effectiveness this is made 
clear by MM62 .   
133. At Nettleham, land east of Brookfield Avenue (WL/NHAM/018) is alloca ted by 
the existing Local Plan and the made Neighbourhood Plan.  Although the 
allocation is justified in principle, the site does have some surface water flooding 
issues which need to be resolved as part of any development proposal.  This is 
made clear by MM63 , which is needed for effectiveness.   Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
31 
 134. Land to the west of Station Road and north of Nettleton Close, Branston is 
allocated for 35 dwellings (NK/BRAN/007).  The site is a logical extension to the 
village and adjoins a new housing development allocated in the existing Local 
Plan which is already under construction.  It is justified and sound.  
135. Two allocations are proposed at Heckington.  Land off Kyme Road is under 
construction (NK/HEC/007).  Land at Sleaford Road (NK/HEC/004) is bounded 
by existing hous ing to the north and east and by the railway line to the south.  
Aside from some surface water issues to be resolved, the site is relatively 
unconstrained and would retain the shape and form of the village.  It is justified 
as an allocation.   
136. At Waddingto n, site NK/WAD/015 is bounded on two sides by development 
under construction.  The allocation would extend the village to a point parallel 
with the site opposite (NK/WAD/014) and follow the line of built development to 
the north (NK/WAD/024).  It would the refore represent a logical and sound 
extension to the village and is the reason why it has been chosen over other 
reasonable alternatives.  The policy requirements will also ensure that any 
future development adequately assesses the proximity of RAF Waddin gton.  
Housing Sites in Medium Villages – Policy S81  
137. At Bassingham, two sites are allocated for housing (NK/BAS/007 and 
NK/BAS/010).  Land at Torgate  Road (NK/BAS/007) relates well to the built 
footprint of the village and is very close to the doctor’s surgery and the school.  
It is justified as an allocation and is proportionate to the size and scale of the 
village.  To ensure consistency across the d evelopment plan, it is required to 
come forward after 2026, thus reflecting the aims and objectives of the made 
Neighbourhood Plan.  No convincing evidence has been provided to suggest 
that the site cannot deliver over the plan period.  Similarly, land at Whites Lane 
(NK/BAS/010) is justified as an allocation and in doing so, reflects the made 
Neighbourhood Plan.  Although housing has yet to come forward, there is 
nothing to suggest that the site  is undevelopable over the plan period.   
138. The Plan includes te xt which states that the allocations are subject to their 
retention in the made Neighbourhood Plan.  We are not aware of any changes 
being sought to delete the sites that would prejudice their allocation in the Local 
Plan.  In the event that circumstances changed, this would be a matter for the 
Committee to address through updates to the Local Plan, if required.  
139. Site NK/DIG/001 (land north of Station Road, Digby) is currently under 
construction with a remaining capacity of approximately 44 units.  As part of this 
phase the site -specific requirements in Policy S81 have all been provided.  As 
such, they are not necessary and for effectiveness are deleted by MM72 . Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
32 
 140. Land at Meadow Lane, Leasingham (NK/LEAS/001) falls partially within Flood 
Zones 2 and 3.  There is also an existing sewage works to the north east of the 
site.  However, Core Document HOU002c explains how the amount of 
development has been reduced to 25 dwellings to avoid the areas at risk of 
flooding and provide an appropriate buffer to the sewage w orks.  The 
Committee’s Matter 7 Hearing Statement also explains how the allocation could 
be developed in a way that would not cause any material harm to the character 
and appearance of the area, principally by reason of its boundary landscaping.  
Other pol icies in the Plan would ensure that future proposals provide the 
necessary contributions towards infrastructure as required.   
141. Access to the site is intended from Deepdale Drive, rather than Meadow Lane.  
If the latter is to be used,  then the policy is jus tified in requiring a scheme of 
highway improvements and widening.  However, in the interests of promoting 
more sustainable modes of transport, it is also necessary to require pedestrian 
and cycle connections as part of the development proposals.  This is achieved 
by MM76  and is needed to ensure that the policy is justified.  
142. Land south of Meadow Lane is allocated for housing under NK/LEAS/006 and 
shares similar characteristics and constraints, including a requirement to avoid 
areas at risk of flooding.  Pa rt of the site already benefits from planning 
permission for new residential development, and combined with the allocation to 
the north, would create a new, clearly defined settlement edge to the village.  
Other policies in the Plan would prevent any harmf ul impacts on infrastructure 
such as the neighbouring wastewater  treatment site.  
143. At Blyton, land to the south of Rowan Drive is allocated for around 62 dwellings 
along with the retention of the existing allotments (WL/BLYT/006).  Access 
would be taken fro m the site frontage onto Gainsborough Road.  Although no 
technical drawings have been provided in support of the allocation, all sites 
have been assessed by the County Council and no in principle objections have 
been raised.  Given the land available and t he forward visibility in both 
directions, we find no reasons to disagree.  The final access arrangements 
would be for the planning application process to determine.  
144. Site WL/FISK/001A is located on the edge of Fiskerton .  Although relatively 
long, the linear allocation would not project beyond the existing built form of the 
village  north of Chapel Road.   Furthermore, the topography is not so 
pronounced that dwellings would obscure views from the footpath to the north 
any more than the existing properties on Ferry Road.  Indeed, residential 
development of the site would provide a similar backdrop to that wh ich currently 
exists.  No substantive evidence has been provided to suggest that the 
allocation would have any harmful impact s on services, facilities, traffic 
generation or flooding  in the village.  Such matters would also be covered by 
other policies in the Plan.   Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
33 
 145. In terms of the scale of growth proposed, Fiskerton is within the Lincoln Strategy 
Area .  It is located close to Lincoln where the majority of new growth is directed, 
consistent with Policy S2.  Evidence provided in the Committee’s Matter 3 
Hearing Statement also identifies that Fiskerton will see an increase of around 
29% in total dwelling numbers.  This does not represent a disproportionate 
amount of growth for a village with existing services and facilities.  
146. Similarly, new development is pro posed at Scothern by site allocations 
WL/SC/003 and WL/SC/004A.  Cumulatively, the sites would provide around 97 
dwellings which represents a growth of around 26% in total dwelling numbers.  
This exceeds the 10% which is currently applied in the existing L ocal Plan.  
However, for the reasons set out above, the Local Plan Review takes a different 
approach which we have found is appropriate and sound.  The scale of growth 
proposed in Scothern, whilst notable, is not disproportionate for a Medium 
Village.  Similar conclusions are reached in respect of other villages where the 
scale of growth proposed in this Plan, is higher than the existing one.  Whilst the 
strategy is different, it is not inherently unsound.   
147. At Sturton by Stow, two additional sites are allo cated in addition to those which 
have planning permission .  Land off the High Street (WL/STUR/003) is currently 
in use for commercial operations but represents a previously developed, 
brownfield site in the centre of the village surrounded by housing.  Its  reuse for 
residential development (upon cessation of the existing use) is therefore 
appropriate and justified.   
148. Land south of Gilberts Farm (WL/STUR/006 A) was reduced in size from a larger 
parcel (WL/STUR/006).  Although scor ing similarly in the SA, the differences are 
explained in Core Document HOU002f.  In summary, the allocated site was 
found to retain the shape and character of the settlement, thus reducing 
encroachment into the countryside.  This is a subjective judgment, but in our 
view, a reasonabl e one.  Combined with the site’s good accessibility to some of 
the services on offer in the village, the allocation is justified.   
Housing Sites in Small Villages – Policy S82  
149. Outline p lanning permission has been granted for a mixed -use development of 
120 houses and 20 retirement units at Swinderby ( site NK/SWI/006 ).  Any future 
reserved matters applications would have to be pursuant to the outline.  In the 
event that any substantive changes are required, Policy S82 requires evidence 
of community support.  This is justified due to the size of the proposed scheme 
and its location in a Small Village, where Policy S4 limits new residential 
development to s ites of up to 5 dwellings.   
150. As consulted upon, MM90  reduced the capacity of the site from 140 to 120 
dwellings.  However, the retirement units as part of the approved scheme are 
not restricted and may fall within Use Class C3.  The MM is therefore not Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
34 
 required to address a soundness issue and is not included in the accompanying 
schedule.   
151. Due to an error, t wo allocations ( WL/BUR/005  & WL/BUR/005A) need to be 
deleted from Policy S82 and moved to Policy  S81 as they should be in the 
Medium Villages category and not the Small Villages ca tegory .  This is achieved 
by MM86 , MM87 , MM92  and MM93  so that the policy is effective and justified.  
Conclusion  
152. We therefore conclude that the process of selecting residential site allocations 
was robust, and subject to the recommended main modifications,  they are 
justified, effective and consistent with national planning policy.  
Issue 5 – Whether  the policies and allocations in the Plan will be 
effective in ensuring that the housing requirement will be met, and 
whether there is a reasonable prospect of a  five-year supply of 
deliverable housing sites on adoption  
153. As modified by MM1 , the housing requirement over the plan period (2018 to 
2040) is 24,244 dwellings.  Based on information from the latest Housing Land 
Supply Assumptions Report22, and discussions at the hearings, it is estimated 
that around 34,600 dwellings will be delivered in total over the same period.   
154. The total supply figure includes dwellings from completions, commitments, sites 
under construction and allocations in the Pla n.  Whilst some of the assumptions 
regarding completion rates on the larger sites may be overly optimistic, the 
Committee can nevertheless demonstrate a strong forward supply  well in 
excess of the housing requirement.  We are therefore satisfied that the h ousing 
requirement will be met in full.   
155. Some representors have queried why the Plan allocates more sites given the 
healthy forward supply of housing, especially in villages and the rural areas.  
This is because a key component of the Plan remains the del ivery of the SUE s.  
By their nature these are large sites with significant infrastructure demands and 
typically come forward more slowly than smaller ones.  In the event that one or 
more of the SUE s stall, or do not deliver at all, the Plan seeks to provid e 
sufficient flexibility to allow for any shortfall.  This is an appropriate and justified 
strategy.  It also ensures that the Plan provides a wider range of smaller sites in 
locations across Central Lincolnshire.  
 
22 Core Document HOU010a  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
35 
 156. For effectiveness, and to ensure that the  Plan is up to date on adoption, MM42 , 
MM43  and MM44  are necessary to update the latest housing trajectories , which 
are required by paragraph 74 of the Framework.  
Five Year Housing Land Supply  
157. Paragraph 74 of the Framework states that local planning autho rities should 
identify and update annually a supply of specific deliverable sites sufficient to 
provide five years' worth of housing against their housing requirement.  The 
supply of specific deliverable sites should include a buffer of 5% to ensure 
choice  and competition in the market for land, or 20% where there has been 
significant under delivery over the previous three years.   
158. Based on the latest Housing Delivery Test results , a 5% buffer is currently 
applicable in Central Lincolnshire.  Taking this in to account the five -year 
housing requirement is 5,786  dwellings (1,102 x 5 + 5%).  
159. The Committee’s Matter 9 Hearing Statement demonstrates that 1,318 homes 
are expected to be built between 2022/23 and 2026/27 on small sites with 
planning permission (sites u nder 10 dwellings).  For larger sites, a forward 
supply of 6,262 dwellings already benefits  from detailed planning permission.  
These sites were ‘sense checked’ by Officers and are defined as ‘deliverable’ in 
accordance with Annex 2 of the Framework .  Sites with full planning permission 
therefore exceed the five -year housing land requirement.   
160. A further contribution of 1,101 dwellings is expected to come forward from sites 
with outline planning permission and allocations in the Plan.  The a mount has 
been derived from discussions with site promoters and developers, with input 
from Officers to ensure that delivery rates are realistic.  As part of this figure, 
some delivery is expected from sites such as the Western Growth Corridor and 
South Ea st Quadrant, sites which despite allocation in the existing Local Plan , 
have yet to come forward.  However, progress has been made on both, with the 
approval of outline planning permissions and the resolution of complex legal 
matters and land ownership iss ues.  When taking into account landowner 
interest and likely phasing, it is reasonable to assume that some housing will 
come forward on the larger sites within the five-year period following  adoption.   
161. A small windfall allowance of 150 dwellings per year is included from 2025/26 
onwards.  This compares to an average of around 288 dwellings per year from 
small windfall sites since 2017.  The allowance included in the trajectory is 
therefore justified and based on compelling evidence as required by paragraph  
71 of the Framework.   
162. In summary therefore, the  Plan identifie s a supply of housing sites sufficient to 
provide around 9,300 dwellings over the first five years following adoption.  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
36 
 Even  in the event that some larger sites do not deliver as expected, the  
Committee can identify a supply well in excess of the requisite five -year 
requirement.  We are therefore satisfied that there is a strong likelihood of a 
five-year supply of housing upon adoption of the Plan in 2023.   
Flexibility  
163. The existing Local Plan includes a policy (LP54) , which states that if job growth 
exceeds 496 full time equivalent roles per year, and housing delivery has been 
near to, or exceeds, 1,540 dpa, then Broad Locations of Future Growth could be 
considered for new development.  No such  policy is included in the Local Plan 
Review.  However, due to the amount of flexibility in the supply of housing as 
referred to above, one is not necessary.  In the event that one or more of the 
SUEs failed to come forward in the manner proposed, or there  was a significant 
change in circumstances, then the Committee would be able to review parts of 
the Plan accordingly.  For effectiveness, this is made clear by MM34 .   
Conclusion  
164. We therefore conclude that the policies and allocations in the Plan will be 
effective in ensuring that the housing requirement will be met and that there is a 
reasonable prospect of five -year supply of deliverable housing sites on 
adoption.    
Issue 6 – Whether the policies relating to climate change are 
justified, effective and co nsistent with national planning policy  
165. One of the primary reasons for carrying out a full review of the Central 
Lincolnshire Local Plan was to introduce a suite of policies that require new 
development to contribute towards the mitigation of, and adaptatio n to, climate 
change , as required by the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act.  Paragraph 
152 of the Framework states that the planning system should support the 
transition to a low carbon future in a changing climate.  Amongst other things, 
this includes shaping places in way s that contribute to “…radical reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions …”. 
166. Chapter 3 of the  Plan sets out 5 main themes.  They are the need to reduce 
energy consumption in new build, the need to generate energy from renewable 
sources, the need to protect or enhance carbon sinks, the need to facilitate net -
zero carbon lifestyles and the need to adapt to a changing climate.   
 
 Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
37 
 Reducing Energy Consumption in New Build  
Design Principles for Efficient Buildings – Policy S6  
167. Policy S6 is an over -arching design poli cy and relates to some of the principles 
which are expanded upon in the policies that follow, such as reducing energy 
needs and generating energy from renewable sources.  Because the policies  
that follow include caveats and flexibility, MM4  is needed to en sure internal 
consistency.  It is also required for effectiveness and states that the design 
expectations should be considered (rather than used) in  new development.   
Reducing Energy Consumption – Residential Development - Polic y S7 
168. The Plan is supported by a suite of comprehensive evidence which set the 
context and background of climate change, identify the need to reduce energy 
consumption and generate more renewable energy and test ways in which the 
aims and objectives can be met by development plan policies.23  In summary, 
the evidence shows that existing buildings in Central Lincolnshire account for 
around 43% of all greenhouse gas emissions.  Because a Local Plan has a 
limited influence on retrofitting existing buildings, in order to reach both nat ional 
and local targets for carbon reductions24, significant reductions in the energy 
requirements of new buildings are needed now.   
169. For new residential development, Policy S7 therefore includes two primary 
requirements.  The first is that schemes must ge nerate at least the same 
amount of renewable electricity on site as the electricity they need to operate .  
To help achieve this, the second requirement  aims to reduce demand in the first 
place and targets a space heating demand of around 15 -20 kWh/m2/year,  with 
a total energy demand of 35 kWh/ m2/year  achieved through a ‘fabric first’ 
approach to construction.  In doing so, Policy S7 seeks to deliver new homes to 
net zero carbon standards.   
170. The requirements in Policy S7 exceed those in the current Building Regulations.  
However, the Planning and Energy Act 2008 s1(1)(c) states that a local 
planning authority may, in their development plan documents, include policies 
imposing reasonable requirements for development to comply with energy 
efficiency standards t hat exceed the energy requirements of the Building 
Regulations.  The Act , at s1(5)  also states that policies included in development 
plan documents by virtue of s1(1)(c) must not be inconsistent with relevant 
national policies.   
171. Paragraph 154b of the Fram ework states that any local requirements for the 
sustainability of buildings should reflect the Government’s policy for national 
 
23 Core Documents CLC001 -CLC013  
24 Inspectors’ Note – Climate Change Act 2008 and City of Lincoln Climate Change Emergency 2019  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
38 
 technical standards.  The PPG provides further information on the use of 
national technical standards25.  It advises that the G overnment has created a 
new approach to rationalise existing standards into a simpler, streamlined 
system.  It also clarifies that the Government has set out its policy on such 
matters in the Written Ministerial Statement – Planning Update March 2015 
(‘WMS ’).  The WMS is a statement of national planning policy.   
172. For the specific issue of energy performance, the WMS reiterates that local 
planning authorities will continue to be able to set Local Plan policies that 
exceed the requirements of the Building Reg ulations until commencement of 
amendments to the Planning and Energy Act 2008 in the Deregulation Bill 2015.  
It goes on to state that:  
“This is expected to happen alongside the introduction of zero carbon homes 
policy in late 2016.  The government has sta ted that, from then, the energy 
performance requirements in Building Regulations will be set at a level 
equivalent to the (outgoing) Code for Sustainable Homes Level 4.  Until the 
amendment is commenced, we would expect local planning authorities to take 
this statement of the government’s intention into account in applying existing 
policies and not set conditions with requirements above a Code level 4 
equivalent …” 
173. The amendments to the Planning and Energy Act 2008 have not been 
implemented and the Governmen t has confirmed that there is no intention to do 
so either26.  It therefore remains the case that a local planning authority can 
impose energy efficiency standards that exceed Building Regulations.  In 
principle, Policy S7 is not inconsistent with national planning policy for England.   
174. Until the amendment is comme nced, the WMS expects local planning 
authorities to take the statement into account in applying existing policies and 
not set conditions with requirement s above a Code for Sustainable Homes 
Level 4 equivalent.  We share the Committee’s interpretation of th is to mean 
during the consideration of planning applications (where existing policies apply), 
with the imposition of conditions used as the mechanism by which a local 
planning authority would enforce compliance with Code Level 4 standards.   
175. Additional gui dance is provided in the PPG27.  It more clearly advises that 
development plan policies can set standards higher than Building Regulations , 
but only up to the equivalent of Code for Sustainable Homes Level 4.  Code 
Level 4 provided a 19% reduction in CO 2 from Part L of the 2013 Building 
 
25 Paragrap h: 001 Reference ID: 56 -001-20150327  
26 Response to Future Homes Standard Consultation, contained within Examination Document EX004  
27 Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 6 -012-20190315  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
39 
 Regulations.  The approach to net zero carbon in Policy S7 therefore e xceed s 
the now revoked Code Level 4 equivalent.  
176. However, notwithstanding the different views presented on the interpretation of 
the WMS and the PPG, crit ically, in June 2022 changes to the Building 
Regulations were introduced that require a 31% reduction from Part L 2013.  
This is a material change in circumstances and means that all new residential 
development already has to exceed the previous Code for S ustainable Homes 
Level 4 equivalent (a 19% reduction over Part L 2013).  The changes brought 
into effect in 2022 are intended to be an interim measure before the introduction 
of the Future Homes Standard, which will see all new homes ‘zero carbon 
ready’ fr om 2025 onwards.   
177. In summary therefore, we conclude that the approach of Policy S7, which seeks 
to go above and beyond the requirements of the Building Regulations, is not 
inconsistent with national planning policy for the purposes of the Planning and 
Energy Act 2008.  When read as a whole, it is also consistent with the 
Framework which states that the planning system should support the transition 
to a low carbon future in a changing climate and help shape places in ways that 
contribute to radical changes in greenhouse gas emissions.  Whilst we find 
conflict with national planning practice guidance, both the PPG and the 2015 
WMS have clearly been overtaken by existing and proposed changes to the 
Building Regulations brought into force in 2022.  MMs are ther efore not 
necessary to require the Plan to adhere to Code for Sustainable Homes Level 4 
equivalent standards, which are now exceeded by the Building Regulations.   
178. Turning to whether Policy S7 is justified, in support of the Plan is a  
comprehensive assessm ent of issues from the need for carbon reductions to 
their feasibility and cost implications28.  Included in the supporting evidence is a 
technical feasibility study which assess es different policy options, compares 
alternatives and makes recommendations w hich have been included in the 
Plan.  Where space heating demand, energy use and renewable energy 
generation is concerned, the evidence shows that the Local Plan option (Option 
1) is the most ambitious.  Nevertheless, the technical analysis indicates that the 
targets are feasible, and because the efficiencies are concerned with the core of 
a building’s operation, potential future occupants will be less exposed to volatile 
energy price changes.   
179. The cost implications in Core Document CLC007 are supplemented  by the 
Viability Assessment Addendum29.  In summary, it shows that in the majority of 
cases , development will still be viable.  As explored at the hearings, there are 
different ways in which the calculations can be carried out, and there will always 
be individual cases which fall outside the scope of the typologies used.  
 
28 Core Documents CLC001 -CLC01 3 
29 Core Document INF003  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
40 
 However, on the whole, the evidence demonstrates that cumulative costs 
associated with the Plan will not adversely affect the majority of development 
types  to such a degree that they become unviable.   
180. The exception to this is for schemes located in the lower value areas around 
Sleaford and Gainsborough.  Here, it is acknowledged by Policy S7 that 
meeting the requirements for energy efficiency may not be possible.  Proposals 
are still required to demonstrate what they can achieve, but the policy includes 
the necessary flexibility  to allow for a lower level of provision.  This is a justified 
and proportionate approach to managing development in areas where viability is 
already challenging.  
181. As submitted, Policy S7 did not make an allowance for brownfield sites in the 
same way.  Alth ough the Viability Assessment suggests that brownfield sites in 
high value areas could still achieve the policy requirements, most development 
in even the mid value zones was found to be unviable.  To ensure that the Plan 
reflects the evidence base and is justified, MM5  is therefore necessary and 
introduces a further caveat for brownfield sites.   
182. It has been suggested that the development industry i n Central Lincolnshire is 
not ready to accommodate  the measures that will be needed to meet Policy S7 
– such as the extensive use of heat pumps and solar panels.  Compared to 
changes to the Building Regulations, there is also no gradual implementation or 
phasing of the standards.  However, no convincing evidence has been provided 
to substantiate these concerns in  response to the information on feasibility and 
viability supporting the Plan.  Moreover, adoption of the Plan would not 
introduce an instant requirement for all development built in Central Lincolnshire 
to meet the higher standards.  Existing sites with p lanning permission would 
continue to be built out over a number of years.  We are also mindful that the 
Plan has been in preparation since 2019, the same point that  the City of Lincoln 
and North Kesteven District Council declared their climate emergency.   
183. In this particular case, the Plan is therefore justified in requiring new 
development to meet the standards from the point of adoption.  In the event that 
housing delivery is impacted, either in terms of completions and/or the granting 
of planning permiss ions, then this is something that the Committee could 
monitor and address as necessary.  This may include, for example, the need for 
targeted updates to the Plan.   
184. In summary therefore, we are satisfied that the Plan’s approach to the use of 
technical sta ndards for energy efficiency is justified  in Central Lincolnshire . 
185. Turning to effectiveness, as submitted , Policy S7 sets specific targets for all 
residential dwellings.  However, there may be instances where some dwellings 
on a site cannot meet the requir ements due to operational reasons, but others Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
41 
 can.  Further flexibility is therefore necessary to ensure the effectiveness of the 
Plan.  It is achieved by MM5  which deletes the requirement for each unit in 
favour of a site -wide approach.   
186. Recognising that in some cases, developments will not be able to meet the 
requirements, Policy S7 also includes an exception clause.  For example, a site 
may be overshadowed or there may be competing policy requirements, such as 
the need to maintain the significance of a heritage asset.  Including this clause 
is therefore justified and appropriate.  Although there may be other technical 
reasons aside from overshadowing and her itage, there is no need for a MM to 
try and include every eventuality.  This would be considered on a case -by-case 
basis.  For the majority of developments, the evidence shows that the 
requirements are feasible and viable.   
187. Where technical reasons have be en shown to demonstrate that a scheme 
cannot meet part 1 and 2 of the policy, then for major development proposals an 
off-site payment in kind is permitted.  This can either be in the form of a financial 
contribution or a legal agreement to secure renewabl e energy elsewhere to off -
set the energy generated by the scheme.  Alternatively, the Plan allows for 
schemes to be connected to a decentralised energy network or a combined 
heat and power unit.  In our view the policy therefore strikes an appropriate 
balance between requiring new development to meet the prescribed targets but 
offering adequate flexibility in circumstances where technical reasons prevent 
this.  The values cited in the policy reflect the average costs in the supporting 
evidence and have been  viability tested.  Smaller proposals under 10 dwellings 
would not be subject to the same off -site offsetting or financial contributions.   
188. Finally, as submitted , Policy S7 states that if developers use a recognised 
accreditation scheme , such as Passivhaus  Classic, then the requirements 
would be met.  However, the ‘Classic’ accreditation does not include a 
requirement for renewables, which was an oversight in drafting the policy.  For 
effectiveness, this is corrected by MM5 .   
Reducing Energy Consumption – Non Residential Buildings – Policy S8 
189. A similar approach to Policy S7 is proposed for non -residential development in 
Policy S8.  Again, the justification, including feasibility and viability have been 
tested and set out in the same evidence supporting the Plan.  A summary and 
further justification is provided in Core Document EVR008.  This makes the 
distinction between residential and non -residential development .  The PPG  
clarifies that local planning authorities are not restricted or limited in setting Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
42 
 energy performance standards above Building Regulations for non -housing 
developments.30 
190. As with residential development, the similar modifications are needed to Policy 
S8 in order to assess schemes across an entire site, and not just by individual 
units.  This is required for effectiveness and is achieved by MM6 .   
191. Flexibility is provided by Policy S8 which allows exceptions where there are site 
specific or other policy reasons for not meeting the requirements, or, where 
there are technical reasons linked to the nature of the building proposed.  An 
example is a commercial building which, by th e very nature of its use, has a 
high demand for energy.  We appreciate that there will inevitably be other 
commercial buildings where it is not feasible to meet the requirements for 
technical reasons.  But it is not necessary to try and list every possible  scenario.  
The Plan includes a caveat which refers to the “unique purpose of the building”.  
In our view that would allow for a proportionate response to be taken in 
circumstances where buildings are proposed and there are valid (and 
substantiated) reason s where the nature of the scheme precludes meeting the 
full policy requirement.   
Reducing Energy Consumption in Existing Buildings – Policy S13  
192. A policy seeking to reduce energy consumption in existing buildings is justified 
and consistent with the aims and objectives of the Plan to reduce carbon 
emissions.  The necessary flexibility is provided by encouraging applicants to 
improve efficiency, rat her than mandating improvements in the same way as 
new buildings.  This reflects the fact that it in many cases, options for 
significantly changing the fabric of an existing building will be outside the scope 
of the development proposed.   
193. For effectivenes s, MM10  clarifies that where heritage assets are concerned, 
improvements in efficiency should be consistent with the asset’s significance 
and consistent with relevant national planning policy on heritage matters.   
Decentralised Energy Networks, Combined H eat and Power and Embodied Carbon 
– Policies S9, S10 and S11  
194. Policy S9 states that any new or extended combined heat and power network 
will only be supported if the source of that network is non -fossil fuel based.  The 
reason for this is that whilst a comb ined heat and power network can be more 
efficient than a standard system, some still require fossil fuels such as coal and 
gas.  We agree that this would be counterintuitive when considering the aims 
 
30 Reference ID: 6-012-20190315  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
43 
 and objectives of the Plan and the evidence provided on the need for significant 
carbon reductions in new development s.  In principle, the approach is justified.  
195. However, paragraph 155 of the Framework states that Plans should identify 
opportunities for development to draw its energy from decentralised, renewa ble 
or low carbon systems.  Low carbon systems are defined in the Framework as 
technologies that can help reduce emissions compared to the conventional use 
of fossil fuels.  
196. To ensure that the Plan is consistent with national planning policy, a MM is 
there fore needed to widen the scope of P olicy S9.  MM8  amends the wording to 
state that the relevant power source should be either renewable or very low 
carbon based.  For effectiveness, a consequential change is also required to the 
supporting text by MM7 .  It clarifies that very low carbon is defined as a power 
source which ha s very low or nil carbon emissions compared to the 
conventional use of fossil fuels in both  its operation and/or manufacture.  This 
could, for example, encompass the use of fuel cells which convert hydrogen into 
electricity.  As modified , the policy therefore seeks to achieve the radical 
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions as required by the Fram ework, and 
meet the aims and objectives of the Plan, whilst recognising that some fossil 
fuels may still be used in combined heat and power technology.  As with other 
policies, whether a proposal accords with Policy S9 will largely depend on the 
nature of the scheme and the detail provided.  There is no need (for 
effectiveness) to list all the permitted technology types which could change as 
technologies progress during the plan period.  The MM also clarifies the latest 
position regarding consultation on pr oposals for heat network zoning to ensure 
that the Plan is up to date upon adoption.  
197. Policy S10 supports proposals which demonstrate their compatibility with the 
principles of a ‘circular economy’.  This includes reducing the demand for raw 
materials and m aking provision for the storage and management of waste for 
recycling and/or re -use.  The principle of minimising waste is entirely 
appropriate and justified.  It is also consistent with the environmental objective 
of sustainable development in the Framewo rk.  
198. Policy S11 seeks to support the repair, re -use and refurbishment of existing 
buildings and contains a ‘presumption against demolition’.  We note that the 
Framework does not contain a similar policy, but through paragraphs 119 and 
120 does seek to make  the effective use of land and support the development 
of underutilised land and buildings.  Furthermore, the policy does not prohibit 
demolition.  Instead, it only requires applicants to demonstrate tha t either a 
building is in a state of disrepair and is  unfeasible and unviable to reuse, that a 
new building would offer an overall lower net -carbon solution or that there would 
be other public benefits that outweigh any carbon savings.  We see no reasons 
why this could not be done on a proportionate basis so  to avoid unnecessary Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
44 
 additional burdens on small scale developers.  Some forms of demolition could 
also take place outside of the planning application process.   
199. For major development proposals from 2025 onwards, Policy S11 requires 
applicants to demonstr ate how embodied carbon has been taken into account 
and minimised where possible.  Prior to 2025 there will be no requirement  to 
use materials with a lower embodied carbon, but the policy requires developers 
to demonstrate that they have considered the opt ions available.  
200. The justification for Policy S11 is provided in Core Document CLC010.  By 
distinguishing between major and non -major developments the policy reflects 
the evidence base which suggests that savings are challenging for smaller 
projects.  Havi ng a phased approach also allows time for developers of larger 
sties to consider how the requirements can be met.  No evidence has been 
provided to suggest that showing how embodied carbon has been considered in 
the design of major housing schemes would be  unduly onerous.  Policy S11 has 
also been considered as part of the Whole Plan Viability Assessment.   
Water Efficiency – Policy S12  
201. Central Lincolnshire is identified as being within an area of water stress.  The 
requirement for developments to achieve t he Optional Technical Standard of 
110 litres per person per day is therefore justified.   
202. In the interests of good design and sustainable water management the 
requirements for permeable surfaces and water butts in new housing are also 
justified.  However, requiring all flat roofs to be ‘green roofs’ is not justified or 
effective as there may be instances where it is impracticable to do so (for 
example a situation where the roof is permanently in sh adow).  MM9 is 
therefore necessary and introduces greater fl exibility.  It also cross -refers to 
Policy S20 where further information is provided  (as modified by MM18 ).  
Renewable Energy Generation  
Renewable Energy – Policies S14, S15 and S16  
203. Policy S14 supports the principle of renewable energy schemes across Central 
Lincolnshire.  Through the supporting text, the submitted Plan also provides an 
indicative capacity for both wind energy generation (150MW) and solar 
(230MW).  
204. Although the figures  are not meant to represent a cap or a ceiling, the text has 
led to some confusion and uncertainty with the way that it is presented, 
especially when comparisons are drawn with the amount of land needed.  For 
effectiveness, MM11  therefore amends the suppor ting text at paragraphs 3.3.4 Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
45 
 and 3.3.5 to confirm that there is no upper limit on the amount of electricity that 
could be generated, subject to meeting the relevant policy requirements.  
205. Current national planning policy on wind energy is set out in paragra ph 158 and 
footnote 54 of the Framework.  It states that except for the repowering of 
existing turbines, a proposed wind energy development involving one or more 
turbines should not be considered acceptable unless it is in an area identified as 
suitable fo r wind energy in the development plan, and following consultation, it 
can be demonstrated that the planning impacts identified by the affected 
community have been fully addressed and the proposal has their backing.   
206. The Plan differentiates between small -medium sized wind turbines (up to 40m 
from the ground to the blade tip) and large -scale wind turbines (anything over 
40m).  Where small turbines are concerned, Policy S14 states that the whole of 
Central Lincolnshire is identified as a broad area potentiall y suitable for a wind 
turbine and requires proposals to meet three criteria.  However, the Framework 
does not differentiate between turbine size.  A MM is therefore needed to 
require proposals to accord with the tests in national policy (relating to the 
impacts on local communities and securing their backing ).  To ensure internal 
consistency, and for effectiveness, the same MM also updates the text for large 
scale wind turbines (MM13 ). 
207. As submitted (and re -ordered by MM13 ), the Plan states that whether  or not a 
proposal has met the footnote 54 test will be a matter of judgement for the local 
planning authority.  We agree with this statement.  It is highly unlikely that any 
development proposal will be supported by 100% of respondents.  Judgements 
will have t o be made by the decision maker, as will judgements around other 
impacts such as landscape or noise.  As such, n o modification is needed to 
correct an issue of soundness, other than re -ordering the wording so that it 
appears in the supporting text rather t han the policy itself.  This is needed for 
internal consistency and because the text refers to how the policy will be 
applied, rather than setting a policy requirement .  It is achieved by MM13  and 
recommended for effectiveness.  
208. For turbines over 40m in height, broad areas suitable for wind energy are shown 
on the policies maps and the extract in the Plan at Map 2.  Core Document 
EVR014 explains how the areas were defined and what factors were taken into 
account, from proximity to  settlements, national landscape designations and 
buffers to airports and airfields.  The assessment of relevant issues is robust 
and the decisions on which areas to include are adequately justified and 
transparent.  To rectify an error, the map in the Pla n needs correcting to include 
RAF Barkston Heath ( MM12 ).  Upon adoption the Committee should also 
ensure that the relevant policies maps are correct.  For the same reasons , and 
for effectiveness,  the list of airfields also needs to include Temple Bruer , the 
supporting text should clarify that not all settlements were sieved out (only those Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
46 
 over 50 dwellings) and that rail safety is a relevant consideration  (MM11  and 
MM13 ). 
209. Historic England and the National Trust raise d concerns about the designatio n 
of land which forms part of a historic landscape around the Witham Fen.  
Concerns were also raised about the importance of this area to the setting and 
key views of significant heritage assets such as Lincoln Castle/Cathedral and 
Tattershall Castle.   
210. However, the evidence in Core Document EVR014 explains that the potential 
impact of a development on the setting of a heritage asset is not typically 
something that can be shown on a map by applying a standard buffer in the 
same way as an airfield.  Instead,  a more bespoke assessment is required 
having regard to issues such as the significance of the asset, the precise 
location of the turbine, its size and the surrounding landscape.  For 
effectiveness, and the avoidance of doubt, MM11 makes this clear by 
confirming that site specific constraints such as heritage and landscape were 
not sieved out and will need to be assessed.  It also specifically refers to the 
Witham Fen as one such example where the historic landscape may be 
sensitive to the introduction of w ind turbines and therefore proposals would 
have to carefully consider their impact.  For the same reasons, MM13  includes 
the historic landscape in the list of considerations in Policy S14.  As modified , 
the Plan therefore provides appropriate safeguards ag ainst harmful heritage 
impacts.  
211. Finally, the submission version Plan included a presumption against any ground 
mounted solar PV panels on best and most versatile agricultural land.  
However, national planning policy in footnote 58 of the Framework refers to the 
significant  development of agricultural land.  A MM is therefore required  to 
ensure consistency with the Framework, which to avoid duplication cross refers 
to Policy S67 ( MM13 ). 
Transition to Net Zero Carbon Lifestyles  
Electric Vehicle Charging – Policy NS18  
212. In the interests of promoting sustainable design and transport, the requirement 
for electric vehicle charging points as part of new developments is justified.  
There is, however, no justification for stating that new developments must meet 
Buildi ng Regulations, which is dealt with outside of the planning application 
process.  MM15  makes the necessary modification.  
 
 Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
47 
 Fossil Fuel Exploration, Extraction, Production or Energy Generation – Policy S19  
213. Policy S19 states that proposals for fossil fuel e xtraction will be refused across 
Central Lincolnshire.  The policy is unsound for two reasons.  Firstly, it is not 
justified or effective as the County Council would be the decision -making 
authority for applications concerning mineral extraction.  Secondly, The Town 
and Country Planning (Local Planning) Regulati ons (2012) require local plans to 
be consistent with the development plan, unless those policies are intended to 
be superseded.  In this case, the development plan for the area contains the 
Lincolnshire Minerals and Waste Local Plan (2016) which permits fo ssil fuel 
extraction.  Policy S19 therefore needs to be deleted by MM17 .  Consequential 
changes are required to the supporting text by MM16 , which is also needed for 
effectiveness to elaborate on the reasons why this is not a matter for the Local 
Plan.   
214. Not all of the supporting text is recommended for deletion.  This is because 
paragraph 3.5.7 (and the latter part of paragraph 3.5.8) set out the Committee’s 
view that the extraction and burning of fossil fuels is not commensurate with 
delivering a net zero  carbon Central Lincolnshire.  In our op inion , this provides 
additional background and context to the wider aims and objectives of the Plan.  
Provided that the text is modified to make it clear that this is the Committee’s in -
principle view on the topic  only, and does not include any reference to the 
determination of planning applications or setting of policy requirements, the text 
remains justified and sound ( MM16 ).  It also helpfully clarifies in paragraph 3.5.8 
that the County Council is responsible for making decisions on applications for 
mineral extraction and allocating land for such uses.   
215. As consulted upon  in Document EX035,  not all of the text at paragraph 3.5.9 
was deleted.  Unlike the proceeding paragraphs, this does refer to the 
determination of  planning applications  and refers to the decisions of the districts 
in their role as consultees on planning applications .  Following the deletion of 
Policy S19, this text is superfluous.  It is also unjustified in the Local Plan where 
the districts will fo rm their own views on individual applications having regard to 
the merits of each case  and relevant policies .  The proposed introduction of text 
which states that the Committee looks forward to working with  the County 
Council in reviewing the Minerals and Waste Local Plan is also unnecessary for 
soundness.  P aragraph 3.5.9 is therefore deleted in the accompanying schedule 
of MMs .   
 
 Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
48 
 Adapting to a Changing Climate  
Resilient and Adaptable Design and Flood Risk – Polic ies S20 and S21  
216. The PPG advises that when  preparing Local Plans, authorities should pay 
particular attention to mitigation and adaptation.  Examples include maximising 
summer co oling and avoiding solar gain31.  Requiring applicants to consider 
how buildings can minimise overhea ting is therefore justified in seeking to 
secure high quality design and higher levels of efficiency in new construction.  
Green roofs can assist in this process but may not always be feasible or 
appropriate.  For effectiveness, further flexibility is therefor e provided by MM18 .  
It also clarifies that green roofs are not just suitable for adding insultation.   
217. The second part of Policy S20 requires new development to be more adaptable 
in the future.  The justification for the policy is to make buildings fit fo r purpose 
over the longer term and avoid the resource implications of redevelopment.  As 
submitted, the policy refers to examples such as the use of stud walls.  
However, at the hearings the Committee accepted that a scheme meeting the 
Building Regulation M4(2) standards would adhere to the aims and objectives of 
the policy and would also offer a standardised approach to determining planning 
applications.  For effectiveness, this is made clear by MM18 , but in the absence 
of any wider justification is not ma ndatory.  In the event that Building 
Regulations are not updated as expected to include M4(2) standards, then this 
is something that the Committee could consider as part of any future review.   
218. For the same reason of effectiveness, MM18 is also needed to c larify that 
schemes should identify the potential  for home working, which could simply 
include bedrooms where more than 1 bedroom is proposed per dwelling.  This 
recognises the fact that not everyone will need a separate dedicated home 
working space in eve ry house type  and provides greater flexibility.   
219. Finally, Policy S21 largely reflects national planning policy on flood risk as set 
out in the Framework.  Additional requirements such as the use of higher water 
efficiency standards, rainwater harvesting a nd sustainable drainage are all 
justified in the interests of promoting higher and more sustainable design 
practices, and because Central Lincolnshire is an area of water stress.   
Conclusion  
220. We therefore conclude that subject to the recommended main modifications the 
policies relating to climate change are justified, effective and consistent with 
national planning policy .   
 
31 Paragraph: 004 Reference ID: 6 -004-20140612  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
49 
 Issue 7 – Whether the policies relating to the type and mix of 
housing are justified, effective and consistent with national 
planning policy  
Affordable Housing – Policy S22  
221. The Housing Needs Assessment32 (HNA) identifies a n overall need for 
approximately 592  affordable homes  each year across  Central Lincolnshire , 
with the greatest need for 2-bedroomed prop erties.   It also estimates that there 
is a shortfall of a round 575 affordable homes to meet current needs , primarily in 
the City of Lincoln and West Lindsey District.  
222. Policy S22  aims to deliver approximately 12,000 affordable dwellings over the 
plan period  with af fordable housing sought on all qualifying development s of 10 
or more dwellings or with a site area of 0.5 hectares or more.   Where a site 
qualifies for affordable housing  provision, the amount required is based on 
location.  The four zones require between 10 and 25% and are informed by the 
Whole Plan Viability Assessment33.  This approach is clear, effective and is 
based on the evidence which shows different levels of viability across the plan 
area.   
223. The Whole Plan Viability Assessment identifies that achi eving the full policy 
costs and affordable housing would be challenging on brownfield sites away 
from the higher value zones.  However, the evidence demonstrates that the 
number of brownfield sites likely to come forward, based on the allocations in 
the Pl an, would be low.  It also identifies that brownfield sites have previously 
managed to deliver affordable housing, and subject to the recommended MMs 
above, these sites would not be subject to the full costs associated with the 
suite of climate change poli cies.  The recommended policy approach is 
therefore to include affordable housing requirements for all sites, including 
previously developed ones, subject to a caveat allowing alternative provision 
where justified by site specific evidence.  This is includ ed in Policy S22, and 
based on the information provided, is appropriate and justified.   
224. The tenure mix for affordable housing will be derived from discussions  with the 
relevant local authority and informed by the latest HNA .  This provides sufficient 
clarity but recognises that circumstances may change during the plan period  
and therefore allows for flexibility.  Policy S22 also states that t he starting point 
for these discussions will be the delivery of 25% of all affordable housing being 
First Homes , with priority  then given to affordable rent .  First Homes are defined 
in Policy S22 as homes priced at least 30% below full market value up to a 
maximum of £140,000 after the discount  is applied .   
 
32 Core Document HOU001  
33 Core Documents INF002a -d and INF003  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
50 
 225. Concerns have been raised that the application of a £140,000 cap would be 
unduly restrictive and limit the provision and choice of new homes.  It is argued 
that the cap should reflect the £250,000 price quoted in the PPG34.  However, 
whilst some people may  be able to afford up to £250,000 for a discounted First 
Home, it does not mean that everyone can.  Core Document EVR022 provides 
the reason for needing a lower cap in Central Lincolnshire due to the below 
average incomes in the area.  The principle of a l ower cap is therefore justified 
and is consistent with national guidance in the  PPG35.   
226. That being the case, the Committee recognises that house prices have already 
risen since preparation of the Plan and could continue to do so going forward.  
This is ev idenced by the ONS East Midlands House Price Index which shows 
an 11.3% rise in house prices over the year to September 2022.  To ensure that 
the Plan is justified and effective upon adoption, MM20 is therefore necessary to 
increase the cap to £160,000 and  clarify that this will be reviewed annually to 
reflect house price inflation.  Recognising that the sale of a First Home could 
come several years after planning permission has been granted, it is also 
necessary for effectiveness to clarify that mechanisms  may be used in planning 
obligations to adjust the price cap accordingly with reference to model 
agreements.  This is achieved by MM19, which also makes the necessary 
consequential changes to the supporting text.  
227. Policy S22 also  requires affordable housin g to be provided on qualifying 
developments for specialist housing for older people .  This reflects the need for 
affordable properties across different types of housing  and is justified .  It is also 
consistent with paragraph 62 of the Framework, which stat es that the size, type 
and tenure of housing for different groups should be assessed and reflected in 
planning policies, including housing for older people.  However, r ecognising that 
the costs for specialist housing may vary, Policy S22 allow s the amount of 
affordable housing to be negotiated where viability  constraints are proven.  
228. Part 3 of the policy permits rural exception sites where local needs are 
demonstrated.  It also allows for a limited amount of market housing where this 
would help facilitate su ch schemes, consistent with paragraph 78 of the 
Framework.  The exclusion of affordable housing from MoD schemes is justified 
where properties are for military personnel and where restrictions are put in 
place on their possible future resale on the open ma rket.  
Meeting Accommodation Needs – Policy S23  
229. The HNA projects the likely need for housing over the plan period for different 
groups in the community.  This includes families with children, older people, 
students, people with disabilities, service famili es, private rented households 
 
34 Paragraph: 002 Reference ID: 70 -002-20210524  
35 Paragraph: 005 Reference ID: 70 -005-20210524  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
51 
 and people occupying houseboats.  It is therefore consistent with the 
requirements in paragraph 62 of the Framework.   
230. The population of people aged over 65 in Central Lincolnshire is expected to 
increase by approximately 45% by 2040, with the working age population only 
increasing by around 2% over the same period.  Concerns have been raised 
that it would be challenging for the Plan to deliver enough specialist 
accommodation to meet the needs of the increasingly elderly popula tion.  The 
HNA also identifies that around 20% of all Central Lincolnshire residents were 
limited to some extent in their daily activities at the 2011 Census.   
231. However, Policy S23 includes a clear expectation that developers will provide 
housing that cont ributes towards meeting the needs of the area as set out in the 
HNA or other appropriate local evidence.  It also requires new residential 
development to maintain, provide or contribute to a mix of housing tenures, 
types and sizes to help support the creat ion of mixed, balanced communities.  
Support is also given to development proposals for residential care in Tiers 1 -4 
of the settlement hierarchy, or other locations where schemes are accessible to 
local services.  Moreover, proposals achieving the higher Building Regulation 
M4(3) standards are encouraged, with the expectation that making M4(2) 
standards compulsory will be introduced via changes to the Building 
Regulations36.  Other policies, such as S20 and S53 would also apply, and seek 
to ensure that new dwellings are adaptable (to M4(2) standards).  When read as 
a whole, the Plan is therefore positively prepared in seeking to ensure that the 
needs of older people and peop le with disabilities can be met.   
Custom and Self Build Housing – Policy NS24  
232. The HNA states that as of late 2019 , there was a total of 136 entries on the self -
build register s across Central Lincolnshire .  As of March 2022 , there was a 
combined total of 7 1 people37, with an average of around 50 people being on 
the register s per year between 2016  and 2021 .  Based on the evidence 
available, the Committee predicts that the requirement for this type of housing 
will be between 30 and 35 plots per year, or 660 -770 plots over the plan period.   
233. In response, Policy NS24 requires proposals for 100 or more dwellings to 
include 5% of the total number of units as self -build or custom plots.  This is 
expected to yield around 265 plots.  The remaining need will be met on  
individual plots or by developers on sites of less than 100 units.  When taking 
into account that planning permissions for around 244 plots have been granted 
in the past 5 years, we are satisfied that the Plan will ensure that needs are met.   
 
36 Inspectors’ Note – In the event that this does not happen, then the Committee should consider 
whether it would be appropriate and justified to introduce the standards as part of a ny future review.   
37 Core Document EVR024  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
52 
 234. As submitte d, Policy NS24 requires plots to be marketed for 3 years before they 
can be built and sold as conventional housing.  However, this is a significant 
period of time and risks plots remaining vacant when they could be used to help 
meet wider housing needs.  T o ensure that the policy is justified and positively 
prepared, MM21  therefore reduces the period of marketing time to 18 months.  
In the interests of effectiveness,  it also clarifies that the period of marketing 
starts when basic requirements have been met , such as the plot having access 
to a public highway, sufficient space to build the house and connections to 
relevant services.  
Sub-division and Multi -occupation of Dwellings in Lincoln – Policy S25  
235. Policy S25 includes criteria for the conversion or change  of use of buildings in 
Lincoln to self -contained flats or shared accommodation , such as houses in 
multip le occupation.  The criteria are justified in that they  seek to address issues  
such as the living conditions of existing and future residents and the standard of 
accommodation.  Requiring applicants to demonstrate a lack of demand for 
single family homes is also necessary in order to help maintain a supply of 
accommodation suitable for families in the city.  The policy is consistent with 
paragraph 130 of the Framework, which requires planning policies to create 
places that are safe, inclusive and accessible and which promote health and 
well-being, with a high standard of amenity for existing and future users and 
where crime and disorder, and the fear of crime, do not undermine the quality of 
life or community cohesion and resilience.   
Houseboat Moorings and Caravans – Policy S26  
236. The HNA highlights that there is a need for approximate ly 30 -40 additional  
residential moorings in the centre of Lincoln  and that there is a demand for 
caravan and park homes as part of the Central Lincolnshire housing market .  
Proposals for new residential houseboat moorings, or extensions to existing 
mooring s that are within or immediately adjacent to a named sett lement as set 
out in Policy S1 are supported  by Policy S26 subject to several criteria.  
237. Likewise,  Policy S26  supports proposals for new caravan pitches or park homes 
or extensions to existing park h ome sites where th ey are in a location  which 
would be suitable for residential development  and satisfy the requirements of 
other policies in the Plan.  These pitches and park homes differ from those used 
by the Traveller community.  The Plan is therefore p ositively prepared in 
seeking to meet the identified needs.   
Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation – Policy S83  
238. As submitted, the Plan identified a need for additional Gypsy and Traveller 
pitches based on the definition in the Planni ng Policy for Traveller Sites (‘PPTS’) Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
53 
 (32 additional pitches between 2019 and 2040).  However, following submission 
of the Plan, the Court of Appeal38 held that the definition was discriminatory.  To 
ensure that the Plan is justified and positively prepared, it is therefore necessary 
to update the text by reference to the higher figure in the Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment (‘GTAA’), which does not exclude people who 
have ceased to travel permanently.  This is achieved by MM94 and refers to a 
need for 41 pitches between 2019 and 2040.   
239. In meeting the identified need, Examination Document EX037 identifies a 
supply of between 27 and 30 pitche s from planning permissions and sites 
allocated in Policy S83.  This comfortably exceeds the need identified up to 
2029 (15 pitches).  Although it falls short of the 41 -pitch total, Core Document 
HOU004 shows how existing sites could be expanded or reconfi gured on 
Council owned land to provide additional space.  When taking this into account, 
the positively worded policy for windfall sites, and the ability for the Committee 
to monitor progress and update the Plan as necessary , we are satisfied that the 
need s of Gypsies and Travellers will be met over the plan period.   
Conclusion  
240. We therefore conclude that subject to the recommended main modifications , the 
policies relating to the type and mix of housing are justified, effective and 
consistent with national planning policy.   
Issue 8 – Whether the strategy for job growth, employment , 
Minis try of Defence sites and tourism is justified, effective and 
consistent with national planning policy  
Spatial Strategy for Employment , Strategic Employment Sites and Employm ent 
Land on SUEs – Polic ies S28, S29 and S30  
241. The ENA39 predicts  that certain sectors such as agri -food, health and social 
work are likely to see significant growth in the plan period but will not require the 
same amount of land as ‘typical’ employment uses .  As a result, the ENA 
forecasts that around 6.5 hectares of land will be needed for offices, 4.3 
hectares for warehousing and only around 1 hectare of new industrial land.   
242. In contrast, the Plan allocates Strategic Employment Sites (‘SES’) with sufficient 
capacity to provide nearly 100 hectares of additional land over the plan period.  
An additional 51 hectares of employment land is allocated as part of the SUEs.   
 
38 Court of Appeal Smith v Secreta ry of State for Levelling Up, Housing & Communities & Anor [2022] 
EWCA Civ 1391  
39 Core Document EC001  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
54 
 243. The justification for t his is because the SES are intended to meet large scale 
investment needs on sites that require a significant land take.  Moreover, all of 
the sites either have planning permission, or, in the case of Hemswell Cliff, 
benefit from a Local Development Order a s part of the Food Enterprise Zone.  
The largest site, Teal Park, is actively coming forward in phases for a range of 
uses and is already occupied by companies such as Siemens and Jaguar Land 
Rover.  Other allocations are also progressing and will deliver phased 
employment provision.  Continued allocation of the SES is therefore justified.  
244. Similarly, there have been no material changes in circumstances insofar as the 
SUEs are concerned .  Here, th e allocation of employment land is justified in the 
interests of providing sustainable, mixed -use communities.   The spatial 
distribution of sites also reflects the strategy in Policies S1 and S2 which seek to 
direct the majority of growth to locations that are, or can be made, sustainable.   
245. Although the al located amount of employment land far exceeds that envisaged 
by the ENA, the Plan will not lead to a harmful imbalance between jobs and 
homes.  This is because the nature of the sites are large, strategic opportunities 
which are likely to take several year s to implement in full.  An example of this is 
Teal Park at North Hykeham which is coming forward in phases (around 29 out 
of the 36 hectares remains available).  Likewise, employment land provision on 
the SUEs will happen alongside the phased delivery of housing.  Even if 
significant amounts of employment land did come forward, for the reasons given 
above the Plan is positively prepared in allocating new housing over and above 
the minimum demographic housing need.  
246. Where new development is concerned, Policy  S29 supports employment 
generating uses on the SESs and seeks to avoid piecemeal development by 
requiring the approval of masterplans.  This is justified in ensuring the 
comprehensive and coherent development of the largest flagship sites.  For the 
same r easons, so is the intention to limit changes of use away from industrial 
and commercial uses.   
247. The spatial s trategy for employment , the allocation of SES and the inclusion of 
more employment land on the SUEs is therefore appropriate, positively 
prepared a nd justified.  For effectiveness, MM22  corrects an error in Policy S29 
relating to the amount of undeveloped land available.   
Important Established Employment Areas and Local Employment Areas – 
Policies S31 and S3 2 
248. Important Established Employment Areas ( ‘IEEAs’) are existing, well -
established sites which include some land available for development.  Local 
Employment Areas (‘LEAs’) are smaller sites providing a role for local 
communities.  Core Document EVR028 -034 includes details of the criteria used 
to assess the differences.   Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
55 
 249. For IEEAs, sites must be in the top 4 tiers of the hierarchy, have 5 or more 
separate units occupied by separate businesses, provide over 8,000 square 
metres of floorspace and occupy a site of 2 hectares or more.  Other factors 
could have been used to determine whether sites are ‘important’, but in our view 
the methodology used is appropriate.  It ensures that sites are assessed on a 
consistent, objective and transparent basis.  To reflect the evidence base and 
correct an error in t he Plan, MM23 is needed to update Policy S31 by referring 
to the correct tests  for designation . 
250. By taking this approach there will inevitably be circumstances where sites fall 
short of designation because they fail to meet one of the requirements.  In some  
cases,  they might also be large sites which clearly play an important role in the 
local economy.  However, this does not make Policy S31 as a whole unsound .  
Moreover, if the Committee was to allow ‘exceptions’ to the criteria, then there 
would be little merit in using this methodology at all if alternative sites could be 
added to the list.  We are also mindful that the Plan does not preclude such 
sites from continued business expansion. Policies S3 3 and S34 support the 
principle of new business developmen t in both the urban area and countryside.  
251. Following submission of the Plan, part of the IEEA at North Hykeham (E18) has 
secured planning permission across a different area to the one designated  (land 
west of Station Road).  To ensure that the geographic il lustration of site E18 is 
correct, the Committee should therefore ensure that the necessary correction is 
made to the polic ies map upon adoption.   
252. The IEEA also encompasses land on the opposite side of Station Road.  
Adjacent to Hykeham station is a small parcel of cleared land which connects 
the much larger industrial areas to the north and south.  Due to its size (relative 
to the rest of the IEEA) it has been su ggested that the parcel should be 
excluded from the wider designation.  However, no evidence has been provided 
to substantiate claims that the parcel of land would be unattractive to 
commercial operators.  The site is surrounded by industrial and commercia l 
uses of varying sizes.  It also has a physical, visual and practical association 
with the rest of the IEEA and its inclusion in the Plan is justified.   
253. Similar conclusions are reached in respect of sites E9 and E14.  Both are 
situated close to the City Centre but there is nothing to suggest that either site is 
likely to become vacant anytime soon.  In the event that circumstances change 
after leases expire in 2027, then the Committee would be able to take any 
necessary action by updating the Plan as requ ired.   
254. Policy S32 defines LEAs as sites over 0.5 hectares in size, provide at least 
2,500 square metres of floor space, have 3 or more units occupied by separate 
businesses and are within Tiers 1 -6 of the settlement hierarchy.  As with IEEAs, 
using thresh olds to identify and designate sites is appropriate and justified for Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
56 
 the purposes of a local plan policy.  The policy is also positively prepared in 
supporting new and expanded  business uses provided that conflicts with 
neighbouring land uses and the high way network (amongst others) are avoided.   
255. By only including locations within Tiers 1 -6 of the settlement hierarchy (and not 
those in the countryside), some significant employment sites are omitted from 
designation by Policy S32.  However, including this requirement reflects the 
spatial strategy for employment (as set out in Policy S28) which states that 
LEAs are intended to ensure that there are jobs and services available to meet 
local needs.  It also reflects the overall spatial strategy in Policy S1 wh ich 
focuses on delivering sustainable growth.  Supporting job growth within existing 
settlements is justified.   
Non-Designated  Sites, Proposals within Settlements and Proposals Outside 
Settlements – Policies S33 and S34  
256. Development proposals for employmen t generating uses on non -designated 
sites within settlements are supported by Policy S33.  Criterion a) is justified in 
requiring applicants to demonstrate that there are no other available sites on 
IEEAs and LEAs within 5km before permission is granted.  The purpose of this 
requirement is to encourage the reuse of vacant land and buildings on 
designated employment sites, thereby strengthening their role and function and 
recognising their importance to the local economy.  For proposals in the 
countryside, P olicy S34 supports new and existing land -based rural businesses 
consistent with paragraph 84 of the Framework.  
Re-Use of Employment Land and Buildings  
257. On SES and IEEAs, proposals resulting in the loss of business uses are only 
permitted where the new deve lopment would, amongst other things, generate 
employment and where the existing units have been marketed for 12 months.  
In our view the protection afforded by the Plan is commensurate with their 
status as employment sites of strategic importance in the ma in urban areas.  It 
is also sufficiently clear enough to be effective.  For example, where planning 
permission is required, other Class E uses would only be permitted where 
criterion a) to d) are met and where the sequential test was passed, or, where 
the use proposed was clearly ancillary to the function of the employment area.  
258. The approach is different for LEAs.  Here, non -employment generating uses will 
be considered on their merits, having regard to criterion a) to e) and having 
considered the impact o f any loss on the local community and site suitability.  
Even greater flexibility is afforded for non -designated sites by Policy S33 where 
no marketing is required.  In taking a proportionate approach to the protection of 
employment land and buildings the different requirements are justified.  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
57 
 Retail and Town Centres – Policies S3 5, S36 , S37, S38, S39  and S40  
259. Policy S35 sets out a hierarchy of centres consistent with paragraph 86 of the 
Framework.  The tiers are justified and reflect the role, form and func tion of 
settlements , with Lincoln City Centre above the town centres at Gainsborough, 
Sleaford, Caistor and Market Rasen.  Town centre boundaries are defined on 
the policies maps in tiers 1 -4 of the settlement hierarchy, in addition to Primary 
Shopping Are as (‘PSAs’) at  Lincoln, Gainsborough, Sleaford and Market Rasen.   
260. Policy S35 also sets out thresholds for requiring impact assessments which vary 
by the size of each centre.  This is justified and reflects the fact that , depending 
on their size, proposals  are likely to have a greater impact on smaller centres 
than the likes of Lincoln, Gainsborough or Sleaford.   
261. Policies S36 -S40 guide development across the hierarchy of centres.  Non retail  
uses are permitted in the Primary Shopping Areas in Lincoln, Gainsborough and 
Sleaford provided that, amongst other things, they are main town centre uses 
and do not result in an over -concentration of similar uses or create ‘dead’ 
frontages.  Although thi s requires an element of professional judgement, it is 
sufficiently clear to be effective.  It is also proportionate in seeking to retain the 
commercial focus in the centre of the largest towns.  Additional flexibility is 
provided in District, Local and Vi llage centres.   
262. As submitted, Policies S36 and S40 refer to a range of uses that would be 
supported in principle within town centres.  However, in error, the list omits 
reference to health services and facilities.  For effectiveness this is rectified by 
MM24 and MM25 .  
RAF Scampton and M oD Sites – Polic ies S75 and S84  
263. RAF Scampton has a significant history and is considered to be of national 
importance.  As a Bomber Command airfield, it was the base for 617 Squadron 
in World War II – ‘The Dambusters’.  During the Cold War it was only one of two 
RAF Vulcan bases to pioneer rocket technologies, and from 1983 to 2022 was 
home to The Red Arrows.   
264. The Red Arrows have since moved to RAF Waddington and the intention of the 
MoD is to sell the site on.  The purpose of Policy S75 is  therefore to guide future 
proposals for its reuse.  However, at present the mix of uses, scale and possible 
amount of development is unknown.  
265. As submitted Policy S75 defers these decisions to a masterplan.  The 
Statement of Common Ground between the Commi ttee, the Defence 
Infrastructure Organisation and West Lindsey District Council agrees that this Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
58 
 could take the form of a Supplementary Planning Document40.  However, that 
would not be subject to any independent examination and would only be a 
material con sideration for decision -making purposes.  Depending on the type of 
development and its scale there may also be wider, strategic cross boundary 
matters to consider.  Combined with the national importance and significance of 
the site, it is therefore necessa ry to stipulate that the masterplan must form part 
of a development plan document, either through a targeted review of the Plan or 
an Area Action Plan.  The changes are achieved by MM40  and are necessary to 
ensure that the policy is justified and effective .  A consequential change to the 
supporting text is required by MM39 . 
266. In the submitted Plan, Policy S75 also states that before any masterplan is 
developed, the “value of the airspace above RAF Scampton and within 5 
nautical miles of its centre must be ful ly understood…” and that any “value” 
should be incorporated into the masterplan.  This relates to the fact that the 
airspace above the site is protected by a statutory instrument and allows for 
low-level flying by The Red Arrows.   
267. The policy requirement i s ineffective because the “value” attributed to the 
airspace will vary between stakeholders.  It is also subjective and currently 
unclear precisely how it would affect uses on the ground.  Moreover, as the 
airspace is controlled by a statutory instrument, its operational use is controlled 
by a separate process outside of the land use planning system.  This is a further 
reason why redevelopment of the site should be subject to a development plan 
document with independent examination in public.  For effective ness, MM40  
therefore deletes the text referring to the value of the airspace in favour of a 
requirement which demands an assessment of how uses on the ground are 
compatible with the airspace and requires consultation with the MoD.  This also 
includes a con sideration of general amenity, as any future residential use of the 
site would also need to demonstrate how it could provide a good standard of 
living conditions if the airspace was continued to operate for low flying.   
268. One of the policy requirements stip ulates that the development as a whole must 
be net zero carbon.  However, the site includes existing buildings, several of 
which are designated heritage assets, and existing dwellings.  A bespoke 
strategy is therefore going to be needed to reflect the site  constraints and it 
should form part of the masterplan ( MM40 ). 
269. Other MoD sites are covered by Policy S84.  The policy is consistent with 
paragraph 97 of the Framework which requires planning policies to recognise 
and support development required for operational defence and security 
purposes and ensure that operational  sites are not affected by development in 
the area.   
 
40 Dated September 2022, Committee Matter 6 Hearing Statement  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
59 
 270. Where reuse of land is concerned, the policy supports the principle of 
redevelopment where, amongst other things, the majority of proposals are on 
brownfield land.  This is justified and seeks to ensure  the efficient use of land 
whilst reflecting the spatial strategy.  Because access to health services would 
be an equally important consideration it should also be included in point f.  The 
requisite change is made by MM95  to ensure the policy is justified  and effective.  
The Lincolnshire Showground, T ourism  and Education – Policies S42, S43 , 
S44 and S52  
271. The Lincolnshire Showground is one of the key agricultural show venues in the 
UK, but is also used year -round for conferences, networking and events.  It i s of 
significant importance to the area and contributes to economic growth, 
education and the visitor economy.   
272. Supporting the range of uses in Policy S44 is therefore appropriate and justified.  
However, this should also include uses within Class F1 (lea rning and non -
residential institutions) and Class F2 (community uses).  MM26  makes the 
necessary change and is needed to ensure that the policy is effective by more 
accurately reflecting the activities which take place at the Showground.  For the 
same reas ons the Committee should also ensure that the policies map is up to 
date on adoption by reflecting the boundary of the approved site.  Any possible 
future alternative uses would be considered on their merits and have to 
demonstrate their compatibility with  the main showground use of the site.  
273. The Statement of Common Ground between the Committee, West Lindsey 
District Council and the Lincolnshire Agricultural Society (who own the site) also 
agrees that because the agricultural college is nearing the 8,000 sq uare metre 
limit, some flexibility is needed for possible future expansion.  We agree that to 
provide flexibility, and to ensure that the policy is effective in supporting the 
Showground, additional development should be allowed in principle up to 
10,000 s quare metres, a figure agreed between the three main parties  (MM26 ).   
274. Policies S42 and S43 support tourism in both urban and rural areas.  In this 
regard the Plan is consistent with paragraph 84 of the Framework which 
supports sustainable rural tourism  and is justified .  The supporting text also 
recognises that locations such as Market Rasen Racecourse are outside the 
built-up area, but are still recognised as a visitor attraction  for the town .  
275. The support for the growth and expansion of universities and colleges in Policy 
S52 is also appropriate and justified, provided that impacts are adequately 
considered.  In error, the Committee omitted the boundary of the Riseholme 
Campus from the submission policies map and this should be corrected upon 
adoption of the Plan.   Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
60 
 Conclusion  
276. We therefore conclude that subject to the recommended main modifications the 
strategy for job growth, employment , MoD  sites and tourism is justified, effective 
and consistent with national planning policy.   
Issue 9 – Whether the pol icies and designations concerning Green 
Wedges, Local Green Spaces  and Important Open Spaces are 
justified, effective and consistent with national planning policy  
 
Green Wedges – Policy S63  
277. Green Wedge designations are included in the existing Local Plan under Policy 
LP22 .  The Local Plan Review continues the same approach under Policy S63 .  
In summary, the Green Wedges are intended to prevent the physical merging of 
settlements, create multi -functional ‘green lungs’, provide an accessible 
recreational resource and conserve and enhance local wildlife.  Within the 
Green Wedges, planning permission will only be granted where it would not be 
contrary to these aims and functions, or, where develop ment is essential and 
the benefits outweigh any impact.  
278. Justification for the Green Wedges is provided in Core Document ENV003, 
which was used to inform the existing Local Plan.  Although the Review was 
produced in 2016, the criteria for designation remain  relevant and justified.  
Moreover, the Committee has assessed the policies map to determine whether 
there have been any material changes in circumstances which require boundary 
alterations.  Where necessary, these are presented in Core Document EVR063.  
We are therefore satisfied that reliance on the 2016 Review, with targeted 
boundary alter ations , is a proportionate and adequate approach to take.  The 
Green Wedge designations are based on a thorough and robust assessment.   
279. Adjacent to Hykeham station is a small parcel of cleared land which is part of 
the E18 designated IEEA .  Beyond this land to the rear ( east) is a large r area of 
open space which is part of the Hykeham Pits  Green Wedge.41  The Green 
Wedge has already been examined, found to be sound and formally adopted as 
part of the development plan for the area.  Based on the evidence provided 
there have been no material changes since adoption of the Plan in 2017 that 
would warrant an alternative approach  for the Plan before us .  For the reasons 
set ou t in ENV003 , Parcel E1 meets the criteria for designation .  The reasoning 
remains relevant  and the designation is justified .   
 
41 Referred to as Parcel E1 in Document ENV003  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
61 
 Local Green Spaces – Policy S64  
280. Paragraphs 101 -102 of the Framework state that Local Green Spaces  (‘LGS’)  
are not appropriate for most open areas and  should only be used where the 
area is reasonably close to the community it serves, is demonstrably special to 
the local community  and holds a particular local significance  and is local in 
character and is not an  extensive tract of land .   
281. Existing Local Green Spaces were designated in the 2017 Local Plan.  These 
sites were reviewed for any significant changes in circumstances and continue 
to be shown on the policies maps.  New sites were subject to the same 
appra isal process, as explained in Core Document SOS002, thus ensuring that 
sites were considered in the same way.  The selection criteria are consistent 
with paragraph 102 of the Framework and the Local Green Spaces are justified.  
282. Following submission of the Plan it became apparent that the South Hykeham 
LGS, as designated by the Hykeham Neighbourhood Plan, was omitted from 
the submission policies maps in error.  The Committee proposes to rectify this 
upon adoption of the Plan as il lustrated on the proposed schedule of policies 
maps changes.   
283. Where new development is concerned, Policy S64 refers to the tests in 
paragraph 103 of the Framework.  This approach is justified and avoids the 
unnecessary repetition of national planning poli cy.   
Important Open Spaces – Policy S65  
284. Important Open Spaces (‘IOS’) from the existing Local Plan have formed the 
baseline of the areas to assess for the Local Plan Review.  Core Document 
SOS001  sets out the methodology and criteria used to assess both e xisting 
sites and proposed new ones.  It presents, in a clear and transparent way, why 
certain areas should be included as IOS, and why others should not.   The IOS 
have been consulted on as part of the Plan’s preparation.  
285. At Swaton, the existing Local Pla n designates an area of IOS to the rear of St 
Michael’s Church running adjacent to Parson’s Drove.  The boundary in the 
submitted Plan has been amended following a review by Officers and following 
the approval of planning permission on part of the site.  A s submitted it now 
excludes a parcel of land to the rear of Orchard House and follows a slightly 
different boundary to Swaton Court.   
286. The site is designated because of the important contribution that it makes to the 
character and appearance of the area, w ith views afforded through the site to 
the church and Swaton Court.  Based on the evidence provided and 
observations from our site inspections, we agree,  and the designation is Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
62 
 justified.  In objection to the Plan a comparison has been made to another area  
of land in Brant Broughton, which was discounted as an IOS.  However, the 
Committee confirms that the site in Brant Broughton was discounted as an IOS 
because it was not visually open.  Indeed, having viewed both sites, the 
circumstances are materially di fferent.   
287. Land at Lee Road, Lincoln is illustrated as an IOS on the submission version 
policies maps.  However, it does not meet the criteria for designation as set out 
in Core Document SOS001 and was included in error.  The geographic 
illustration of the  policy is therefore not justified and it will be necessary for the 
Committee to update the policies maps upon adoption of the Plan.   
288. Policy S65 states that some areas of IOS are not shown on the policies maps 
but are still safeguarded from development an d will be considered against 
national planning policy.  The list in the Plan includes ‘school playing fields’ 
whereas paragraph 99 of the Framework includes all playing fields.  Although 
there is a discrepancy between the two documents, the Plan clearly de fers 
decisions for consideration against the Framework.  We are therefore satisfied 
that sufficient clarity exists without the need for main modifications.   
Conclusion  
289. We therefore conclude that subject to the recommended main modifications the 
policies a nd designations concerning Green Wedges, Local Green Spaces and 
Important Open Spaces are justified, effective and consistent with national 
planning policy.   
Issue 10 – Whether the policies relating to the built and natural 
environment are justified, effe ctive and consistent with national 
planning policy  
 
Built Environment – Policies S53  and S57 
290. Policy S53 aims to ensure that good design will be at the centre of every 
development proposal and provides a clear set of standards and considerations 
under ten themes that are closely aligned with those set by the National Design 
Guide.  The criteria are all clear enough to be effecti ve and are justified in 
seeking to promote high quality design, consistent with national planning policy.  
The exception is criterion 7b), where it is necessary for soundness to make it 
clear that new and existing uses should be compatible with each other in all 
circumstances.  (MM28 ) 
291. Policy S57 aims to protect, conserve and seek opportunities to enhance the 
historic environment.  MM29  is necessary for the effectiveness of the policy by 
clarifying that the fourth paragraph relates to proposals for changes o f use.  The Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
63 
 same MM is also needed to correct an error in the policy, as conservation area 
boundaries are set by the individual districts and not the Local Plan process.   
Natural Environment – Polic ies S60, S61 and S67  
292. Policy S60 sets out a hierarchy of d esignated sites within Central Lincolnshire.  
However, because some sites could be added and/or amended outside of the 
Local Plan process (such as a Local Nature Reserve), it is necessary to delete 
the words ‘as shown on the policies map’.  This is in the interests of 
effectiveness and to remove any possible conflicts where sites are protected by 
policies in the plan but not always shown on the maps ( MM30 ).   
293. MM31  is required to ensure that the supporting text to policy S61 is consistent 
with the mitigation  hierarchy set out in paragraph 180 a ) of the Framework.  It is 
also necessary for effectiveness to provide additional clarity in relation to 
potential delivery mechanisms for biodiversity net gain.   MM32  is needed for the 
same reasons, b y clarifying the r elationship between Policy S61 and national 
planning policy, recognising that some small -scale proposals may be exempt, 
recognising that conditions may be used to secure measures and that national 
policy may change during the course of the plan period.   
294. Policy S67 aims to protect the best and most versatile agricultural land thereby  
protecting opportunities  for food production and the continuance  of the 
agricultural economy .  However, Footnote 58 of the Framework refers to the 
‘significant’ development of  agricultural land.  For consistency with national 
planning policy, the relevant change is made by MM33 . 
Conclusion  
295. We therefore conclude that subject to the recommended main modifications the 
policies relating to the built and natural environment are just ified, effective and 
consistent with national planning policy.  
Issue 11: Whether the policies relating to infrastructure and 
transport are justified, effective and consistent with national 
planning policy  
 
Strategic Infrastructure Requirements – Polic y S45 
296. Throughout the examination concerns have been raised that the Plan would 
lead to new housing without the necessary supporting infrastructure.  Policy S45 
applies to new development and clearly states that planning permission will only 
be granted if it can  be demonstrated that there is, or will be, sufficient 
infrastructure capacity to support and meet all the necessary requirements from 
the proposed development.  Proposals must also consider all the infrastructure Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
64 
 implications of a scheme, not just those o n site or in the immediate vicinity.  The 
Plan therefore provides a robust policy framework to ensure that all relevant 
infrastructure, including healthcare and education, will be provided.  
Accessibility and Transport – Policies S46, S47, S48 and S49  
297. The Greater Lincoln Transport Model (‘GLTM’) has been used to assess the 
traffic impacts of the Plan with a horizon year of 2040.  In summary, National 
Highways concludes that the evidence underpinning the Local Plan Review is 
suitable for considering growth a round the A46, and that the amount of growth 
has not changed significantly from the existing Plan.  The GLTM was not 
considered sufficiently extensive for testing impacts on the A46 between the A1 
and the A46 Hykeham roundabout, but National Highways confi rms that this can 
be dealt with through appropriate testing and mitigation as required to support 
individual development proposals.  In summary therefore, we are satisfied that 
the residual cumulative impacts on the road network have been adequately 
tested  and will not be severe.   
298. One of the key transport provisions in the Plan remains the North Hykeham 
relief road.  It will link the Eastern Bypass (at the A15 Sleaford Road) with the 
existing A46 Western Bypass (at its junction with Newark Road), creating a 
complete Lincoln ring road .  It forms part of the Lincoln Integrated Transport 
Strategy42, and in 2020 the County Council secured £110m towards its 
construction.  Identification of the project and the safeguarding of the route by 
Policy S46 is therefore appropriate and justified.   
299. North Lincolnshire Council and its partners have prioritised i nvestigating 
improvements to the A15.  Although this work is not explicitly referred to in the 
Central Lincolnshire Local Plan, it is still at a relatively early stage.  The Plan is 
not unsound by failing to reference to this emerging project.  As and when  
proposals for RAF Scampton come forward, then clearly any impacts on the 
A15 would have to be considered as part of that process.  
300. Policy S47 provides an overarching framework for accessibility and transport 
and supports development proposals which contri bute towards an efficient and 
safe transport network that offers a range of transport choices.  It also sets out 
how transport related infrastructure will be delivered.  Any development that has 
severe transport implications will not be permitted unless de liverable mitigation 
measures have been identified and their implementation has been secured.   
The requirements are sufficiently clear, effective and consistent with the aims 
and objectives of national planning policy in seeking to promote more 
sustainable  modes of transport.   
 
42 Core Document TRA003  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
65 
 301. Policy S48 outlines how new walking and cycling infrastructure will be provided  
as well as how existing infrastructure will be protected, maintained and 
improved .  For effectiveness, MM27  is required to make sure that the aim of 
connecting communities and facilities is explicitly referenced in criterion a).  
302. Where parking spaces are concerned, paragraph 107 of the Framework states 
that policies should take into account accessibility, the ty pe, mix and use of 
development proposed, the availability of public transport, local car ownership 
levels and the need to provide facilities for ultra -low-emission vehicles.  The 
requisite evidence is provided in Core Document TRA005.  In summary, it 
asses ses car ownership across Central Lincolnshire by location, then looks at 
other areas and observations from completed local developments before testing 
different options.   
303. The outcome in Policy S49 seeks to prioritise walking, cycling and the use of 
public  transport and existing car parks in and around Lincoln City Centre.  
Within 300m of the City Centre , applications for residential development will be 
considered on their merits, having regard to the location of the scheme, its 
connectivity and available p arking nearby.  Although this will require a degree of 
professional judgement as to what level of parking is acceptable, it is sufficiently 
clear and reflects the fact that within and around the city centre the connectivity 
and need for parking spaces coul d vary significantly.  It therefore provides an 
appropriate level of flexibility.   
304. Elsewhere, development proposals are expected to meet the minimum  
requirements in Appendix 2.  The standards are justified by the evidence in 
Core Document TRA005 and seek to ensure that enough on -site parking is 
provided, especially in rural areas where car ownership levels are higher.  For 
housing developments, the preference for parking on -site is also justified in the 
interests of good quality design and the usability of  housing, especially where 
charging points are required.  Sufficient flexibility is included in the policy 
wording to allow for other arrangements where they can be justified.  
Community Facilities and Open Space, Sports and Leisure Facilities – Policies 
S50 and S51  
305. Policy S50 introduces clear requirements to prevent the unjustified loss of 
community facilities.  It is consistent with paragraph 93 of the Framework which 
states that planning policies should, amongst other things, guard against the 
unnecessary loss of valued facilities and services.  The policy is also justified in 
requiring the provision of new community facilities, preferably on -site where they 
have been demonstrated to be necessary.  We note Sport England’s comments 
regarding the Facilities Planning Model, but also their generally supportive 
position on the soundness of the policy.   Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
66 
 306. All new residential developments of 10 dwellings or more are expected to 
provide new or enhanced open space, sport and leisure facilities to meet the 
standards in Appendix 3 of the Plan.  Those standards are evidenced by, 
amongst other things, Core Documents SOS003a -b and SOS006.  Although the 
various studies do not constitute a formal Playing Pitch Strategy, Sport England 
confirms that it has no object ions to Policy S50 and that it will work with the 
Committee to produce the necessary strategy as part of a review of the Plan.  In 
the absence of any other contradictory and/or compelling studies, we are 
satisfied that the requirements of Policy S5 1 are ap propriate and justified.   
Conclusion  
307. We therefore conclude that subject to the recommended main modifications the 
policies relating to infrastructure and transport are justified, effective and 
consistent with national planning policy.  
  Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review, Inspectors’ Report, March 2023  
67 
 Overall Conclusion  and Recommendation  
308. The Plan has a number of deficiencies in respect of soundness  for the reasons 
set out above, which mean that we recommend non -adoption of it as submitted, 
in accordance with Section 20(7A) of the 2004 Act.  These deficiencies have 
been explained in the main issues set out above.  
309. The Committee has requested that we recommend MMs  to make the Plan 
sound and capable of adoption.  We conclude that the duty to cooperate has 
been met and that with the recommended MMs set out in the Appendix to this 
Report the Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Review satisfies the requirements 
referred to in Section 20(5)(a) of the 2004 Act and is sound.  
Matthew Birkinshaw and Clive Coyne  
INSPECTORS  
 
This report is accompanied by an Appendix containing the Main Modifications.  