Adopted April 2021
CONTENTS
3CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040FOREWORD
FOREWORD
City Plan 2019–2040, first and foremost, is a plan for 
people. It sets out to deliver an ambitious strategy to 
make Westminster one of the best places to live, work 
and play. Not just in London or the UK, but globally.
Although this plan projects us forward to 2040, the 
transformation starts now. Being a city where people want 
to live is at the forefront of our agenda. Whilst a quarter  
of all homes in Westminster are social rented – a statistic 
of which we are very proud – we have a pressing need for 
new, affordable homes. Regeneration of key areas such as 
Victoria and Paddington, and the north west of the city, will 
invigorate both our residential and business capabilities. 
It’s absolutely vital that development must never be 
at the expense of our heritage. Our new approach to 
managing development will make sure planning for 
Westminster is about conservation not just preservation, 
and building tomorrow’s heritage today. Our iconic 
landmarks and outstanding heritage form a stunning 
backdrop where people build lives, forge careers, 
and make memories. We have identified ‘specialist 
clusters’ to be protected; places whose character 
adds significantly to London’s global appeal, such 
as Soho, Mayfair, Harley Street and Savile Row. 
Sustainability must drive everything we do. This 
strategy defines what we need to achieve and how 
innovative planning and design will achieve it. Greener 
living must inform the choices we make – sometimes literally. Soft landscaping and streets lined with trees, 
bring natural beauty and mitigate against the harmful 
effects of CO 2. A stunning city encourages walking 
and cycling, bringing further environmental benefits. 
With higher rents and changing patterns of how 
people shop, bold action will ensure London’s West 
End remains the jewel in our commercial crown. This 
strategy sets out a game-changing Central Activities 
Zone (CAZ) to deliver a world-class leisure experience. 
We remain committed to investing £150 million to secure 
the future of Oxford Street as a global destination, 
with an unrivalled experience and visitor offer.
As we set out to create our city of the future, there is one 
question that should be at the forefront of our minds in every 
development we undertake: Will this be an asset to people’s 
lives? If we can answer this positively every time, the 
Westminster of 2040 is one we will all want to be a part of.
Councillor Matthew Green  
Cabinet Member for Business, Licensing and Planning  
Westminster City Council
4
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
This is the City Plan for Westminster to 2040. 
Along with the Mayor of London’s London Plan  and 
any neighbourhood plans which may be made in 
future, it is the statutory development plan setting 
out our vision and strategy for the development of 
the city, and contains policies that will be used in 
determining planning applications.1
If you are submitting, assessing or commenting  
on applications, or want to find out more about the 
policies for your area:
Step 1: Start with the vision and spatial strategy. 
They show the main areas for growth and 
change in the city. 
Step 2: Consult the ‘policies map’ that goes  
with this plan. It shows where the policies apply. 
You can use this to find the policies that relate to 
your site or area of interest.  
1 Under section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004 planning decisions should be taken in 
accordance with the statutory development plan unless 
material planning considerations indicate otherwise.Step 3: Some policies in the Plan deal with 
different types of use. This helps to determine 
whether a use or change of use of a building is 
appropriate or not. The contents pages and 
specific topic-based chapters should also help 
you identify the relevant policies. 
Step 4: Other policies set out requirements for 
the form that the development should take and 
any measures needed to mitigate its impacts. 
The City Plan should be read as a whole to 
understand if a development will be acceptable. 
Policies are not cross-referenced throughout the 
Plan, however there are many interrelated issues 
across the chapters which should be considered  
in tandem.
Appendix 2 identifies our strategic policies and  
will be particularly helpful to anyone involved in 
creating, or commenting on, neighbourhood plans. HOW TO USE THIS PLANHOW TO USE THIS PLANCONTENTS
6
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
CONTEXT  8
OUR APPROACH FOR WESTMINSTER 22
OBJECTIVES  24
Spatial Strategy Policies  28
1. Westminster’s spatial strategy 30 
2. Spatial Development Priorities:  
West End Retail and Leisure Special Policy Area  
and Tottenham Court Road Opportunity Area  34
3. Spatial Development Priorities:  
Paddington Opportunity Area  38
4. Spatial Development Priorities:  
Victoria Opportunity Area 41
5. Spatial Development Priorities:  
North West Economic Development Area  44
6. Spatial Development Priorities:  
Church Street / Edgware Road and  
Ebury Bridge Estate Housing Renewal Areas 47
7. Managing development for Westminster’s people  51Housing Policies  54
8. Housing delivery  56
9. Affordable housing  59
10. Housing for specific groups 62
11. Innovative housing delivery  65
12.  Housing quality  67
Economy and Employment Policies  70
13. Supporting economic growth 72
14. Town centres, high streets and the CAZ 75
15. Visitor Economy  82
16. Food, drink and entertainment  86
17. Community infrastructure and facilities  89
18. Education and skills 91
19. Digital infrastructure, information  
and communications technology  92
20. Soho Special Policy Area 93
21. Mayfair and St. James’s Special Policy Areas 97
22. Harley Street Special Policy Area 99
23. Savile Row Special Policy Area 99CONTENTS7CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Connections Policies  102
24. Sustainable transport  104
25. Walking and cycling  106
26. Public transport and infrastructure 109
27. Parking  112
28. Highway access and management  115
29. Freight and servicing  116
30. Technological innovation in transport  119
31. Waterways and waterbodies 120
Environment Policies  124
32. Air quality  126
33. Local environmental impacts  128
34. Green infrastructure  130
35. Flood risk  134
36. Energy  137
37. Waste management  141Design and Heritage Policies  144
38. Design principles  146
39. Westminster’s heritage  148
40. Townscape and architecture  155
41. Building height  160
42. Building height in the housing renewal areas  162
43. Public realm 164
44. Security measures in the public realm  168
45. Basement developments  169
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING  172
APPENDIX 1: WESTMINSTER’S HOUSING TRAJECTORY  181
APPENDIX 2: SCHEDULE OF STRATEGIC POLICIES  186
APPENDIX 3: SCHEDULE OF SUPERSEDED POLICIES   190
GLOSSARY  2068
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
50AD
Founding of London 
(Londinium)
The Roman Governor 
of Britain (Ostorius 
Scapula) gives orders 
to build a permanent 
base on the North 
Bank of the Thames.600
The Saxons 
create a new 
town at Covent 
Garden
1862
The new 
Westminster 
Bridge is opened1863
The first London 
Underground line 
opens between 
Paddington and 
Farringdon1865
Bazalgette’s sewer 
system opened, leading 
to the construction of 
Victoria Embankment1876
Parliament is 
reconstructed1903
Westminster 
Cathedral is 
completed1928
1928 Thames flood
The 1928 Thames flood was a 
disastrous flood of the River 
Thames that affected much of 
riverside London on 7 January 
1928. As a result 14 people 
died and thousands were 
made homeless.
1940
Blitz
During the Blitz two million 
houses (60% of these in 
London) were destroyed 
resulting in redevelopment 
and the emergence of 
council estates being built. 1947
Town and Country Planning Act
The Town and Country Planning Act 
1947  came into effect on 1 July 1948, 
which was the foundation of modern 
town and country planning in the UK.1956
Clean Air Act1965
Westminster’s current boundary
The borough as we know it today was created with the 
1965 establishment of Greater London. Upon its creation, 
it inherited the city status previously held by the smaller 
Metropolitan Borough of Westminster from 1900, which 
was first awarded to Westminster in 1540.460
The Roman army 
leaves Britain 
and London is 
abandoned43AD
First London road network
Roads built in the first phase of Roman 
occupation (43–68 AD) connected London 
with the ports used in the invasion, and with 
the earlier legionary bases at Colchester, 
Lincoln, Wroxeter, Gloucester and Exeter. 
As Roman influence expanded, so did the 
network, until around 180 AD when the 
known network was complete.Westminster TimelineCONTEXTCONTEXT9
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTEXT
960
Westminster 
Abbey first 
founded1666
Great Fire of London
The Great Fire of 1666 
destroyed four-fifths of the 
City of London and more 
than 13,000 medieval, 
Tudor and early-17th 
century buildings were lost.1735
First Prime Minister 
in 10 Downing Street1746
First detailed map 
of London
John Rocque created the  
first detailed map of London.  
His 1746 map includes every 
named court and alleyway.  
It shows a much smaller city, 
with areas like Bloomsbury 
and Marylebone largely 
undeveloped.1814
Lord’s Cricket 
Ground opens1825
Regent Street 
layout complete1828
London Zoo 
opens to the 
public
1834
Parliament is 
destroyed 
due to fire1837
Buckingham 
Palace completed1838
Paddington 
Station opens1839
Trafalgar Square construction
Trafalgar Square’s name 
commemorates the Battle of 
Trafalgar, a British naval victory in 
the Napoleonic Wars with France 
and Spain that took place on  
21 October 1805 off the coast of 
Cape Trafalgar, Spain.1851
Royal Parks  
become public
Royal Parks become 
public parks with the 
introduction of the 
Crown Lands Act 1851.1860
Victoria  
station opens
Victoria station opened 
by Victoria Station  
and Pimlico Railway.
1970
Westway  
opens2002
Golden Jubilee  
Footbridge joining  
Embankment to  
Southbank opens2003
London 
Congestion 
Charge comes 
into force2012
London  
Olympic  
Games2019
Ultra Low 
Emission Zone 
(ULEZ) comes 
into force2020
UK leaves 
the 
European 
Union2021
Elizabeth 
Line due  
to open2025
Thames 
Tideway due to 
be completed2028
Heathrow 
expansion due 
to be completedCrossrail 210
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
CONTEXT
Stretching just over eight square miles, Westminster 
is one of London’s largest central boroughs and one 
of only two to have city status. Much of Westminster 
is within the Central Activities Zone (CAZ) which is a 
designation set by the Mayor of London to guide 
planning policies. 
We are home to many of the landmarks 
synonymous with ‘tourist London’. We have some 
of the most affluent residential areas in the country, 
but a diverse demographic means also some of 
the most deprived (see Figures 1 and 2). Ours is  
a densely populated city, with 118 people per 
hectare; almost double the London average of 57.1 
This means that space is at a premium, so we must 
ensure its most effective use.
1 ONS, Mid year Population Estimates 2019Figure 1: London Central Activities Zone11CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTEXT
Figure 2: Levels of deprivation in Westminster. Source: ONS Index of Multiple Deprivation 201912
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTSCONTEXT
White British and Irish 31% 
Other White 29%Mixed 6%
Other Ethnic Group 4%
Arab 9%
Other Black 1%
Other Asian 5%
Chinese 2%
Bangladeshi 3%
Pakistani 1%Black Caribbean 2%
Black African 4%
Indian 3%
Figure 3: Westminster’s ethnic mix. Source: GLA 2016-based ethnic group population projection13
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTEXT
Figure 4: Age mix in Westminster. Source: City Intelligence, 2018 628 90+ 952
1483
2358
2913
4056
5001
5775
6652
7752
8010
9011
10786
11944
11156
8453
5857
5821
7259
66131217 85-89
1925 80-84
2579 75-79
3805 70-74
4436 65-69
5123 60-64
6532 55-59
8360 50-54
9256 45-49
10775 40-44
14164 35-39
14952 30-34
12728 25-29
9501 20-24
6552 15-19
6380 10-14
7480 5-9
7079 0-4Female
Male14
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
121,000  households with 31%  owner occupied, 
40%  private rented, 26%  social rented  
and 3% other tenure
Median property price  
£1,054,400The average mean household income in 
Westminster is £52,199, yet the median house  
price was £1,054,400 in 2017. That’s nearly two 
times higher than London as a whole, and almost 
five times higher than that of the UK.2 There is high 
contrast in income between different wards with an 
average mean income of £62,074 in Knightsbridge 
and Belgravia compared to £31,601 in Church 
Street. Rental property prices now top the  
£3,000-a-month mark.3 Lack of intermediate 
housing stock means that less than 2% of homes 
are available for people who can’t afford to rent  
on the open market but are ineligible for social 
housing – creating a unique problem.
This is an issue further compounded by a growing 
population. ONS Population Projections estimate 
that Westminster’s population will increase to 
284,300 by 2040.4
2 Average Property Price, Land Registry 2017
3 Valuation Office Agency (VOA) data
4 Population projection for 2040, GLA (2016)261,000  including 51,500  children
Population increases to 1.1 million   
workers with the influx of workers,  
shoppers and tourists in the  
day timePopulationIncomesHousing
Average household income:  
£55,897We have identified existing housing estates which 
are in need of renewal – Church Street, Ebury 
Bridge and Tollgate. The renewal of these estates 
will bring about much needed housing growth and 
improvements to existing stock. Other housing 
estates may be identified by us in future for renewal.
The local housing market assessment5 has 
identified the need for 316 intermediate  
homes and 247 social homes each year.  
City Plan 2019 – 2040 looks to support innovation 
and delivery, with an emphasis that is people-
focussed. It is essential that affordable doesn’t 
mean inferior quality but enhances the quality  
of life for those who live here.
There are 3,100 homes within the city declared  
as second homes with many more used as short 
term lets. It is estimated that 12% of the housing 
stock is empty.
5 Westminster Housing Market Assessment, 2019CONTEXT15CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040
Westminster’s unique historic environment is  
an irreplaceable resource, with an exceptional 
concentration of heritage assets, one of the highest 
of any local authority in the country. These date 
from all eras and alongside more recent buildings, 
help tell the story of Westminster’s continuing 
growth and development. 
We have more than 11,000 listed buildings and 
structures, with over 200 of them being Grade I 
listed including Buckingham Palace, the National 
Gallery, the Royal Albert Hall and 10 Downing 
Street. Westminster Cathedral, is another world 
renowned example of a historic building within 
Westminster that is highly symbolic and serves a 
very important religious function attracting not 
only local residents but visitors from afar.
Perhaps the best known listed building is  
The Palace of Westminster – one of the most 
iconic and significant buildings in the world,  
which, alongside Westminster Abbey and  
St Margaret’s Church, forms the Westminster  
World Heritage Site, recognised by UNESCO  
as having Outstanding Universal Value.Neighbourhood Planning is a key tool to ensuring 
good growth within Westminster and the City Plan 
provides the framework for emerging neighbourhood 
plans to follow to deliver that growth for their areas. 
The council strongly supports and encourages 
neighbourhood planning in Westminster, as 
evidenced by almost all of the city being covered by 
designated neighbourhood areas. Within the majority 
of these areas, designated local neighbourhood 
forums have the power to make neighbourhood 
plans. The council will engage with and advise these 
forums as their plans are prepared. The Knightsbridge 
Neighbourhood Plan was the first neighbourhood 
plan to be formally made.
Westminster is home to a number of internationally 
renowned educational institutions such as King’s 
College London, London School of Economics and 
Political Sciences, University of Westminster, 
Imperial College London, University of the Arts and 
many others. They are a huge asset as they help to 
boost local economies and with both national and 
international reputations they make Westminster an 
attractive place to come and study. Heritage
11,000  listed buildings and structures  
including the Westminster World Heritage Site
56 conservation areas  
covering 78% of the  
city’s footprint
23 Registered Historic Parks,  
including 5 Royal Parks
85 London Squares
3 scheduled monumentsCONTEXTCONTENTS
16
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTSCONTEXT
Figure 5: Neighbourhood planning in Westminster (N.B. Queen’s Park is not a neighbourhood forum, but instead is Westminster’s only Community Council) 17CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTEXT
This rich heritage contributes to the townscape 
and distinctiveness of different areas within the 
city but also brings many wider benefits including 
being a major draw for tourists to the city and is 
one of the reasons why many businesses choose 
to locate here.
There are also 56 conservation areas, which cover 
78% of our city, three scheduled monuments and 
many areas rich in archaeological potential as well as 
23 registered historic parks and gardens.
With such a special historic environment this  
is a critical factor in managing development and 
change in the city. Westminster’s built environment 
is constantly evolving with 6,283 planning 
applications processed in 2018; 1,791 of these  
were for listed buildings.6
Our challenge goes beyond conserving our 
historical legacy, to one where we must find ways 
of developing which enhance it, retaining and 
integrating those buildings and features which 
contribute positively to Westminster’s sense of 
place into new development to allow the city to 
grow in a way which retains its distinctiveness.
6 Based on figures returned to MHCLGEconomy
Highest economic output  
of any local authority at  
£53.6 billion  per annum
Largest night time economy  
in the UK, generating £3 billion   
per annum towards the UK’s  
economic output
699,000  jobsEmployment by Sector
Professional, business admin, finance 42%
4% Public admin, education, healthAccommodation, food services 5%6% Retail
IT and communications 11%
8% Arts, entertainment, recreation
Wholesale, transport, storage 3%11% Property services
10% Manufacturing, construction, utilities18
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Westminster is home to numerous uses and 
functions of national and international importance 
including the seat of Government, cultural 
institutions, higher education Institutions, sporting 
venues such as Lord’s Cricket Ground, and many 
research and medicine facilities. These help to 
boost the economy as workers, students, visitors 
and tourists spend time in Westminster. Many of 
the buildings that feature these uses have great 
historical value and contribute positively to local 
areas and the heritage of the city.
Westminster is home to various unique areas and 
neighbourhoods each with distinctive townscape 
character and serving different functions and uses. 
Many of these areas are rich in history and 
heritage assets and have widely recognised 
reputations making them unique. Savile Row for 
example is well known for its suit tailoring, while 
Soho offers a mix of small independent shopping 
and a vibrant night life.A vibrant and attractive city creates a vibrant 
economy. Westminster’s commercial activity 
reverberates at a national level. The scale and 
diversity of our 51,410 businesses is a key factor in 
our sustained growth. From our large retailers on 
Oxford Street to our many local street markets, 
Westminster has a range of commercial and 
shopping activities that helped contribute  
£66 billion in gross value added (GVA) in 2018;7 
15% of London’s total and 3.2% of that of the UK.8
Whilst professional, business and financial 
industries make up the largest sector, we’re also a 
global hub for creative industries with 27% of all 
London’s jobs in music, performing arts and visual 
arts based within the city. Westminster is home to 
more than 130 major cultural establishments such 
as Tate Britain and the National Gallery. Many 
cultural activities and programmes also take place 
in Westminster such as the City of Sculpture 
programme and ‘Fourth Plinth’ art Installations  
at Trafalgar Square.
7 ONS, 2019
8 Greater London Authority Economics, Current Issues Note 
55: Examining GVA in London’s local authorities in a 
London and UK context, 1997-2015 (September 2017)CONTEXT19CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040
Many famous attractions make Westminster a very 
popular destination for tourists and visitors alike. 
The West End provides a vibrant night life shown 
by the huge economic output. There are nearly 
500 hotels, 56 theatres and 21 LGBTQI+ night time 
venues.9 Hotels are an integral part of the CAZ 
generating both direct and indirect spending in 
the local economy. There are a range of hotels in 
Westminster accommodating for different budgets 
– from well-known historic hotels such as the Ritz 
and the Savoy to the smaller local hotels.
The GLA estimates that between 2016–2041  
there will be a need for approximately 75,000 
additional office-based jobs in Westminster.10  
Over the Plan period an increased demand for 
other commercial spaces, including hotels, retail 
and leisure developments is also expected, 
meaning additional commercial floorspace  
of a range of types will be required.
9 Cultural Infrastructure Map, Mayor of London  
10 London Office Policy Review, 2017Figure 6: Proportion of London’s jobs within each borough 2015-1611
11 Business Register and Employment Survey 2015 / 16Other 25 Boroughs 
48%Westminster 14%
City of London 10%
Camden 7%
Tower Hamlets 6%
Southwark 5%
 Islington 4%
 Hillingdon 4%
 Hounslow 3%CONTEXT20
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
4 Terminal Train Station
Charing Cross Paddington Marylebone Victoria
Elizabeth Line Stations
Bond Street Paddington Tottenham Court RoadMain Airport Links
Luton Heathrow Stansted Gatwick City
Canal Frontage
6.4kmPopulation density puts pressure on every aspect 
of our infrastructure. A constant challenge is how 
our 1.1 million daytime population moves around 
the city. Increased capacity, more ‘joined-up travel’, 
greater efficiency and more sustainable transport 
options, as well as more choice is needed to meet 
increasing demand.
The structure of our city is also a major contributor 
to CO 2 emissions. In the UK, buildings are 
responsible for around 40% of CO 2 emissions.  
In Westminster that figure is more than double  
at around 90%. This not only wastes energy but 
amplifies the urban heat island effect. The Mayor 
of London’s target is to reduce emissions by 60% 
by 2025. This target informs everything we do  
as we strive towards being a Cleaner Air City. 
Regeneration of our waterways, canals and streets 
to promote greener travel options and encourage 
walking and cycling is essential if we are to meet 
our ambitious carbon reduction targets.
Air quality isn’t the only pollution issue 
Westminster faces. We have a responsibility to 
address all forms of pollution. Westminster 
receives the highest number of noise complaints  
in London. Light pollution wastes energy, detracts 
from the character of our conservation areas and 
can negatively impact on health.CONTEXT21CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTEXT
350 km of highway170 cycle hire docking stations150 + bus routes3 passenger piers
32 underground stationsAir Quality
Exceedence over  
WHO and EU Limits
Road Transport  
of total particulates64.9%26%Westminster is home to many high-quality sporting 
facilities and open green spaces with significant 
investment over the past decade. There are six 
swimming pools, 16 physical activity centres and 
58 park-based sports facilities within the city.12 
Several regular sporting events take place in the 
city including the London Marathon and the 
Westminster Mile. Enabling residents to stay active 
is crucial to their health and well-being but it also 
contributes to the local economy and relieves 
stress on the health service. Our green spaces, 
parks and the River Thames frontages not only 
provide recreational opportunities but contribute 
to the character and attractiveness of the city and 
provide access to nature. In particular, our five 
Royal Parks are a huge asset to the city and as 
designated tranquil spaces, they provide a 
welcome break from the urban environment.
The challenges we face are not insurmountable,  
in fact they afford us the great opportunity create a 
sustainable city for all. Every action we undertake 
must enhance the lives of everyone who comes to 
our city, whether to live, work or visit.
City Plan 2019 – 2040 is a plan for people. 
12 Active Westminster Strategy, 2018 22
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
OUR APPROACH FOR WESTMINSTER
A city where people choose to 
live or work because it’s enriching. 
A city that focuses on the needs  
of our community and beyond. 
A city that will be sustainable  
for generations to come.
City Plan 2019 – 2040 brings 
together our vision for Westminster.A vision for homes  
and communities
Westminster will be a city where people feel they 
belong to connected and thriving communities. 
Affordable housing is at the heart of our vision. 
Through smart design and innovation we will have 
created not just enough new homes to meet our 
housing targets, but more crucially to exceed the 
expectations of the people who live here.
By 2040, at least 35% of all new homes delivered 
will be affordable. But that’s just part of the story. 
We need not only to create affordable housing,  
but the right kind of housing. That means providing 
the size and type of homes that take into account 
our changing demographic and the diverse needs  
of everyone who lives here. 
The golden standard is for people of all ages and all 
abilities to feel safe, and have a sense of belonging 
and enjoyment. Being able to connect with other 
people will forge communities, improve well-being, 
and make social isolation a thing of the past. 
We want people to feel connected to nature even 
though they live in the heart of the city. Initiatives like the regeneration of the Grand Union Canal, 
and development of the north bank of the Thames 
will open up even more of the city to a new 
generation. We want every resident to be within  
a five minute walk of an open space, so they have 
the benefits of a healthier life on their doorstep.
Living in Westminster should afford residents  
the opportunity to live the best life possible.
A vision for a healthier 
and greener city
Improvements in our air quality will improve  
our quality of life. 
Climate change is changing the way we do things. 
Design will prioritise sustainable construction 
materials, with energy-efficiency on an equal footing 
as aesthetic appeal. We will be a world leader  
in sustainable design. Specialist attention will  
be given to retrofitting our historic buildings,  
so they can take their place in the modern world. 
Our city will be characterised not just by our 
stunning built environment, but also our natural 
environment. Soft landscaping which weaves OUR APPROACH FOR WESTMINSTER23CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040OUR APPROACH FOR WESTMINSTER
micro-habitats for wildlife into buildings and 
spaces, whilst helping to mitigate the effects  
of CO 2. By bringing nature into the city we inspire 
active travel, as moving around the city becomes  
a leisure activity in itself.
The move away from petrol and diesel cars towards 
more energy efficient electric cars is going to be 
made easier by changes to our roads and more 
electric vehicle charging points. Reduction in 
traditional forms of traffic will improve our air  
quality and considerably reduce our noise pollution. 
Multiple polluting delivery vehicles won’t be 
clogging up our streets and pumping out fumes, 
because better, more convenient, options to 
consolidate deliveries will exist. 
By 2040 we will have regained our status as  
a ‘river city’, through a complete transformation  
of the public realm at the north side of the Thames. 
A transformation that will bring a whole new 
dimension to the area, without impacting on the 
views of the iconic buildings around.
Over the course of the next 20 years Westminster’s 
air quality will improve dramatically. 
It will feel like a healthier city because it will be  
a healthier city.A vision for the right  
kind of growth
The very best design, using the most innovative 
technology will create the heritage of the future.
City Plan 2019 – 2040 sets out a blueprint for  
how Westminster will enter the next few decades 
in a strong and competitive position. To do this we 
need to be adaptable to change, but at the same 
time conserve the character of a city with one  
of the world’s most iconic skylines.
Growth in the right kind of housing is a huge priority. 
People want to live here; we need to create the 
conditions to make that happen. The most notable 
significant areas of housing growth will be seen in 
the Victoria and Paddington Opportunity Areas as 
new thriving streets with new homes and new jobs 
are created. The north west of the city will see 
economic regeneration and housing developments 
in Church Street / Edgware Road and Ebury Bridge 
estates will bring a renewed vitality. A vitality that 
will resonate throughout the city. 
An exciting, more creative approach to retail will 
offer residents and visitors alike a complete leisure 
experience. The West End will be the place to go  for leisure, because it will offer everything;  
a place where people can shop, socialise and  
be entertained. Our high streets will be vibrant  
hubs of commercial activity, providing the kind  
of experience that online retailing simply can’t 
compete with.
Soho is unique, and this plan will ensure it stays 
that way. As an area in our ‘special clusters’ zone, 
the focus will be on protecting its vibrant and 
cosmopolitan character that has made it such  
a dynamic place to live, work and socialise. 
Westminster is a powerhouse of business. Our 
offices showcase the very best in contemporary 
design and we continue to attract the most dynamic 
workforce. By 2040, our business landscape will 
have grown to create some 63,000 new jobs. We’ll 
be setting the pace for changing working patterns 
with office space and super digital connectivity 
allowing for more flexible working, giving people  
a better work-life balance, and so better lives.
City Plan 2019 – 2040 will cement our reputation 
as a place where people want to live, work and 
contribute to our growth.24
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
7 5 6Increase the stock of high-  
quality housing and provide 
variety in terms of size, type  
and tenure to meet need and 
promote mixed and inclusive 
communities, with a clear  
focus on affordability and  
family homes.1
Improve quality of life,  
climate resilience and tackle 
environmental challenges  
by protecting, enhancing, 
expanding our valuable network 
of parks and open spaces.Enhance connections by 
improving options for cycling, 
walking, leisure, sport and play, 
whilst prioritising pedestrians 
and improving the interchange 
between transport modes and 
incorporating innovative 
solutions to manage the 
highway network.Improve air quality, minimise 
noise and other polluting 
impacts, and reduce carbon 
and water demands by  
minimising detrimental  
impacts from development. OBJECTIVES
OBJECTIVES
These objectives all contribute to our commitment to improve  
the health and well-being of the city’s residents and workers and  
to help ensure Westminster is a place we can be proud to hand to 
our successors. The objectives also contribute to the delivery of 
three key themes in the council’s ambition to make Westminster a 
City for All: homes and communities , a healthier and greener city , 
and opportunities for growth . The success of the Plan will be 
monitored against these objectives.25CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040OBJECTIVES
4
8 103
9Enhance the West End  
as London’s primary retail, 
leisure, and visitor destination, 
and ensure our town centres 
and high streets can adapt  
to the challenges they face. Broaden the city’s cultural 
offer, while managing the 
impacts of clusters of uses, 
and of the evening and night 
time economies on existing 
residential communities. 
Making sure our 
neighbourhoods  
continue to thrive. 2
Make the most of our  
unique heritage and  
historic environment, while 
encouraging innovations  
in building technology and 
improving a sense of place.Enable job growth across a 
range of sectors vital to the  
UK economy, and ensure 
those from disadvantaged 
backgrounds benefit from the 
opportunities this presents.
Promote quality in the design 
of buildings and public spaces, 
ensuring that Westminster  
is attractive and welcoming. 26
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
HOMES AND 
COMMUNITIES
A city with community at its heart.
Westminster is one of London’s most densely  
populated boroughs, with growth set to rise year  
on year. With this challenge comes the opportunity  
to transform the lives of the people who live here.  
This plan is key to that transformation.
By 2040 we will have created enough new homes  
to exceed our target for affordable homes.
But we’re not just looking to build homes,  
we’re looking to build communities.
Communities where every consideration has been  
given to the people who live there. Safe communities  
that bring people together. Healthy communities  
with green open spaces within a five minute walk  
where people can feel a million miles away from  
the everyday pressures of city life.
Communities where people can truly enjoy  
where they live.OBJECTIVES27CONTENTS
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040OBJECTIVES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR GROWTH
Nurturing growth in Westminster
Growth is the lifeblood of any city. But growth is only possible  
when that city is a rewarding place to live, work or visit. Here we  
set out how new developments will help us build on our rich heritage  
to create an environment where people can enjoy more fulfilling  
leisure time. Creating more open spaces, making the most of our 
waterways, and expanding our retail offering.
Ambitious projects to regenerate Victoria, Paddington  
and the north west of the borough will bring a new vitality. 
To sustain successful economic growth, it’s not enough just  
to attract new businesses. We also have to nurture them.A HEALTHIER AND 
GREENER CITY
A healthier and greener Westminster.
The greener Westminster of 2040 is already being built.  
It’s one where everything we plan, everything we design,  
everything we build makes our city a more carbon-neutral,  
healthier place to live. The policies we set out will help  
us to deliver exactly that.
It’s about those little changes that make a big difference;  
maximising soft landscaping, planting more trees, being  
less wasteful. It’s protecting our open spaces so people  
can enjoy healthier, more active leisure time. It’s making  
greener travel the best travel because it’s more efficient,  
more pleasant and costs less. It’s creating buildings that  
are more energy efficient, making them cheaper  
to run and more comfortable to be in.
It’s a city that’s greener. A city that’s  
healthier. A city that’s better.
SPATIAL STRATEGY
SPATIAL STRATEGY
Building better futures
To respond to our growth we need to develop; the challenge  
is to maximise our limited space. The West End Retail and 
Leisure Special Policy Area will bring significant jobs growth 
through a range of commercial development, alongside   
affordable new homes. Transforming the public realm of the 
north bank of the Thames will create an exciting new buzz. 
Opportunity Areas inspire the redevelopment of brownfield 
land to create new possibilities and deliver the homes and  
jobs growth the city needs, but always with an eye on what has 
gone before. Preserving our design, our character, our heritage 
is paramount. Special Policy Areas like Soho, Harley Street and 
Mayfair have enhanced protection, as each brings its own 
unique contribution to our economy. And to us. 
This is a Spatial Strategy that looks beyond building  
a city to building futures.CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
30
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
1. Westminster’s spatial strategy
A. Westminster will continue to grow, thrive  
and inspire at the heart of London as a  
World City by: 
1. Supporting intensification and  
optimising densities in high quality new 
developments that integrate with their 
surroundings and make the  
most efficient use of land, including 
through developments that showcases 
the best of modern architecture. 
2. Delivering at least 20,685 homes, of 
which at least 35% will be affordable.
3. Supporting the growth, modernisation 
and adaptation of a variety of business 
space to provide at least 63,000 new 
office-based jobs alongside other forms 
of commercial growth. 
4. Balancing the competing functions of 
the Central Activities Zone (CAZ) as a 
retail and leisure destination, visitor 
attraction, global office centre, and 
home to residential neighbourhoods.
5. Protecting and enhancing uses of 
international and/or national importance, 
the buildings that accommodate them, 
and the specialist clusters of uses within 
the city’s most distinct places.Areas to at least achieve London Plan 
growth targets of 13,000 new jobs and 
1,000 new homes in Paddington 
Opportunity Area; 4,000 new jobs and 
1,000 new homes in Victoria 
Opportunity Area; and 3,000 new jobs 
and 150 new homes in Tottenham Court 
Road Opportunity Area;
3. renewal of Church Street / Edgware 
Road and Ebury Bridge Estate Housing  
Renewal Areas to collectively provide 
2,750 new homes alongside increased 
local job opportunities; and
4. regeneration of the North West Economic 
Development Area including the 
commercial-led intensification of areas  
of commercial and mixed-use character, 
to increase local job opportunities 
alongside residential growth. 6. Supporting town centres and high 
streets, including centres of international  
importance in the West End and 
Knightsbridge, to evolve as 
multifunctional commercial areas to 
shop, work, and socialise. 
7. Protecting and enhancing the city’s 
unrivalled heritage assets (including their 
settings), and townscape value. 
8. Adapting to and mitigating the effects  
of climate change, and securing 
enhancements to the natural 
environment and public realm, including 
supporting the delivery of a new North  
Bank river front destination.
9. Prioritising sustainable travel.
10. Ensuring sufficient supporting infrastructure 
is delivered to facilitate growth.
B. Growth will primarily be delivered through the:
1.  intensification of the CAZ, the West End,  
and our town centre hierarchy with 
commercial-led and mixed-use 
development to provide significant 
growth in office, retail, and leisure 
floorspace, alongside new homes;
2. continued major mixed-use 
redevelopment in identified Opportunity 31
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
B
CC1
C2
C3C
R
R1
R2
R3
R4
CRA1
1
1
2
22
3
4
5A
BC
C1C2C3R1
R3
R4PROPOSED CROSSRAIL 2ELIZABETH LINE
West End
PartnershipWestminster Boundary
Central Activities Zone
Opportunity Areas
- Paddington
- Victoria
- Tottenham Court Road 
(Westminster portion)
North West Economic 
Development Area
Housing Renewal Areas
- Church Street / 
Edgware Road
- Ebury Bridge Estate
West End Retail 
and Leisure
Special Policy Area
Royal Parks
- Regent's Park
- Hyde Park
- Kensington Gardens
- Green Park
- St. James's ParkWaterways
International Centre
Major Centre
District Centre
Strategic Cultural Areas:
- Millbank
- Knightsbridge 
- West End
World Heritage Site
Major Rail Stations 
(4 Terminal)
- Marylebone
- Paddington
- Charing Cross
- Victoria
Elizabeth Line Stations
- Paddington
- Bond Street
- Tottenham 
Court RoadKey
Brent
Camden
City of London
Lambeth
WandsworthKensington 
& ChelseaNeighboursArea (Hectares)
2,147
CR1
CR2
CR3
54321R2
CR1
CR2CR3
London Central
Activity Zone
Figure 7: Key Diagram32
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
1.1 / Westminster’s growth will be managed to 
maximise benefits for residents, businesses, 
workers and visitors in accordance with the 
principles of good growth established through the 
London Plan. It should make the most efficient use of 
land while protecting and respecting Westminster’s 
natural and built environment, including the Royal 
Parks, the Westminster World Heritage Site, our 
conservation areas, listed buildings, and the urban 
heritage of the city more broadly.
1.2 / Our Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) sets out 
the key infrastructure needed to support growth. It 
identifies key infrastructure projects, their location, 
timescale for delivery and funding sources.
Intensification and optimisation
1.3 / Westminster is already very densely developed 
with highly valued open space and heritage worthy 
of conservation. To deliver additional growth in the 
city, it will be necessary to intensify existing 
urbanised areas. This includes optimising 
opportunities for infill development and extensions 
to existing buildings, up as well as out. This plan 
encourages high quality, creative and contemporary 
design solutions to deliver additional growth.
1.4 / Developers will be encouraged to work together 
to bring forward coordinated proposals, including 
combining adjacent sites into larger development 
opportunities. This approach is likely to offer greater 
potential to increase the scale and mass of buildings 
through exemplary design. It will encourage the most 
efficient use of scarce land, helping to create places that are better integrated with the surrounding built 
environment and that work effectively for existing 
communities and future occupants. 
Housing
1.5 / Like the rest of London, demand for new 
housing across all tenures in Westminster is  
very high. The affordable housing target will ensure 
that in addition to meeting the demands from the 
private housing market, delivery also meets 
identified need in the affordable sector, and 
conforms with the Mayor’s strategic target of 50% 
affordable housing across all of London. 
1.6 / The policies in this plan encourage much  
more housing development of the right types,  
sizes and tenures, to meet the city’s needs. It 
includes support for new types of housing rarely 
seen in Westminster, embraces innovative designs, 
and is based on an expectation of higher densities 
across the city. The Plan also enables the delivery 
of large housing renewal projects such as at Church 
Street / Edgware Road and the Ebury Bridge Estate. 
Employment
1.7 / Employment activity in Westminster is highly 
diverse, and of vital importance to the wider UK 
economy. To secure the right conditions for 
continued economic growth, the past trend of 
losing business space must be halted, and the 
growth of a range of spaces that meets the needs 
of modern businesses supported.The Central Activities Zone (CAZ)
1.8 / The CAZ is designated through the London 
Plan, and includes more land in Westminster than 
any other London borough. It provides a rich mix of 
commercial uses that contribute to central London’s 
wide appeal but is also home to a substantial 
residential population. As the heart of a world city, 
Westminster’s portion of the CAZ includes the 
functions of monarchy and government, a variety  
of cultural, educational, professional and religious 
institutions, world-class retail, headquarters of 
national and international businesses, embassies, 
leisure and entertainment.
1.9 / The future growth and intensification of the 
CAZ in a manner that balances its many competing 
functions is supported. This includes the protection 
and intensification of office clusters, and a growth 
and diversification in retail and leisure activity that 
respects residential amenity. Additional residential 
development that does not compromise nearby 
businesses’ continued commercial functions can 
also positively contribute to the vibrancy and 
diversity of the area.33
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Uses of international and/or  
national importance
1.10 / Central to London’s world-class capital city 
status, Westminster is home to a variety of uses  
and buildings that are of international and national 
importance, and positively contribute to its unique 
appeal. This includes buildings and uses that host 
the functions of government and the state, centres 
of excellence for higher education, research and 
medicine, world-famous arts and cultural institutions 
and other prestigious institutions, an international 
sporting venue (Lord’s Cricket Ground), and major 
tourist attractions. Many of the buildings that host 
these uses contribute to Westminster’s heritage, 
and are vitally important to London and the UK’s 
tourist industry.
1.11 / A Restoration and Renewal Programme is 
underway to protect and enhance the outstanding 
universal value of the Palace of Westminster. Over 
the lifetime of the Plan, to safeguard the country’s 
democracy, development proposals to facilitate the 
temporary full decant of the House of Lords and 
House of Commons will be necessary, and is 
supported in principle. The programme will enable 
continuous parliamentary activities whilst 
refurbishment is undertaken, and secure the historic 
legacy of one of the world’s most iconic buildings for 
future generations. It will ensure that the Palace of 
Westminster is a resilient, sustainable and functional 
building that is more open and accessible, develops 
heritage skills, and strengthens the World Heritage 
Site’s appeal as a visitor destination.Specialist clusters of uses
1.12 / Within some parts of Westminster, clusters of 
specialist uses exist that have a distinct character, 
make a major contribution to London’s global 
appeal, and merit policy protection. These include: 
 –Soho Special Policy Area: small scale mixed use 
including specialist retail, creative industries, 
cultural and entertainment uses. 
 –Harley Street Special Policy Area: medical uses. 
 –Mayfair and St James’s Special Policy Area:  
art galleries and luxury / niche retail.
 –Savile Row Special Policy Area: bespoke tailoring.
1.13 / The West End, Millbank and Knightsbridge 
Strategic Cultural Areas also provide important 
clusters of uses. Within these areas cultural uses 
are afforded protection to retain the character and 
function of the area.
Town centres and high streets
1.14 / The evolution of town centres and high streets 
will be supported to ensure they can respond to the 
challenges posed by online retailing and to make 
certain that they remain vibrant hubs of commercial 
activity which meet the needs of local 
neighbourhoods, workers and visitors.Heritage and townscape
1.15 / Westminster’s heritage and townscape value 
reflects its rich history and importance as a leading 
world city. It includes the Palace of Westminster and 
Westminster Abbey World Heritage Site, over 11,000 
listed buildings and structures, and conservation 
areas covering approximately 78% of the city. These 
assets positively contribute to the city’s wide appeal 
to visitors, businesses, and residents. New 
development will therefore need to respond 
positively to this context through high quality design 
and architecture as the city continues to evolve. 
Heritage assets should be seen as an asset that 
positively shapes new developments and contributes 
to a sense of place, rather than a constraint.34
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Natural environment, public realm,  
and North Bank riverfront
1.16 / The quality of the public realm and green 
infrastructure network are vitally important to the 
continued growth and success of Westminster, as 
acknowledged through a number of council 
strategies1. It includes the city’s streets, the Royal 
Parks, canals and waterways, and London 
Squares. Together these provide opportunities for 
rest and relaxation, the setting to the city’s iconic 
architecture, enable the safe movement of people, 
and help address climate change. High quality 
streets, parks and spaces can and should 
encourage, facilitate and enable physical activity 
by default and well-designed spaces should be 
flexible and support a range of physical activity, 
leisure and sport. Enhancing these areas over the 
lifetime of the Plan will help achieve a more 
pleasant walkable environment and better air 
quality - to the benefit of residents, workers and 
visitors. A shift towards more sustainable travel 
patterns that makes the most of central London’s 
extensive public transport network will also be 
necessary to make efficient use of scarce land  
and accommodate the levels of commercial and 
residential growth the city needs.
1 Including the ActiveWestminster Strategy 2018-2022, A 
Partnership Approach to Open Spaces and Biodiversity in 
Westminster (2019), the Westminster Walking Strategy 
2017-2027, and the Westminster Cycling Strategy (2014)1.17 / The River Thames is a strategic waterway at the 
heart of London’s origin. It reflects the city’s history 
and its worldwide position. The river is also one of the 
city’s largest spaces and has itself become a tourist 
attraction. The North Bank is home to some of 
Westminster’s more distinctive buildings and 
institutions and is also an incomparable platform from 
where other London landmarks can be observed. It 
therefore provides a significant opportunity to create 
a new destination that reconnects the buzz of the city 
with its water boundary, where people meet, relax 
and play while activating public life and contributing 
to the city’s success. Improvements to the public 
realm, alongside uses that promote the cultural and 
commercial character of the area and help activate 
the riverfront are therefore supported in principle  
– to help realise this ambition.
Infrastructure
1.18 / New development will be supported by 
investment in supporting infrastructure. This will 
include physical infrastructure such as the 
transport network, and social and community uses 
that help support good growth. We will combine 
developer contributions, secured through  
the Community Infrastructure Levy and Section 
106 planning obligations, with council resources 
and other public funding streams such as grants,  
in order to maximise delivery of the objectives  
set out in this plan.2. Spatial Development 
Priorities: West End Retail and 
Leisure Special Policy Area and 
Tottenham Court Road 
Opportunity Area
The intensification of the West End Retail  
and Leisure Special Policy Area (WERLSPA) 
over the Plan period will deliver the  
following priorities:
A. Significant jobs growth through a range 
commercial-led development including 
retail, leisure, offices and hotel use. 
Additional commercial floorspace will be 
provided in a manner that respects its 
setting, through: 
1. Increased scale and massing in 
Tottenham Court Road Opportunity 
Area, to at least achieve London Plan 
targets of 3,000 new jobs and 150 new 
homes, and;  
2. The sensitive refurbishment and 
extension, or replacement of existing 
buildings across the WERLSPA.
B. An improved retail and leisure experience 
that responds to innovation and change in 
the sector, including the transformation of 
the Oxford Street District. 35
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
C. A diverse evening and night-time economy 
and enhanced cultural offer.
D. A more co-ordinated approach to 
managing the area’s freight, servicing,  
and delivery demands.
E. An enhanced pedestrian environment, 
public realm (including along the North 
Bank), and network of public transport 
infrastructure.
F. Protection of the unique character of 
central London’s distinct and iconic places 
and heritage assets.
2.1 / The West End is a showcase for London on 
the international stage, attracting visitors from 
around the world. It provides one of the largest 
and most diverse concentrations of jobs anywhere 
in the UK. The nature of commercial activity that 
takes place in the West End is vital to the UK 
economy – generating more gross value added 
(GVA) than the City of London.2
2.2 / The area contains some of London’s most 
iconic shopping and leisure districts, alongside its 
role as a global office centre. It is home to Oxford 
Street, Regent Street, Bond Street, (which alongside 
Knightsbridge, as International Shopping Centres, 
sit at the top of London’s town centre hierarchy), 
2 West End Good Growth, Arup, 2018Tottenham Court Road Opportunity Area
2.5 / The area around Tottenham Court Road 
station, which includes land both in Westminster and 
Camden, has been identified as an Opportunity 
Area in the London Plan. This is in recognition of the 
significant capacity for high quality new 
development that delivers new jobs and homes and 
an enhanced public realm, alongside transport 
improvements associated with the Elizabeth Line. 
The London Plan sets out indicative growth targets 
of 6,000 additional jobs and 300 new homes over 
the period 2016-2041 for the entire Tottenham Court 
Road Opportunity Area – including land in both 
Westminster and Camden. As one of London’s more 
mature Opportunity Areas, and given the progress 
already made on upgrading the station environs, a 
substantial contribution towards these growth 
targets has already been made. At least 50% of the 
overall London Plan target will be achieved within 
Westminster (including what has been permitted or 
built since 2016). Over the Plan period, we will 
continue to facilitate the further intensification of this 
area in accordance with the principles of good 
growth - including through the development of 
Crossrail 2 safeguarded sites either alongside or 
after necessary infrastructure works. Delivery of our 
contribution towards the indicative targets set out in 
the London Plan will be documented through future 
Authority Monitoring Reports.and other world-renowned retail and leisure 
destinations including Covent Garden, Soho, and 
Theatreland. It also contains some of London’s most 
recognised tourist attractions and public spaces 
such as Piccadilly Circus, Leicester Square, 
Trafalgar Square, and parts of the River Thames. 
The quality of the built environment, with a high 
concentration of listed buildings and heritage 
assets, positively contribute to a unique setting.
2.3 / The current mix of attractions and workplaces 
already result in intense activity across the area. 
This is set to increase as the introduction of the 
Elizabeth Line brings a projected further 1.5 million 
people within 45 minutes reach of central London.3 
While new development is welcomed, it must be 
managed in a way that respects and enhances the 
character of some of London’s most distinct and 
recognisable places and heritage assets. This 
includes protecting the character and function of 
areas with clusters of specific uses that have been 
identified as Special Policy Areas (SPAs), and the 
wider quality of the built environment. 
2.4 / Historically the area was designated as the 
West End Retail Special Policy Area, which 
covered a smaller area of the West End 
International Centre, Soho, and Covent Garden. 
This has now been expanded to better reflect the 
mixed-use nature of the wider area, and 
interdependence of uses that is much more 
diverse and varied than simply retail. 
3 crossrail.co.uk/news/crossrail-in-numbers  CONTENTS
36
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 8: WERLSPA and Tottenham Court Road Opportunity Area37
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Commercial-led development
2.6 / Identified growth within the WERLSPA will be 
commercially led and will require the delivery of 
additional floorspace alongside the intensification 
of existing space. Growth will be achieved through 
new developments with increased scale and 
massing that respect local context, including within 
Tottenham Court Road Opportunity Area, along 
Oxford Street, and the area’s key thoroughfares. 
Replacement buildings will be focused in areas of 
lower townscape value, whilst in areas of higher 
townscape value, sensitive refurbishment and 
extension of existing buildings can also support 
growth. The majority of commercial growth is 
anticipated to come through windfall development, 
as has historically been the case in Westminster.
Good growth
2.7 / The WERLSPA is anticipated to absorb  
much of Westminster’s future commercial growth 
– reflecting its unique status, size, and wide 
appeal. Scenario testing for the West End4 has 
projected potential for an uplift of 124,000 jobs 
across the entire West End (including parts of 
London Borough of Camden) to the period 2041, 
through a range of commercial development 
including retail, food and drink uses, hotels, arts, 
culture and entertainment and offices. Investment 
in all of these sectors will be necessary to  
achieve good growth that:
4 West End Good Growth, Arup, 2018 –Enhances the West End’s position as a globally 
competitive retail destination;
 –Secures a diverse range of office space that 
supports increased employment opportunities 
in growth sectors and takes full advantage of 
the opportunities the Elizabeth Line (and 
Crossrail 2) bring;
 –Protects and supports the arts, culture and 
entertainment offer for residents, workers,  
and visitors;
 –Supports the visitor economy, including through 
the upgrading of hotel stock; 
 –Diversifies the food and beverage offer to 
complement the retail environment; and
 –Minimises negative impacts on residential 
neighbourhoods.
Oxford Street
2.8 / Growth in retail and leisure floorspace will 
ensure the West End responds to change in the 
sector and its status and reputation is enhanced.  
This will include the transformation of Oxford Street to 
ensure a more diverse and interesting mix of uses and 
better quality public realm that prioritises pedestrians, 
enhances the shopper experience, and makes it a 
more attractive place to visit and enjoy. Along with an 
improved public realm, the built form of Oxford Street 
offers scope for increased height to deliver a range  
of commercial floorspace that complements the 
retail offer and provides modern workspace - 
reinforcing its role as a key commercial centre.Evening and night-time  
economy and cultural offer
2.9 / The West End is home to the largest  
evening and night-time economy in the UK.  
It has a wealth of cultural uses, pubs, bars, 
restaurants, nightclubs, cinemas, theatres and 
other leisure uses. To ensure the area is 
welcoming and attractive to all communities,  
the appropriate management and further 
diversification of the evening and night-time 
economy will be supported. This will be done 
through enhancements to its cultural offer,  
hosting of events and art installations such  
as Lumiere London, and late-night shopping.
2.10 / This activity will help ensure the evening 
and night-time economy is not dominated by the 
consumption of alcohol, which can lead to issues 
of anti-social behaviour and deter those who do 
not drink from visiting central London outside of 
the daytime. Enhancing the cultural offer will 
include support for new venues, ancillary uses  
that enable existing ones to thrive (e.g. cafés 
within museums or theatres), and investment in  
the public realm around existing clusters such  
as that proposed at the Strand / Aldwych.38
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Freight and servicing
2.11 / The nature and intensity of activity in the West 
End generates significant freight and servicing 
requirements. This causes congestion and pollution, 
and makes the area less attractive to walk and cycle. 
We will work with landowners and businesses to 
support the better coordination of freight and servicing 
in order to minimise unnecessary vehicular trips. This 
will be done alongside interventions that secure a 
more pleasant environment that incentivises walking, 
cycling and use of public transport. This will include 
investment in the public realm to help green the area 
as part of the Wild West End programme,5 improved 
wayfinding, and investment in public transport 
interchanges by TfL and Network Rail. As set out in the 
spatial strategy, investment in the public realm along 
the North Bank is also a key priority for the area.
Partnership working
2.12 / The rich mix of historic buildings, uses  
and level of activity in the West End results in a 
complex number of issues and challenges which 
cannot be met through land-use planning alone. 
We will therefore continue to work within the  
West End Partnership6 and with other stakeholders 
to achieve the shared objectives of enhancing  
and maintaining its global reputation, improving  
the retail and leisure offer and pedestrian 
environment, and make visiting the area a  
more pleasurable experience.
5 wildwestend.london
6 westendpartnership.london3. Spatial Development 
Priorities: Paddington 
Opportunity Area
Development in the Paddington Opportunity 
Area will deliver the following priorities:
A. The achievement of the growth targets for 
the area of at least 1,000 new homes and 
13,000 additional jobs identified in the 
London Plan.
B. New workspace through an expanded 
range of offices, light industrial units and 
workshops with particular support for 
flexible workspaces.
C. Inclusive and high-quality public realm  
that enhances sense of place and  
encourages dwelling.
D. Enhanced sustainable travel modes  
through improvements to transport 
interchanges and the pedestrian and  
cyclist environment, including public  
access to the canal waterfront.
E. Reduced severance from surrounding areas 
including Church Street, Edgware Road 
station, the North West Economic 
Development Area (NWEDA) and Praed 
Street town centre.F. Upgraded healthcare facilities.
G. Enhanced job opportunities and community 
facilities for the residents of Paddington and 
the neighbouring areas of Church Street and 
the NWEDA.
3.1 / While a significant amount of growth has 
already happened in Paddington, the area remains 
one of the city’s most significant opportunities for 
large-scale regeneration thanks to the presence  
of under-utilised brownfield sites and the expansion 
of the Paddington Station transport node with the 
arrival of the Elizabeth line. We want to ensure the 
area continues to develop as a successful place and 
destination that is welcoming and accessible to all 
and can help bring together existing and emerging 
communities. We will continue our commitment to 
working in partnership with local stakeholders to 
develop a Place Plan for Paddington to deliver our 
shared ambitions for the area.
Paddington Station
3.2 / Paddington Station is Westminster’s major 
transport node. A Grade I listed building contributing 
to London’s distinctiveness, the station is one of the 
key arrival points into central London. It has a 
number of railway services that link London to the 
west of the country and four London underground 
lines, with the new Elizabeth line also coming to 
serve the station in the near future. The station 
provides connection to the expanding Heathrow 39
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Airport and to growth areas to the west of the city 
including the Old Oak and Park Royal Opportunity 
Area. With increased numbers of passengers 
arising from residential and commercial growth and 
expanded transport network capacity, it is 
important that Paddington Station continues to be 
sensitively adapted to accommodate the higher 
volumes of traffic and ensure a seamless integration 
between different transport nodes.
3.3 / Significant changes in pedestrian flows and 
routes are expected in connection to different 
phases of station improvement works and major 
redevelopment projects in the area around the 
station (including Crossrail and Paddington 
Square) will require different solutions to enable 
the operations of the transport hub and the 
success of its neighbourhood. This is key to 
ensure the area is accessible and can be easily 
navigated, which in turn will enable growth and 
help encourage sustainable modes of travel, 
including active mobility.
Homes and jobs growth
3.4 / The London Plan has identified capacity for 
further high-density development in this area and 
sets out indicative growth targets of at least 13,000 
additional jobs and 1,000 new homes over the 
period 2016-2041 for the Paddington Opportunity 
Area. Over the Plan period, we will continue to 
facilitate the further intensification of this area.3.5 / The excellent public transport connections  
in the area provide opportunities for building at 
higher density while maintaining a focus on liveable 
public spaces and high-quality housing. The arrival 
of the Elizabeth line to the area will help increase 
Paddington’s connection to other parts of London 
and the wider region and enable further growth  
in the area. In addition to its excellent links, 
Paddington’s location within the CAZ has enabled 
this area to achieve significant office gains in the 
last two decades. It is now – together with Victoria 
– home to most of Westminster’s larger office 
spaces, but there is scope for further office 
provision and for widening the range of 
workspaces. This will encourage new types of 
business and align with evolving trends in office 
styles and flexible work patterns, create more  
job opportunities and act as a catalyst for further 
commercial growth beyond the Opportunity Area 
boundary through to Edgware Road.
3.6 / We welcome proposals for all types of 
workspace across the Opportunity Area from large 
floorplates to flexible space. There are particular 
opportunities to accommodate workshops and light 
industrial units, on canal-side locations and under 
the Westway such as is seen at Great Western 
Studios in the nearby NWEDA. Meanwhile uses  
are also supported in these locations to encourage 
and support proposals from small businesses and 
start-ups and to prevent long-term vacancy.3.7 / Paddington is not just an office location.  
To ensure development contributes to making  
an inclusive, sustainable neighbourhood and to 
strengthening the area’s offer as a destination,  
a mix of other commercial and community uses  
will also be supported.
Development sites
3.8 / A number of identified development sites 
within the area have the potential to contribute 
significantly to the delivery of the policy priorities. 
St. Mary’s Hospital is one of the largest hospitals in 
Central London. The site presents an opportunity to 
re-provide improved health facilities, alongside 
meeting the other priorities in the Paddington 
Opportunity Area and wider City Plan objectives.
3.9 / The Travis Perkins site to the north of the 
Paddington Basin is occupied by an industrial use 
which supports the strategic function of the CAZ. 
The site presents a significant opportunity for 
change to deliver the priorities of the area. We will 
support proposals of high-quality design that can 
enhance the public realm and create permeability, 
including public access to the canal.  CONTENTS
40
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 9: Paddington Opportunity Area41
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Connections and public realm
3.10 / The Grand Union Canal and the Paddington 
Basin are already strong assets to the area 
providing a sense of place. There are opportunities 
to further improve these waterside places in ways 
that encourage walking and cycling for pleasure 
and as an alternative last-mile connection to the 
Paddington public transport hub. An improved canal 
side environment will also strengthen links with 
other areas to the north west of Paddington along 
the course of the canal. An improved public realm 
will help ease congestion linked with the volume of 
pedestrians using the station and provide 
accessible, welcoming spaces for people to rest 
and enjoy the area.
3.11 / Across the Opportunity Area developments 
should contribute to improving permeability and 
legibility to create intuitive routes, public space 
and townscape improvements that support 
pedestrian and cycle movement throughout the 
area. Developments should aim to minimise 
severance and strengthen links with the 
neighbouring areas of Church Street, Edgware 
Road, the NWEDA and Praed Street.4. Spatial Development Priorities: 
Victoria Opportunity Area
Development in the Victoria Opportunity  
Area will deliver the following priorities:
A. The achievement of the growth targets for the 
area of at least 1,000 new homes and 4,000 
additional jobs identified in the London Plan.
B. Additional and enhanced social and 
community facilities.
C. Improved integration between public 
transport modes.
D. Inclusive and high-quality public realm  
that enhances sense of place and 
encourages dwelling.
E. Enhanced sustainable travel modes 
through improvements to the public realm 
and local environmental quality to 
strengthen the area’s capacity, legibility 
and permeability, particularly for 
pedestrians and cyclists.
F. Support for the relocation of Victoria  
Coach Station.
G. The safeguarding of sites for Crossrail 2.H. Enhanced routes and connections between 
visitor attractions.
I. The safeguarding and enhancement of 
heritage assets, particularly Westminster’s 
World Heritage Site.
4.1 / Victoria faces unique pressures and challenges 
given its unique position as a busy transport hub, 
hotspot for businesses and government functions, 
place of tourism and leisure, and home to a growing 
residential population. We want to encourage 
growth in this Opportunity Area alongside 
improvements to public transport, accessibility and 
the public realm to enable the area to thrive and 
grow its reputation as an attractive destination. We 
will continue our commitment to working with local 
stakeholders to develop a Place Plan for Victoria to 
deliver our shared ambitions for the area.
Home and jobs growth
4.2 / The well-connected nature of the area means 
that it has the potential to accommodate higher 
residential and office density, particularly where it 
contributes to achieving the other objectives of the 
Opportunity Area. Parts of the Victoria Opportunity 
Area fall between conservation areas, providing 
greater scope for change.CONTENTS
42
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 10: Victoria Opportunity Area
43
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
4.3 / The London Plan sets out indicative growth 
targets of 4,000 additional jobs between 2016  
and 2041 and 1,000 new homes over the period 
2019-2041 for the Victoria Opportunity Area and 
identifies Victoria Station and its environs, 
including the airspace above its tracks and 
approaches, to have significant potential for 
mixed-use intensification. Over the Plan period,  
we will continue to facilitate the further 
intensification of the Opportunity Area according 
to the principles of sustainable development.
4.4 / Victoria Street is dominated by commercial 
activity at ground floor, with office entrances, 
shops, restaurants and theatres adding to the 
vitality of this area. A mix of uses on development 
sites in this area including active frontages at 
ground floor level is encouraged unless this would 
compromise movement in and around the Victoria 
Transport Interchange, or access and operational 
requirements for existing activities.
Social and community uses and open spaces
4.5 / With local population numbers expected to 
rise through densification of the housing stock,  
it is essential that housing delivery is supported  
by adequate provision of social and community 
facilities including libraries, facilities for children and 
young people, and sports and leisure facilities. This 
will be achieved through new facilities as well as 
improvements to and re-provision of existing stock.Townscape and heritage assets
4.6 / The area contains a significant number of 
larger and taller buildings which are primarily 
located along the key routes of Buckingham 
Palace Road, Vauxhall Bridge Road and Victoria 
Street. Victoria is also home to a significant 
number of heritage assets, including the Grade II 
Listed station, Grade I listed Westminster 
Cathedral and is in close proximity to the Royal 
Parks, the Thames and the Westminster World 
Heritage Site. Development in the Opportunity 
Area will need to be sensitive to these assets  
and their settings, and contribute to their 
enhancement where possible.
The Victoria Transport Interchange
4.7 / Victoria is one of the best-connected areas  
in the country both in terms of public transport and 
the road network. Movement is therefore one of 
the area’s main activities and a defining feature of 
the south western extent of the Opportunity Area. 
The Victoria Transport Interchange comprises 
underground and a mainline railway station 
providing direct links with Gatwick Airport and 
connecting central London with the wider south 
east, and a busy bus terminus and coach station. 
4.8 / Victoria is undeniably a congested area. 
Currently there is insufficient capacity to 
accommodate pedestrians using the interchange 
which can result in conflicts between pedestrians 
and vehicular traffic. Existing developments 
sometimes contribute to this issue, presenting physical obstacles to movement. The dominance 
of roads over pedestrian desire lines force people 
to undertake confusing and counter-intuitive 
journeys. The area also lacks a coherent sense  
of place and of urban quality. Visual clutter and  
the absence of key landmarks add to this.
4.9 / The Department for Transport has made a 
safeguarding direction for Crossrail 2 and we will 
support the project in safeguarding sites. Should 
this project be realised it will result in an even 
busier transport interchange and provide a further 
catalyst for change. Crossrail 2 presents an 
opportunity to re-imagine the station and the 
surrounding area to deliver a modern transport 
interchange that can support increased future 
operation, improve access to transport, movement 
in the area and enhance the public realm. As part 
of this and because the coach station operations 
have grown beyond the capacity of the building 
and its location, we support the potential future 
relocation of the coach station, which is among the 
safeguarded sites for Crossrail 2. This may be to 
outside of Westminster.44
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
4.12 / The railway tracks and the busy Buckingham 
Palace Road are barriers, hindering pedestrian 
movement east to west and vice-versa, particularly 
for the residential areas of Pimlico and Belgravia. 
Improved connectivity throughout the area could 
be achieved by strengthening the area’s links with 
neighbouring sites and visitor attractions, including 
Parliament Square and the World Heritage Site 
and other significant heritage assets such as the 
Royal Parks and the Thames.
4.13 / Traffic domination and poor air quality  
are key challenges that need to be addressed in 
order to improve the quality of public space and 
enable active travel and easier movement 
throughout the area. We welcome interventions 
that can help improve the pedestrian and cyclist 
environment and priority on Victoria Street and 
Parliament Square, as well as enhanced 
connections between the two areas.
4.14 / Provision of green infrastructure as  
well as permanent and temporary landscaping 
interventions (e.g. on cleared sites awaiting 
redevelopment) can help soften the streetscape 
and contribute to improved air and environmental 
quality and enhanced sense of place. Christchurch 
Gardens represents one such opportunity to 
improve existing green space, and provide a 
quieter space away from the buzz of the main 
street where workers, residents and visitors can 
rest and interact. Improvements to the character, 
appearance and safety of Westminster Cathedral 
Piazza will also be encouraged.5. Spatial Development  
Priorities: North West Economic 
Development Area
Regeneration of the North West Economic 
Development Area (NWEDA) over the Plan 
period will deliver the following priorities:
A. Increased job opportunities, particularly for 
local residents. This will include the 
protection of existing employment 
floorspace, and the provision of additional 
employment and commercial floorspace, in 
particular that which is suitable for small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) and / or helps 
diversify the local economy.
B. New residential and mixed-use developments 
that improve housing quality and help 
diversify the area’s tenure mix.
C. A greener and more walkable environment 
that addresses issues of severance caused 
by the railway, canal, Harrow Road and the 
Westway, and creates opportunities for the 
extension of, and greater use of, the Grand 
Union Canal towpath.
D. Enhancements to Harrow Road District 
Centre to provide a greater range of activity 
and a more attractive physical environment.Development sites
4.10 / Victoria Station represents a key opportunity 
to deliver our priorities for the area, including an 
improved transport provision, modal integration, 
public realm and local environmental quality, and 
act as a catalyst for further development. The 
presence of other identified development sites 
within the station’s environs, provides scope to 
ensure a coordinated approach to development is 
taken to integrate sites together and deliver 
successful places designed around people. This 
will support the creation of a network of high 
quality and welcoming places, which will 
contribute to a stronger identity for the area.
Improving public space and connections
4.11 / Developing the potential of Victoria and 
particularly its role as an integrated transport hub is 
largely dependent on managing the high levels of 
pedestrian and vehicular traffic to ease movement 
in and around the area. This will be achieved by 
sensibly improving the public realm to make it  
easy to navigate through enhanced wayfinding.
Improved and new public spaces should be 
inclusive, pleasant, and safe to encourage 
residents, visitors and commuters to enjoy and relax 
in the area. Active frontages can also contribute to 
interest and visual entertainment which can  
support a sense of place and aid legibility.45
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
E. The provision of new and improved social 
and community infrastructure that meets 
the needs of the local community.
5.1 / The NWEDA has long contained some of 
Westminster’s most deprived areas, with lower 
levels of qualifications, earnings and health, and 
higher levels of worklessness, than elsewhere in 
the city. It is an area requiring coordinated 
intervention to tackle persistent levels of inequality. 
Efforts through this plan will include providing for 
improved opportunities within the area itself, but 
also ensuring residents benefit from the 
opportunities offered by development in more 
central parts of Westminster. The boundary of the 
area has been amended from the previous adopted 
City Plan to exclude Paddington Opportunity Area 
– to reflect the different nature of development 
expected in both areas.
Commercial growth
5.2 / Much of the NWEDA is primarily residential, 
with a high proportion of social rented affordable 
housing. It also contains some commercial areas. 
The Woodfield Road area is home to a variety of 
businesses and offers opportunities for 
intensification that can deliver new job 
opportunities alongside additional high-quality 
homes. Building on the success of Great Western 
Studios nearby, there is scope to grow the local 
offer for creative, start-up, and grow-on business 
space including workshops, studios and canal boat offices – distinct from the employment offer 
elsewhere. Land under the A40 Westway also 
offers potential for additional enterprise space. 
Multi-purpose spaces that provide opportunities 
for community use, such as at Paddington Arts,  
will be welcomed, as will meanwhile use of space 
in advance of redevelopment proposals. New 
commercial development in Harrow Road District 
Centre for town centre uses can help sustain its 
long-term vitality and viability and provide 
employment opportunities.
Open space and connectivity
5.3 / The area is deficient in publicly accessible 
open space. Severance from the Grand Union 
Canal, A40 Westway, and railway lines, all currently 
limit access to existing open spaces within the area 
and beyond. New development should therefore 
seek to green the area, by providing new publicly 
accessible open spaces wherever possible, such as 
that being provided at Walterdon and Elgin 
Community Homes Gardens. 
5.4 / Development in the area represents an 
opportunity to increase activity along the Grand 
Union Canal. The canal is a significant 
underutilised asset that offers opportunities  
to provide an attractive walking and cycling 
environment – both to job opportunities in nearby 
Paddington, the Kensal area and Old Oak 
Common, and to high quality open space at 
Regent’s Park. Bids are being made to TfL’s 
Liveable Neighbourhoods Programme to fund interventions that help encourage walking, cycling 
and use of public transport. We will work with TfL 
and the Canal & River Trust to facilitate the 
Paddington to West Drayton Quietway.
5.5 / Redevelopment in the Woodfield Road  
area represents an opportunity to improve the 
pedestrian environment in this part of the NWEDA 
and to address the issues of severance identified 
above. Developments in the NWEDA will deliver a 
mix of uses including housing, will help to improve 
pedestrian permeability and provide better 
connections both within and beyond the NWEDA. 
These opportunities will be further explored in the 
Harrow Road Place Plan.
Retail
5.6 / Harrow Road District Centre provides the main 
cluster of shops and other town centre uses within 
the area. It is important that this continues to provide 
for local residents’ shopping and servicing needs 
alongside Maida Hill Market, but also that it adapts 
to the challenges traditional high streets face.  CONTENTS
46
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 11: North West Economic Development Area47
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
5.7 / The findings of the Westminster Town Centre 
Health Check 2018 identified poor quality public 
realm, lack of active shop fronts, and the presence 
of some low-quality retail and uses such as hot food 
takeaways and betting shops. Greater diversity 
within the centre, including the growth of the 
evening and night-time economy, hotels, and spaces 
for small businesses with active frontages (including 
meanwhile uses) will therefore be supported, 
alongside investment in the public realm to improve 
its physical appearance. To secure its long-term 
sustainability, it is envisaged that the retail core of 
the centre will remain close to Maida Hill Market, 
with a more diverse mix of uses supported on the 
periphery of the centre. Recent investments to 
improve Maida Hill junction will help enhance the 
centre by securing a safer, more welcoming 
environment for pedestrians and cyclists. 
Opportunities to reduce severance to the District 
Centre so it more conveniently serves a wider 
catchment area will also be sought. This could 
include additional or more inviting canal crossings 
and road underpasses. Proposals for the centre will 
be set out in a forthcoming Harrow Road Place Plan. 
Social and community infrastructure
5.8 / New social and community infrastructure in 
the area will be important to support sustainable 
growth, meet the needs of local communities,  
and provide opportunities for them to mix. 
Development will therefore be supported by 
investment in the improved education, health  
 and leisure facilities necessary to support growth.6. Spatial Development Priorities: 
Church Street / Edgware Road 
and Ebury Bridge Estate Housing 
Renewal Areas
CHURCH STREET / EDGWARE ROAD 
HOUSING RENEWAL AREA
Redevelopment of the Church Street / Edgware 
Road Housing Renewal Area over the Plan 
period will deliver the following priorities: 
A. At least 2,000 high quality new  
homes, in accordance with the Church 
Street Masterplan.
B. At least 350 new jobs and linking further 
employment opportunities in the CAZ to  
the local community.
C. Community facilities, including a new  
health and well-being hub.
D. New green infrastructure and public realm 
improvements, including a north-south 
green route or ‘green spine’.
E. Improved mobility through infrastructure 
improvements to support active travel.
F. Innovative and high-quality design to 
ensure the most efficient use of land, 
including tall buildings.G. Enhancements to Church Street / Edgware 
Road District Centre, including improved 
facilities for Church Street Market.
EBURY BRIDGE ESTATE HOUSING  
RENEWAL AREA
The renewal of the Ebury Bridge estate will  
deliver the following priorities:
H. Approximately 750 new high-quality homes.
I. Enhanced connections to the wider  
area through improved public realm and 
green infrastructure.
J. Innovative and high-quality design to 
ensure the most efficient use of land.
K. Improvements to the Ebury Bridge Local 
Centre in the form of new retail 
accommodation and community facilities.CONTENTS
48
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 12: Church Street/Edgware Road Housing Renewal Area
49
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Church Street / Edgware Road  
Housing Renewal Area
6.1 / The redevelopment of the Church Street / 
Edgware Road Housing Renewal Area is a key 
priority for us. We have worked closely with the 
local community to produce an ambitious 
masterplan, which will be delivered over the City 
Plan period. The Church Street Masterplan creates 
a framework for development in the area and is a 
material consideration for any planning applications.
6.2 / At least 2,000 new homes will be delivered  
in the Church Street / Edgware Road Housing 
Renewal Area over the next 15-20 years. Sites  
in the area will make efficient use of land through 
densification, incorporating innovative and  
high-quality design, including the development  
of higher buildings where these will deliver high 
quality homes that meet local needs.
6.3 / Alongside the delivery of new homes, the 
regeneration of Church Street / Edgware Road  
will create at least 350 new jobs in the local area, 
as well as supporting around 3,500 jobs during 
the construction phase. The area is within easy 
reach of transport hubs at Edgware Road Station 
and Marylebone Station, and the potential these 
links have to attract businesses and create a new 
destination for workspace has not yet been fully 
realised. Opportunities to link further job growth in 
Westminster, particularly in the CAZ, to the local 
community in Church Street / Edgware Road is a 
priority for us and will be explored and secured 
using planning powers where appropriate.6.4 / Opportunities to enable further connectivity 
between the Church Street / Edgware Road  
Housing Renewal Area, the Paddington Opportunity 
Area and the rest of the CAZ should be supported 
through redevelopment.
Open space and connectivity
6.5 / Church Street / Edgware Road lies within an 
area of open space deficiency. The redesign of 
public realm and the introduction of a ‘green spine’ 
north-south route across the area represents an 
opportunity to improve both mobility and access  
to open space. The Church Street Masterplan 
envisages an increase of up to 40% in publicly 
accessible open space in the area. Public realm  
and environmental improvements to increase 
walking and cycling and to enhance accessibility, 
connectivity, safety and comfort, will improve 
mobility and active travel across the area, including 
the introduction of 20mph traffic calming zones.
6.6 / Development proposals will be encouraged 
to make the most of the area’s potential, 
maximising opportunities to improve connectivity 
through the implementation of the objectives of 
the Westminster Walking Strategy. Pedestrians will 
be prioritised in public realm developments to link 
Lisson Grove and Edgware Road. Improvements  
to wayfinding and streetscape along Marylebone 
Road will help to strengthen connections between 
the area and Regent’s Park. Enhancements to the 
Regent’s Park canal towpath will also contribute  
to improvements in east-west connectivity.Retail
6.7 / The redevelopment of the area also presents 
an opportunity to enhance the Church Street / 
Edgware Road District Centre. This will continue  
to be an important hub for the local community, 
providing access to retail and community facilities, 
including a new health and well-being hub. The 
centre will also provide opportunities for skills, 
training, business support and other initiatives  
to broaden possibilities for local residents. There 
will also be improved facilities for Church Street 
Market, including a new layout, higher quality public 
realm, and parking and storage facilities for traders. 
The existing antiques markets are an important 
source of local employment and are an important 
feature of Church Street’s identity. The masterplan 
envisages a new cultural quarter centred around 
these and the adjacent Cockpit Theatre.
Ebury Bridge Estate Housing Renewal Area
6.8 / The Ebury Bridge Estate is situated between 
Victoria Station and the Thames, bounded by the 
railway line to the east and Ebury Bridge Road to 
the west. It comprises 13 blocks and 336 existing 
homes. In 2010 Ebury Bridge Estate was 
highlighted as a strategic opportunity in our 
Housing Renewal Strategy. The site has the 
potential to create a significant uplift in the  
number of homes, contributing to meeting 
strategic housing need, but it will also deliver 
wider benefits for the community, made possible 
by the large-scale nature of the estate renewal.CONTENTS
50
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 13: Ebury Bridge Estate Housing Renewal Area
51
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
6.9 / The renewal of the estate over the Plan 
period represents an opportunity to improve 
quality of life for existing residents by upgrading 
the ageing housing stock, addressing 
overcrowding and providing improved public 
realm, which will deliver walking links to the 
surrounding areas including Victoria Opportunity 
Area, the nearby Chelsea Barracks site and 
Belgravia. The long-term regeneration of the 
estate will allow for the phasing of new buildings, 
and the introduction of meanwhile uses on-site, 
ensuring the continued presence of community 
facilities and local convenience retail whilst the 
estate is redeveloped.7. Managing development for 
Westminster’s people
Development will be neighbourly by:
A. Protecting and where appropriate 
enhancing amenity, by preventing 
unacceptable impacts in terms of daylight 
and sunlight, sense of enclosure, 
overshadowing, privacy and overlooking.
B. Protecting and where appropriate 
enhancing local environmental quality.
C. Protecting and positively responding  
to local character and the historic 
environment.
D. Not overburdening the capacity of  
local infrastructure.
E. Contributing to the greening of the city.
F. Improving sustainable transport 
infrastructure and highway conditions.
G. Making appropriate and effective  
waste management arrangements.7.1 / Westminster is already densely developed.  
As the city grows, detrimental impacts on  
existing users of the area must be avoided.  
It is imperative that design solutions are found  
to avoid negative impacts associated with further 
growth. By adopting the principle of neighbourly 
development, we expect development to make a 
positive contribution to the quality and function of 
the local area. We will take a balanced approach 
that considers the specific location and context as 
well as the merits of each proposal including the 
wider benefits a scheme can deliver, against 
impacts on the surrounding area.
7.2 / The principles of neighbourly development 
contained in this policy apply to all applications. 
Opportunities to enhance the quality of the local 
area might differ for developments depending on 
scale and typology, and we may therefore apply 
relevant criteria flexibly. We encourage early 
engagement with us for advice on the application 
of this and other policies in the Plan.CONTENTS
52
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Amenity impacts
7.3 / Negative effects on amenity should be 
minimised as they can impact on quality of life. 
Provision of good indoor daylight and sunlight 
levels is important for health and well-being  
and to decrease energy consumption through 
reduced need for artificial heating and lighting. 
Overshadowing affects the quality or operation  
of adjacent buildings and can negatively impact  
on the use of public and private open space for 
recreation, rest and play. Positioning, scale and 
orientation of buildings as well as the incorporation 
of design measures should be considered to 
minimise overshadowing and overlooking and 
ensure adequate levels of privacy. Even when  
there may be no material loss of daylight or sunlight, 
new developments should prevent unacceptable 
increases in the sense of enclosure.
Local environmental quality
7.4 / Polluted air, excessive smells, noise and strong 
vibrations are examples of environmental impacts 
that have an adverse impact on quality of life and 
health and well-being. Development must prevent 
unacceptable environmental impacts on existing 
and new users of building or its neighbours. The 
policies in the environment chapter cover these 
issues in more detail. We will utilise the Agent of 
Change principle, which places the burden on  
the applicant to ensure mitigation measures are 
included to safeguard future local amenity and 
ensures development does not cause existing 
nearby uses from having to curtail their activities.Character
7.5 / Westminster consists of many distinct  
and high-quality neighbourhoods, including 
townscapes, buildings and spaces that contribute 
to our heritage. The built and natural environment 
of Westminster is of exceptional quality and new 
development should seek to celebrate and 
reinforce this. The policies in the design chapter 
set out our approach to the creation of high-quality 
places. There are also several areas known for 
particular functions and uses, attracting visitors 
and businesses. The Special Policy Areas in the 
economy chapter set out the principles to protect 
the uses and character of these areas.
Infrastructure
7.6 / A range of facilities, services and other types of 
infrastructure play a vital role for our communities 
and the successful operation of the city. When 
infrastructure capacity is overburdened, this can 
create major nuisances to residents, businesses and 
visitors. Development should, where possible, seek 
to enhance infrastructure provision. We will work with 
applicants and infrastructure providers to realise this. 
The Infrastructure Delivery Plan sets out our 
approach to the delivery of infrastructure to support 
future growth in the city. 
City greening
7.7 / The Royal Parks and other open spaces  
make an important contribution to the quality of 
Westminster. These spaces also include important 
biodiversity assets, which are supported by our tree population and other green features. Additional 
growth in the city will put these spaces under 
increased pressure. Development must therefore 
protect and enhance the green infrastructure in the 
city. This includes seeking to achieve wider benefits 
of greening such as climate resilience, enhanced 
amenity and well-being. The environment chapter 
sets out our approach to the greening of the city.
Highways
7.8 / The highway is used by pedestrians, cyclists 
and motorists, both for movement and for a variety 
of other activities. Development should not 
obstruct the normal functioning of the highway. 
As far as possible, the pedestrian environment 
should be enhanced, as well as integrated with 
other transport modes to facilitate active travel. 
Parking and servicing arrangements require 
particular attention in a city with competing 
priorities. The policies in the connections chapter 
set out our approach to transport management.
Waste management
7.9 / Poor waste management can negatively 
affect the quality of the street scene, impact  
on health and safety and cause disturbance  
for highway users and neighbouring uses. 
Appropriate waste management will be required 
for new developments in accordance with this plan 
and in line with Westminster’s Waste Management 
Strategy which has a focus on maximising waste 
reduction, reuse and recycling.53
SPATIAL STRATEGY CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
HOUSING
Improved housing, improved lives
Historically our housing hasn’t grown at the same rate  
as the rest of the city. That’s changing. By 2040 we will  
have delivered over 20,000 new homes. Good, affordable 
housing that will contribute towards healthier, happier lives. 
Housing that makes the most of the land available and 
embodies the very highest standards of design. 
Whilst Westminster is home to some of the most affluent 
postcodes in the country, we have diverse communities.  
This brings an immediate need to create housing that’s 
affordable, inclusive and allows everyone to share in  
the economic prosperity of the city. 
How we respond to housing speaks volumes about who  
we are as a city. Our response needs to be world-class. CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
56
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
8. Housing delivery
A. The number of new homes built in 
Westminster will exceed 20,685 over  
the Plan period. This will be achieved by: 
1. optimising site densities, including those  
in Housing Renewal Areas;
2. delivering a higher number  
of homes on small sites;
3. permitting appropriate 
upwards extensions;
4. planning positively for tall  
buildings in certain locations.
B. No new homes in Westminster will  
exceed 200 sq m Gross Internal Area  
(GIA), except where it is necessary  
to protect a heritage asset. 
EXISTING HOUSING
C. All existing residential units, uses, 
floorspace and land will be protected, 
except where:
1. the reconfiguration or redevelopment  
of supported or affordable housing 
would better meet need; or
2. non-family sized housing is being 
reconfigured to create family 
sized housing.D. The change of use of any type of housing 
to temporary sleeping accommodation on  
a permanent basis will not be permitted.
8.1 / Achieving Westminster’s housing targets to 
help meet growing and diversifying housing need 
is a key priority of this plan. To do this, it is 
necessary to protect existing housing and fully 
optimise the delivery of new provision across the 
city, ensuring land is used most efficiently. This 
means delivering as many new homes as each site 
can accommodate, without compromising quality 
of life for both new and existing neighbouring 
residents. This will require higher density living  
in the majority of cases.
Housing Target
8.2 / The London Plan sets all London boroughs  
an annual housing target based on the GLA’s 
estimate of land capacity through the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA).  
The target allocated to Westminster in the London 
Plan is 985 homes per year over ten years. This 
figure is based on capacity of land to deliver new 
homes and considers existing local plan policy to 
estimate capacity.
8.3 / The National Planning Policy Framework 
requires local planning authorities to use a standard 
methodology to calculate the number of homes 
needed unless exceptional circumstances exist to 
justify using a different methodology. The standard methodology differs from the SHLAA’s capacity-
based approach in that it starts off with a baseline 
housing need based on population projections, 
then adjusts that figure based on an ‘affordability 
factor’. The resultant figure is then capped at 40% 
above the existing housing target. Using this 
methodology results in an annual requirement  
of 1,495 homes per year for Westminster.
8.4 / This City Plan is more pro-growth and 
ambitious than its predecessors. Our policies are 
geared towards encouraging applicants to come 
forward with more housing, optimising housing 
delivery sites and finding new innovative ways to 
deliver more homes. Through this approach,  
we expect to exceed the London Plan derived 
target of 20,685 homes across the Plan period.
Housing Supply
8.5 / In reviewing our housing trajectory, we have 
considered how changes in our strategic policies 
will influence housing delivery up to 2040. This 
includes a high number of smaller sites, based on 
previous levels of delivery and a stronger level  
of policy encouragement in both this plan and the 
London Plan. This City Plan is supportive of design 
solutions to meet housing needs through less 
prescriptive design requirements. Taken together 
with a more welcoming approach to innovative 
housing delivery, including through upwards 
extensions, this plan will deliver more housing  
than previous policies have. 57
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
Figure 14: Housing trajectory 2019  /  202020  /  212021  /  222022  /  232023  /  242024  /  252025  /  262026  /  272027  /  282028  /  292029  / 302030  /  312031  /  322032  /  332033  /  342034  /  352035  /  362036  /  372037  /  382038  /  392039  /  40Cumulative number of homes992135214841533
1220
1169
906
7431221
831 834 810978
6981000 989 985 985 985 985 98558
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
8.6 / Historically more than 80% of Westminster’s 
housing delivery has come forward as windfall. 
Through our housing trajectory and the  
future production of a Site Allocations 
Development Plan Document we are taking a 
more proactive approach to planning for growth  
in Westminster. Nevertheless, high existing use 
values in Westminster mean that it is not always 
possible to predict when land will come forward 
for redevelopment. This means that sites will 
inevitably continue to come forward as windfalls 
and therefore we continue to include a windfall 
allowance in our housing trajectory. Consistent 
past trends and future projections are used to 
estimate the scale of windfall delivery.
Density and the size of new homes
8.7 / Historically, housing in Westminster has  
been developed at relatively low densities.  
This cannot continue in the face of very high 
demand for housing and projected population 
growth. Therefore, as developable land is  
scarce, to deliver our housing targets, higher 
density development will be required.
Existing housing
8.8 / The high cost of land in Westminster and its 
limited availability mean that all existing housing 
uses must be protected. The acute shortage of 
affordable housing and the continued need to 
provide for family-sized homes mean that the only 
exceptions where the loss of residential uses or 
floorspace may be acceptable is where they are being reconfigured to better meet these needs. 
Where existing supported or affordable housing  
is being reconfigured or redeveloped it will be 
assessed against the latest evidence of need, either 
through our Annual Affordable Housing Statement 
or up-to-date evidence specific to Westminster. 
8.9 / To help meet the continued need for family 
sized housing in Westminster, we will allow the 
loss of one existing non-family sized home where 
this is being reconfigured or merged with another 
to provide larger units (de-conversion), provided 
other options to extend the building to create 
larger units have first been explored. Properties 
that are de-converted to create family-sized 
homes should not exceed the 200sq m maximum 
unless it is demonstrably impracticable to do so.
8.10 / Internal design features such as including 
utility space to dry washing, extra internal storage 
space and partitions that can be moved to alter 
room layouts can contribute to making high-density 
developments acceptable. Good external design, 
public realm and provision of high-quality open 
space, including trees and soft landscaping, can also 
help ensure the right kind of growth, where impacts 
on surrounding neighbourhoods are mitigated.8.11 / Furthermore, in order to ensure that site 
capacities are optimised, no new homes in 
Westminster (including changes of use and 
residential extensions where new homes are 
created) will exceed 200sq m of Gross Internal 
Area (GIA). This size restriction is needed because 
Westminster’s position in the global housing 
market can create demand for super-sized 
properties do not optimise development density 
on our scarce land. The only exception to this will 
be where a larger unit is needed to ensure the 
protection of a heritage asset or a converted home 
as we recognise that it is not always practicable or 
appropriate to merge parts of the floors to create 
larger units. The 200sq m limit is 62sq m above 
the highest minimum standard in the Nationally 
Described Space Standards and is higher than the 
average size of recently built private homes in 
Westminster (163sq m between 2013 and 2018). 
The limit will still enable generously sized homes 
to be developed to meet demand from the prime 
market and large families, but balances that 
against the other, more strategic housing needs of 
the city. The limit will not apply to the replacement 
of a single dwelling.59
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
9. Affordable housing
A. At least 35% of all new homes will be 
affordable across Westminster. 
B. There will be no net loss of affordable 
housing across the city. All residential 
proposals will provide a minimum of 35%  
of the total residential units as affordable 
housing on-site if they:
1. have a site area of 0.5 hectares  
or more; or
2. are proposing ten or more residential 
units; or
3. are proposing 1,000 sq m or more 
residential floorspace (for sale or rent).
C. In exceptional cases, affordable housing 
provision can be made off-site (in whole  
or in part) in the vicinity of the host 
development. This will only be accepted 
where it is sufficiently demonstrated that 
on-site provision is physically or otherwise 
impracticable or is inappropriate in terms of 
the quantity or quality of affordable housing 
to be provided. Provision of affordable 
housing off-site (in whole or in part) beyond 
the vicinity of the host development will  
only be acceptable where:
1. it can be demonstrated that a rigorous Permanent temporary sleeping 
accommodation (short-term lets) 
8.12 / While delivering new homes is essential,  
if we are to meet Westminster’s growing housing 
needs we must also ensure that existing stock 
remains available for permanent residents. 
Westminster has seen the number of properties 
used for temporary short-term lets grow 
significantly since the need for planning permission 
to short-term let a property was removed.1 In addition 
to the impact on housing availability, this can have 
unacceptable impacts on the residential amenity of 
those living in neighbouring properties. Regular noise 
disturbance for neighbours, anti-social behaviour, 
inappropriate disposal of waste, reduced security and 
overcrowding of properties are all consequences of 
this entrenched commercialisation of residential 
properties. Restricting change of use to short-term 
letting will safeguard our existing housing supply and 
protect residents from the negative aspects of this 
activity. The restriction on short-term letting applies 
to purpose-built student accommodation outside  
of term time, unless the letting is directly linked to 
conferences taking place on the education premises 
the accommodation is linked to. This is because 
student homes are often situated in residential  
areas rather than on purpose-built campuses  
and the amenity of permanent residents must  
be protected from the negative impacts of a  
churn of holiday makers.
1 Since 2015 planning permission has not been required to 
short-term let a home in London for less than 90 nights 
within a calendar yearsearch for sites revealed no sites are 
available for affordable housing in the 
vicinity that could be reasonably and 
viably purchased, including on council 
owned land; and
2. the site proposed can demonstrably 
provide more affordable housing and of  
a higher quality than would have been 
possible on or off-site in the vicinity; and 
3. provision off-site will demonstrably 
contribute to achieving mixed 
communities. 
D. A payment in lieu to the council’s 
Affordable Housing Fund may be accepted 
only as a last resort if it is demonstrated to 
the council’s satisfaction that no sites are 
available for off-site provision. 
E. 60% of the affordable units will be 
‘intermediate’ affordable housing  
for rent or sale and 40% will be social  
rent or London Affordable Rent. 
F. For intermediate housing, new  
affordable homes will be provided  
across the indicative income levels set  
out in the Planning Obligations and 
Affordable Housing SPD. 60
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
submitted in a standardised and accessible format 
in accordance with London Plan requirements.
9.2 / To maintain our stock, where affordable 
homes are redeveloped at least an equivalent 
amount of affordable housing floorspace must be 
re-provided. We will seek an uplift in the amount of 
affordable housing provided where existing 
affordable housing is redeveloped as part of mixed 
tenure or mixed-use schemes. Such proposals will 
be expected to submit a viability assessment to 
maximise the amount of additional affordable 
housing provided. There will be no overall net loss 
of floorspace and re-provision must be  
in the vicinity of the original home(s) to maintain 
mixed tenure communities. Provision of affordable 
housing in the vicinity means it is close to the host 
development; however, vicinity is not strictly 
defined to avoid unhelpful restrictions when 
dealing with different site circumstances or 
availability and will be assessed in light of  
the circumstances of each case. 
9.3 / All affordable housing requirements from 
residential development will be calculated based  
on the total gross residential development 
proposed (Gross Internal Area). All developments 
that include the re-development of affordable 
housing will be assessed in line with the Mayor’s 
threshold approach to viability. On estate 
regeneration schemes we will maximise the 
amount of affordable housing, seeking to deliver 
50% affordable housing on public land where 
viable. On these schemes, to facilitate large-scale estate renewal and deliver mixed communities, 
better quality homes and a more appropriate mix 
of unit sizes, the affordable housing requirement 
will apply across the regenerated estate, taking 
account of any affordable homes that have been 
re-provided. This is in recognition of the wider 
benefits brought about for residents of affordable 
accommodation by estate regeneration beyond 
just an increase in numbers. Maximising affordable 
housing on estate regeneration schemes will help 
contribute to the Mayor’s strategic 50% affordable 
housing target.
Tenure and bedroom split
9.4 / At present, ‘intermediate’ homes make  
up only around 1.5% of Westminster’s housing 
stock and our Housing Needs Analysis shows that 
there is a high demand for this tenure. We want to 
grow and diversify this sector to create a more 
balanced mix of tenures and improve housing 
options. Therefore, we will require that 60% of  
the affordable housing delivered will be 
‘intermediate’ housing for rent or sale across  
a range of household income levels. This is 
important to ensure new homes provide genuine 
choice and meet the variety of needs of different 
people and families who are vital to the effective 
functioning of the local economy and delivery  
of public services in Westminster. 
9.5 / The high cost of housing in Westminster 
makes even relatively small shares of shared-
ownership properties unaffordable for many 
households eligible for intermediate housing. G. The size of these homes, including the 
number of bedrooms required to meet need 
will be provided in line with the council’s 
Annual Affordable Housing Statement. 
H. Proposals involving the demolition of existing 
affordable housing will not be permitted 
unless it is replaced by at least an equivalent 
amount of affordable housing floorspace. 
Additional affordable housing will be 
maximised in such redevelopment proposals.
9.1 / Westminster is the second most expensive 
local authority in the country in which to rent or 
purchase a home. Average house prices are more 
than double those for London and more than 20 
times the average Westminster household income. 
The shortage of land, its high price and current 
funding mechanisms mean that to exceed the 35% 
affordable housing threshold and contribute to the 
Mayor’s strategic target of 50% affordable homes 
across London, it is essential to require affordable 
housing contributions from private housing 
developments. All major developments are 
therefore expected to provide at least 35% of new 
homes as affordable housing, rising to 50% for 
developments on public sector land. Developments 
which fall short of provision of this requirement will 
be subject to viability assessment and review in line 
with the Mayor’s Viability Tested Route as part of 
the threshold approach to planning applications set 
out in the London Plan. Viability evidence should be 61
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Therefore, although we support innovative low-
cost home ownership products, most intermediate 
homes are expected to be for rent. The household 
income thresholds for intermediate housing 
products in Westminster will be set out in the 
Planning Obligations and Affordable Housing SPD.
9.6 / We will work towards 10% of new intermediate 
homes being for either affordable home ownership 
or rent-based products that help residents move  
in to home ownership. Based on evidence about 
local housing needs, costs and incomes, we 
consider that a tailored approach to meet shared 
regional and national affordable home ownership 
ambitions is appropriate and will not prejudice our 
ability to meet other housing needs. 
9.7 / Our Housing Needs Analysis shows that 
there remains a need for low cost rented housing 
in Westminster, and therefore 40% of all new 
affordable homes will be for social or affordable 
rent. We consider London Affordable Rent to be an 
appropriate rental level for Westminster residents 
on lower incomes alongside traditional social 
rented accommodation.
9.8 / Although increasing the number of new 
affordable homes of any tenure in the city is a priority, 
we do not support increases in affordable housing 
that do not result in an increase in the number of  
new homes. Therefore, outside of existing council 
housing estates, we do not permit the purchase  
of market tenure homes to change their tenure  
to meet affordable housing requirements.9.9 / Registered Provider (RP) owned affordable 
homes delivered through section 106 agreements 
may change to market tenure provided the unit is 
vacant, the affordable homes are re-provided in 
Westminster and are of an equal or higher quality 
in terms of size, location and design quality, and 
the change is part of a transparent asset 
management process. All receipts from the sale of 
affordable homes to market tenure housing should 
be re-invested in affordable housing re-provision. 
The mechanisms for achieving this will be set out 
in the forthcoming Planning Obligations and 
Affordable Housing SPD.
9.10 / Getting the right mix of sizes is important 
across all tenures. Our Annual Affordable Housing 
Statement will set out up-to-date affordable unit 
size requirements based on actual need and 
demand shown on the social and intermediate 
housing registers.
Off-site affordable housing
9.11 / Where it is accepted for residential schemes that 
affordable housing cannot be provided on-site, 
development off-site in the vicinity of the host site is 
our priority. This is to ensure mixed and sustainable 
communities are created and maintained. The off-site 
housing is expected to be higher quality than would 
have been possible on-site e.g. larger homes which 
better meet identified need, more amenity space or 
better access to public transport. Applicants are 
expected to discuss with us any potential 
opportunities to provide off-site affordable  
housing on existing council owned land either  
as infill or as part of estate renewal.9.12 / Where single ownership of a large estate  
is a barrier to the delivery of on-site affordable 
housing, we encourage landowners to deliver 
on-site affordable housing in ways which do not 
break up their land ownership. For example, by 
considering becoming RPs in their own right and 
transferring affordable units to themselves as RPs. 
9.13 / Affordable housing developments 
completed prior to an application for market 
housing may in some circumstances count towards 
meeting future affordable housing requirements to 
enable estate regeneration to take place. The 
mechanism for this will be set out in the 
forthcoming Planning Obligations and Affordable 
Housing Supplementary Planning Document.
Payment in lieu
9.14 / Where payments in lieu are accepted, they 
will be at a level of broadly equivalent value to 
actual provision so there is no financial benefit 
from providing a payment rather than delivery of 
actual units. Payments will be based on a fixed 
rate per sq m of floorspace that would have been 
provided as affordable housing. They will be 
equivalent to the uplift in value resulting from the 
floorspace that would have been provided as 
affordable housing being delivered as private 
housing. This approach will ensure a cost neutral 
impact on the developer. The value of the payment 
in lieu, including indexation, will be set out in the 
forthcoming Planning Obligations and Affordable 
Housing Supplementary Planning Document. 62
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
10. Housing for specific groups
A. Residential developments will provide  
a mix of units in terms of size, type, and 
tenure to secure mixed and inclusive 
communities, and contribute towards 
meeting Westminster’s housing needs  
for different groups.
FAMILY SIZED HOMES
B. New build homes will be designed with 
growing families in mind and 25% of all  
new homes across Westminster will be 
family sized. Where two-bedroom units  
are provided, the majority should be large 
enough to accommodate two double 
bedrooms within a single development. 
Studios will make up no more than 10% of 
new homes within a single development.
C. Conversion of purpose-built single-family 
homes into multiple family homes is 
welcomed. Family sized homes will be 
required where a House in Multiple 
Occupation (HMO) surplus to requirements 
(as demonstrated by appropriate marketing 
as an HMO for at least 18 months) is 
proposed to change to market housing.
SPECIALIST HOUSING
D. The council supports the provision of  well-managed new housing which meets an 
identified specialist housing need. All existing 
specialist and supported housing floorspace 
will be protected from changing to non-
specialist or supported residential use except 
where it is demonstrated that:
1. the accommodation is of poor  
quality, does not meet contemporary 
requirements and is not capable of  
being upgraded; or
2. the use has a demonstrable and 
significant adverse effect on  
residential amenity; or
3. it is surplus to requirements as any  
form of specialist or supported housing; 
or
4. the accommodation is being adapted or 
altered to better meet specialist need or 
to enable residents to remain in their 
existing property.
OLDER PEOPLE’S HOUSING
E. The council supports the development of 
high-quality accommodation for older 
people across a range of tenures and use 
classes that meets identified need.
F. The council will support adaptations and 
alterations to homes occupied by older residents, which enable them to remain in 
their existing property. Replacement older 
people’s accommodation intended to be 
occupied by the original occupant(s), will as far 
as practicably possible, be located near to the 
original accommodation.
PURPOSE-BUILT STUDENT ACCOMMODATION
G. The council supports the development of 
new, well-managed, purpose-built 
accommodation for students studying at 
higher education institutions.
H. A proportion of the purpose-built student 
accommodation will be secured as affordable 
student accommodation in accordance with 
the London Plan. All accommodation should 
include a proportion of units that are 
adaptable to meet specialist needs.
I. Existing purpose-built student 
accommodation will be protected unless 
demonstrably surplus to requirements.
GYPSY AND TRAVELLER SITES
J. Gypsy and traveller sites may be permitted 
where it is demonstrated that there is a need 
in Westminster, that they are appropriately  
designed and will not have unacceptable 
impacts, particularly on traffic or parking. 63
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
10.1 / Westminster has a broad range of housing 
needs and we support delivery of a range of 
housing types and sizes to meet those needs.  
The provision of specialist housing and 
accommodation will contribute to our overall 
housing target of at least 20,685 homes over  
the Plan period.
10.2 / Our strategic housing requirements are set 
out in both regional and local assessments and 
show that there are shortfalls for all sizes of homes 
in Westminster, except for studios. We require a 
range of housing sizes across different tenures to 
be provided to ensure the kind of homes people 
need are delivered, including lifetime homes. 
Consequently, studios will be restricted to 10%  
of new homes within individual developments. 
Family sized homes
10.3 / To ensure that homes are adaptable,  
and families have enough space to grow in their 
existing homes, we require a proportion of double 
bedrooms within each new-build unit. This will  
give growing families the option to remain in their 
existing home, rather than move elsewhere or  
out of Westminster.
10.4 / Our Housing Needs Analysis shows that  
a large proportion of new homes in Westminster 
are developed as one- and two-bedroom units.  
In order to give families more housing choices, 
25% of all new homes across Westminster will be 
family sized – this means having between three 
and five bedrooms. Homes with six or more bedrooms are unlikely to meet the housing needs 
of families and will therefore not be included in the 
calculation of the 25%. Furthermore, the majority 
of two-bedroom units within a single development 
should be large enough to accommodate two 
double bedrooms.
10.5 / In new intermediate tenure homes, two and 
three-bedroom homes may be permitted with only 
one double bedroom, if it is required to make the 
units more affordable to eligible households and 
the new homes are meeting demand on the 
intermediate waiting list.
10.6 / The 25% requirement for family-sized homes is 
a strategic target. Whilst individual proposals should 
seek to incorporate this requirement, there may be 
circumstances where it is not appropriate to provide 
family-sized homes, due to a site’s small size, location 
or other practicability issues. These circumstances 
will be assessed on an individual basis.
Specialist and supported housing
10.7 / Westminster’s existing stock of specialist 
housing provides accommodation tailored to the 
needs of the vulnerable and others with specific 
housing needs which are not met by conventional 
housing. High land values mean there is pressure to 
change low-value specialist housing to higher value 
private residential accommodation. Without this 
stock, the people who occupy specialist housing 
would be unable to remain in Westminster. The 
protection of existing, and encouragement of new, 
accommodation that meets an identified need is therefore particularly important to ensure inclusivity 
and maintain Westminster’s rich diversity.2
10.8 / We will resist the loss of specialist housing  
if it only requires minor layout changes or 
improvements in quality to bring it up to standard 
to meet modern requirements. However, we 
appreciate that needs and service delivery change 
over time and specialist housing can become 
obsolete or surplus to requirements. The loss of 
specialist floorspace may therefore be considered 
acceptable to: make optimum use of housing sites, 
make our housing stock more sustainable as 
needs change, and deliver our or other local 
service provider’s published strategies.
10.9 / We will only accept the loss of any specialist 
housing uses where there has been no interest 
from another organisation providing housing  
for any specialist needs in that location or by  
a registered provider for the use of the site  
for any type of specialist housing. This will be 
demonstrated by the housing being marketed  
for 18 months as a specialist or supported home.
10.10 / Where the loss of an HMO is accepted 
following the marketing exercise, we expect  
it to be converted into family sized homes. By 
increasing the stock of such homes in the city, the 
loss of the specialist floorspace will be mitigated.
2 For new HMOs please refer to the council’s  
licensing scheme64
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
10.11 / Where new specialist housing is proposed, 
a management plan will be required and secured 
via legal agreement or planning condition to 
ensure the new use does not have negative 
impacts on the amenity of neighbouring residents. 
The management plan will address parking 
pressures, noise and other potential impacts on 
neighbouring residents or vulnerable uses, such 
as schools.
Older people’s housing
10.12 / Population projections indicate a 52% 
increase in those aged 75 and over living in 
Westminster between 2017 and 2030.3 
Additionally, there is expected to be a 45% 
increase in those over 65 suffering from dementia 
in Westminster between 2015 and 2030.4 There  
is therefore a growing need for new housing to 
meet a range of older people’s accommodation 
needs. This is not necessarily restricted only to 
extra-care, sheltered housing or residential 
institutions, although there remains a need for 
these types of accommodation. Meeting the 
needs of older people can also take the form  
of mainstream housing designed to aid mobility, 
adapt to changing health or which facilitate the 
lifestyles of those in later life, as well as private 
homes marketed specifically to older people.
3 Westminster Housing Needs Analysis, 2019
4 Westminster Housing Needs Analysis, 201910.13 / We welcome new and innovative 
approaches to delivering this type of housing 
across a range of tenures. New homes to meet  
the needs of older people will be determined  
with regard to past delivery against the 
benchmarks set for different tenures of  
older people’s housing in the London Plan.
10.14 / Self-contained older people’s housing  
that does not fall within the definition of affordable 
housing will be required to contribute to the  
supply of affordable housing. This will be in the 
form of on-site affordable units specifically for  
the occupation of older people.
10.15 / The quality of accommodation for older 
people is more specific than for other types of 
housing. We will assess the quality of new homes 
proposed with particular regard to:
 –design features suitable for dementia  
sufferers5 both in the home and in shared 
spaces which are part of the development;
 –availability of on-site care and support;
 –facilities in the development or nearby  
for community and social interaction;
 –access to technology such as tele-care;
 –Wi-Fi and broadband;
5 Healthy Building Note 08-02. Dementia-friendly Health and 
Social Care Environments (Department of Health, 2015) 
should be consulted. –storage options for mobility scooters;
 –adaptability of the units for future  
mobility needs; and
 –access to public transport.
10.16 / The location of this type of housing  
can be critical in ensuring a high quality of  
life for older residents and contributing to their 
independence. Older people are more likely  
to suffer from memory loss, which may lead to 
feelings of vulnerability, loss of self-confidence 
and independence. Where older people’s  
housing is being redeveloped, the re-provision  
will preferably be in the vicinity of the original 
accommodation to ensure residents  
can maintain familiarity with their surroundings  
and their networks of friends and family.
10.17 / Housing developed specifically  
for older people will be subject to conditions to 
ensure it continues to be used for its original 
purpose – this may include a minimum age for the 
occupants or the continued delivery of on-site 
care, where this is included as part of the 
original development.
Student accommodation
10.18 / Westminster has 11 major universities and 
colleges, more than any other London Borough.  
It is also home to many smaller colleges and 
professional education institutions. More than  
a third of higher education students in London 
attend a Westminster-based institution, meaning 65
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
that there is a high demand for purpose-built 
student accommodation. Nevertheless, our 
Housing Needs Analysis indicates that there is  
no overwhelming demand for accommodation  
for Westminster-based students to be housed in 
Westminster and there is no evidence to suggest 
that current levels of provision are affecting 
student numbers or profiles.
10.19 / We will continue to support the 
development of purpose-built student 
accommodation for higher education institutions, 
secured via nominations agreements, in order to 
balance the demand for student accommodation 
against the competing demands for other types of 
housing in the city.
10.20 / Student accommodation must be well-
managed and a sufficient proportion must be 
adaptable to meet specialist needs. A proportion of 
purpose-built student accommodation must be 
provided as affordable student accommodation, as 
defined in the London Plan and associated guidance. 
The Mayor’s threshold approach to viability will be 
used to assess the appropriate proportion of 
affordable student accommodation in accordance 
with London Plan policy H17.
Gypsy and traveller sites
10.21 / Proposals for new gypsy and traveller sites 
will be assessed based on identified need for this 
type of housing in Westminster, how the site 
optimises the land and the likely impacts the site 
will have. The most recent research commissioned by the Mayor of London confirms that there is no 
identified need for residential pitches for gypsies 
and travellers in Westminster.6 The city does not 
have reserves of sites of a size or kind suitable for 
use for this type of accommodation and it is 
unlikely that there will be any suitable sites 
available in the future. 
6 GLA Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Topic 
Paper, 201711. Innovative housing delivery
A. The council welcomes applications for 
innovative models of high-quality housing 
that contribute to providing a range of 
housing options to Westminster’s residents.
B. Qualifying Build to Rent and large-scale 
purpose-built shared living proposals will 
be required to provide a proportion of the 
accommodation as affordable housing in 
accordance with the London Plan.
C. The council welcomes applications for  
new homes built using modern methods  
of construction particularly when they 
contribute to a quick and more sustainable 
delivery of homes.11.1 / London’s housing market is evolving.  
New housing models are emerging in response  
to the demand for more (and relatively affordable) 
homes and reflect changing lifestyles and ways  
of working. These new housing models include:
 –self-build and custom-build homes
 –build to rent homes
 –rent to buy, help to buy and shared  
ownership homes
 –large-scale purpose-built shared living  
and live/work schemes. 
11.2 / We welcome innovative ways to  
deliver more housing and address the high  
cost of traditional self-contained market housing.  
If proposals for innovative housing models do  
not meet the definition of affordable housing  
they will be required to contribute to the supply  
of affordable housing regardless of what use class 
they fall into. We will expect qualifying Build to 
Rent and large-scale purpose-built shared living 
schemes to follow the affordable housing 
requirements set out in the London Plan (see 
Policy H11 Build to Rent and Policy H16 Large-scale 
Purpose-built shared living). A deviation from the 
social/intermediate tenure split set out in Policy 9 
may be acceptable if any of these models of 
housing are delivered following the conditions set 
out in the London Plan.66
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Self-build and custom-build homes
11.3 / Self-build and custom-build homes can  
help deliver new homes that meet the needs and 
demands of an individual or group who organises 
the design and construction of the new home,  
with or without the help of a specialist developer. 
11.4 / In accordance with the Self-build and  
Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 ,7 we keep a 
register of individuals and associations of 
individuals who are seeking to acquire serviced 
plots of land in Westminster to build homes for 
those individuals to occupy. We use the data when 
preparing housing assessments and analysing 
housing demand.
Build to rent homes
11.5 / Build to rent developments contribute to 
meeting the demand for rented homes and can 
deliver high-quality and self-contained homes  
that are available on longer tenancies. Build to  
rent developments often target a certain type  
of residents (e.g. young professionals, downsizers 
or students) and provide shared spaces and 
services. We welcome build to rent developments 
especially when they help deliver a large  
number of more affordable homes and offer 
longer-term tenancies.
7 As amended by the Housing and Planning Act 2016Rent to buy, help to buy and shared  
ownership homes
11.6 / Rent to buy, help to buy and shared ownership 
products can help households on average income 
levels save for a deposit to buy their first home 
through bespoke rental arrangements. We therefore 
welcome these products and developments 
especially when the “rent” element is affordable  
and where the homes are allocated to customers  
on our intermediate housing register.
Large-scale purpose-built shared living  
and live/work schemes
11.7 / Purpose-built shared living can offer an 
acceptable form of accommodation for young 
professionals who are content to share some 
space, particularly if it offers a less expensive 
option (when including service charges) than 
conventional self-contained homes. The amount  
of communal storage and living space provided 
separately to private spaces should be generous 
and relate directly to the number of occupants  
in the development, to ensure there is sufficient 
space for comfortable living.
11.8 / Live/work developments can additionally 
provide workspace for start-ups and small 
businesses alongside homes, which is more 
affordable than renting office space and will 
contribute to the city’s economic growth. However, 
we expect the ‘work’ element to include facilities 
such as a high-speed internet connection, 
bookable meeting rooms and touchdown working space that is separate from the ‘live’ element. This is 
to ensure it is quality work space capable of 
meeting modern business requirements. Long term 
management plans will be submitted alongside 
proposals for purpose-built shared living schemes.
11.9 / Because purpose-built shared living schemes 
(including live/work developments) will have been 
designed to meet a specific demand, the layout is 
likely to mean that, without significant adaptation, 
changing the development to meet an alternative 
residential use will result in a failure to meet the 
minimum space standards. To protect residential 
amenity, we may therefore use legal agreements or 
conditions to prevent shared living developments 
from converting to other housing types.
Modern methods of construction
11.10 / The architecture, design and construction 
sectors are changing, and new and modern 
methods of construction and materials are being 
used. Modern methods of construction can have a 
positive impact on the quality of homes, the pace 
of delivery and its cost.
11.11 / Modular homes are homes constructed 
partially off-site, usually delivered by road to  
their destination and put in place by crane, where 
they are connected to utilities and fitted out. We 
welcome the delivery of modular homes in 
Westminster for a number of reasons: the units 
themselves can be constructed very quickly; off-
site development means less deliveries being 
made in Westminster as only the ‘modules’ are 67
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
delivered instead of multiple streams of 
construction materials and equipment – resulting in 
lower energy use and reduced emissions; the 
construction disruption caused to neighbours such 
as noise, dust and pollution from on-site 
construction is significantly reduced compared to 
traditionally built homes; and more homes can be 
delivered on small plots.
11.12 / We recognise the design and construction 
industry is changing and we embrace new technology 
which helps us respond to the housing challenge. 
However, new homes resulting from new construction 
techniques such as modular homes must be of the 
highest quality, with high standards of quality control 
throughout the entire construction process. We will 
only accept modular homes in Westminster which are 
constructed out of sustainable materials.12. Housing quality
A. All new homes and residential extensions 
will provide a well-designed, energy 
efficient and high-quality living 
environment, both internally and externally. 
New homes will be designed to a standard 
that ensures the safety, health and well-
being of its occupants.
B. 90% of all new-build homes will meet 
Building Regulation requirements M4 (2) 
“accessible and adaptable dwellings”  
and 10% of all new-build homes  
(including changes of use) will meet 
Building Regulation requirement M4 (3) 
“wheelchair user dwellings”.
C. All new homes will meet or exceed the 
Nationally Described Space Standards 
(where the units are self-contained).
External amenity space
D. All new-build homes will provide at  
least five sq m of private external amenity 
space for each dwelling designed for one-two 
persons or more and, where practicable, a 
further one sq m for each additional person 
the dwelling is designed to accommodate. 
Where it is not considered practicable or 
appropriate to provide private external 
amenity space for all or some homes, the following, measures will be required: 
1. provision of communal external amenity 
space; or
2. provision of additional and/or higher 
quality public open space.
E. Where it is sufficiently demonstrated that it 
is not practicable or appropriate to provide 
any type of external amenity space, 
additional internal living space equivalent 
to the external requirement set out in 
clause D will be required.
12.1 / Housing plays an important role in the  
safety, health and well-being of individuals  
and communities and in the shaping of 
neighbourhoods. It must therefore be designed  
to a high quality. This is particularly important in 
Westminster given the growing need for housing 
driving higher density developments.
12.2 / High quality can take many forms and  
can be achieved through design solutions  
such as the location of one home’s living room  
in relation to another’s bedroom, private internal 
living or external amenity space, adaptability  
to mobility needs, access to natural light and a 
dual aspect8 to the home for ventilation to reduce 
8 Dual aspect homes have openable windows on two or 
more walls, allowing for views in more than one direction.CONTENTS
68
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
overheating and provide suitable internal air 
quality. Where it is impracticable or inappropriate 
to provide dual aspect homes (or windows  
have to remain closed owing to external noise),  
we will expect design measures to mitigate 
overheating and to provide adequate ventilation 
within each property.
12.3 / Applicants will be expected to demonstrate 
how hazards identified in the Housing, Health  
and Safety Rating System9 have been addressed 
in the design of new homes.
12.4 / Part A of the policy applies to: all new homes 
(across all tenures); residential extensions; when 
flats are being merged; or when a change  
of use results in new homes.
Mobility needs
12.5 / We need to ensure that all new-build homes 
are adaptable or adapted for wheelchair users,  
so new homes are future-proofed for a population 
that is living longer and for less able-bodied 
residents. It will also prevent residents being forced 
to move into specialist housing because their 
current home cannot meet their changing needs 
over their lifetime. This requirement applies to 
new-build dwellings – it is recognised that it is 
sometimes impracticable to meet the Building 
9 See Housing health and safety rating system: guidance  
for landlords and property-related professionals.  
Also refer to the Council’s guidance on bedsits/studios, 
self-contained flats, flats in multiple occupation standards 
and hostel standards.Regulations requirements within heritage assets, as 
– for example – changes to built form and fabric are 
more restricted. However, we expect the standards 
to be met in all types of homes where possible.
Space standards
12.6 / In a place where demand for housing is 
extremely high and higher density is subsequently 
the norm, the minimum size of new homes must  
be kept in check. The Nationally Described Space 
Standards (NDSS) are therefore adopted in 
Westminster in accordance with the London Plan 
(see Policy D6 Housing quality and standards) and 
will ensure residents have access to a suitable 
amount of space in their self-contained homes. 
This requirement applies to new-build dwellings – 
it is recognised that it is sometimes impracticable 
to meet them within heritage assets. However, we 
expect the standards to be met when converting 
or extending homes where possible.
External amenity space
12.7 / External amenity space in housing 
developments contributes to good quality living 
environments and may provide leisure space  
and pleasant views. Common forms of private 
amenity space are balconies and gardens. The use 
of screens or glass enhancements or stepping back 
the façade can help mitigate unacceptable potential 
impacts such as overlooking, privacy, noise or air 
quality. The requirement does not count towards 
the GIA used in calculating the internal space 
standard set out in clause C. This requirement 
applies to new-build dwellings – it is recognised that it is sometimes impracticable to provide new 
external floorspace within heritage assets, as – for 
example – changes to built form and fabric are 
more restricted. However, we expect the standards 
to be met in all types of homes where possible.
12.8 / In a densely built environment such as 
Westminster, the provisoin of private external 
amenity space for all or some homes within a 
development may be impracticable or inappropriate. 
In these cases, developers should provide the 
external requirement in the form of communal 
external amenity space that will be safe, accessible 
for all residents across-tenures, designed to take 
advantage of direct sunlight and are well-managed. 
Common forms of communal amenity space are 
courtyards, terraces and roof gardens. When it is not 
possible to provide communal amenity space, 
additional or higher quality public open space in line 
with amenity, design and environment policies in this 
Plan should be provided.
12.9 / We want to ensure that all new-build housing 
developments provide external amenity space; 
however, the provision of external private amenity 
space, communal amenity space or additional 
public open space may not always be practicable 
or appropriate. Where it has been demonstrated 
that it is not possible to provide any type of 
external amenity space, dwellings will provide 
additional internal living space equivalent to the 
external requirement set out in clause D. Enclosed 
balconies or winter gardens should be considered 
as options. This will be in addition to the minimum 
internal space standards set out in clause C.69
HOUSING CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
ECONOMY AND 
EMPLOYMENT
A thriving city creates a thriving economy
The scale and breadth of Westminster’s economy is like no other. 
Our diverse range of enterprise makes us a global hub not just for 
business and finance, but also for creative and cultural industries. 
It’s an economy that benefits beyond our own communities  
to the UK as a whole.
For our economic success to continue in the decades to come, we 
need to respond to people’s changing needs. The need for affordable, 
quality housing that’s suitable for our diverse demographic. The need 
for flexible workspaces. A city that’s integrated and connected.  
A city where people want to be and want to stay.
By creating a thriving place where people to want to be,  
we create a thriving economy. CONTENTSCONTENTS72
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
13. Supporting economic growth
A. New and improved office floorspace will be 
supported to provide capacity for  
at least 63,000 new jobs over the Plan 
period, enabling the continued growth  
and clustering of the creative, knowledge, 
and research-based sectors. Additional 
floorspace that meets the needs of modern 
working practices, including through the 
provision of co-working space and a range 
of Class E (commercial, business and 
service) uses on site, is supported in 
principle in the:
1. Parts of the Central Activities Zone 
(CAZ) with a commercial or mixed-use 
character, including the West End Retail 
and Leisure Special Policy Area 
(WERLSPA) and Opportunity Areas;
2. North West Economic Development Area 
(NWEDA) and Church Street / Edgware 
Road Housing Renewal Area; and
3. Town centre hierarchy.
B. In the NWEDA and the Church Street / 
Edgware Road Housing Renewal Area,  
a range of workspace typologies,  
including workshops and studios,  
will be particularly welcome. C. Proposals involving the provision of 
affordable workspace will generally be 
supported throughout the commercial 
areas of the city.
D. The net loss of office floorspace from  
the CAZ:  
1. to residential development will only be 
permitted in those parts of the CAZ that 
are predominantly residential in 
character and where the proposal would 
reinstate an original residential use;
2. to hotel use will only be permitted 
where there is no interest in its 
continued use for office or any other 
Class E (commercial, business and 
service) uses education or community 
use, as demonstrated by vacancy and 
appropriate marketing for a period of  
at least 12 months.
E. Proposals within the NWEDA involving  
the loss of space suitable for small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) will be resisted. 
Redevelopment proposals will be required 
to re-provide existing employment 
floorspace, including dedicated space  
that meets the needs of SMEs.13.1 / Westminster is a global office centre, with an 
estimated 8.45 million sq m of office floorspace,1 
ranging from small traditional offices in heritage 
buildings, to large modern floorplates. These cater 
for a full range of occupiers, including real estate, 
hedge funds, professional / financial services and 
creative industries. However, since 2005, more 
than 720,000 sq m2 of office stock has been lost  
in the city – predominantly to residential (including 
permitted development schemes). Reduction in 
supply has resulted in low vacancy levels (a ten-
year quarterly average of 6.4% across the entire 
West End, which includes part of Camden and 
Kensington and Chelsea)3 and high rents. This 
trend needs to be halted in order for Westminster 
to continue to compete globally, to support the 
continued growth of emerging sectors, such as 
creative industries and technology, and to adapt  
to modern working practices. 
Projected need for new office floorspace
13.2 / The London Office Policy Review (2017) 
estimates a need for more than 75,000 office-
based jobs in Westminster from 2016 to 2041 – 
which equates to more than 63,000 jobs over the 
Plan period (2019-2040). Average employment 
densities of 1 worker per 11.3sq m used within the 
London Office Policy Review would indicate that 
1 As of March 2018 – based on 1990 Land Use Survey  
and pipeline updates
2 Pipeline data, March 2018
3 Central London Quarterly Office Report, Q4,  
Knight Frank, 201873
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
this could translate to a requirement for the delivery 
of over 710,000 sq m of additional office stock in 
Westminster to meet demand. However, such 
calculations would assume that additional jobs are 
only created through the provision of new office 
floorspace. Structural changes in the way offices 
are viewed in many growth sectors as places for 
interaction and collaboration, rather than places to 
go and work at a fixed desk is resulting in a rise in 
agile working practices such as working from home, 
hot desking, and shared workspace models – all of 
which enable the more efficient use of space. If this 
continues, it will reduce the extent to which new 
jobs need additional dedicated office floorspace, 
and significant jobs growth could be delivered 
through the refurbishment and upgrading of 
outdated stock, to better facilitate such working 
practices through ‘spaceless growth’. The London 
Office Policy Review also therefore looked at 
alternative scenarios that treats space with lower 
than London average employment densities  
as excess stock – which could reduce demand  
for additional floorspace in Westminster to 
approximately 213,000 sq m over the period  
2016-2041 – or 179,000 sq m over the Plan period. 
As future office jobs growth is likely to come from a 
combination of new office floorspace and the more 
efficient use of existing stock, 445,000 sq m of 
additional office floorspace (i.e. a mid-point 
between 179,000 sq m and 710,000 sq m) is 
considered a reasonable minimum amount of office 
floorspace growth to plan for – taking account of 
likely capacity in commercial areas, and the need to 
respect Westminster’s townscape and heritage.13.3 / Planning for such growth recognises that the 
continued loss of office stock from the city at past 
rates is unsustainable. This plan therefore provides 
stronger protection for existing office floorspace 
than has historically been the case, encourages its 
renewal and modernisation, and seeks additional 
provision, in accordance with recognition in the 
London Plan of the strategic importance of the 
central London office market.
Growth sectors
13.4 / The diversity of Westminster’s economy is 
one of its great strengths, positively contributing to 
its resilience. Alongside its world-class retail, arts 
and entertainment, and hospitality offer, the city is 
highly attractive to a number of economic sectors 
associated with office activity. The city has more 
registered businesses than any other London 
borough in each of the following categories: 
information and communication, finance and 
insurance, property, and professional, scientific 
and technical.4 It is also second only to the City of 
London in terms of businesses administration and 
support services. Together, these sectors provide 
a diverse range of jobs, including in software 
development, film production, advertising, 
accounting, legal services, medical research, real 
estate, creative industries, investment funds and 
insurance. Growth in these high value industries, 
which is projected in the London Office Policy 
Review to underpin London’s continued economic 
4 Inter-Departmental Business Register 2018, ONSgrowth, will drive demand for future office 
floorspace growth in Westminster.
Opportunities for office floorspace growth
13.5 / The West End, along with the Opportunity 
Areas at Paddington, Victoria and Tottenham  
Court Road, provide the main opportunities for 
significant office growth. These areas of the city:
 –are home to existing concentrations of such use 
by a variety of occupiers (from small spaces in 
Mayfair and St James’s, to large floorplates in 
Victoria and Paddington);
 –include clusters of activity in growth sectors  
– such as in the creative industries in Soho;
 –represent areas of high demand (Paddington in 
particular has seen substantial office gains over 
the period 1997-2018 of over 134,000 sq m);5
 –are benefiting from investment in public transport 
infrastructure (including the Elizabeth Line and in 
the future, potentially Crossrail 2); and
 –offer opportunities for future growth and 
intensification.
5 Pipeline data, March 201874
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
13.6 / Office growth in these locations will be 
secured through a combination of:
 –the refurbishment and expansion of existing stock;
 –the development of new office buildings  
at a greater density than the buildings they 
replace; 
 –the inclusion of additional office floorspace  
as part of new mixed-use developments; and 
 –the reconfiguration of existing commercial 
spaces, which could include changes of use  
that are deemed permitted development. 
13.7 / While commercial uses including offices are 
a strategic function of the CAZ as set out in the 
London Plan, it is important to recognise that some 
parts of the CAZ, such as much of Pimlico, parts of 
Knightsbridge, Mayfair, Belgravia, Marylebone and 
Fitzrovia all include streets that are wholly or 
predominantly residential in character. Policy 
therefore seeks to direct offices to those parts of 
the CAZ that are of a commercial or mixed-use 
nature, in order to protect local character and 
residential amenity. The dense nature of 
Westminster makes it difficult to accurately and 
definitively map clear boundaries of different 
character areas on a city-wide level. As such, 
judgements will be based on an assessment of the 
mix of land uses within the vicinity of a 
development site, and any assessments of local 
character within made neighbourhood plans.13.8 / Beyond these key office markets, further 
provision of new employment space in the NWEDA 
and the Church Street / Edgware Road Housing 
Renewal Area can help complement regeneration 
schemes and secure a more sustainable pattern of 
growth. New employment space in these areas, 
where land values are lower, can help support small 
start-up businesses and enhance job opportunities 
in areas of deprivation. They could also offer scope 
for a more diverse range of workspaces than the 
office orientated activity found in more central 
locations. The provision of affordable workspace 
here, both as a meanwhile use and that provided by 
managed workspace providers, will be supported. 
Such provision elsewhere in Westminster could also 
help support growth in small businesses.
13.9 / Offices are identified in national planning 
policy as a town centre use, and recent changes  
to the use classes order increase flexibility for a 
wider range of uses typically found in town centres 
categorised as Class E, to enable them to evolve 
as multifunctional places to work, shop, and spend 
leisure time. Additional office floorspace provision  
will therefore be supported across our highly 
accessible network of town centres as they 
continue to evolve as multi-functional areas  
of commercial activity.
Changing working practices
13.10 / Technological advances are clearly 
resulting in changing working practices, which 
new and improved workspaces need to respond 
to. A growth in hot-desking, remote working, less regimented working hours, freelancing and small 
businesses are all increasing demand for more 
flexible workspaces that better facilitate 
collaboration and provide ancillary facilities on-site 
for workers to help improve their work-life balance.
13.11 / To enable growing sectors to continue  
to thrive, new and refurbished employment 
floorspace should be designed to meet the needs 
of modern occupiers. This could include providing 
dedicated space for hot-desking, informal 
meetings and collaboration, hosting conferences, 
and the provision of on-site amenities that helps 
make them attractive to a talented workforce. 
Proposals to this effect should be clearly detailed 
on floor plans, with the rationale behind them 
detailed in planning or design and access 
statements. Development should also offer flexible 
spaces and leasing arrangements that can adapt 
to occupier’s changing demands through the 
life-cycle of their business. Doing so is consistent 
with national and London planning policy that new 
and emerging business sectors should be planned 
for through the provision of a range of workspaces.
Protection of central London’s office function
13.12 / Loss of office floorspace from the CAZ risks 
undermining its key strategic employment 
functions as defined in the London Plan, and as a 
result, the global competitiveness of the London 
economy. We have therefore introduced an Article 
4 Direction to ensure that proposals for loss of 
offices to C3 residential continue to require 
planning permission. Given past levels of loss,  75
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
and the national, international and London 
significance of the central London office market, 
further net loss of total office floorspace from the 
CAZ to residential or hotel use will normally be 
resisted, subject to some exceptions.
13.13 / Some parts of the CAZ are largely 
residential in character but include isolated office 
buildings that have historically come from 
conversion of buildings originally built and 
occupied as residential. Where such office stock 
does not meet the needs of modern ways of 
working, and there is limited scope for it to be 
adapted to do so, conversion back to its original 
residential use can provide benefits in terms of 
townscape, local character, and increasing 
housing supply.
13.14 / There may also be instances where existing 
office stock within the CAZ has reached the end  
of its economic life, and there is no interest in  
its continued use for such purposes, or for other 
uses that fall within Class E of the Use Classes 
Order. In such circumstances, its redevelopment or 
re-purposing for educational uses, such as new 
teaching and research facilities, can provide 
economic benefits in terms of improving skills and 
contributing to the further growth and clustering of 
knowledge-based industries. Community uses, 
such as new health facilities, can help address 
needs arising from a growing population and 
provide significant employment opportunities. 
Where there is also no interest in these uses, well 
designed and managed hotels can support London’s visitor economy and the strategic 
functions of the CAZ. Past levels of permissions to 
convert or redevelop office floorspace from the 
CAZ to hotel use in Westminster, however, justify 
only continuing to support such proposals after 
other reasonable options have been exhausted.
The North West Economic Development  
Area (NEWDA)
13.15 / Promoting growth and diversification in 
economic activity are central to our strategy  
for the future development of the NWEDA. To  
ensure growth is not at the expense of local job 
opportunities, while the intensification of the area 
to deliver much needed housing is supported, 
re-development proposals should not result in  
the loss of existing employment floorspace.
13.16 / To assess if development proposals would 
result in the loss of workspace suitable for SMEs, 
applicants should provide details of existing and 
previous occupiers, how much space they rent / 
rented, and at what cost. This will be used alongside 
any information provided by such occupiers on their 
needs in terms of building layout and locational 
requirements for proximity to supply chains, to 
inform re-provision proposals. The provision of 
co-working space within new developments could 
help meet the needs of SMEs, in addition to offering 
other economic benefits, such as facilitating the 
clustering of entrepreneurial activity.14. Town centres, high streets 
and the CAZ
A. The intensification of town centres, high 
streets and the CAZ to provide additional 
floorspace for main town centre uses is 
supported in principle, subject to impact on 
townscape and heritage. Proposals in 
existing town centres and high streets will 
enhance and diversify their offer as places 
to shop, work and spend leisure time.
B. Uses that provide active frontages and serve 
visiting members of the public will be required 
at the ground floor throughout the town 
centre hierarchy. Uses serving visiting 
members of the public will also be supported 
at first floor level within centres characterised 
by large format, multi-level stores. The use of 
upper floors for residential use is supported in 
principle across all parts of the town centre  
hierarchy except the International Centres.
C. All development within the town centre 
hierarchy will be of a scale, type and format 
that reflects and enhances the role and 
function of the centre within which it  
is proposed.
1. The International Centres of the West End 
and Knightsbridge will provide a focal 
point for large format comparison retail, 
supported by complementary town centre CONTENTS
76
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
uses that increase customer dwell time, 
and new office floorspace; 
2. The WERLSPA will provide a wide mix of 
commercial uses that support the West 
End’s role as a retail, employment and 
cultural hub, and as a centre for the 
visitor, evening and night-time economy; 
3. CAZ Retail Clusters will provide further 
large format retail and complementary 
town centre uses to meet the needs of 
residents, workers, and visitors; 
4. Major, District and Local Centres will 
provide a mix of commercial and 
community uses to meet residents’ day 
to day shopping needs, provide local 
employment opportunities, and support 
opportunities for community interaction. 
D. The provision of a range of retail unit sizes 
including small stores in redevelopment 
proposals are supported in principle.
E. Temporary proposals for ‘meanwhile use’  
of empty spaces within the town centre 
hierarchy will be supported where it can  
be demonstrated that they will enhance 
town centre vitality and viability, and will  
be appropriately managed.
F. New and extended markets will be supported 
throughout the town centre hierarchy and wider CAZ where any negative impacts on 
the surrounding area (including the 
operational requirements of existing 
businesses in the vicinity) can be mitigated.
G. Town centre uses will also be supported in 
principle throughout the parts of the CAZ with 
a commercial or mixed-use character, having 
regard to the existing mix of land uses and 
neighbourhood plan policies. In the parts of 
the CAZ that are commercial or mixed-use in 
character, the loss of town centre uses from 
the ground floor will be resisted.
H. Only sites that fall outside of the CAZ and the 
town centre hierarchy will be required to pass 
the sequential test set out in the National 
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). Retail 
impact assessments will only be required for 
proposals of more than 2,500 sq m of (gross) 
new retail floorspace outside the town centre 
hierarchy, including proposals for Class E 
(commercial, business and service) uses that 
would enable at least 2,500 sq m of (gross) 
floorspace to be occupied by retail use.
I. Within largely residential areas not well served 
by the town centre hierarchy, conversion of 
existing shops to residential use will be 
resisted. Alternative uses that maintain an 
active frontage, provide opportunities for 
employment, or serve local community needs, will be supported where any negative impacts 
on residential amenity are fully mitigated.
Town centre hierarchy
14.1 / Westminster’s town centre hierarchy includes 
some of the most iconic parts of London and 
provides a diverse network of areas to shop, work, 
visit and socialise. It includes the International 
Centres of the West End and Knightsbridge, the 
WERLSPA, CAZ Retail Clusters, Major, District, and 
Local Centres. The locations of these, along with 
the CAZ boundary, are shown in Figure 15.  
14.2 / Most of these centres are designated through 
the London Plan. Additional areas designated 
through this plan include the Local Centres and 
some CAZ Retail Clusters. All are based on the 
findings of our Town Centre Health Check 2018, 
which monitors the performance of our centres in 
terms of mix of uses, levels of vacancies, and their 
boundaries. The intensification of these centres, 
through a combination of the repurposing and 
extension of, and replacement of, existing buildings, 
will be necessary to secure their long-term 
sustainability. High quality new developments that 
respond to their surroundings and are supported by 
investment in a healthier physical environment will 
be vital in ensuring key commercial centres in 
Westminster remain attractive to a full range of users 
as places to shop, work, and spend leisure time.77
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 15: Town Centre Hierarchy
78
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Growth and diversification
14.3 / GLA forecasts based on a range of scenarios 
indicate that despite the growing use of online 
shopping and increased space efficiency within 
stores, over the period from 2015 to 2041, there will 
be a need for between 284,693 sq m and 399,021 
sq m (net) additional comparison retail floorspace in 
Westminster,6 assuming base expenditure levels 
continue. Over the Plan period, this equates to 
229,944 - 322,286 sq m. Only small-scale growth 
in convenience shopping is expected as retail 
growth will mainly be driven by increased spending 
from domestic and overseas visitors and workers 
on comparison goods. The extent and distribution 
of existing convenience shopping in Westminster 
means demand for additional provision to meet  
the growing resident populations’ day-to-day 
needs are likely to be minimal.
14.4 / The increased trend in retail towards larger, 
more successful centres that serve a range of 
visitors highlights the need to continue to plan  
for retail growth in Westminster through the 
intensification of existing centres and high streets 
– where some additional building height can also 
accommodate office floorspace growth and other 
town centre uses. This is also key to why 
Westminster is anticipated to absorb a significant 
proportion of London’s future retail growth. 
Furthermore, the Town Centre Health Check 2018 
indicated that town centres and high streets across 
6 Consumer Expenditure and Comparison Goods Floorspace Westminster largely buck the trend of nationwide 
struggles – with healthy, diverse centres that have 
relatively low levels of vacancy.
14.5 / To ensure their long-term sustainability, it is 
important that town centres and high streets can 
adapt to changing consumer demands and 
behaviours, and the challenges posed by online 
retail. Recent revisions to the Use Classes Order 
recognise this, by combining a number of different 
town centre uses including shops, cafés and 
restaurants, offices, gyms and health centres as 
Class E (commercial, business and service) uses – 
thereby enabling a shift towards mixed-use and 
multi-purpose spaces; both within commercial 
parades, and individual units. The focus across our 
town centres will therefore be on providing a mix of 
commercial uses that provide activity at street level, 
and creates a welcoming, attractive and healthy 
environment for consumers to shop, access 
services, and spend leisure time, whilst also 
supporting their role as major employment hubs 
and visitor destinations. Beyond Class E 
(commercial, business and service) uses, other town 
centre uses such as pubs and drinking 
establishments, exhibition spaces, cultural and 
leisure uses, can all help support the future success 
of these key clusters of commercial activity. Ground 
floor residential however, would break up active 
frontages, is not identified as a main town centre 
use in the NPPF, and will therefore be resisted.14.6 / Development across the town centre hierarchy 
should be of a scale, type, and nature that reflects the 
role of the centre within which it is located (see 
explanation of each type of centre below). This will 
ensure the town centre hierarchy is not compromised. 
Proposals should also demonstrate how they will 
enhance the existing centre and mitigate any 
potential negative impacts, having regard to policies 
15 Visitor economy and 16 Food, drink and 
entertainment uses where relevant. Although they 
provide active frontages and serve visiting members 
of the public, a predominance of uses such as shisha 
bars, betting shops and fast-food takeaways (which 
are all classified as sui generis  uses) can undermine 
town centre vitality and viability and be detrimental 
to public health, and should be avoided. For such 
uses, migitating any potential negative effects will 
also require the production and the implementation 
of management plans. 
Unit sizes
14.7 / Subject to the context of a proposed site and 
the part of the retail hierarchy it sits within, 
proposals for major new retail and complementary 
developments will be expected to provide a range 
of unit sizes – to encourage variety in the shopping 
offer and support small business growth. As a 
guide, small shops will generally be considered  
as those under 150 sq m gross retail area.79
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Meanwhile use and innovation
14.8 / Well managed pop-up and meanwhile uses 
across the town centre hierarchy can help 
minimise vacancies while a long-term occupier is 
sought, maintain active frontages, support small 
businesses to test their products, add to the 
vibrancy of an area by attracting new footfall, and 
provide community benefits. All of this, combined 
with an improved public realm, and further 
innovation such as the greater use of digital media 
within stores, and development of new models 
such as brand showrooms and experience centres 
will help ensure our town centres, and high streets 
remain at the cutting edge of the revolution in 
retail, and offer experiences that cannot be 
matched by online shopping.
Markets
14.9 / Suitably located, well designed and 
managed markets can also add to the diversity, 
vibrancy and experience of our town centres. They 
can be a source of fresh, affordable, and locally 
sourced food that supports a healthy diet, 
complement the local retail offer, and like 
meanwhile uses, support small businesses in 
showcasing their products. Existing council-run 
markets within Westminster include:
 –Strutton Ground SW1
 –Tachbrook Street SW1
 –Maida Hill W9 (temporary consent)
 –Church Street NW8 –Berwick Street W1
 –Rupert Street W1.
14.10 / Existing markets will be enhanced  
through partnership working with traders, 
residents and businesses, in accordance with  
our Markets Strategy. Where it has been 
demonstrated that existing markets are no  
longer viable in their existing form and location, 
proposals for comparable re-provision in the 
vicinity impact on the surrounding area.
14.11 / Proposals for new markets will be directed to 
our town centre hierarchy and commercial areas of 
the wider CAZ – to support the existing retail offer 
and minimise disturbance to the amenity of 
residential neighbourhoods. Management plans  
will be sought through legal agreements in order  
to minimise any disturbance – through matters such 
as the arrangements for setting up and removing 
stalls and collecting refuse.
International Centres
14.12 / Within the town centre hierarchy, the West 
End and Knightsbridge International Centres 
provide London’s prime retail destinations and 
offer unparalleled specialist and comparison retail 
of regional and national importance that draws in 
international visitors. The West End International 
Centre includes Oxford Street, Regent Street and 
Bond Street, while Knightsbridge International 
Centre includes Brompton Road and extends 
beyond the city boundary into the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea. Comparison retail is 
the dominant use in these centres, which are 
largely characterised by large format stores, often 
provided over multiple floors.
14.13 / The Mayor of London has identified these 
centres as being of high commercial growth 
potential7 and therefore especially suitable for 
further large-scale retail growth. To reflect their 
role and function, retail provision should be 
predominantly for comparison shopping and 
maintain a strong retail core at ground floor level 
and immediately above. Complementary town 
centre uses that enhance customer experience 
and increase dwell time are also supported, 
particularly on upper floors. In addition, new and 
improved office floorspace on uppers floors can 
support wider jobs growth, and support customer 
spend within the International Centre from a 
worker, as well as visitor population. While 
residential use of upper floors can help sustain 
smaller town centres and high streets that do not 
generate high footfall, they are not supported 
within the International Centres to ensure:
 –they do not fetter opportunities for these 
commercial centres of international importance 
to continue to grow and diversify;
 –the scale of commercial activity in these 
centres, and their operational requirements,  
are not compromised.
7 2017 London Town Centre Health Check,  
Greater London Authority, 201880
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
14.14 / Where provided, non-retail uses should 
enhance and sustain, rather than dilute the centre’s 
comparison shopping role. Convenience shopping, 
such as supermarkets, could also dilute the 
comparison shopping offer and present significant 
servicing issues and they are therefore discouraged.
14.15 / As the UK’s premier shopping street, the 
impact of changes to the retail sector will likely be 
most strongly felt in Oxford Street – particularly 
given the existing presence of large format stores 
and the presence of multiple stores by the same 
operators. Comprehensive proposals for the future 
of the area that respond to these challenges are 
therefore set out in the Oxford Street Place Strategy 
and Delivery Plan. This includes proposals for an 
enhanced public realm befitting the status of the 
area, that will provide a more attractive shopping 
environment and user experience.
West End Retail and Leisure Special Policy 
Area (WERLSPA)
14.16 / The WERLSPA covers the wider West End, 
where there is an insatiable demand for new 
floorspace across all land uses. Beyond the West 
End International Centre lie iconic areas of retail and 
leisure activity, such as Covent Garden, Leicester 
Square and Theatreland. Away from the main 
shopping streets, the land use is highly diverse, 
containing a mix of commercial activity, including 
retail, pubs, bars, restaurants, theatres, cinemas and 
other entertainment venues. Together, these provide 
a wealth of attractions that draw in visitors and make 
a major contribution to London’s world city status. The mix of uses also provides rest and refreshment  
for workers and shoppers during the day.
14.17 / Alongside retail growth, a balanced mix of 
complementary leisure, entertainment, food and 
drink and cultural and employment offers are 
welcomed to help the West End to grow, not only  
as a global shopping destination, but also as an 
enhanced leisure and employment destination. 
14.18 / Continued growth in a diverse range of 
commercial uses in the West End will make an 
important contribution to meeting Westminster’s 
employment growth targets. To ensure such growth 
occurs in a manner that maintains and enhances the 
West End’s global reputation, and improvements to 
the local environment are secured, we will 
continue to work within the West End Partnership 
(WEP) and with other stakeholders.
CAZ Retail Clusters
14.19 / The CAZ Retail Clusters provide clusters  
of retail and other complementary town centre uses 
that make a major contribution towards the strategic 
functions of the CAZ, as set out in the London Plan. 
Most are designated through the London Plan, 
though some additional areas have also been 
re-classified from designations in the previous  
City Plan as ‘other centres in the CAZ’ or ‘named 
streets’. All CAZ Retail Clusters meet the needs  
of a combination of residents, workers and visitors, 
adding to central London’s wide appeal. Catering  
to this wide audience, the offer in some clusters 
includes large format retail over multiple floors.  New development will respond to local character 
in terms of the scale and nature of the proposed 
uses. The nature of activity across the CAZ  
means that in many instances retail and other 
complementary town centre uses will be welcomed 
above the ground floor, though proposals will 
need to respect that the CAZ is also home to a 
large residential population. Supporting larger 
scale retail and complementary town centre uses 
within these clusters can also help respect the 
character of parts of the wider CAZ that are 
predominantly residential.
Queensway/ Westbourne Grove Major Centre
14.20 / Queensway / Westbourne Grove Major 
Centre is the only Major Centre in Westminster.  
It is designated as such due to the scale and nature 
of its mix of convenience and comparison retail 
activity and complementary town centre uses.  
It has a traditional high street character largely 
surrounded by residential areas and provides an 
important convenience shopping function to these 
local residents. Over the Plan period, new 
development should ensure the centre meets the 
needs of its local catchment area through a variety 
of commercial space at ground floor, including 
shops and services, workplaces, and community 
facilities, supported by residential development 
above and investment in the public realm.81
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
District Centres
14.21 / The District Centres of Praed Street, St 
Johns Wood High Street, Harrow Road and Church 
Street each have their own distinct character and 
challenges that new development will need to 
respond to. The proximity of Praed Street to the 
Paddington Opportunity Area is likely to increase 
demand for retail floorspace that is more focussed 
on new resident’s needs than the current offer, 
which is more orientated towards visitors, tourists 
and workers. Such provision could also help serve 
existing residential areas to the north (around Little 
Venice) that have limited convenience retail 
floorspace nearby. The presence of boutique 
fashion and independent retailers in small format 
stores is fundamental to the character of St John’s 
Wood High Street, although there is a lack of 
leisure and community facilities in the centre. 
Harrow Road currently suffers from a comparative 
lack of quality and diversity in its retail offer. A 
balance therefore needs to be found between 
protecting the remaining retail and allowing for 
other uses that provide new employment 
opportunities and bring greater activity to the 
centre. Church Street provides a range of shops 
and services to local residents and has a long-
established antiques market and theatre that hosts 
community events. A growth in retail, cultural and 
community facilities in the area will support 
sustainable growth as regeneration proposals 
come forward.Local Centres
14.22 / There are numerous Local Centres in 
Westminster. They are smaller in scale than District 
Centres, playing a more localised role for residents 
and workers. They normally contain a mix of 
convenience goods shops, local service uses, such as 
pharmacies and launderettes, restaurants, cafés and 
pubs at ground floor. These centres can provide a 
focal point for community activity, and the availability 
of a range of shops and services close to where 
people live can be particularly important for the less 
mobile. Over the Plan period, these centres will 
maintain a healthy mix of uses that includes a range  
of convenience shops for local residents to carry out 
their day-to-day shopping needs, supplemented by 
complementary uses that enhance the centres’ vitality 
and viability. This includes uses such as banks, advice 
centres, doctor’s surgeries and cafés.
14.23 / New Local Centres have been designated 
through this plan, based on the findings of the  
Town Centre Health Check 2018. They include the 
designation of a previously unidentified centre  
at Elgin Avenue / Chippenham Road, and the 
re-classification of small centres in Pimlico and 
Fitzrovia that serve a primarily local function.
14.24 / Beyond the existing town centre hierarchy, 
we will work with neighbourhood forums to identify 
additional retail frontages of importance to 
neighbourhood areas and support neighbourhood 
plan policies to guide development within them.The Central Activities Zone (CAZ)
14.25 / Whilst not forming a part of Westminster’s 
town centre hierarchy, the wider CAZ as defined in 
the London Plan covers much of the city. Town 
centre uses provide a key element of the mix of 
uses within it and contribute to its character and 
strategic functions. However, the CAZ is also 
home to many local residents and some parts of it 
are also wholly residential in character. To respect 
its many functions, and the need to protect 
residential amenity, policy support is therefore 
provided for town centre uses within the parts of 
the CAZ that are of a commercial or mixed-use 
character. Furthermore, this character and function 
will be maintained by resisting the loss of ground 
floor town centre uses from these areas to 
residential development that would break up 
commercial frontages, and may result in a poor 
living environment. In applying this policy 
approach, the dense nature of Westminster makes 
it difficult to accurately and definitively map clear 
boundaries of different character areas on a city-
wide level. As such, judgements will be based on 
an assessment of the mix of land uses within the 
vicinity of a development site, and any 
assessments of local character within made 
neighbourhood plans. Our approach to 
requirements for sequential tests and impact 
assessments – as set out in the NPPF – reflects 
that whilst commercial uses should be supported 
throughout the parts of the CAZ with a commercial 
or mixed-use character, the town centre hierarchy 
should provide the key focus of retail related 
growth. However, recent revisions to the Use 82
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Classes Order mean that it may not always be 
clear if a development proposal will provide retail 
floorspace, as permission can be sought for a 
variety of uses under Class E (commercial, 
business and service) uses. Where a proposal for 
more than 2,500 sq m of Class E floorspace is 
proposed outside of the town centre hierarchy 
with no restrictions on types of future occupier,  
a retail impact test will be required. This will help 
ensure that any significant out of centre retail 
provision would not be harmful to the retail 
function of the town centre hierarchy.
Existing shops outside of the town  
centre hierarchy
14.26 / The extent of Westminster’s town centre 
hierarchy means that most residents benefit from 
good access to a diverse range of shops and 
services. However, outside of the CAZ there are 
some residential areas that are not within easy 
walking distance (i.e. 400m or less) of a 
designated town centre or high street. In such 
areas, where isolated convenience stores that do 
not form part of a wider parade exist (e.g. a corner 
shop), they provide a vital function for meeting the 
day to day needs of surrounding communities, and 
can help avoid unnecessary trips by car. Under 
recent changes to the Use Classes Order, such 
stores can be converted to any Class E 
(commercial, business, and service) use without 
planning permission. Beyond this, some other 
uses falling outside of Class E, such as community 
halls or a pub or drinking establishment, may also 
provide enhanced amenities for the local community, and changes to these uses  
will therefore also be supported subject to  
appropriate mitigation of any negative amenity 
impacts (e.g. noise disturbance from a pub or 
drinking establishment).
14.27 / Furthermore, outside of the CAZ some  
small undesignated parades of shops and services 
exist. The Town Centre Health Check 2018 found 
that these suffer from:
 –vacancies;
 –poor physical appearance;
 –concentrations of uses detrimental to public health 
such as hot food takeaways and betting shops.
14.28 / As recent changes to the Use Classes 
Order have increased flexibility in terms of the use 
of premises within such parades, policy also 
supports a range of new uses that can provide 
community benefits (subject to impact on amenity), 
to help improve the vitality and viability of these 
parades. Piecemeal conversion to residential 
development that breaks up any frontages and 
provides little benefit to the wider community 
meanwhile, will be resisted. 15. Visitor Economy
A. We will maintain and enhance the 
attractiveness of Westminster as a visitor 
destination, balancing the needs of visitors, 
businesses and local communities.
ARTS AND CULTURAL USES
B. All existing arts and cultural uses and uses 
of cultural significance will be protected 
and proposals for enhancement will be 
supported in principle. Proposals for new 
arts and cultural uses will be supported in:
1. Strategic Cultural Areas when they 
complement the existing cultural  
offer; and
2. the town centre hierarchy; and
3. commercial areas of the CAZ.
Outside of the CAZ, new arts and cultural 
uses will be of a scale and nature 
appropriate to the local context and of 
benefit to the local community.
C. Commercial developments associated  
with an arts or cultural use should be 
clearly ancillary, maintain its core arts or 
cultural function which could not otherwise 
be achieved, and be of clear and lasting 
benefit to that use.83
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
D. In the exceptional circumstances where  
it is necessary to redevelop a theatre or 
cinema, a replacement of equivalent size 
and standard will be required. Proposals  
to improve theatres and cinemas will be 
encouraged and should have particular 
regard to their heritage designation.
EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC REALM
E. Events in the public realm will benefit the 
city, its people and enterprises. They 
should support the character and function 
of the area in which they take place and 
must be organised in ways that minimise 
the impact on the long-term access  
to open space, amenity of residents, 
businesses and others, and maintain  
the quality of the public realm.
HOTELS AND CONFERENCE FACILITIES
F. Existing hotels will be protected, except 
where the proposal is in a predominantly 
residential area and would re-instate an 
original residential use, or where the 
existing use has significant negative  
effects on residential amenity.G. New hotels and conference facilities will be 
directed to: 
1. commercial areas of the CAZ; and
2. town centres that are District Centres  
or higher in the town centre hierarchy. 
H. Applications for extensions and upgrades 
to existing hotels will have regard to 
impacts on the wider area. Development 
proposals should improve accessibility and 
enable the extended lifetime of buildings 
by incorporating principles and measures 
of sustainable design wherever possible. 
Development proposals should, where 
appropriate, reveal the historic significance 
of hotels located within heritage assets.
PUBLIC TOILETS
I. Safe, secure and publicly accessible  
toilets will be required in proposals  
that generate a large amount of visitors 
including large retail, leisure and 
entertainment developments, tourist 
attractions and transport interchanges.15.1 / The visitor industry forms an important part 
of Westminster’s economy, creating a significant 
number of jobs. Growth in this sector must be 
balanced with the need to protect the liveability  
of the city and enhance participation of local 
communities in cultural activities.
Arts and cultural uses
15.2 / Attractions, events, businesses and 
institutions in Westminster attract visitors from 
around the world and contribute to the appeal  
of the city. These include uses that represent  
a major part of the nation’s cultural heritage,  
such as the Westminster World Heritage Site, 
London Zoo and Lord’s Cricket Ground.
15.3 / There are many parts of the city that have  
a distinct cultural focus or present a more localised 
cultural offer. These include Soho for film and 
visual effects, Church Street for art and antiques, 
and Covent Garden for street entertainment.  
We seek to protect both those uses of national  
and international significance as well as those  
that serve particularly local communities. 
Developments that enhance the visitor experience 
and provide interesting activities for residents  
will be supported in appropriate locations.
15.4 / The designated Strategic Cultural Areas 
contain a number of renowned arts and cultural 
uses, which we seek to promote, protect and 
enhance. The West End Strategic Cultural Area 
(SCA) has one of the largest clusters of cultural and 
entertainment uses in the country, including CONTENTS
84
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 16: Strategic Cultural Areas
85
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Theatreland, Trafalgar Square, the National and 
National Portrait galleries and Somerset House. The 
Millbank SCA along the River Thames includes Tate 
Britain and the Chelsea College of Art and Design. 
In the Knightsbridge SCA a concentration of 
institutions of international importance includes the 
Royal Albert Hall, the Serpentine Gallery, the Royal 
College of Art and the Royal College of Music.
15.5 / We recognise that commercial activities, 
such as cafés and restaurants, can help arts and 
cultural facilities to attract additional visitors and 
generate income to fund their core activities. 
However, these activities should not dilute the 
primary arts or cultural function of the venue,  
harm the character of the use or compromise  
its operation. We only support these ancillary 
activities when they are part of a long-term 
strategy to maintain and enhance the arts or 
cultural value of the venue. Management plans 
may be required to mitigate any potential  
negative impacts of these activities.
15.6 / Given their valuable economic and 
reputational contribution to Westminster as a 
cultural centre, replacement theatres and cinemas 
may be required to be provided within a stated 
period to ensure the continuity of the use. Any 
replacement theatre or cinema should seat at least 
the same number of people as the original and  
be fully equipped to cater for live theatrical 
productions. A reduction in seating capacity  
may be allowed as part of cinema or theatre 
refurbishments, if this is necessary to improve accessibility or visibility, or other improvements 
relating to the operation of the theatre.
15.7 / We recognise the difficulties faced in 
upgrading theatre facilities to meet the needs of 
theatregoers and the standards they expect, while 
minimising adverse effects on theatrical heritage. 
We will continue to work closely with the theatre 
industry and other agencies to seek to resolve these 
issues, whilst ensuring that Westminster’s unique 
heritage is maintained. We will continue to consult 
with The Theatres Trust and the Society of London 
Theatres on applications relating to theatres.
Events in the public realm
15.8 / The public realm is an important arena for an 
increasingly diverse range of functions, 
experiences and cultural activities for the nation as 
a whole. These range from international sporting 
events, bespoke art installations, Armed Forces 
commemorative events, to the Lord Mayor’s 
annual procession, Royal celebration events,  
Pride London and a rich variety of other 
commercial, civic and cultural events.
15.9 / Although many events will not require formal 
planning permission, we intend to ensure our 
planning functions are aligned with other powers 
and responsibilities in managing events safely and 
effectively, with any negative impacts on the built 
environment minimised and mitigated.8
8 Our emerging Active Events Protocol should be consulted15.10 / Management plans are required to set  
out how the event will be managed; the length  
of time necessary for set-up and dismantling of  
any structures or equipment required; and how  
the organisers will cover the cost of, and 
contribute to any clean-up of public areas and 
return of functionality of space required after the 
event.9 They should also set out arrangements to 
work with the police, fire and ambulance services 
as part of the event, where appropriate.
15.11 / Proposals for temporary events will be 
assessed based on the short-term impacts of the 
event itself, but also the cumulative impacts of all 
events in the local area – including road closures 
and residential amenity.
Hotels and conference facilities
15.12 / Any significant decline in the extent of 
visitor accommodation in Westminster would  
have significant impacts on strategically  
important central London activities and levels  
of employment. Therefore, a strong level of 
protection is given to existing hotels.
15.13 / The CAZ is the centre of commerce and 
activity in London, served by excellent national 
and international public transport connections.  
It is therefore an appropriate location for hotels 
and conference facilities. Hotels and conference 
9 The Royal Parks and Westminster’s Paddington Recreation 
Ground utilise management plans for temporary events which 
could be used as a template for other management plans.86
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
facilities may also be appropriate in all town 
centres (except local centres), where they enhance 
their role and function and there are no adverse 
impacts on the wider area, including on residential 
properties. When assessing proposals for new 
hotels, hotel extensions and conference facilities, 
we will take into account the site location, 
relationship to neighbouring uses, scale of 
accommodation and facilities proposed (the 
number of bedrooms and nature of other services 
the hotel offers), highways and parking. Proposals 
for extensions and upgrades to existing hotels will 
also consider how the sustainability and 
accessibility of the building can be improved. 
When located within heritage assets and where 
appropriate, development should better reveal the 
historic significance of the building.
15.14 / There is a need to ensure a balance 
between hotel and residential uses so that they 
can all function well, while also ensuring a good 
quality of life for residents. Particularly large or 
intensively used hotels or conference facilities  
are often not compatible with predominantly 
residential streets, because the amount of activity 
they generate can cause amenity problems.
15.15 / The change of use of hotels to residential 
use will be encouraged where the existing hotel  
is not purpose built and is demonstrated to be 
causing adverse effects on residential amenity.Public toilets
15.16 / Publicly-accessible toilets provide an 
important facility for residents, workers and 
visitors. They contribute to keeping London’s 
streets clean, and reduce the risk of anti-social 
behaviour. They are especially important for some 
groups, such as the elderly, families with children, 
or those with certain health conditions.
15.17 / For the purposes of this policy, large retail 
developments are those having 1,000 sq m of gross 
floorspace or more. Large entertainment uses are 
those having 500 sq m of gross floorspace or more. 
The toilets should be maintained at the applicant’s 
expense as part of the overall maintenance of any 
development. Toilets accessible to the public 
should be clearly sign-posted within developments 
to ensure they are easily located and the needs of 
less mobile people must be taken into account in 
the design of new toilets. Facilities should be well-
managed, and their opening hours should reflect 
the needs of the area.16. Food, drink and entertainment
A. Proposals for food and drink and 
entertainment uses will be of a type  
and size appropriate to their location.  
The over-concentration of those uses will be 
further prevented where this could harm 
residential amenity, the vitality and character 
of the local area or the diversity that defines 
the role and function of the town centre. 
Applications for entertainment uses will 
need to demonstrate wider benefits for the 
local community, where appropriate.
PROTECTION OF PUBLIC HOUSES
B. Public houses will be protected throughout 
Westminster, except where there is no 
reasonable prospect of its continued use 
as a public house, as evidenced by 
appropriate marketing for a period of at 
least 18 months. Replacement of ancillary 
spaces on upper floors to public houses, 
such as function rooms or accommodation, 
may be acceptable where it can be 
satisfactorily demonstrated that loss of this 
floorspace will not compromise the viability 
or function of the public house.
HOT FOOD TAKEAWAYS AND DELIVERIES
C. Proposals for hot food takeaways within 
200m walking distance from the entrance 
of a primary or secondary school will not  
be supported.87
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
D. Provision for food deliveries from 
restaurants or cafés, including facilities for 
platform-based delivery, will only be 
supported where it is demonstrated that 
the facilities do not result in a change of 
use to hot food takeaway or other uses 
including composite / sui generis  uses.
E. Purpose-built facilities for platform-based 
deliveries will only be supported when they 
are purposely designed to limit the adverse 
impacts of this type of delivery mechanism.
SHISHA SMOKING
F. The use of premises and outdoor areas for 
shisha smoking in exceptional circumstances 
may be permitted within the town centre 
hierarchy, provided any unacceptable 
impacts on public health and the amenity of 
the surrounding area (including residential 
properties, the pedestrian environment and 
the operational requirements of existing 
businesses in the vicinity) are adequately 
mitigated. Applicants will therefore be 
required to demonstrate how any negative 
impacts of the proposal can be mitigated 
through the implementation of a 
management plan for the premises.16.1 / Westminster has a vibrant entertainment 
sector, including a huge range of food and drink 
uses. This plays a vital role in supporting the  
visitor economy, providing local employment 
opportunities and contributing to London’s world-
city status. Given the recent changes in the Use 
Classes Order we cannot control growth of cafes 
and restaurants that are now in a new Class E. The 
focus of this policy will therefore be on other uses 
such as takeaways, shisha smoking bars and other 
drinking establishments that are sui generis  uses. 
Much of the entertainment sector is concentrated 
in the West End, but clusters also exist in other 
parts of the city, such as Edgware Road and 
Queensway / Bayswater. Proposals for the 
provision of these mix of uses within the WERLSPA 
will be supported provided they do not lead to 
over-concentration owing to the impacts on 
servicing and amenity.
16.2 / The impacts of food, drink and 
entertainment uses on the surrounding area need 
to be carefully managed. Proposals for food, drink 
and entertainment uses should be accompanied 
by an assessment of development impacts, which 
should be proportionate to the likely impact of the 
proposal. This is based on the principle that larger 
scale proposals, and those with later opening 
hours, will be likely to have disproportionately 
larger impacts on surrounding areas. These 
impacts will also be felt more strongly within 
smaller commercial areas, given their role and 
function. The type of use proposed, as well as  
the concentration of uses in proximity, will also  be taken into account. Applicants will be required 
to produce a management plan setting out the 
steps identified as a result of the assessment. 
Implementation of management plans will be 
secured by planning condition and / or legal 
agreements as appropriate.
16.3 / The cumulative impact of multiple food,  
drink and entertainment uses in a particular area 
can have a negative impact on the functioning  
and use of an area and can negatively impact 
residential amenity. We will therefore prevent  
the over-concentration of these uses and require 
proposals to make sure any negative impacts are 
managed (applying the Agent of Change principle).
16.4 / Applicants proposing new entertainment 
uses will set out in their planning statements the 
benefits that the local community will gain from 
these uses. Arrangements may be formalised 
through a legal agreement, where appropriate. 
Local community functions provided by new 
entertainment uses could include discounted 
access to space for community functions, or the 
provision of learning and training for the local 
community associated with the use.
Protection of public houses
16.5 / While we acknowledge that under the new 
Use Class Order public houses and other drinking 
establishments such as wine bars are sui generis , 
this policy specifically applies only to public 
houses. Although the public health risks of alcohol 
consumption are recognised, public houses can 88
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
play an important role as social hubs at the heart of 
communities, add to the diversity of commercial 
areas, and make a positive contribution towards 
townscape and local identity. They include many 
premises that have Best Bar None10 status. The 
protection of public houses is supported by both 
national policy and the London Plan.11
16.6 / Latest records indicate there are 439  
public houses in Westminster, of which 87% are  
in conservation areas and 28% are listed. They  
can support the economy by providing direct 
employment, supporting food suppliers and the 
brewing industries, and helping make Westminster a 
desirable place in which to work and do business. 
Despite this, they are facing increasing threat of 
closure. Recent monitoring data shows that over 
recent years there has been an increasing loss  
of floorspace for drinking establishments. These 
include venues aimed at specific communities (such 
as LGBTQI+), the decline of which we seek to halt 
through the introduction of this policy and by working 
in partnership with community groups, landlords, the 
Mayor of London and other partners. This policy 
essentially seeks to halt the loss of public houses 
through incorporating flexibility that differentiates 
between active public house use and ancillary upper 
floor space to allow the latter to be changed to other 
10 Best Bar None is an accreditation scheme promoting 
responsible management and operation of alcohol  
related premises.
11 See paragraph 92 of the NPPF; and Policy HC7 Protecting 
public houses of the London Plan.uses where it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that 
loss of this floorspace will not compromise the 
viability or function of the public house.
Hot food takeaways and deliveries
16.7 / Reducing health inequalities is a priority  
for us. Although being overweight has different 
causes, evidence12 shows a link between the 
consumption of hot food takeaways and obesity. 
We resist new hot food takeaways opening up 
around schools, to protect our children from the 
negative consequences of consuming junk food. 
Due to the high density of schools in Westminster, 
a buffer of 200m is appropriate to allow some 
growth in the sector in the right locations.
16.8 / In recent years there has been significant 
growth in mobile technology-based platforms  
used to order hot food. This often leads to negative 
impacts on the amenity of residents and businesses 
arising from the noise and other disturbance from 
large numbers of delivery agents outside food 
premises or elsewhere. Hot food takeaways fall 
under a different use class to restaurants and cafés 
and by their nature, can result in increased 
disturbance as a result of motor vehicles, mopeds 
and motorbikes taking deliveries of food  
to customers. It is becoming increasingly 
commonplace for restaurants and cafés to offer 
takeaway services with the rise of platform-based 
delivery options. We recognise the convenience of 
12 London Plan topic paper: Hot food takeaways,  
Mayor of London, 2018delivery platforms, however, we will ensure that any 
negative impacts are minimised and managed. We 
will therefore seek to control numbers and hours of 
operation of food deliveries through planning 
conditions to ensure any such services are ancillary 
to the primary use of the premises and will seek to 
promote use of sustainable delivery options.
16.9 / Westminster’s dense pattern of development 
means that it is unlikely that there will be anywhere 
within its boundaries that are suitable for stand-
alone food preparation facilities supporting these 
platforms given their likely amenity impacts, 
particularly in terms of noise and odour.
Shisha smoking
16.10 / Shisha is a flavoured tobacco smoked 
through a waterpipe or hookah. Shisha smoking 
creates smoke containing chemicals which are 
linked to several life limiting diseases, including 
cancer, heart disease and respiratory disease,  
as recognised by Public Health England. Smoke 
free legislation means it cannot be smoked 
indoors in public places, but a licence for outdoor 
smoking is not required. Shisha smoking is often a 
social activity, with people sharing waterpipes. 
This means that the outdoor areas of the premises 
offering shisha smoking are likely to be occupied 
by people wanting to smoke this type of tobacco. 
Although smoking any type of tobacco and under 
any circumstances is harmful, when many people 
smoke together and in the same area, the public 
health risks increase. Smoking material and 
burners needed for shisha smoking and secondary 89
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
smoke from water pipes and fuel sources also 
pose a health risk to non-smokers present in  
the area. We are committed to managing the 
concentration and impacts of any uses detrimental 
to public health throughout the city.
16.11 / An increased amount of outdoor shisha 
premises are emerging in the city, often as  
ancillary uses within cafés and restaurants that  
then incrementally expand. Estimates indicate  
that from the period 2010 – 2013, the number of 
premises more than doubled, from 60, to more  
than 130.13 Such premises are distributed across the 
city, with notable concentrations in Edgware Road.
16.12 / The use of premises and outdoor areas for 
shisha smoking is a sui generis  use, meaning that 
where an applicant seeks to change the use of 
premises or outdoor areas for shisha smoking, 
planning permission will be required.
16.13 / In addition to its direct health impact, 
outdoor shisha smoking, which often occurs late at 
night, can harm amenity through increased noise, 
odour and fumes, particularly in areas with large 
concentrations of these uses. This, in turn, can also 
have an impact on quality of life and public health. 
A loss of retail units for shisha smoking can result 
in a change of character and function of established 
shopping areas. The use of outdoor tables, chairs, 
and charcoal burners can also block pavements 
13 Reducing the Harm of Shisha: towards a strategy  
for Westminster, 2017making it more difficult for people to get around 
the city. We will use planning conditions to seek to 
control the positioning and the numbers of tables 
and chairs used for outdoors shisha smoking, the 
opening hours of the premises and the 
management of waste disposal. Management 
arrangements will be required to safeguard 
residential amenity, minimise disturbance and 
negative impacts on the operational requirements 
of existing businesses in the vicinity and manage 
any negative impacts in the environment. The 
approach to new shisha is necessarily different 
from, for example, drink and entertainment uses 
because shisha smoking is not a licensable activity 
and does not therefore come within the control of 
statutory licensing regime. As such, any necessary 
control must be exerted through the planning 
process. Given the amenity and public health 
impacts of shisha smoking, we are lobbying for 
increased licensing powers to control the 
proliferation of shisha bars.
17. Community infrastructure  
and facilities
NEW INFRASTRUCTURE
A. New community infrastructure and facilities 
will be supported where there is an 
identified present or future need. The 
council will use its Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan alongside other strategies to plan for and deliver new infrastructure. New 
facilities will be of a nature and scale to 
meet identified need and be sufficiently 
flexible to meet the requirements of 
providers as they may change over time.
B. Where new facilities are provided they 
should be designed to accommodate  
a range of community uses wherever 
possible. The council will strongly 
encourage the co-location of facilities  
and access for appropriate organisations 
and the local community.
EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE
C. Existing community facilities and floorspace 
will be protected other than where it can be 
demonstrated that either:
1. the loss or relocation is necessary  
to enable service provision to be 
reconfigured, consolidated, upgraded,  
or delivered more effectively as part  
of a published strategy to improve 
services and meet identified needs; or
2. there is no demand for an alternative 
social and community use for that facility 
or floorspace, evidenced by vacancy  
and appropriate marketing for at least  
18 months.90
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
D. Where a reduction in community floorspace 
is deemed acceptable, other ancillary uses 
will be permitted where they support the 
continued function of the main 
community use.
E. Within designated town centres, where the 
loss of community facilities is deemed 
acceptable, replacement uses with an 
active frontage will be prioritised. For other 
sites in the CAZ, other town centre uses will 
be supported in principle. In all other cases, 
residential use will be preferred.
17.1 / Community infrastructure and facilities are 
integral to supporting people’s everyday lives, 
being used by residents, workers and visitors, and 
are a vital resource to support successful places 
and communities. Community infrastructure and 
facilities consist of:
 –Health facilities e.g. hospitals, GP surgeries.
 –Education facilities e.g. schools, nurseries, 
universities and colleges.
 –Sports and leisure facilities e.g. leisure centres, 
swimming pools, outdoor playing pitches and 
Multi-Use Games Areas.
 –Cultural facilities e.g. theatres, museums and  
art galleries.
 –Social facilities e.g. meeting halls, public 
houses, libraries and places of worship.17.2 / Community facilities and infrastructure  
can be either publicly or privately owned and/or 
operated. Wherever possible, they should have 
shared or extended use to serve the wider 
community, for example, the use of school sports 
facilities beyond the school day for the wider 
community. Shared use of facilities can encourage 
active lifestyles, help ensure the effective use  
of resources and land, reduce maintenance and 
management costs, and encourage joined-up and 
coherent service delivery.
17.3 / Westminster’s community infrastructure 
needs will be kept under review to ensure they 
continue to be met. We will work with providers  
of local services to review existing provision, to 
identify future needs, and ensure the most efficient 
use of land and other assets across the public 
estate in delivering services, with particular use 
made of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). We 
will utilise other council strategies to inform the IDP 
and deliver required infrastructure including our 
existing Active Westminster Strategy, our 
emerging Playing Pitches and Built Facilities 
Strategies, School Organisation and Investment 
Strategy and the Health and Wellbeing Strategy, 
as well as documents prepared by other 
infrastructure providers such as the NHS  
and Thames Water.
New community infrastructure
17.4 / New development will place pressure on 
existing community infrastructure and facilities  
and these must continue to be provided to meet the changing needs of the city, and to mitigate 
impacts on existing services, as Westminster 
grows and changes. We also want to be sure that 
new facilities are only provided where they are 
really needed to avoid facilities being developed 
where there is not an identified need, resulting in 
development sites being under-optimised. We will 
take into account the role of the proposed facility 
beyond just local need – some facilities have a 
wide range of functions including at a regional, 
national or even international level, for example, 
certain educational or medical institutions.
Existing community infrastructure
17.5 / We accept that demands change over time 
and this may result in changes to the pattern of 
service delivery. To be resilient to such changes, 
community facilities need to operate in buildings 
that meet the modern needs of the service and 
those who use them. This may mean that 
co-location of a number of different community 
facilities within a single site or building is 
appropriate, alongside rationalisation of floorspace 
to facilitate this. A good example of this is the 
recent refurbishment of Seymour Leisure Centre  
in Marylebone, which has combined swimming 
facilities with a gym, sports hall and climbing 
centre. There are also plans to co-locate a library 
facility at the site to create a community hub.
17.6 / Nevertheless, we will only accept a 
rationalisation of community floorspace if it is part 
of a published strategy and brings overall benefits 
to the local community or is necessary to deliver a 91
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
new or improved facility. It should not compromise 
the core function of any part of the facility. We  
will encourage (and where appropriate, lead) 
coordinated joint work by public service providers 
to ensure the most effective use of landholdings, 
identifying shared opportunities to improve the 
range and efficiency of services through a “One 
Public Estate” approach.
17.7 / There may be some cases where commercial 
uses operating alongside community infrastructure 
will help the function and viability of the facility, such 
as an on-site café. Such uses will be supported 
where they are ancillary to the main community use 
and the requirements of clause C are met.
17.8 / There may be cases where there is no 
continued need or demand for the provision  
of community facilities. Where this may be the 
case, the early marketing of vacant community 
floorspace to assist in identifying any alternative 
occupiers who could make a good public service 
use of the site is strongly encouraged. A 
comparable market value when undertaking  
a marketing exercise will be based on the facility 
being public, regardless of whether it has most 
recently been occupied by a private social / 
community occupier.18. Education and skills
A. The council will support the provision of new 
or expanded primary and secondary schools 
and further education facilities, to meet the 
needs of a changing population and enhance 
education provision.
B. The improvement and expansion of 
Westminster’s world-class higher educational 
institutions will be supported  
in principle, in recognition of the economic 
benefits they provide to Westminster, London 
and the UK. This includes proposals for the 
upgrading of existing, and provision of new, 
teaching and research facilities and the 
provision of purpose-built student housing.
C. Where new and additional educational 
facilities are provided, proposals for their use 
outside of core operation hours for 
community or recreational use will be 
supported in principle.
D. Major developments will contribute to 
improved employment prospects for local 
residents. In accordance with the council’s 
Planning Obligations and Affordable Housing 
SPD, this will include:
1. financial contributions towards 
employment, education and skills initiatives; and
2. for larger schemes, the submission  
and implementation of an Employment 
and Skills Plan.
Education
18.1 / Current pupil projections14 indicate a decline 
in demand for primary school places, and a 
growing demand for secondary school places  
in Westminster. However, demand will continue  
to fluctuate over the Plan period as the population 
grows, children move through the school system, 
families move in and out of the city, and schools 
are expanded or contracted. In the short term,  
our school expansion programme, along with 
additional capacity being created through the 
relocation of Marylebone Boys Sixth Form to 
Paddington, will meet demand for additional 
secondary school places in the city.15 Beyond this, 
demand will continue to be monitored as pupil 
projections are updated, and additional capacity 
planned for in accordance with our annual School 
Organisation and Investment Strategy.
14 Greater London Authority, 2018
15 See School Organisation and Investment Strategy and 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan92
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
18.2 / Currently there is a lack of suitable and 
available land for the construction of new schools 
within the city, though there may be opportunities to 
adapt the existing school portfolio in response to 
changing demands for different age groups. Further 
unidentified opportunities could also emerge over 
the Plan period.
18.3 / The presence of world-class higher educational 
institutions, including London School of Economics, 
Imperial College London, and King’s College London, 
form an integral part of the character of central London. 
They provide a significant source of employment, 
contribute towards a highly skilled workforce, support 
the clustering of the knowledge economy, and are 
internationally recognised for their research 
reputations. Such benefits help London compete on a 
global stage as a location of choice for business.
18.4 / To maintain and enhance their international 
standing, and continue to attract the best talent  
to London, higher educational institutions are likely to 
need to upgrade, and / or provide additional teaching 
and research facilities over the Plan period. Such 
investment is supported in principle – in recognition 
of the benefits this will bring to the wider economy.
18.5 / To maximise the community benefits of new 
educational uses, applicants are encouraged to make 
facilities available and adaptable for public use, where 
this does not compromise their primary purpose and 
operational needs. Multiple purpose use of such 
facilities can help make efficient use of scarce space 
and overcome any deficiencies in dedicated 
community space within a locality.19. Digital infrastructure, 
information and communications 
technology
A. Investment in digital and 
telecommunications infrastructure will be 
supported. The public benefits of proposals 
for new infrastructure will be weighed 
against impacts on local character, heritage 
assets, or the quality of the public realm.
B. Major new developments and infrastructure 
projects will be designed to enable the 
installation of the most up-to-date 
standards of digital connectivity and ensure 
easy maintenance and future upgrading as 
technologies and standards improve.
C. Major commercial developments will 
provide a communal chamber on-site for 
telecommunications equipment or make  
an appropriate contribution to the cost of 
providing one nearby.Skills
18.6 / Whilst Westminster has the highest  
number of jobs of any London borough, it  
relies heavily on in-commuting of skilled  
workers.16 As the heart of a world city, this will 
continue to be the case over the Plan period – as 
new job opportunities continue to attract workers 
from across the south east and beyond. However, 
alongside this, it is important that Westminster 
residents, particularly those from disadvantaged 
backgrounds, fully benefit from the diverse  
range of opportunities economic growth brings. 
Removing barriers to local employment can improve 
resident’s life chances, help support continued 
business growth, and reduce traffic movements.
18.7 / We will therefore use the opportunities offered 
by new development, in both the construction and 
operational phases, to improve residents’ access to 
skills, training and employment. This will include 
seeking financial contributions towards employment, 
education and skills initiatives, and on larger 
schemes, requiring apprenticeships and job 
placements in accordance with targets set out in an 
agreed Employment and Skills Plan. Securing job 
placements within the end use of a development, 
rather than solely in the construction phase will be 
important to ensure residents fully benefit in the 
long term from the diverse opportunities economic 
growth brings. The Westminster Employment 
Service17 will provide a key point of contact to assist 
16 Local Economic Assessment, 2014
17 westminster.gov.uk/employmentdevelopments in delivering benefits to local 
residents. Further details of how financial 
contributions will be calculated, when Employment 
and Skills Plans will be sought and what they 
should include, will be provided in our Planning 
Obligations and Affordable Housing SPD.93
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
D. Opportunities for co-location, shared 
facilities and innovations such as smart 
street furniture should be explored where 
new digital and telecommunications 
infrastructure is proposed and proposals 
for standalone apparatus should 
demonstrate that such opportunities  
have been exhausted. Proposals on the 
highway should also demonstrate that it  
is not feasible to locate on existing 
buildings or other structures.
19.1 / The last twenty years have seen huge 
technological advances resulting in a shift in  
ways of working and significant growth in 
technology-based sectors of employment.  
Access to high quality digital infrastructure and 
information and communications technology (ICT) 
are increasingly viewed as a vital component of 
modern life – by residents, visitors, and a wide 
range of businesses. The government’s UK Digital 
Strategy sets out the importance of providing 
world class digital infrastructure to improve 
connectivity, and the government is investing  
£1 billion to accelerate investment in, and roll-out 
of, next generation digital infrastructure,  
including 5G and full fibre broadband.18
18 UK Digital Strategy, 201719.2 / The continued growth and success of 
Westminster’s economy is dependent on securing 
access to digital infrastructure and ICT services of 
the highest specification available that is future-
proofed to enable upgrades as technologies and 
standards improve. To ensure end users can 
exercise choice regarding technologies and 
suppliers, applicants are encouraged to engage 
with a range of providers in the design of major 
developments. To minimise disruptive street 
works, major commercial development will provide 
or contribute towards communal entry chambers 
that enable the quick and easy installation of new 
ICT services to meet occupiers’ needs.
19.3 / Although future investment in digital 
infrastructure and ICT is vital and of clear public 
benefit, it must be provided and coordinated in a 
manner that respects Westminster’s rich heritage. 
New apparatus such as boxes that enable the roll 
out of 5G should be sited away from listed 
buildings wherever possible, but applicants should 
also seek to minimise unnecessary and visually 
obtrusive clutter of the public realm.
19.4 / Proposals for new standalone apparatus  
will only be supported where all reasonable 
options for sharing existing facilities, or the use  
of less obtrusive locations, have been ruled out  
as impracticable. It is recognised that there are 
some forms of telecommunications infrastructure 
where co-location or sharing of facilities may not 
be an option.19.5 / Equipment that is no longer required should 
also be removed in accordance with Ofcom’s 
Electronic Code of Practice, to reduce clutter and 
improve the experience of pedestrians and other 
highway uses and the quality of the public realm.
20. Soho Special Policy Area
A. Development in the Soho Special Policy 
Area will reflect its unique character and 
function and demonstrate how it respects, 
protects and enhances the existing scale 
and grain of the built environment and the 
unique mixture of uses present there.
B. The following uses will be supported:
1. small and medium enterprise (SME) 
workspace, particularly in the  
creative industries;
2. specialist retailing;
3. housing that meets the needs of those 
working in the area;
4. LGBTQI+ venues;
5. new live music venues;
6. physical, social and green infrastructure;
7. small-scale hotels; and
8. food, drink and entertainment uses, 
subject to clause C.CONTENTS
94
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 17: Soho Special Policy Area95
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
C. Proposals for new drinking establishments 
will be considered with regard to their 
cumulative impact on the character of 
Soho’s streets and mix of uses.
D. The scale and setting of Soho and Golden 
squares will be protected. The function of 
these squares and of St. Anne’s Churchyard 
as green spaces will also be protected and 
enhanced. Other opportunities to improve 
the public realm should be explored in 
development proposals.
20.1 / Soho has been a mixed residential and 
commercial district since the mid-18th century, 
when it was popular with artisans, traders and 
immigrants, often fleeing conflict in continental 
Europe.19 In the 19th and 20th centuries, Soho 
further developed as a centre for the creative arts, 
particularly the British film industry. By the 1960s, 
Soho had become a focal point of London’s music 
scene, alongside its boutique shops and other 
bohemian culture, and has become a home for 
London’s LGBTQI+ community. The area was 
designated a conservation area in 1969. Since the 
1960s, Soho has become a major tourist attraction 
and has become more commercialised. It still has a 
unique role to play within the wider West End and 
it is important that its distinctive qualities are 
conserved and enhanced.
19 Soho Heritage and Character Assessment, 201820.2 / Soho Special Policy Area (SPA) has a 
cosmopolitan character, density and diversity of 
uses. It functions as a place to live, work and visit, 
with all these roles taking place within its dense 
network of narrow streets, and often within the 
same buildings. Soho has a distinctive scale of 
uses, typically smaller than elsewhere in the West 
End, typified by the small scale of its individual 
commercial units at street level. The dense nature 
of the urban fabric lends itself to smaller 
floorplates, which typically support tenants from 
specialist and smaller scale industries, particularly 
the cultural, creative and visitor sectors and for 
SMEs. Smaller units and flexible workspaces to 
encourage this type of use will be supported.
20.3 / Where development proposals involve the 
amalgamation of units behind retained façades, 
particularly at ground floor level, they will be 
considered in the context of Soho’s existing scale 
and grain of development. Where proposals seek 
to reduce the duplication of cores in adjoining 
buildings, for example to improve energy 
efficiency, they may be justified provided the 
ability of the commercial floorspace to be let to 
several individual occupiers is not inhibited.
20.4 / It is important to maintain the mix of uses 
present in Soho to protect local character. This 
policy aims to promote a range of uses that reflect 
Soho’s cosmopolitan and varied nature. Soho has 
a diverse range of retailers, many of which form 
specialist clusters within the area, such as: fashion 
and tailoring; music and the arts; food; and those 
catering to the LGBTQI+ community.20.5 / Changes of use to new drinking 
establishments will be assessed in terms of their 
cumulative impact on Soho’s streets. This will 
ensure that the mix and balance of uses in the area 
is maintained by preventing over-concentrations of 
these uses. Although already prevalent in Soho, 
further clustering of these uses can have a 
detrimental impact on the area’s overall mix and 
can lead to incremental changes to its character.
20.6 / Applicants should address this issue in their 
Planning Statement and should consider both the 
surrounding uses at ground floor level and the 
existing servicing arrangements in the vicinity of 
the site. Noise and amenity impacts will also be 
carefully considered, especially where there are 
residential uses on upper floors in the immediate 
vicinity of the site.
20.7 / Although hotels are generally considered 
acceptable within the CAZ, within Soho, smaller scale 
or ‘boutique’ hotels are more appropriate due to 
Soho’s existing character. Large-scale hotel facilities 
will not generally be considered acceptable within 
the SPA, as their larger floorplate requirements are 
likely to erode local character through the loss of 
smaller scale existing units, which will also displace 
other commercial uses, as well as having potential 
amenity and environmental impacts. Larger floorplate 
units are generally at odds with Soho’s existing scale 
and grain. We consider small-scale hotels, in a Soho 
context, to be those of fewer than 100 rooms.CONTENTS
96
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 18: Mayfair and St. James’s Special Policy Area
97
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
20.8 / Soho has a range of housing stock, meaning it 
is a place where people can both live and work. 
Proposals for new housing in Soho will demonstrate 
that they are able to meet the needs of those working 
in the area by contributing to the range of stock 
including through the provision of affordable housing.
20.9 / Soho is also a centre with a high 
concentration of LGBTQI+ venues and they remain 
an important aspect of its character. The number 
of LGBTQI+ venues in Westminster has declined 
by 46% between 2006 and 2018, representing a 
loss of 16 unique venues.20 It is therefore important 
that we seek to retain existing, and encourage 
new, LGBTQI+ venues so that Soho remains a 
centre for the LGBTQI+ community. Existing 
LGBTQI+ venues will be protected through this 
plan and new venues are explicitly encouraged 
within the SPA to ensure Soho retains its status as 
a centre of LGBTQI+ culture, retail and nightlife.
20.10 / Soho’s green spaces are rare and formalised 
green space only exists in Soho Square, Golden 
Square and St Anne’s Churchyard. It is therefore 
important that their function as green spaces is 
protected and enhanced where possible, with further 
opportunities explored for providing green 
infrastructure and enhanced public realm in new 
development. Public realm improvements should 
implement the findings and recommendations of the 
Soho Public Realm Study (2014). Furthermore, Soho 
20 LGBTQ+ Cultural Infrastructure in London: Night Venues, 
UCL Urban Laboratory, 2006-presentSquare and Golden Square are designated London 
Squares that perform an important heritage function. 
As a result, their setting and scale should be 
respected in development proposals.
20.11 / Alongside policies in this Plan, development 
proposals within the Soho SPA will be assessed 
against the Soho and Chinatown Conservation Area 
Audit, supplementary planning documents, specific 
studies and the Soho Neighbourhood Plan.
21. Mayfair and St. James’s  
Special Policy Areas
A. Developments in the Mayfair and St. 
James’s Special Policy Areas (SPAs) that 
enhance the character and function of both 
areas as centres for the art trade and luxury 
retail, through the provision of additional 
floorspace for use as art galleries, antique 
trading or luxury retail, is encouraged.
21.1 / Together Mayfair and St. James’s are 
prestigious locations with long standing 
international recognition, and a distinctive pattern of 
specialist uses including art galleries, antiques 
traders, and luxury retail. They also have a rich 
visual townscape and history, with grand formal 
buildings including palaces and formal open 
spaces. While their heritage value is recognised 
through wider conservation area designations, the 
pattern of land use within the SPAs acts as an attraction for international visitors and investors and 
have a broader significance for London’s economy.
21.2 / Both areas are home to niche and  
bespoke retailers. Examples can be found on Jermyn 
Street and the arcades linking it to Piccadilly. Jermyn 
Street is renowned for shirt makers, grooming 
products and accessories including hatters and shoe 
makers amongst other uses, which are also found in 
the neighbouring streets and arcades, such as wine 
merchants, tobacconists and other niche uses.
21.3 / Mayfair is the historic centre of the art 
market in London and the UK. It is home to many 
commercial art galleries, the internationally 
renowned Sotheby’s and Bonham’s auction 
houses on New Bond Street, and the Royal 
Academy of Arts on Piccadilly. Most of the retail 
galleries are now found in the southern part of 
Mayfair, with clusters on Cork Street and parts  
of nearby Bruton, Bond and Albermarle streets. 
The areas character and function are highly 
influenced by the art trade, with galleries being  
a long-standing feature and draw of the area  
– attracting collectors from all over the world.
21.4 / Art galleries have also been in existence  
in St. James’s for several hundred years. Today  
the area contains a number of small independent 
businesses employing specialist and skilled 
workers, that attract clients from all over the world. 
The internationally renowned Christie’s Auction 
House is located in the centre of St James’s, 
surrounded by commercial art galleries.CONTENTS
98
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 19: Harley Street Special Policy Area
99
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
22. Harley Street Special  
Policy Area
A. Development in the Harley Street Special 
Policy Area will support and enhance its 
continued role as an international centre  
of medical excellence, complemented 
primarily by residential use.
B. Proposals for additional floorspace to 
upgrade or provide new medical facilities, 
patient care and patient accommodation, 
will be supported subject to impact on 
townscape and heritage.
C. Medical facilities that do not fall within Class 
E (commercial, business and service uses) 
as a result of being attached to the 
residence of the consultant or practitioner, 
will be protected, unless:21.5 / Proposals for new development in either area 
should demonstrate that it respects and 
complements the area’s character and function, 
given their contribution to central London’s global 
appeal. Proposals for additional gallery floorspace, 
antiques trading, and luxury, bespoke and niche 
retail, are therefore welcomed. In seeking to protect 
existing character, it is recognised that existing art 
galleries and antique trading uses may be able to 
change to a range of Class E (commercial, business 
and service) uses without planning permission.1. There is no reasonable prospect of its 
continued use for medical use or 
complementary facilities, as evidenced 
by vacancy and appropriate marketing 
for a period of at least 12 months; and 
2. The proposal is for high quality 
residential development.
22.1 / Harley Street is a national and international 
centre for medical excellence and has been the 
home to a wide range of medical disciplines for 
nearly 200 years. It has more than 5,000 medical 
practitioners,21 adds to the economic diversity of 
the city, and provides education and training 
services. The clustering of medical uses in the 
area is specifically recognised in the London Plan 
and its proximity to, and links with, the medical 
research cluster around Euston gives it a particular 
strategic significance.
22.2 / The townscape and heritage value of the 
area is recognised through the wider conservation 
area designation. As such, the impact of 
development proposals on this setting will be an 
important consideration. The continued evolution 
of the Special Policy Area (SPA) to meet the needs 
of modern medical practices is supported to 
ensure the area continues to attract the world’s 
best medical talent.
21 harleystreetmedicalarea.com/aboutus22.3 / We will seek to protect existing and support 
new medical floorspace and complementary 
facilities in the area to ensure continuation and 
extension of the benefits of the clustering of these 
uses. Complementary facilities include 
physiotherapy and health training services. The 
nature of treatments provided in Harley Street 
means that ancillary patient and family 
accommodation is sometimes required  
within or near medical institutions. Therefore 
accommodation specifically for patients and their 
families may also be considered a complementary 
facility, but will be restricted to such occupancy 
through use of legal agreements.
22.4 / In common with many parts of the  
CAZ, the area is also home to some residential 
properties. Where it can be demonstrated  
through appropriate marketing evidence (see the 
glossary) that space is no longer needed for medical 
or support services, residential use may therefore be 
acceptable. Legal agreements will be used to ensure 
any accommodation cannot be converted to general 
purpose short-term accommodation, to ensure the 
area’s existing function and character is not eroded.
23. Savile Row Special  
Policy Area
A. Development in the Savile Row Special 
Policy Area (SPA) will complement and 
enhance its continued role as an CONTENTS
100
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 20: Savile Row Special Policy Area
101
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
23.1 / The cluster of bespoke tailoring 
establishments in Savile Row has been established 
for centuries. It is globally synonymous with premium 
bespoke tailoring. Premises on the east side of 
Savile Row include a mix of workrooms and retail 
elements that are both visible from street level, and 
as such are categorised as sui generis . To the west 
of Savile Row retail uses dominate, whilst to the 
north the mix of uses includes art galleries and retail uses complementary to the predominant tailoring 
uses in the area. Some office space is also 
interspersed throughout the area, meaning 
alongside its tailoring function, the area includes a 
range of Class E (commercial, business and service 
uses), reflecting its location within the CAZ. The rich 
townscape and heritage value of the area is 
recognised through conservation area designations.
23.2 / The clustering of uses and floorspace within 
Savile Row results in agglomeration benefits for 
established businesses that contribute to the 
character of the area, a diverse economy within 
the city and the UK tailoring industry. The numbers 
of tailors employed within existing premises are 
increasing, including through a growing number  
of apprenticeships that is helping to ensure the 
continued long-term success of this specialist 
cluster and the tailoring industry more widely.
23.3 / The unique status of the area as a specialist 
cluster is acknowledged in the London Plan. Given 
its status, demand for tailoring floorspace within the 
area remains strong, and the presence of existing 
bespoke workshops within premises make the area 
distinct from other luxury retail nearby. To enable 
the tailoring industry to continue to thrive and grow 
within this globally recognised destination, the net 
loss of dedicated tailoring floorspace from the area 
will be resisted and the provision of additional 
dedicated tailoring floorspace is supported. Where 
floorspace not previously used for tailoring 
purposes in the SPA becomes vacant (e.g. an 
existing retail unit), the use of temporary international centre of excellence for 
bespoke tailoring, supported by 
complementary Class E (commercial, 
business and service uses) floorspace that 
respects townscape and heritage value.
B. New bespoke tailoring uses will be supported 
throughout the SPA, particularly at lower floor 
levels. Proposals for other uses that would 
result in the net loss of tailoring floorspace 
from the SPA will be resisted, unless this 
relates to floorspace benefiting from 
temporary consent for tailoring purposes.
C. Where new Class E (commercial, business 
and service uses) development 
incorporates retail floorspace, provision of 
a size, type and format that complements 
the unique character and function of the 
SPA is encouraged. Redevelopment 
proposals that would result in the 
replacement of multiple individual stores 
with large format retail will be resisted.permissions can be an effective way of securing 
further clustering of tailoring uses, whilst still 
offering flexibility over the future use of such space.
23.4 / New retail development within the SPA that is 
small scale, in the fashion industry and offers 
bespoke services, will complement the role and 
character of the area, and is encouraged where it 
would not result in the net loss of dedicated tailoring 
floorspace. In contrast, large and flagship high street 
stores selling a wide range of products over multiple 
floors and generating high levels of footfall are more 
suited to nearby principal shopping streets with 
wider pavements designated as part of the West 
End International Centre or as CAZ Retail Clusters, 
where such retail formats are supported under 
Policy 14. Any proposals for the wholescale 
redevelopment of existing retail premises that would 
require planning permission should therefore 
respond to the unique character and offer of the 
tightly defined SPA. Conditions will be used to 
restrict the extent to which any new Class E 
(commercial, business and service uses)
development can be occupied by large format retail. 
The average size of existing retail units in the SPA is 
266 sq m. As such, stores of up to 300 sq m gross 
internal floorspace will normally be considered 
reasonable. Other Class E (commercial, business 
and service uses) that are of a scale and design that 
respect local townscape, and can complement the 
commercial nature of the area, are in principle 
supported – as uses such as cafés and restaurants 
can increase dwell time, and additional office 
floorspace can contribute to the strategic office 
function of the CAZ.CONNECTIONS
Connecting with a healthier way of life
A growing city puts growing pressure on our transport system, 
which in turn presents us with a greater environmental challenge. 
As we move towards 2040, we move towards more sustainable 
travel. More ‘joined-up’ public transport options and greater use 
of our waterways will become a more attractive choice to people 
than driving around Westminster.
But it’s the area of ‘active travel’ where we’ll see the  
real difference, as a greener city with more accessible 
pedestrianised areas, even in the very centre of our busiest  
West End streets, to make Westminster a truly walkable city.
A city that connects us to healthier living.CONTENTSCONTENTS104
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
24. Sustainable transport
A. The council will support a sustainable 
pattern of development which maximises 
trips made by sustainable modes, creates 
safer streets for all, reduces traffic, 
improves air quality and reflects the 
objectives in Westminster’s Transport and 
Public Realm Programme and Local 
Implementation Plan 2019/20 to 2021/2022.
B. New development and the connected 
transport modes should contribute towards 
maintaining and enhancing Westminster’s 
places and streets as one of the most 
attractive and liveable areas in London.
C. Development must:
1. Positively contribute towards the 
improvement of its public transport 
nodes in terms of accessibility and 
legibility and the improvement and 
delivery of walking and cycling routes 
that serve a site in order to create an 
environment where people actively 
choose to walk and cycle as part of 
everyday life.
2. Support the reallocation of road and 
development space to promote walking, 
cycling and the use of public transport 
where appropriate.3. Positively contribute to the reduction of 
the dominance of private motor vehicles 
both in terms of traffic and congestion, 
whilst not worsening the excessive 
levels of on street parking and tackling 
poor air quality.
4. Contribute to the London Plan’s  
Healthy Streets  approach to improve  
air quality, reduce congestion and  
make Westminster’s diverse 
communities become greener,  
healthier and more attractive places  
in which to live, work or visit.
5. Major development should provide or 
financially contribute towards creating 
well-connected, high-quality, convenient, 
safe infrastructure and routes where 
necessary to mitigate its impacts.
24.1 / We are committed to improving the quality of 
life for people who live and work in or visit the city. 
A key element of this is creating a more joined up 
and integrated transport system which positively 
supports the existing and future built environment, 
its relationship with the public realm and which 
encourages healthier living and active travel.24.2 / This policy reflects this aim and embodies 
Westminster’s 2019/20 to 2021/2022 Local 
Implementation Plan objectives which are to:
 –deliver sustainable development for growth
 –deliver safer roads for us all
 –deliver better air quality for future generations
 –prioritise the transport network for pedestrians
 –promote better health and inclusivity
 –deliver a sustainable future network
 –implement the ‘pay for your impact’ principle.
24.3 / There is a strong connection between our 
aim of promoting sustainable transport, the city’s 
existing urban structure and character and the 
need to guide development in a manner which 
responds to the needs of a 21st century city. To 
achieve this, active, efficient and sustainable travel 
should be a key element considered in new 
developments. This responds to the need to 
create an integrated transport network that 
minimises the impact that motorised traffic  
has on growth by directly designing in more 
pedestrian and cycle measures.105
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Road safety
24.4 / Transforming road safety for all road users 
and ensuring that all future road safety schemes 
and projects steadily reduce causalities will deliver 
upon our emerging 2019 Road Danger Reduction 
Strategy and the Mayor’s Vision Zero ambition.1 
Creating safer environments will promote active 
travel which in turn is supported by our other 
strategies such as the Walking Strategy2 and 
initiatives such as the emerging City Kerbside 
Hierarchy which calls for calmed traffic and 
improved and safer facilities for walking and 
cycling. These aims are also reflected in localised 
initiatives such as in the Oxford Street District.
Public realm and Healthy Streets
24.5 / A fundamental instrument in delivering  
a sustainable pattern of development and 
sustainable transport is development’s  
relationship with an improved public realm.
24.6 / Approximately 1.1 million visitors step into 
Westminster each weekday so ensuring that all 
highways and public realm projects prioritise the 
needs of the pedestrian is essential. This aligns 
with the Mayor’s Transport Strategy and its 
headline outcome to deliver Healthy Streets for 
London and the objectives of our Health and 
Wellbeing Strategy which identifies a high 
prevalence of childhood obesity within 
1 Vision Zero Action Plan (2018)
2 Westminster’s Walking Strategy (2017)Westminster. Our Greener City Action Plan 2015-
2025 indicates that parts of the city are among the 
worst performers in air quality tests in Europe. 
Seeking to reduce NOx emissions by discouraging 
motor vehicle use will contribute to reducing the 
exposure of children and vulnerable people to 
transport-related air pollution and to delivering 
Westminster’s Air Quality Strategy and Action Plan.
Growing demand
24.7 / There is a wider need to deliver a 
sustainable future network by recognising that as 
central London grows the transport network will 
need to be developed in a manner that meets the 
demands of the majority in terms of encouraging 
more use of active travel options, like walking and 
cycling along with use of the bus, underground 
and national rail networks.
24.8 / The emphasis towards more sustainable 
modes of transport is supported by Westminster 
having one of the lowest car ownership rates in 
London3 and is rated above the London average  
in terms of walking activity.4
3 74% of English households have a car, and 58% of  
London households. Westminster has the fifth lowest  
car ownership rates in London (at the time of the Census)  
at 37% (Census, 2011)
4 67% of residents walk for 30 mins at least three times  
a week while the London average is 60% ranking 
Westminster 5th of 33 London boroughs (Active People 
Survey by Sport England, 2015/16)24.9 / The “pay for your impact” principle 
recognises that as central London grows it is 
imperative that we work with applicants, land 
owners and other stakeholders to grow the city in 
a more sustainable manner where active transport 
modes and co-ordinated delivery and servicing of 
buildings is delivered on the street through a 
greater use of developer funded Community 
Infrastructure Levy (CIL) contributions.
24.10 / Related to this is the need to cater for the 
proper consideration of a proposal’s transport 
impact. As a result, applicants of major 
developments are urged to engage with our pre-
application process at the earliest possible stage 
to discuss the potential need for the submission of 
either a Transport Assessment and Travel Plan, or 
a Transport Statement and Local Level Travel Plan.
24.11 / The submitted information should be 
sufficiently detailed and accurate to enable us to 
fully assess the development proposal. This may 
include traffic modelling to demonstrate that 
development proposals will not have an impact 
(individually or cumulatively) on the flow of traffic.  
A road safety audit/assessment may also be 
necessary on specific schemes.106
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
25. Walking and cycling
A. Development must promote  
sustainable transport by prioritising  
walking and cycling in the city.
WALKING
B. Development must:
1. Prioritise and improve the pedestrian 
environment and contribute towards 
achieving a first-class public realm 
particularly in areas of kerbside stress, 
including the provision of facilities for 
pedestrians to rest and relax (including 
seating) and high-quality and safe  
road environments and crossings, 
where needed.
2. Contribute towards improved legibility 
and wayfinding including signage to key 
infrastructure, transport nodes, green 
spaces and canal towpaths (such as 
through TfL’s Legible London).
3. Be permeable, easy and safe to  
walk through, enhance existing routes 
which are adequately lit, creates step-
free legible access and entrance points 
whilst providing direct links to other 
pedestrian movement corridors  
and desire lines.
4. Facilitate the improvement of high-quality footpaths to Department for 
Transport minimum standards5 with 
regard to existing street furniture and 
layout including through the provision  
of land for adoption as highway.
5. Enable footway widening, re-surfacing 
and de-cluttering where increased 
footfall is expected, to be suitable for 
vulnerable road users including older 
people, people suffering from  
dementia and disabled people.
CYCLING
C. Development should contribute to 
improvements to deliver a first-class  
public realm which supports cycling  
by improvements to legible signage, 
provision of access and facilities that do  
not conflict with the needs of pedestrians  
or compromise safety and addresses risks 
posed to cyclists from other transport modes.
D. To promote cycling and ensure a safe  
and accessible environment for cyclists, 
major development must:  
1. provide for and make contributions 
towards connected, high quality, 
5 Local Transport Note 1/12 DfT 2012convenient and safe cycle routes for  
all, in line with or exceeding London 
Cycle Design Standards;
2. enable and contribute towards 
improvements to cycle access, including 
the delivery of current and planned cycle 
routes identified in the council’s Local 
Implementation Plan and existing and 
potential Cycle Permeability Schemes;
3. meet the cycle parking and cycle 
facilities standards in the London Plan. 
Where it is not possible to provide 
suitable short-stay cycle parking off the 
public highway an appropriate on-street 
location should be considered provided 
it does not conflict with improvements to 
and the quality of the public realm;
4. provide links to public transport nodes;
5. contribute towards improved  
wayfinding; and
6. promote and contribute towards the 
introduction and expansion of cycle  
hire facilities.
25.1 / We will continue to improve conditions  
for pedestrians and cyclists through a variety  
of interventions including the development of  
our cycle network, upgrading the public realm, 
managing parking demand, reducing severance, 
pro-actively place shaping, junction improvements 
and introducing traffic calming measures.107
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Walking
25.2 / Pedestrians, particularly those with mobility 
difficulties, are the most vulnerable of all users of 
the highway and their personal safety can be 
compromised by poorly designed developments. 
National policy states that priority should be given 
to pedestrian movement as a sustainable mode  
of transport, and the London Plan emphasises the 
need to secure a significant increase in walking  
in London.
25.3 / Prioritising pedestrians has multiple 
benefits, including easing the pressure on the 
public transport and road networks, encouraging 
healthier lifestyles, and making places feel safer 
through increased natural surveillance. ‘Healthy 
Streets’ that provide attractive walking 
environments is a key pillar of the Mayor of 
London’s Transport Strategy which we support.
25.4 / It is also more space efficient than other 
forms of transport enabling development to make 
the best use of the available land whilst reducing 
the environmental and health impacts of motor 
vehicles, which is of particular importance in 
Westminster which has a dense urban pattern.
25.5 / These interventions will contribute to 
achieving the ambitions of our Walking Strategy  
to increase the percentage of daily trips that 
resident’s make on foot from the current 84%  
to more than 92% by 2027. This means that 
Westminster’s people would have the highest 
walking levels in London.25.6 / New development can facilitate change to 
people’s walking habits by providing permeable 
spaces with direct, safe and attractive walking 
routes. These spaces should both minimise the 
conflict between pedestrians and competing  
uses such as servicing or car parking and ensure 
movement and the quality of the public realm is not 
impeded by street clutter whilst catering for the 
specific needs of pedestrians with mobility issues. 
The emerging Site Allocations Development Plan 
Document will provide further detailed guidance 
on design principles that can help achieve these 
aims, whilst further guidance on how the needs of 
pedestrians can be met is set out in Westminster’s 
Walking Strategy.
Cycling
25.7 / Similarly to walking, cycling has multiple 
benefits. It enables people to lead healthier,  
more active lives, can help to reduce the pressure on 
highway capacity and public transport, facilitate 
improvements to the public realm and enable greater 
numbers of people to use the existing road space.
25.8 / Through co-ordinated efforts to improve  
the environment for cyclists, cycling can become  
a more attractive transport option resulting in  
an increased shift from the motor car. This will 
contribute towards a reduction in harmful 
emissions leading to better air quality, as well as 
improving health by enabling an active lifestyle.Cycle routes
25.9 / There are now more than 730,000 cycling 
trips per day in London and cycling in central 
London has increased by 8.9% since 2014. Within 
Westminster, a number of strategic cycle routes 
exist, including the London Cycle Network, Cycle 
Superhighways, Quietways, and the Thames Cycle 
Route. Along with our Cycle Permeability Scheme, 
which seeks to immediately improve upon the 
safety and permeability of other key sections 
across the Westminster highway network, these 
form an important element of London’s cycle 
network. These routes will continue to be 
improved through further investment to ensure 
they are intuitive, visible and safe, and are well 
integrated with existing infrastructure.
Facilities for cyclists
25.10 / Provision of cycle parking and storage 
facilities, as well as facilities for cycle hire, are 
essential in order to encourage this mode of 
transport. Showers, changing facilities and lockers 
should be provided for cyclists at all new workplaces, 
places of further and higher education, hospitals and 
health facilities. At least one shower should be 
installed for every 20 cycle parking spaces provided 
and one locker provided per cycle space. These 
facilities should be conveniently located in relation  
to the cycle parking spaces and accessible to all staff 
(and students where applicable). Therefore, the 
needs of cyclists should be given careful 
consideration during the design of new 
developments as provision of cycle parking and 
storage space as well as supporting cycle facilities is 
intrinsically linked to the quality of the public realm.CONTENTS
108
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 21: Cycle Routes109
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
25.11 / However, pressure from competing uses, 
high PTAL values across the city and the limited 
space on offer within Westminster’s fine grain 
urban environment mean that provision of short-
stay cycle spaces will not always be appropriate. 
This approach is reflected in Westminster’s travel 
pattern that suggests people don’t generally cycle 
to visit areas like the Central Activities Zone (CAZ) 
and many of Westminster’s town centres.
25.12 / Major developments may also need to 
provide new cycle docking facilities for cycle hire, 
in addition to parking facilities. Applicants should 
seek pre-application advice to determine these 
requirements and refer to Westminster’s 2014 
Cycling Strategy which has further information.
26. Public transport and 
infrastructure
A. The council seeks better connectivity, 
legibility, quality, usability and capacity in 
public transport. Therefore development 
should help to support the:
1. investment in strategic transport 
infrastructure including the Elizabeth 
Line and Crossrail 2, HS2, mainline 
termini and key underground stations;
2. streamlining of bus services and the 
relocation of standing facilities to less 
intensively used areas of the city;3. management of coach routes stops  
and stands whose use may be intensified 
subsequent to the relocation or 
redevelopment of Victoria Coach Station.
B. Development must improve the 
accessibility to, and legibility of existing  
and proposed public transport by creating 
and improving walking and cycling links  
to stops or stations.
C. Major development must:
1. facilitate improvements to the  
operation of all sustainable transport 
modes through improvements to the  
public realm;
2. support car clubs, cycle hire facilities and 
other sustainable transport initiatives 
such as electric vehicle charging 
infrastructure where they do not 
detrimentally impact upon public realm 
improvements and pocket parks; and
3. improve access to public transport 
facilities by promoting walking and 
cycling and through their design 
improve the legibility of transport nodes 
and interchanges.26.1 / A high-quality public transport system is 
essential to our strategy to promote sustainable 
travel patterns in the city, with less reliance on 
private cars and increasing use of other modes.  
As a result, there is a need to continue to upgrade 
public transport infrastructure and its relationship 
with the public realm in locations such as railway 
stations where a large number of people 
congregate and busy transport nodes exist.
26.2 / As most of Westminster’s built environment 
has a fine urban grain and space is limited, 
improvements to the accessibility and quality of 
public transport infrastructure are required in order 
to maximise use of these modes, especially by 
disabled people, the elderly, young children and 
others for whom public transport accessibility is a 
barrier. Improvements to routes to and from public 
transport nodes (bus stops and stations) are critical 
in persuading more people to use buses and trains.
26.3 / Major investment will be necessary during 
the lifetime of the Plan to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the transport infrastructure serving 
Westminster and to ensure it remains fit for purpose. 
This includes a package of measures to increase 
the capacity and reliability of public transport.110
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 22: Strategic Transport Infrastructure
111
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Figure 23: Edgware Road Safeguarding Area112
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
26.4 / As resident, worker and visitor  
numbers continue to rise, improvements to rail 
infrastructure are needed to increase capacity and 
connectivity, reduce overcrowding and improve 
rail’s attractiveness as a sustainable mode of 
transport. It is therefore essential to ensure that 
consideration is given to how rail passengers 
continue their onward journeys and the impacts 
this has on other parts of the transport network 
and public realm. As a result, we will work with 
Network Rail, TfL and other agencies involved in 
planning rail services to ensure these synergies 
are taken into account at the earliest stages.
Coach travel
26.5 / Victoria Coach Station (VCS) is the country’s 
largest and is considerably exceeding its original built 
capacity, resulting in substantial congestion and 
environmental and amenity concerns. We will 
continue to work with TfL and National Express  
to find an appropriate strategy to relieve these 
impacts in the short-term. In the long-term we support 
the closure of VCS and relocation of new coach 
terminal provision. A suitable new location (or 
locations) for a coach station must support multi-
modal interchange while minimising amenity, traffic 
and environmental impacts. We recognise that the 
best location(s) may be beyond Westminster’s 
boundary. This approach is consistent with the 
commitment in the London Plan and Mayor’s 
Transport Strategy that the Mayor will identify and 
deliver replacement coach station facilities to provide 
easier access to the coach network, while retaining 
good access to central London for coach operators.27. Parking
A. The parking standards in the London Plan  
will apply to all developments. All new 
parking spaces should provide active 
provision for electric charging vehicles.
B. Where on-site parking is delivered 
applicants will:
1. provide car club membership for  
all residents and provision of car  
club spaces;
2. ensure that all outdoor and open  
parking areas are designed to a 
standard which accommodates the 
need for safe pedestrian and vehicle 
movement and creates permeable  
links through the site; 3. prioritise the issue of parking spaces 
within development to families with 
young children; and
4. let, rather than sell, parking spaces  
to residents of new developments on  
a short-term basis, with spaces 
allocated to individual addresses or 
property numbers.
C. The council will apply the maximum  
non-residential car parking standards  
set out in the London Plan.
D. When considering parking impacts, the 
council will prioritise alternative kerbside 
uses (such as car club spaces, cycle 
parking and electric vehicle charge points) 
ahead of parking for private vehicles.
E. For major developments, contributions will 
also be required for on-street provision of 
electric vehicle and other low emission 
vehicle infrastructure.
F. Where sites are redeveloped, existing 
parking provision must be reduced to meet 
the parking standards in the London Plan 
unless there is site specific justification to 
re-provide an element of the existing 
parking. On housing renewal schemes, 
parking provision may be retained or Highways
26.6 / Local road improvements may sometimes  
be necessary, particularly in areas of substantial 
regeneration or development activity. Edgware 
Road is expected to experience development 
activity along the road frontage over the Plan 
period, but narrow sections of it currently cause 
congestion. As a result, we will continue to 
safeguard this location in conjunction with any 
redevelopment proposals that may allow or require 
the acquisition of land affected by the safeguarding.113
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
re-provided where it can be demonstrated 
that:
1. existing occupiers with established 
parking spaces or permits are to return 
to the site once the development is 
completed and that the retained or 
re-provided parking is for those 
residents only; and
2. there is evidence of adequate capacity 
within the relevant controlled parking  
zone if the re-provided parking is to be 
on-street; and
3. the retained or re-provided parking  
is delivered as part of an overall 
package of measures improving 
legibility, including walking and cycling 
routes, and making improvements to  
the public realm.
G. Proposals for the redevelopment of existing 
car parks for alternative uses will be supported. 
The removal of boundary treatments and 
gardens to provide vehicle crossovers and 
on-site parking will be resisted (where 
permitted development rights do not exist).
H. Proposals for, or including, new public car 
parks (and other motor vehicle public parking, 
including for coaches) will be assessed against 
the objective of reducing motorised travel.27.1 / The effective management of parking spaces 
will influence transport mode choice and will be an 
important tool for improving health and tackling 
congestion and local pollution in the city.
27.2 / The management of parking spaces is 
particularly important in an area like Westminster 
which, for the most part, has a dense and fine grain 
built environment where considerable pressure  
on public space and in particular kerbside  
space exists.
27.3 / By minimising parking provision, space for 
other uses is released and facilitates better 
integration with a new development scheme. This in 
turn precipitates the more efficient use of land which 
has a positive impact on the public realm particularly 
in areas of kerbside stress and will benefit sustainable 
travel modes such as walking and cycling.
On-site parking
27.4 / Our approach to residential car parking 
conforms to the London Plan principle of balancing 
new development with the prevention of excessive 
car parking that undermines cycling, walking, and 
public transport use. The standards in Table 10.3 
‘Maximum residential parking standards’ in the 
London Plan apply in Westminster and set out 
maximum residential parking standards, which 
take into account the high level of public transport 
provision in the city. For non-residential 
developments the standards in the London Plan 
also apply in Westminster.27.5 / Given the high levels of public transport 
provision and accessibility to jobs, leisure and 
shopping facilities in Westminster, we have taken 
the view that new development should be 
predominantly car free. Notwithstanding, there will 
always be a need to ensure that a lack of provision 
does not result in significant increases in demand 
for on-street parking in the vicinity of the 
development, leading to increased congestion, 
disruption to traffic flow, air and noise pollution, 
poor parking practices, and adverse impacts on 
the amenity of residents. To ensure this is the 
case, developments should not create or 
exacerbate areas of parking stress. Where a 
residential development without on- or off-site car 
parking is proposed in an area of existing high 
parking stress (i.e. over 80% of on-street parking 
spaces being occupied during the day or at night, 
in compliance with existing parking restrictions), 
mitigation measures will be expected to off-set the 
impact of increased car parking on Westminster’s 
streets. As a minimum, mitigation may include 
lifetime car club membership for all future 
residential occupiers, increased cycle parking 
quantum and quality within the development site 
and other measures agreed with us.
27.6 / Where on-site parking is provided in line with 
clauses A-C, developers will also include sustainable 
transport measures, such as provision for car clubs 
and cycling parking. Disabled parking for residential 
and non-residential uses should be provided in 114
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
accordance with the London Plan standards. We 
advocate the letting rather than selling of car park 
spaces to residents in new developments on a short-
term basis so that their use can be kept under review. 
If under-used, this approach enables car parks to be 
converted into another use. 
27.7 / Where parking is provided in new residential 
developments, free membership to a Carplus 
accredited car club will be secured for the occupiers 
of all residential units. The demand for car club bays 
arising from this requirement should be assessed as 
part of the Transport Assessment or Statement. If 
necessary, off-street parking will be provided by the 
applicant in a publicly accessible location. 
Cycle and motorcycle parking 
27.8 / Cycle parking should be provided in 
accordance with the London Plan where they do not 
conflict with public realm enhancements. Motorcycle 
/ moped parking should also be provided in 
accordance with the London Plan standards. 
Cycle facilities  
27.9 / Showers, changing facilities and lockers should 
be provided for cyclists at all new workplaces, places 
of further and higher education, hospitals and health 
facilities. At least one shower will be installed for 
every 20 cycle parking spaces provided and one 
locker will be provided per cycle space. These 
facilities will be conveniently located in relation to the 
cycle parking spaces and accessible to all staff (and 
students where applicable). Car clubs and car sharing
27.10 / The use of car clubs can contribute to  
a reduced need for car ownership and hence reduce 
parking stress, and as such they are encouraged. 
Where provision is made for car clubs, they should 
provide a range of vehicle types and sizes, including 
low emission and family sized vehicles. This can help 
broaden the appeal of membership to a range of 
households. Doing so can improve take-up thus 
reduce demand for car ownership and parking stress.
On-street parking
27.11 / On-street parking is a limited resource  
and demand can exceed supply in parts of the  
city, meaning that the loss of such space will not 
normally be supported. On-street parking spaces can 
cater for a wide range of users including residents, 
short stay (visitor) parking, and to facilitate loading 
and servicing requirements at various times of the 
day. Balancing these needs requires careful 
management, and we will therefore work with the full 
range of user groups to ensure their needs are met as 
far as possible. This could include reviewing existing 
parking zones and controls as circumstances change  
over the Plan period.
27.12 / Our approach in recent years has been  
to minimise the number of resident cars parked 
on-street, where on-street facilities are under 
pressure, by seeking off-street parking in new 
residential development to cater for those that 
want or need to own a car. This allows residents  
to own cars but does not necessarily encourage them to use them. Residents have also been able  
to acquire a resident’s parking permit to park 
on-street, but only in the zone in which they live.
27.13 /  Although the policy encourages car-free 
residential development, residents will still be able 
to apply for on-street parking permits. The 
eligibility criteria for on-street residents’ parking 
permits will be kept under review.
27.14 / Given the increasing demand on kerbside 
space in the city, proposals seeking exclusive 
access to the kerbside through measures such as 
dedicated parking bays, permits or Parking Identifier 
Boards for exclusive parking will be resisted. This 
will ensure the free-flow of vehicular traffic and allow 
all users of the highway to access the kerbside in 
compliance with existing restrictions. Exceptional 
circumstances such as an overriding national 
security, NHS or other emergency services  
needs, or where it can be demonstrated that any 
restrictions will not adversely impact on traffic  
flow, highway safety or parking conditions, will be 
considered on a case-by-case basis. If granted,  
such concessions will be regularly reviewed.
Off-street parking
27.15 / The creation of additional off-street public 
parking can undermine efforts to encourage use of 
more sustainable modes of transport, which is 
necessary to reduce congestion and improve air 
quality and road safety. New parking provision for 
the public should therefore only be made where it 
is replacing existing off-street public parking, and 115
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
should include provision for disabled people’s 
parking, electric vehicle spaces as well as car club 
spaces and cycle parking to encourage more 
sustainable travel choices.
27.16 / There are some exceptions where the 
essential operational needs of the proposed use 
may require dedicated off-street parking. Such 
uses include hospitals, medical centres, and the 
key emergency services. In addition, hotels, 
leisure, entertainment, and education uses can 
increase demand for coaches, minibuses or taxis, 
and parking facilities. Meeting the needs of these 
vehicles should be considered although parking 
should only be provided where it is needed for the 
essential operation of the use.
27.17 / Housing renewal schemes will be expected 
to attain an overall reduction in car parking 
provision over time.
28. Highway access and 
management
A. Given the increasing demands on existing 
highway space, the council will resist the loss 
of highway land, particularly footways. In 
cases involving the setting back of buildings, 
the council will seek the designation of 
resulting frontage land as highway.
B. New highway accesses should minimise 
the amount of footway, cycling space and 
kerb space lost for parking and / or servicing and should ensure no loss of 
street furniture.6
C. Development will only be allowed access 
onto the strategic road network where it can 
be demonstrated that:
1. there is no reasonable alternative  
to direct access; 
2. the number of individual new access 
points will be minimised; 
3. there is no adverse impact on the strategic 
road network including impact on the local 
neighbourhood network;
4. the proposed access is not in close 
proximity to road junctions; and
5. the provision of access does not adversely 
affect the safety and free flow of traffic and 
pedestrians, including through provision of 
adequate visibility splays.
D. New development likely to attract large visitor 
numbers should ensure that proportionate 
provision is made for taxis, coaches and other 
tourist vehicles, where necessary, particularly 
where it is in close proximity to major tourist 
destinations and transport hubs.
6 Street furniture is considered to be distinct from street 
clutter which is defined as unnecessary structures 
such as signs, railings, street lighting, road markings 
and advertising hoardings.28.1 / The road network plays a vital role in the  
life and work of Westminster, enabling trips by 
residents, businesses and visitors. It also enables 
public transport to deliver staff and customers to 
businesses and provides for their servicing needs.  
All these demands mean that highway space in 
Westminster is under particular stress and there  
is a pressing need for a strategic approach to its 
management.
Loss of highway land
28.2 / The loss of highway land will not generally be 
acceptable, as reducing space on the highway for 
pedestrians and vehicles impedes movement and 
traffic flow, worsening congestion and discouraging 
active transport modes such as walking and cycling. 
However, we recognise that there may be 
circumstances where a minor loss of highway land 
may be appropriate to deliver benefits. By 
designating frontage as highway land where 
buildings are set back from the highway, we will be 
able to carry out improvements such as footway 
widening to encourage active travel opportunities 
and smooth pedestrian flows.
New highway access
28.3 / Footway will not be reduced as a result of 
changing building lines following redevelopment to 
allow adequate space for pedestrians. Likewise, 
where new developments require vehicular access 
to the highway, they should minimise the loss of kerb 
space for parking where this will lead to increased 
congestion on local residential side roads and not 
result in loss of footway or cycling space.CONTENTS
116
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
The Strategic Road Network and  
Westminster’s road hierarchy
28.4 / Westminster has a defined road hierarchy 
setting out the different types of roads and their 
distinctive roles:
 –Transport for London Road Network (TLRN)  
is considered most suitable for through traffic.
 –The Westminster Strategic Road Network 
(WSRN) distributes traffic within Westminster 
and to neighbouring boroughs.
 –Local Roads give priority to pedestrians and 
cyclists over motor traffic, providing access  
to residential areas and local centres.
28.5 / Direct vehicular access onto the strategic 
parts of the network (TLRN and WSRN) from new 
development is likely to lead to increased 
congestion and compromise its function and 
therefore should be avoided wherever possible. 
When considering development proposals, this 
principle will be used to discourage traffic from 
using unsuitable streets in order to minimise the 
negative impacts of traffic on local residents and 
local amenity and to improve road safety.
Provision for taxis, coaches and  
tourist vehicles
28.6 / Developments that are likely to generate 
large visitor numbers or those in close proximity to 
major tourist attractions or transport hubs should 
ensure that adequate space is made available for taxis, coaches and other tourist vehicles, such as 
sightseeing buses. This could include dedicated 
parking, layovers, pick up and set down points, 
minicab offices, and taxi ranks. The benefits of 
provision should, however, be balanced against 
the need to protect residential amenity (given 
potential noise disturbance and impacts on air 
quality) and allow sufficient parking and circulation 
space for other vehicles.
Unadopted highways
28.7 / To ensure consistency across Westminster 
in terms of quality of design, materials and 
maintenance, housing estate roads which are not 
publicly adopted highways should accord with the 
policies and standards in this plan.
29. Freight and servicing
A. The council will strongly support the 
provision of consolidated facilities for 
freight, servicing and deliveries in new 
development in accordance with emerging 
London Plan policy. The net loss of existing 
off-street facilities will be resisted.
B. Servicing, collection and delivery needs  
should be fully met within a development 
site and applicants will produce Delivery 
and Servicing Plans which encourage 
provision for low-emission, consolidation 
and last mile delivery modes.C. Provision for servicing, collection and 
deliveries within developments will be:
1. located behind new or converted 
buildings, or below street level;
2. appropriate in size, type and anticipated 
frequency of arrival of vehicles; and
3. capable of being shared with  
other businesses.
D. Where it is not possible to fully meet the 
servicing, collection and delivery needs 
within a development site they must be met 
in such a way that minimises adverse 
effects on other highway and public realm 
users, and other residential or commercial 
activity. In this instance, the council will 
seek planning obligations in the form of a 
commuted sum for both the cost of 
implementation and maintenance of any 
loading bay as well as the opportunity cost 
of lost kerbside space.
E. For major developments where construction 
related activities may lead to a significant 
impact on the surrounding public highway, the 
transport and environmental impacts of 
development construction must be minimised 
and mitigated through Constructions and 
Logistics Plans (CLPs) incorporating 
adherence to the Construction and Logistics 117
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 24: Westminster’s Road Hierarchy118
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Community Safety Scheme (CLOCS) and the 
Freight Operator Recognition Scheme (FORS). 
On-site machinery and vehicles used should 
comply with industry best-practice emission 
standards contributing to the council’s  
air quality objectives.
Freight
29.1 / Westminster has a high level of demand for 
freight, servicing, delivery and collection services 
(including personal delivery and ‘click and collect’), 
that must be managed to allow residents to access 
the goods and services they need and to enable 
businesses to continue to grow. The high 
concentration of commercial activity interspersed 
with residential development is a particular 
characteristic of Westminster’s dense, historic 
urban fabric. This is especially the case in the CAZ 
including the West End, which creates particular 
challenges for the movement, re-moding and 
re-timing of freight, servicing and deliveries.
29.2 / Consequently, we support the West End 
Partnership’s (WEP) Freight & Servicing Strategy 
which seeks to go beyond the Mayor’s target by 
reducing overall numbers of delivery and servicing 
vehicles in the West End by 10%, rising to 80% at 
peak visitor times where key public realm and 
highway interventions are planned.29.3 / The re-timing of deliveries, collections and 
servicing to avoid the busiest times of the day will 
bring significant safety, environmental and social 
benefits to residents, businesses and visitors. By 
spreading movements evenly throughout the day 
and reducing their noise impact, the efficiency and 
road safety of on-street loading areas will be 
improved, through reducing collisions and 
congestion. In addition, air quality improvements 
will occur as smoother traffic flow is enabled 
thereby freeing capacity on the road network  
to absorb more growth.
29.4 / Delivery and Service Plans associated  
with a development proposal should address the 
final stage in the movement of goods between  
a transport hub such as a distribution centre and  
the end destination, commonly known as the ‘last 
mile’.7 This stage of the delivery process should be 
viewed as an important part of the supply chain 
where significant environmental and efficiency 
gains can be made. Utilising electric vehicles  
for the last mile or consolidating loads are just a 
couple of examples of how the last leg can be 
made in a more sustainable way. This stage of the 
delivery process should be informed by the Mayor 
of London’s Freight and Servicing Action Plan.8
7 The ‘last mile’ delivery term does not imply a strict 
measurement of distance but rather the last stage in the 
delivery process from a transport node such as a 
distribution centre.
8 tfl.gov.uk/corporate/about-tfl/the-mayors-transport-
strategy29.5 / New development can contribute to the 
management of freight traffic through the provision 
of sufficient, dedicated off-street space for 
servicing, deliveries and collections particularly 
where multiple developments can share the same 
facility so as to ensure the most efficient use is 
made of scarce space, where this does not 
compromise businesses’ operational needs. This 
includes the provision of appropriately sized ground 
floor holding areas for deliveries and refuse bins. 
Such provision of off-street space takes delivery 
activity off the highway, avoiding obstructing other 
road users, including pedestrians. It can also help 
minimise residents’ exposure to noise if such areas 
are underground or sited away from residential 
properties. This is more likely to enable the 
re-timing of deliveries to ‘shoulder hours’, or other 
times when residents’ amenity will be less affected.
29.6 / The use of freight and micro-consolidation 
facilities can also help to reduce the number of 
vehicle movements and enable the use of lighter 
vehicles or more sustainable options to make 
deliveries or carry out servicing that cause less 
disturbance and environmental impact. We  
are keen to promote facilities of this kind.119
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
30. Technological  
innovation in transport
A. Technological innovation in transport 
designed to improve mobility, reduce 
congestion and improve air quality will be 
supported where it does not compromise 
highway safety and other amenity and 
environmental concerns. The council will work 
with applicants, infrastructure providers and 
other stakeholders to minimise any negative 
impacts of these new technologies.
REFUELLING
B. Existing refuelling stations will be protected, 
unless demonstrated to be operationally 
unviable. Opportunities for new refuelling 
technologies, such as hydrogen refuelling and 
electric vehicle charging facilities, should be 
fully explored before a change of use is 
considered. New or replacement refuelling 
facilities will be directed to accessible 
locations on the strategic road network.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING FACILITIES
C. The council will support the continued roll 
out of on-street electric charging points  
for use by the general public across 
Westminster.D. New development must incorporate  
vehicle charging facilities with a high level 
of active provision in line with the council’s 
parking policy.
30.1 / Technological advances and innovations will 
change the way people travel and the operation of 
the transport network over the Plan period. We will 
embrace the opportunities such changes offer, 
whilst ensuring that the introduction of new 
technologies do not compromise the safety or 
security of people living in, working in, or  
visiting Westminster.
30.2 / New modes of travel will help to improve 
mobility by offering a wider choice of travel options, 
including dockless cycle hire, electric scooter hire 
and autonomous vehicles. Other technological 
changes will help to reduce congestion by removing 
vehicles from the road, particularly in terms of 
deliveries and collections. This includes the use of 
unmanned aircraft or ‘drones’, and other self-driving 
delivery vehicles that operate on the highway. 
Nonetheless, the opportunities represented by 
technological change may sometimes have 
unintended negative impacts in terms of amenity and 
the local environment, such as noise, street clutter 
and on local character, as well as potential safety  
and security concerns. We will therefore work with 
applicants and a range of stakeholders to avoid or 
mitigate any negative impacts and to ‘design in’ 
facilities in new development where required.Servicing
29.7 / Servicing provision is essential to the 
viability of commercial developments in order to 
facilitate the timely and practical delivery and pick 
up of goods and for the maintenance and care of 
the building. Servicing, including waste collection 
facilities, must be provided on-site and vehicles 
must be able to pull clear of the public highway 
without causing obstruction, unless it is clearly 
demonstrated that it cannot be accommodated 
and adequate justification is provided for this. If 
servicing is to be undertaken on street, it must be 
demonstrated that it would not lead to adverse 
safety implications, for pedestrians and / or 
vehicles, or the obstruction of traffic.
29.8 / This is particularly important in mixed-use 
developments including residential uses where 
adequate areas for servicing must be designed  
in a way which does not conflict or cause adverse 
amenity impacts. Therefore, servicing should be 
integrated into the development at the early 
design formulation stages and not after the 
scheme has been designed.
29.9 / Cycle safety measures should be  
included in construction logistics plans for new 
developments, particularly to provide safe routes 
for cyclists during the construction period.120
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Refuelling
30.3 / New fuel types will help reduce air pollution; 
however, during the transition from fossil fuels 
traditional refuelling stations will remain essential, 
particularly in the first half of the Plan period. There 
are limited such facilities within Westminster and a 
lack of coverage could lead to unnecessary 
detours for refuelling purposes, cause additional 
traffic and congestion, and undermine economic 
competitiveness. We will therefore protect existing 
refuelling facilities in Westminster unless it is 
robustly demonstrated that the station is unused 
or operationally unviable.
30.4 / For refuelling sites identified as suitable for 
hydrogen refuelling, protection is justified by their 
scope to facilitate the more widespread use of 
innovative energy technologies, in accordance 
with the London Plan. Where provided, alternative 
lower emission fuel and recharging points should 
be in addition to, rather than instead of, traditional 
refuelling facilities. Options for incorporating these 
facilities alongside traditional refuelling should be 
considered prior to any proposed change of use.
30.5 / Where redevelopment is proposed, refuelling 
stations should be re-provided, preferably on-site, or 
in an appropriate location nearby where this is not 
possible, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that 
there are viable alternatives for refuelling already in 
the vicinity. New or replacement facilities will be 
directed to accessible locations on the strategic road 
network (TLRN or WSRN). As these routes still include 
sensitive land uses, impact on local amenity will be considered through appraisals such as noise and air 
quality assessments.
Electric vehicle charging
30.6 / Fully electric and hybrid vehicles are 
becoming more prevalent on London’s roads and 
Westminster has the highest number of new 
plug-in vehicles being registered in London, with 
new registrations currently exceeding 1,000 per 
quarter. Westminster currently has 153 off-street 
electric vehicle charging bays, comprising 109 
spaces and 44 car club bays. Many developments 
also provide off-street electric vehicle charging, 
although usually for private use only. In addition to 
the wider roll out of on-street charging facilities 
accessible to the general public, where 
developments propose new car parking, charging 
provision should be made in accordance with the 
standards set out in Policy 27. This will enable 
people to continue to take up electric vehicles, 
thereby helping improve Westminster’s air quality. 
It is also important to ensure suitable fast-charge 
points in off-street delivery / servicing bays for 
goods vehicles are placed in appropriate 
locations, given the high volumes of freight, 
servicing and delivery traffic in Westminster.31. Waterways and  
waterbodies
A. Proposals alongside or affecting  
water should support the creation of a 
network of high-quality water spaces  
which promotes biodiversity and the  
use of Westminster’s waterways and 
waterbodies for sport, leisure,  
recreational and educational uses as  
well as for water-based transportation.
B. Development along waterways or adjacent 
to waterbodies and within the Thames 
Policy Area must address their waterfront 
location in terms of access and design. 
Water-related and waterfront enhancing 
uses will be encouraged and the loss of 
such existing uses resisted. Access for 
pedestrians and cyclists will be improved 
through enhancements to waterside 
towpaths and footpaths.
DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING  
WATERWAYS AND WATERBODIES
C. Development that builds into or over 
waterways will only be acceptable if it  
is a water-related or water dependant use at 
appropriate locations.9 Transport  
9 Appropriate locations are defined in Clause F121
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
related structures, projects of strategic 
importance to London, or major water related 
infrastructure will be supported only where an 
overriding strategic case for such 
development can be demonstrated.
D. In assessing development proposals 
affecting Westminster’s waterways and 
waterbodies, the council will have regard to 
the Thames River Basin Management Plan, 
the Marine Policy Statement and the 
emerging South East Marine Plan.
PIER FACILITIES
E. Improvements to pier facilities  
will be encouraged as part of new 
development along the River Thames. 
Proposals for new or enlarged piers  
should improve accessibility for 
passengers, and not impact adversely  
on other land-side functions.
MOORINGS
F. Residential and commercial moorings and 
facilities for boaters on Westminster’s 
canals will be encouraged in appropriate 
locations as long as:
1. they do not negatively impact on 
navigation, water quality, the openness 
and character of the water space  
and the amenity of surrounding residents; 31.1 / Westminster’s blue infrastructure of waterways 
and waterbodies is of strategic importance to London 
and forms part of the open space network that is 
essential to quality of life in such a dense city.
31.2 / The open aspect of Westminster’s 
waterways is important for several reasons.  
They offer respite from the built-up nature of the 
city, supply important habitats for wildlife, and 
provide the setting for significant heritage assets. 
The River Thames provides the setting for the 
Palace of Westminster and other historic buildings, 
and many of London’s most iconic views include 
the Thames and the lakes in the Royal Parks.
31.3 / Waterways and waterbodies are also 
important for providing habitat and wildlife 
corridors, providing for recreational activity  
and public enjoyment, fulfilling environmental 
functions such as drainage, and in some cases 
supporting sustainable transport. They therefore 
merit strong protection, and opportunities to 
enhance their use are encouraged.
Development affecting waterways and waterbodies
31.4 / Where development proposals are adjacent 
to rivers or canals, buildings should orientate 
towards the water, and allow for continuous public 
access along the waterside. Water-related and 
waterfront enhancing uses are encouraged at 
waterside locations and at sites within the Thames 
Policy Area10 in order to enrich the waterfront.
10 The Thames Policy Area is a London Plan tool for ensuring 
Planning co-ordination. The boundary of the Thames Policy 
Area has been informed by the London Plan maps 
encompassing the Westminster area.2. they will not hinder navigation; and
3. they can be satisfactorily serviced by 
utility services and the road network.
G. Proposals for permanent moorings on  
the River Thames will:
1. enhance the character and  
appearance of the riverside and  
be open to the public;
2. not compromise views of the river,  
the World Heritage Site and other 
heritage assets and their settings; 
3. not hinder navigation or jeopardise the 
long-term use of pier recesses;
4. not compromise the integrity of the 
River Thames flood defences or the 
ability to raise them in the future in line 
with the Thames Estuary 2100 Plan; and 
5. not negatively impact the intertidal 
foreshore defined and protected within 
the London Biodiversity Action Plan 
and, where feasible, provide 
improvements to intertidal habitats. 
Where required, developers should 
provide appropriate mitigation 
measures that will preserve the 
continued dynamism and biodiversity 
value of the foreshore.CONTENTS
122
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
31.5 / If development detrimentally affects the 
usability and accessibility of the associated water 
spaces, such as where there is an existing riverside 
path or canal towpath, development will facilitate the 
extension, widening and improvement of these paths 
including the provision of appropriate safety features 
such as riparian lifesaving equipment (e.g. grab 
chains, access ladders, life buoys as appropriate).
31.6 / Existing paths must not be removed, narrowed 
or otherwise adversely affected. Where no such 
paths exist, provision of these will be required, but 
they should not narrow the waterway by creating 
boardwalks or other solid overhanging projections. 
Public access to existing riverside steps will be 
maintained and improved where necessary.
31.7 / Development that encroaches over or into 
waterways will normally be resisted due to impacts 
on openness, unless it demonstrates overriding 
strategic benefits such as water quality improvements 
(such as the Thames Tideway), enhanced flood 
defences, or increased river transportation.
31.8 / This approach means that as a matter of 
principle we do not favour proposals for new river 
crossings in Westminster. Any proposals for new  
or replacement crossings that do come forward will 
be required to demonstrate that they meet a 
robustly evidenced strategic transport need on  
a scale sufficient to outweigh the importance of 
protecting our waterways’ open character. Where a 
new bridge meets land it will make a positive 
contribution to existing open space and the urban and environmental fabric such as conservation 
areas and listed buildings and protected trees and 
parks. Where this need is evidenced, proposals 
should be designed for pedestrians and cyclists 
only, and link to the public transport network to 
incentivise sustainable travel. Proposals should be 
designed to respect the strategic importance of the 
setting and ecological value of the Thames, the 
important character and amenity of surrounding 
residential areas, and reflect aspirations to increase 
the use of the river by passengers and freight.
Pier facilities
31.9 / Enhanced pier provision in the right locations 
can help broaden the choice of  
transport modes and reduce congestion  
elsewhere, particularly where it is well linked to 
public transport, pedestrian and cycle routes. 
Enhancements should be focused on improving 
access to the water. Proposals located downstream 
of Westminster Bridge should make use of the 
existing purpose-built pier recesses along the 
Embankment Wall, where these are compatible with 
heritage and environmental concerns.
Moorings
31.10 / A range of moored vessels and other floating 
structures along the city’s waterways can add to 
Westminster’s diversity and vibrancy; however, the 
riverfront is a finite resource, and the River Thames is 
a strategically important and iconic feature of London, 
as set out in the London Plan. Permanent moorings 
on the River Thames therefore need careful management to protect the character of the river, 
including its views and as part of the setting to 
important heritage assets, to protect its role as a 
continuous wildlife corridor and to avoid impeding 
river navigation.
31.11 / To manage these impacts, moorings  
along the Thames should be restricted to uses  
that encourage public use of the river, rather than 
private uses such as residential or offices. Uses such 
as galleries, exhibition areas, or recreation and 
education will be supported in principle, although 
impact on the character of the river and the listed 
Embankment Wall (and impacts on the setting of 
other listed buildings) may limit opportunities for 
ancillary structures such as ticket kiosks.
31.12 / To support the use of the city’s other 
waterways, moorings and facilities for boaters are 
supported in principle where they do not disrupt main 
navigation routes. Likely suitable locations include 
Paddington Basin, Little Venice, and Lisson Grove.123
CONNECTIONS CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 25: Westminster’s blue infrastructure networkENVIRONMENT
A healthy environment created by everyone, for everyone
Our environment is crucial to how we perform as a city. 
Tackling climate change head on is the only way we can 
continue to grow and prosper as a healthy and resilient city. 
For the past two decades Westminster has been designated  
an Air Quality Management Area, and reducing our CO 2 
emissions remains a top priority. A bold approach to traffic 
management and greener travel options is already helping  
us ease congestion and reduce pollution. 
The urban heat island effect has called for even greater 
consideration in everything we build. Energy efficiency  
isn’t just desirable, but fundamental.
By taking measures to lower our environmental footprint,  
we give people in our city the highest quality of life. CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
126
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
32. Air quality
A. The council is committed to improving  
air quality in the city and expects 
development to reduce exposure to poor 
air quality and maximise opportunities to 
improve it locally without detriment of air 
quality in other areas.
AIR QUALITY NEUTRAL AND POSITIVE
B. Major developments and developments 
incorporating Combined Heat and Power 
(CHP) should be at least Air Quality Neutral. 
C. Major developments in Opportunity  
Areas and Housing Renewal Areas and 
those subject to an Environmental Impact 
Assessment must additionally demonstrate 
how local air quality can be improved 
across the proposed development as part 
of an air quality positive approach. 
AIR QUALITY ASSESSMENTS
D. Air Quality Assessments will be  
required for: 
1. Major developments;
2. Proposals that include potentially  
air pollution generating uses or 
combustion-based technologies;32.1 / Air pollution causes significant detrimental 
health, environmental and economic impacts in 
Westminster. Air quality is among the top 
environmental concerns for our residents1 and 
improving it is a particular priority for us. The whole 
of the city has been declared an Air Quality 
Management Area (AQMA) for nearly two decades. 
Air pollution levels in large areas of the city exceed 
current EU and World Health Organisation (WHO) 
Standards. While EU standards for Particulate Matter 
(PM) are met across Westminster, we are continuing 
to work to reduce PM levels as far as possible. 
32.2 / We seek to tackle poor air quality in an 
integrated way in this plan, for instance through  
our approaches to design and construction, green 
infrastructure, energy efficiency and sustainable 
travel. Together with the wider measures set out  
in our Air Quality Strategy and Action Plan (2019-
2024) and those set out in the Mayor’s London 
Environment Strategy, this will support the 
ambitions and actions in the Government’s Clean 
Air Strategy (2019).
1 Air Quality Manifesto (WCC), March 2018Air Quality Neutral and Positive
32.3 / We have adopted the air quality positive and 
neutral approach as set out in the London Plan. 
Large masterplanned developments in particular 
have the potential to include methods to improve 
local air quality, which is reflected in the policy 
requirement for an air quality positive approach. 
32.4 / All other major developments should not 
make air quality worse and are encouraged to 
achieve an overall improvement to air quality. The 
Air Quality Neutral requirement also applies to 
developments incorporating CHP due to the 
potential impact of these technologies on air 
quality. 
32.5 / If air quality neutral status cannot be 
achieved, the Mayor’s Sustainable Design and 
Construction SPG sets out the actions that should 
be considered. When all measures to achieve Air 
Quality Neutral status have been exploited, 
financial contributions to offset the impact of the 
development on air quality may be considered as 
a final intervention. The process and calculation for 
this are set out in Section 5 of the GLA’s Air Quality 
Neutral Planning Support Document (AQNPSD). 
We will set out updated guidance in a forthcoming 
supplementary planning document following an 
expected review of the AQNPSD. 3. Proposals incorporating sensitive  
uses; and
4. All residential developments within  
Air Quality Focus Areas.127
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 26: NO₂ Pollution and Air Quality Focus Areas128
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Air Quality Assessments
32.6 / Air Quality Assessments (AQAs) should 
identify the potential for air quality to impact on, or 
be caused by, new development and demonstrate 
how these impacts are being appropriately 
minimised and mitigated.
32.7 / Consideration must be given to the impact  
of improvements on air quality elsewhere. For 
instance, traffic reductions could improve local air 
quality but push traffic-related air quality impacts  
to other areas. Early engagement with us is 
encouraged to assess how development could 
avoid this unintended consequence. 
32.8 / Where AQAs show that emissions or exposure 
should be reduced, this should be done on-site. Off-site 
measures to improve local air quality may be acceptable 
where it can be demonstrated that on-site provision is 
impractical or inappropriate, and equivalent air quality 
benefits to the local area will be achieved. 
32.9 / Development proposals that include potential 
air pollution generating uses or combustion based 
technologies, could comprise, for example, those 
which generate extensive traffic such as from 
deliveries or customer arrivals and departures, car 
parking proposals or those which include CHP or 
biomass boilers. Consideration must be given to how 
these will be designed so as to not worsen local air 
quality to ensure their acceptability. 33. Local environmental impacts
A. The council will make sure that quality of 
life and health and wellbeing of existing 
and future occupiers, and the natural 
environment are not adversely affected by 
harmful pollutants and other negative 
impacts on the local environment.
LIGHT POLLUTION
B. Developments must be designed to 
minimise the detrimental impact of glare 
and light spill on local amenity, biodiversity, 
highway and waterway users.
NOISE AND VIBRATION
C. Development should prevent adverse 
effects of noise and vibration and improve 
the noise environment in compliance with 
the council’s Noise Thresholds, with 
particular attention to:
1. minimising noise impacts and 
preventing noise intrusion to residential 
developments and sensitive uses;
2. minimising noise from plant machinery 
and internal activities;
3. minimising noise from servicing and 
deliveries; and
4. protecting the relative tranquillity in and 
around open spaces.32.10 / The exposure of poor air quality to vulnerable 
people is a particular concern which development 
should reduce or avoid. Sensitive uses include many 
types of social and community infrastructure, 
including schools, hospitals and nursery facilities, as 
well as types of specialist housing such as elderly 
housing and care homes.
32.11 / There are eight Air Quality Focus Areas 
(AQFAs) in Westminster, which are designated by the 
Mayor of London.2 These areas not only exceed air 
quality limits but are also locations with high human 
exposure. Due to the existing poor air  
quality in these areas, developments incorporating 
new residential units in these areas will be required to 
submit an AQA to demonstrate air quality is not made 
worse and where possible, improved. AQFAs and 
their environments will be prioritised for air quality 
offset projects, including those funded through 
contributions made in accordance with this policy. 
2 The London Datastore provides the most up to date 
information on Air Quality Focus Areas in Westminster129
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
ODOUR
D. Development will effectively address  
the adverse impact of odour through the 
incorporation of appropriate mitigation 
measures using a precautionary approach.
LAND CONTAMINATION
E. Applicants are required to carry out 
contaminated land assessments and take 
appropriate remediation measures for 
development on or near a site which is 
potentially contaminated.
CONSTRUCTION IMPACTS
F. Developments are required to minimise 
demolition and construction impact by 
complying with Westminster’s Code of 
Construction Practice (CoCP).
G. Modern methods of demolition and 
construction that minimise negative local 
environmental impacts will be encouraged.
33.1 / The many varied activities in Westminster 
create a vibrant city, but in the wrong locations or at 
the wrong time these activities can be of nuisance. 
We aim to maintain high standards of life in the city 
and protect health and well-being, particularly  
of vulnerable groups. We therefore seek to 
manage impacts that negatively affect the local 
environment. We apply the Agent of Change Noise and vibration
33.4 / People come to the city for work, culture, 
education and entertainment, and noise and vibration 
are inevitable by-products of these activities. Some of 
these activities are focused in areas, such as the 
Central Activities Zone, and as a result the noise 
environment changes significantly across different 
parts of the city. However, not all noise and vibration 
can be attributed to city living and if uncontrolled, can 
be of nuisance and severely impact on health and 
quality of life. Defra’s Noise Action Plan and our noise 
data show that ambient noise levels in Westminster 
are higher than national and regional averages.  
We therefore not only seek to avoid adverse noise 
impacts, but also reduce noise in the city.
33.5 / Developments should ensure that any noise  
and vibration impacts are mitigated. They should be 
constructed and operated to achieve appropriate 
noise levels and ensure that any cumulative effects  
of new noise sources (for example additional plant 
machinery or music) does not contribute to the existing 
background noise level. Careful consideration must be 
given to the design and location of schemes that could 
impact or be impacted by noise from development  
that includes: plant machinery, internal activities, 
amplified noise, transport (including servicing and 
deliveries) and other noise generating activities.
33.6 / Our Noise Strategy (2010-2015) sets out  
our overarching framework for controlling noise in the 
city. Our Noise Technical Guidance Note sets out the 
Noise Thresholds developments are expected to 
meet and shows where existing tranquil spaces exist.principle which places the burden on the applicant 
to mitigate negative environmental impacts and 
ensures development does not cause existing 
nearby uses from having to curtail their activities.
33.2 / A range of measures can improve the  
quality of the local environment, including the 
management of land use, the design and location 
of buildings, incorporation of green infrastructure, 
and management of transport infrastructure.  
We will publish technical guidance that provides 
detail on the assessments, standards and other 
requirements that should be met.
Light pollution
33.3 / We seek to make sure artificial lighting uses 
the right light, in the right place and at the right 
time. Lighting helps to keep our public realm 
accessible, legible and safe after dark. Artificial 
lighting can also help to extend the use of sports 
facilities for communities. We will use the relevant 
professional standards3 as a guide to assessing 
light impacts. Applications for physical activity, 
leisure, sport and/or play facilities should follow 
Sport England’s Artificial Lighting Guidance. It is 
also important to retain subtly-lit and dark spaces 
to protect biodiversity from light spill – for instance 
along canals. The desire to minimise wasted 
energy should also be considered. Where 
relevant, we will require lighting assessments  
to demonstrate compliance with this policy.
3 E.g. standards set out by the Institute of  
Lighting ProfessionalsCONTENTS
130
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
building works take place, our Code of Construction 
Practice (CoCP) sets out the standards and measures 
that applicants and construction firms will need to 
adhere to. We expect applicants and contractors  
to mitigate the construction impact as much as 
possible, to implement good site management and 
communication, and proactively engage with the 
local community and affected residents. Innovative 
methods of construction to reduce nuisance and 
emissions from construction should be 
implemented where possible.Odour
33.7 / Some uses and activities in Westminster  
will create odour, smells or fumes which can be 
sources of nuisance. It is important that activities 
that create odour do not impact on the amenity of 
surrounding buildings or the adjoining highway. 
Where appropriate, we will require odour 
assessments to make sure potential impacts are 
appropriately mitigated. Permitted development 
rights mean that some developments can 
accommodate a wide range of uses without the 
need for planning permission to change between 
them. Proposals for such uses, such as hot food 
premises, will require mitigation measures to be 
incorporated to prevent unacceptable odour  
issues arising in the future.
Land contamination
33.8 / Developable land is scarce in Westminster, 
which means that development will take place  
on or adjacent to land that potentially may be 
contaminated. In order to ensure that occupiers  
or users are not exposed to health risks and 
environmental impact is avoided (e.g. on soil, 
watercourses or waterbodies) the history of the  
land uses need to be identified and if required used 
as a basis for any proposed remediation measures.
Construction impacts
33.9 / Development activity in the city often results  
in additional traffic and related detrimental vibration, 
noise and dust impacts. To protect the environment 
and the community whilst the demolition and 34. Green infrastructure
A. The council will protect and enhance the 
city’s green infrastructure to maximise its 
environmental, social and economic value.
CITY GREENING
B. Developments will, wherever possible, 
contribute to the greening of Westminster by 
incorporating trees, green walls, green roofs, 
rain gardens and other green features and 
spaces into the design of the scheme.
OPEN SPACE
C. All open spaces and their quality, heritage 
and ecological value, tranquillity and 
amenity will be protected.
D. Major developments will be required to 
provide new or improved public open space and space for children’s active play, 
particularly in areas of open space or play 
space deficiency.
E. Development affecting the Royal Parks should 
enhance their quality and range of uses.
BIODIVERSITY AND ACCESS TO NATURE
F. Sites of Importance for Natural 
Conservation (SINCs), priority habitats and 
other ecological features outside of the 
SINCs network will be protected.
G. Developments should achieve biodiversity 
net gain, wherever feasible and appropriate. 
Opportunities to enhance existing habitats 
and create new habitats for priority species 
should be maximised. Developments within 
areas of nature deficiency should include 
features to enhance biodiversity, particularly 
for priority species and habitats.
TREES
H. Trees of amenity, ecological and historic 
value and those which contribute to the 
character and appearance of the 
townscape will be protected.
I. The planting of trees to optimise the  
city’s canopy cover will be encouraged in 
new developments.131
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 27: Open space and deficienciesCONTENTS
132
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
34.1 / We are proud of our green infrastructure. 
Almost one quarter of Westminster is open and 
green space, and the number and range of other 
green assets such as green walls and roofs is 
increasing. Over half of the city’s open spaces 
have a heritage designation, and many provide  
an important function for wildlife and biodiversity. 
The functions and benefits that our green and  
blue assets bring are diverse and include  
climate change adaptation, health and well-being, 
improving air quality, sport, leisure, recreation  
and play, landscape and heritage conservation, 
education, biodiversity and ecological resilience.
34.2 / An integrated approach is required to get the 
most out of our green infrastructure network to 
maximise its benefits. Challenges such as flood risk, 
poor air quality, and the heat island effect can often 
effectively be addressed by nature-based solutions, 
which can bring wider benefits when fully 
integrated into the green infrastructure network. 
Our strategy ‘A Partnership Approach to Open 
Spaces and Biodiversity in Westminster’ (2019) 
describes how we will work with partners to 
enhance our green infrastructure network. Further 
detail on our approach to green infrastructure will 
be set out in our emerging Green Infrastructure 
Strategy. We will also prepare a supplementary 
planning document on the application of this policy.City greening
34.3 / All developments have opportunities to 
contribute to the further greening of the city. The 
type and scale of measures that will be suitable 
will depend on the specific type, scale and context 
of the development. Examples of greening 
measures include green roofs and walls, rain 
gardens, planting, grassland, vegetated 
sustainable drainage systems and trees. 
Applicants should ensure appropriate 
management and maintenance arrangements for 
relevant green spaces and features are in place for 
the lifetime of the development.
Open space
34.4 / Currently not all of our open spaces are 
publicly accessible or inclusive for wheelchair 
users and people with physical disabilities. We 
encourage applicants to work with us and our 
partners to improve accessibility and the quality of 
our open spaces. Public access to privately owned 
open spaces will be secured via legal agreement.
34.5 / Development on open space must be 
essential and clearly ancillary to maintaining or 
enhancing the values of the open space. 
Development adjacent to or underneath open 
spaces must safeguard the functions of the open 
space. In the case of temporary events on open 
space, the land should be fully remediated to 
restore the function and different values of the 
open space following the event.34.6 / Despite the number of high-quality open 
spaces there is an overall deficiency in the city. In 
areas of open space deficiency every opportunity to 
increase the supply of open spaces by focussed 
‘small open spaces’ and ‘pocket parks’ through new 
development should be explored. These spaces are 
an important element of our green infrastructure and 
when developed and managed appropriately can 
make a positive contribution to nature conservation, 
amenity and recreation amongst other functions.
34.7 / There is a deficiency of play space in the  
city which will increase if we do not ensure that 
future developments provide sufficient opportunities  
for children and young people.4 We are committed 
to providing accessible and active play space that 
caters for the needs of all children and young 
people in the city as well as their parents and carers. 
Major residential development should provide the 
quantum of play space in accordance with the Mayor 
of London’s Shaping Neighbourhoods Plan and 
Informal Recreation SPG (2012) or any subsequent 
replacement document.
34.8 / The five Royal Parks in the city (Regent’s Park, 
Kensington Gardens, Green Park, Hyde Park and St 
James’s Park) are designated Metropolitan Open Land 
(MOL) and are therefore afforded the same protection 
as green belt land. The Royal Parks constitute close to 
90% of Westminster’s open space and are a vital part 
of the character of the city. We will work with partners 
and applicants to preserve the open character of the 
4 See emerging Playing Pitch and Built Facilities Strategies133
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 28: Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation
134
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
34.12 / Developments impacting on biodiversity 
should follow the Mayor of London’s mitigation 
hierarchy of avoid, minimise and compensate.  
The emerging Green Infrastructure Strategy and  
a supplementary planning document will set out 
additional information on how biodiversity can be 
protected and enhanced, including for priority 
habitats and species.
Trees
34.13 / Westminster’s trees, whether on the  
streets, in parks, public open spaces or in private 
gardens, make a significant contribution to 
London’s reputation as one of the world’s greatest 
cities. They are an integral and historic component 
of Westminster’s townscape and bring an 
enormous amenity value. Trees provide additional 
functions as vital parts of the green infrastructure 
network: trees shade buildings and streets, provide 
a drainage function, form green corridors and 
contribute to tackling poor air quality. Many trees 
also provide a heritage function as an integral part 
of historic townscapes and landscapes. Their loss 
should therefore be prevented.
34.14 / Proposals for new trees should have regard 
to the wider context, consider their contribution to 
biodiversity and follow the guidance in our Trees 
and the Public Realm SPD (2011) or any 
replacement document. All tree planting strategies 
should be submitted as part of a landscaping,  
tree or biodiversity strategy.Royal Parks and enhance the value they bring for 
London. Any development affecting the Royal Park 
boundaries must be accompanied by thorough 
evidence which demonstrates that there are 
exceptional circumstances consistent with the 
requirements for changes to MOL in national policy 
and the London Plan.  
Biodiversity and access to nature
34.9 / There are 33 Sites of Importance for Natural 
Conservation (SINCs) in the city, which account for 
more than 3,000 hectares. This includes eighteen 
Metropolitan SINCs, which have regional importance 
and national significance. SINCs provide important 
habitats for a range of species and make it possible 
for residents and visitors to access nature.
34.10 / It is important to utilise all opportunities to 
enhance biodiversity in the city. Despite the large 
number of SINCs, there are still significant areas of 
nature deficiency in the city. Development will be 
expected to take all opportunities to improve access 
to nature - bringing nature to residents’ doorstep.
34.11 / Development should aim to create  
net gains in biodiversity, leaving the natural 
environment in a better state than before. There  
are a growing number of tools and good practice 
guides available which can help developments 
achieve measurable biodiversity net gain.35. Flood risk
A. All developments should be safe for their 
lifetime from the risk of flooding, complying 
with the council’s Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA), Surface Water 
Management Plan (SWMP), Local Flood 
Risk Management Strategy (LFRMS) and  
the Mayor of London’s Regional Flood  
Risk Appraisal (RFRA).
B. A site-specific Flood Risk Assessment  
(FRA) must be submitted for:
1. developments of 1 hectare or greater;
2. all developments in Flood Zones 2  
and 3; and
3. all developments within a  
Surface Water Flood Risk Hotspot.
VULNERABLE USES
C. Highly Vulnerable Uses will not be  
allowed within Flood Zone 3; in Flood  
Zone 2 they will be required to pass  
the Exception Test and should as far  
as possible be located outside of the  
Surface Water Flood Risk Hotspots.
D. Proposals for Essential Infrastructure and 
More Vulnerable Uses within Flood Zone 3 
will be required to pass the Exception Test. 135
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Within the Rapid Inundation Zone, basement 
dwellings and basement extensions to 
existing dwellings will not be acceptable.
E. More Vulnerable Uses should, as far as 
possible, be directed away from Surface 
Water Flood Risk Hotspots.
F. A Flood Warning and Evacuation Plan  
will generally be required for More 
Vulnerable Uses within the areas at risk of 
tidal breach flooding, especially if the land 
use is within the Rapid Inundation Zone.
FLOOD MANAGEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE
G. All existing flood management 
infrastructure will be protected, including 
access for maintenance. Wherever 
possible, an undeveloped buffer zone of 
16m should be maintained around flood 
defence structures, including buried 
elements of the flood defence.
H. Improvements to flood defences will be 
secured through planning conditions and / 
or legal agreements where the size, type 
and / or location of development impacts 
on flood risk. Development should not limit 
future raising of flood defences outlined in 
the Thames Estuary 2100 Plan.
I. Where appropriate, planning permission for developments which result in the need for 
off-site upgrades to the water or sewerage 
network, will be subject to conditions to 
ensure the occupation is aligned with the 
delivery of necessary infrastructure upgrades.
SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE
J. New development must incorporate 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) to 
alleviate and manage surface water flood 
risk. Development should aim to achieve 
greenfield run-off rates and demonstrate 
how all opportunities to minimise site 
run-off have been taken.
35.1 / As our climate changes the risk of flooding in 
the city increases. Sources of flood risk include tidal 
flooding (from the Thames), sewer flooding (foul 
water from the sewer system) and surface water 
flooding. Increased levels of development have the 
potential to increase risks of surface water flooding. 
However, redevelopment provides the opportunity 
to reduce flood risk by the incorporation of flood 
resilience and resistance and drainage measures.
35.2 / With the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA), Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP), 
Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (LFRMS) 
and the Mayor of London’s Regional Flood Risk 
Appraisal (RFRA), we have a strong framework  
in place to manage flood risk in the city that 
applicants should comply with.35.3 / Our requirements for site-specific Flood Risk 
Assessments (FRAs) are aligned with the SFRA. 
Proposals should be accompanied by a signed 
Flood Risk and Sustainable Drainage pro forma.
35.4 / In addition, sleeping accommodation below 
the modelled breach flood water level in areas 
identified as being at risk of flooding in the event 
of a breach of the Thames Tidal Flood Defences, 
as set out in Environment Agency guidance, will 
not be supported.  
Vulnerable uses
35.5 / Development should be steered to the areas 
with the lowest probability of flooding, as set out in 
the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). 
Given the dense built-up nature of Westminster, it 
will not be possible to direct all development 
outside of the Flood Zones and Surface Water 
Flood Risk Hotspots. Depending on vulnerability, 
some developments within Flood Zone 2 and 3 will 
therefore be required to satisfy the Exception Test 
set out in the NPPF. This approach gives 
consideration to the type of development, as some 
uses are more vulnerable to the impacts of flooding 
than others. The approach to vulnerable uses is 
derived from the SFRA.
Flood management infrastructure
35.6 / Besides the Thames Barrier, Westminster is 
protected from tidal and fluvial flooding by Thames 
Tidal Flood Defences including the Embankment 
wall. We will protect flood management CONTENTS
136
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 29: Flood Zones
137
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
infrastructure to ensure the risk of flooding is 
minimised. Development within 16m of a tidal flood 
defence will only be acceptable if it can be 
demonstrated that the defences can be raised and 
maintained for the lifetime of the 
development.  Access to defences for maintenance 
and emergency purposes must be retained, and 
their improvement will be sought as a condition or 
via legal agreement where appropriate.
35.7 / The Thames Estuary 2100 Plan (TE2100) is 
the strategic flood management plan for London 
and the Thames Estuary. Its primary focus is tidal 
flooding, and Westminster is located in the London 
City Zone. We will work with our partners to make 
sure the Thames Flood Defences remain strong 
and the recommendations of the TE2100 Plan  
are implemented. We will also continue to work 
with partners to support the timely implementation 
of the Thames Tideway Tunnel including the 
combined sewer outflows in the city.
Sustainable drainage
35.8 / Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) 
incorporate a range of measures which help drain 
surface water, reduce pollution of water entering 
the watercourse, reduce surface water flooding 
and attenuate surface water run off. Examples  
of SuDS include permeable paving, green / blue 
roofs and rainwater harvesting systems.
35.9 / SuDS can be a multifunctional asset to  
the city, not only helping to reduce flood risk  
from surface water flooding but also provide  36. Energy
A. The council will promote zero carbon 
development and expects all development to 
reduce on-site energy demand and maximise 
the use of low carbon energy sources to 
minimise the effects of climate change.
CARBON REDUCTION
B. All development proposals should follow 
the principles of the Mayor of London’s 
energy hierarchy. Major development 
should be net zero carbon and 
demonstrate through an energy strategy 
how this target can be achieved.
C. Where it is clearly demonstrated that it is 
not financially or technically viable to 
achieve zero-carbon on-site, any shortfall in 
carbon reduction targets should be 
addressed via off-site measures or through 
the provision of a carbon offset payment 
secured by legal agreement.
HEAT NETWORKS
D. Developments should be designed in 
accordance with the Mayor of London’s 
heating hierarchy. Major developments 
must connect to existing or planned local 
heat networks, or establish a new network, 
wherever feasible.an ecological value and improve air quality and 
amenity while increasing resilience to climate 
change. Our canals can also play a role in 
managing surface water drainage from adjacent 
development. Engagement with the Canal & River 
Trust is encouraged for development adjacent  
to canals to explore opportunities.
35.10 / A Sustainable Drainage Strategy should  
be submitted with major developments and  
when advised by us, setting out how SuDS will be 
incorporated into the development and how peak 
flow volumes will be reduced. Where it is not 
possible to deliver greenfield run-off rates, 
applicants should demonstrate how all opportunities 
to minimise site run-off have been taken to get it as 
close to greenfield standard as possible. Applicants 
should follow the Mayor of London’s drainage 
hierarchy and set out the proposed SuDS 
maintenance schedule in the strategy.
Wastewater infrastructure 
35.11 / Developers are encouraged to contact 
Thames Water as early as possible to discuss  
their development proposals and intended 
delivery programme to assist with identifying any 
potential water and wastewater network 
reinforcement requirements. Where there is a 
capacity constraint, we will, where appropriate, 
apply phasing conditions to any approval to 
ensure that any necessary infrastructure upgrades 
are delivered ahead of the occupation of the 
relevant phase of development.CONTENTS
138
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Figure 30. Energy hierarchyOffsetBe green: use 
renewable 
energyBe clean: supply 
energy efficientlyBe lean: use less energyBuilding Regulations baseline
Energy  
efficiency 
target
35% on site 
carbon reduction
Zero carbon targetOVERHEATING
E. All developments should be designed and 
operated to minimise the risk of internal 
overheating. Major development proposals 
will include a cooling strategy in line with the 
Mayor of London’s cooling hierarchy.
36.1 / We recognise that the level of growth in  
the city will have a cumulative impact on energy 
demand and associated carbon emissions.  
It is essential that developments utilise every 
opportunity to reduce emissions now to limit the 
extent of future climate change. Our priority is  
for new developments to achieve net zero carbon 
emissions. Net zero carbon means reducing 
operational emissions from all regulated uses (i.e. 
space heating, lighting, hot water and ventilation), 
and minimising both annual and peak emissions. 
Developments should also explore routes towards 
net zero carbon across the development life-cycle, 
to avoid a legacy of emissions to be addressed in 
the future.
36.2 / We recognise that a large portion of 
Westminster’s carbon emissions are produced  
by existing buildings. We will therefore support 
proposals that seek to sensitively refurbish or 
retrospectively improve the performance of current 
buildings to reduce their energy use and improve 
comfort. Interventions to upgrade historic buildings 
will be undertaken sensitively in recognition of their 
heritage value. Applicants should refer to our latest 
guidance on sustainable retrofitting.36.3 / The challenge of zero carbon development 
will be achieved through a range of measures and 
taking advantage of technical innovation. We will 
work with applicants, industry and local and regional 
partners to share knowledge in achieving this target 
and we will prepare a supplementary planning 
document to share best practice and draw attention 
to successful approaches to dealing with these 
issues in Westminster’s unique circumstances.  We expect major developments to install appropriate 
energy monitoring equipment to demonstrate 
on-going effective energy monitoring and 
management over the lifetime of the development  
in accordance with London Plan policy.139
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 31: District energy centres and networks
140
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Carbon reduction
36.4 / The Mayor of London’s energy hierarchy 
sets out the criteria to maximise the sustainability 
and efficiency of energy systems in developments. 
Carbon emissions can be reduced via a range of 
measures, including the design and orientation of 
buildings, incorporation of green infrastructure, 
use of light and sustainable materials, as well as 
active measures such as heating, cooling  
and energy efficient lighting systems. Where 
developments and retrofitting projects do not 
utilise standard construction methods and /  
or incorporate new and emerging technologies, 
applicants should discuss their proposal in our 
pre-application process prior to the submission  
of the planning application.
36.5 / Developments that are unable to achieve 
the carbon targets set out in policy on-site will 
need to calculate their emissions shortfall in 
tonnes of carbon and offset via a cash in lieu 
payment. The value of the payment will be 
determined by multiplying the emissions shortfall 
by the local cost of carbon over a period of 30 
years. Carbon offset funding will then be allocated 
to projects that will reduce carbon emissions 
elsewhere in Westminster. Details of how the 
Westminster Carbon Offset Fund contribution  
will be calculated and administered will be set  
out in the Planning Obligations and Affordable 
Housing SPD. 36.6 / Applicants are strongly encouraged to 
engage with us through the pre-application advice 
process to discuss how they are going to achieve 
the carbon reduction figure, especially when it is  
a combination of physical and financial measures. 
Energy networks
36.7 / Decentralised energy generates power at 
the point of use, increasing efficiencies by utilising 
generated heat that would otherwise be wasted. 
Decentralised energy can be distributed to 
buildings over a larger area via an underground 
network of pipes, avoiding the need for buildings 
to have individual heating equipment. In areas  
of high density and heat demand, such as 
Westminster, heat networks can provide a  
viable energy solution for new developments.
36.8 / Westminster contains one of the UK’s  
first heat networks at the Pimlico District Heat 
Undertaking (PDHU) and there is opportunity for 
new or expanded networks in locations including 
Victoria, east of Oxford Street, Soho, Paddington 
Basin, Church Street and across the city border  
to South Kilburn in Brent.
36.9 / The Decentralised Energy Masterplan for 
Westminster (DEM) explores the technical potential 
of decentralised energy in the city and the 
opportunity areas for future network development. 
We will review this document to better reflect future 
network opportunities and the current policy 
context. In addition, we will publish a supplementary 
planning document to assist applicants in meeting 
the requirements of this policy.Overheating
36.10 / Incorporating low energy and passive 
design measures that manage the risk of a building 
overheating is central to adapting to future climate 
changes. We want to ensure that all who live and 
work in the city occupy buildings which are not 
overheated as this can lead to detrimental health 
effects. Applicants should perform internal 
temperature modelling as part of the cooling 
strategy and prioritise low-energy measures  
to mitigate overheating e.g. orientation, solar 
shading and use of green infrastructure.141
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
37. Waste management
A. The council will promote the Circular 
Economy and contribute to the London 
Plan targets for recycling and for London’s 
net self-sufficiency by 2026. 
B. All new developments (including extensions 
and change of use) must provide appropriate 
facilities for the storage of separate waste 
streams which are safe and convenient to 
access for deposit and collection, with 
sufficient capacity for current and projected  
future use.
C. Developers are required to demonstrate 
through a Circular Economy Statement, Site 
Environment Management Plan and/or 
associated Site Waste Management Plan, 
the recycling, re-use, and responsible 
disposal of Construction, Demolition and 
Excavation waste in accordance with 
London Plan targets and the council’s  
Code of Construction Practice (CoCP). 
D. Existing waste management facilities 
shown on Figure 32 will be protected.  
Any proposals for new waste management 
facilities will be assessed against the 
criteria set out in the London Plan and 
national policy.E. The council will continue to collaborate with 
other Waste Planning Authorities in the 
management of its waste and monitor its 
waste exports.
37.1 / Waste management is one of the greatest 
challenges for a growing city, which is also 
transitioning to a circular economy. Westminster 
produces more than 180,000 tonnes of waste per 
year. Households, businesses, institutions and 
building projects all generate waste in 
Westminster and we have a duty to plan for the 
management of seven waste streams and to drive 
waste up the waste hierarchy. The seven waste 
streams include Local Authority Collected Waste 
(LACW), Commercial & Industrial (C&I) waste, 
Construction, Demolition and Excavation (CD&E) 
waste, hazardous, agricultural, low level 
radioactive waste and waste water. 
37.2 / We will contribute to the London Plan target 
of net self-sufficiency by 2026 by planning for 
Westminster’s apportionment targets. We have 
reached an agreement with the London Borough 
of Bexley to use part of its surplus capacity to meet 
Westminster’s 2.3% waste apportionment targets 
(LACW and C&I waste streams) as set out in the 
London Plan5. This arrangement has been 
informed by a Waste Data Study (2020) which 
provides an understanding of the city’s waste 
need and has been formalised in a Statement of 
Common Ground which is included in an appendix 
5 Table 9.2 in Policy SI8 of the London Planto the study. We have the aspiration to join the 
Southeast London Joint Waste Planning Group to 
plan for waste collectively. The London Borough of 
Bexley is already part of that group.
37.3 / We will contribute towards meeting London 
Plan recycling targets. These include 65% for 
‘municipal’ waste by 2030, 95% for reuse/recycling/
recovery for Construction and Demolition waste 
and 95% beneficial use for excavation waste. These 
are London-wide targets and Westminster will 
contribute in its capacity as a waste authority  
by implementing the municipal waste strategy and 
in its capacity as a planning authority by requiring 
developers to meet the recycling and beneficial use 
targets for construction, demolition and excavation 
(CD&E) waste in the London Plan and provide 
sufficient space for segregating waste in new 
developments. Circular Economy Statements 
should be submitted for referable applications  
in line with London Plan policy SI7 to demonstrate 
how CD&E recycling and beneficial use targets will 
be met. The Government revoked the Site Waste 
Management Plan Regulations 2008 requiring a site 
waste management plan (SWMP) for construction 
projects costing greater than £300,000 (exc VAT). 
However, given the very significant amounts of 
construction and associated CD&E waste 
generated in the city, we continue to require 
production of an SWMP for such projects and for all 
basement developments as specified in its CoCP 
which includes management of CD&E waste, both 
through on-site recycling and re-use and on-site 
waste processing prior to disposal.CONTENTS
142
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
37.4 / Agricultural waste is composted in the city’s 
Royal Parks together with agricultural waste imports 
from other boroughs and no additional capacity is 
required for such waste. The City of London 
Corporation provides a Hazardous Waste 
Collection and Disposal Service, HWCDS, to 
London residents in all London Boroughs (except 
Hillingdon). Waste water treatment is addressed by 
Thames Water through the upgrade and expansion 
of the Beckton Sewage Treatment Works as part of 
the Thames Tideway Tunnel scheme and only a 
very small amount of low-level radioactive waste is 
generated in Westminster, so no additional facilities 
are required for these waste streams.
37.5 / Westminster has no industrial land suitable 
for new strategic waste management facilities and 
we will therefore protect existing waste 
management facilities and we will continue to 
monitor and research opportunities for new sites in 
Westminster. Any proposals for waste management 
facilities will be assessed against the criteria set out 
in London Plan Policy SI8 and National Planning 
Policy for Waste Appendix B.
37.6 / Developments should provide adequate 
segregated waste storage facilities that are fully 
integrated into the design of the scheme, both for 
individual units and communal storage areas ready 
for collection. Our Recycle and Waste Storage 
Requirements guide (April 2019)6, provides 
applicants with guidance on how it expects this to 
6 westminster.gov.uk/waste-storage-planning-advicebe done including the installation of balers and 
compactors within the development as required. 
This also supports the requirements for the 
amalgamation of facilities in locations that demand 
an area specific approach to waste collection. 
Where uses generate specialist types of waste, 
appropriate facilities to manage these waste types 
should be provided on-site.
37.7 / The Waste Data Study (2020) provides detail 
on waste imports and exports. It explains that 
Westminster is a net exporter of waste, with all of 
the local authority collected and commercial and 
industrial waste going to facilities in London 
including Southwark and Lewisham. Part of 
Westminster’s Construction, Demolition and 
Excavation waste and Hazardous waste is 
managed in facilities outside of London. We have 
agreed Statements of Common Ground with the 
Waste Planning Authorities whom receive a 
strategic amount of Westminster’s waste to agree 
this can continue or highlight any issues where 
waste exports may not be able to continue and 
agree that alternative destinations for CD&E waste 
are available. We will continue to monitor waste 
exports and engage with these authorities under 
the duty to co-operate. Monitoring indicators 
include the amount, type and destination of 
Westminster’s waste exports.143
ENVIRONMENT CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 32: Waste management facilities
DESIGN AND HERITAGE
A design for life
Westminster is a city of contrasts. A place where the  
historic heart of London stands shoulder to shoulder  
with the contemporary heart of business. 
It’s a city that means different things to different people,  
but has to work for everyone.
For us, the only design that works is design that’s  
people-centred. Design that strives to enhance not just  
our environment, but the health and well-being of those  
in it. Design that adds to our heritage and character for 
generations to come. Design that brilliantly exemplifies  
the very best in sustainable, urban living.
By placing the people at the heart of the design process,  
we improve the quality of life for everyone.CONTENTSCONTENTS146
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
38. Design principles
A. New development will incorporate 
exemplary standards of high quality, 
sustainable and inclusive urban design  
and architecture befitting Westminster’s 
world-class status, environment and 
heritage and its diverse range of locally 
distinctive neighbourhoods. 
RESPONDING TO WESTMINSTER’S CONTEXT
B. All development will positively contribute to 
Westminster’s townscape and streetscape,  
having regard to:
1. the character and appearance of the 
existing area, adjacent buildings and 
heritage assets, the spaces around and 
between them and the pattern and grain 
of existing streets, squares, mews  
and passageways;
2. materials, building lines, scale, 
orientation, access, definition, surface 
treatment, height and massing;
3. the form, character and ecological  
value of parks, gardens and other  
open spaces;
4. Westminster’s waterways and 
waterbodies; and
5. the preservation and enhancement  
of the surrounding tree population.PEOPLE-CENTRED DESIGN
C. All development will place people at 
the heart of design, creating inclusive 
and accessible spaces and places, 
introducing measures that reduce the 
opportunity for crime and anti-social 
behaviour, promoting health, well-being 
and active lifestyles through design and 
ensuring a good standard of amenity 
for new and existing occupiers. 
SUSTAINABLE DESIGN
D. Development will enable the extended 
lifetime of buildings and spaces and respond 
to the likely risks and consequences of 
climate change by incorporating principles 
of sustainable design, including:
1. use of high-quality durable materials  
and detail;
2. providing flexible, high quality floorspace;
3. optimising resource and water efficiency;
4. enabling the incorporation of,  
or connection to, future services  
or facilities; and
5. minimising the need for plant  
and machinery.
E. Applicants will demonstrate how 
sustainable design principles and measures have been incorporated  
into designs, utilising environmental 
performance standards as follows:
1. Non-domestic developments of  
500 sq m of floorspace (GIA) or above 
will achieve at least BREEAM “Excellent” 
or equivalent standard.
2. Residential conversions and extensions 
of 500 sq m (GIA) of residential 
floorspace or above, or five or more 
dwellings will aim to achieve “Excellent” 
in BREEAM domestic refurbishment or 
equivalent standard.
PROMOTING EXCELLENCE IN 
CONTEMPORARY DESIGN
F. Imaginative approaches to  
contemporary architecture and use of 
innovative modern building techniques  
and materials will be encouraged where 
they result in exemplary new buildings  
and public realm which incorporate the 
highest standards of environmental 
sustainability, that respect and enhance 
their surroundings and are integrated  
with and better reveal Westminster’s 
heritage and existing townscape.147
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
38.1 / Central to delivering the right kind of  
growth that underpins this plan is ensuring that 
new development embodies the highest quality  
of design that will deliver sustainable development 
and a successful future for our city.
38.2 / Given the exceptional quality of 
Westminster’s built environment, it is essential to 
ensure equally high-quality architecture and urban 
design in all new developments. Westminster’s 
unique built environment, spacious parks and river 
frontage are known throughout the world and 
include some of central London’s best loved historic 
areas, buildings and landmarks, as well as lesser 
known residential areas; most are characterised by 
their human scale. These qualities underpin the 
city’s attractiveness as a place to live, work and visit 
and contribute to a high quality of life for everyone. 
To achieve our growth targets sustainably, we 
expect a design-led approach which will optimise 
capacity of sites in the most appropriate way, based 
on an understanding of context.
38.3 / We will prepare supplementary guidance  
on the application of this and other design policies.
Responding to Westminster’s context
38.4 / Design should always respond to  
local context and distinctiveness, including 
Westminster’s differing roles as a place to live,  
the heart of national life and government, as a 
business and commercial centre and a tourist 
destination. It should show how it will improve  
the quality of existing residential neighbourhoods 
and, where appropriate, provide a successful 
foundation for new communities.38.5 / Applicants should demonstrate that design 
proposals are based on a thorough analysis and 
understanding of the site, its setting, context and 
character, taking account of the qualities of the 
built and natural environment, streetscape, open 
spaces, trees, green infrastructure and canal and 
riverside settings. This analysis should include  
the area’s physical form, its morphological and 
historical development, its uses, the nature  
and quality of the public realm, the relationship 
between different parts of the city and the patterns 
of movement and activities.
People-centred design
38.6 / We promote a city that works for everyone, 
a city for all. Placing people at the heart of the 
design process means that the users of the 
buildings and spaces are considered throughout 
all design stages. We encourage applicants to 
engage with local communities early in the design 
process and will support collaborative and 
participatory design approaches.
38.7 / Architecture and urban design can help 
promote good physical and mental health by 
creating streets, spaces and buildings which allow 
and encourage healthy lifestyles and take into 
account the amenity of occupiers, considering 
issues such as noise, access to open space and  
air quality. Applicants should demonstrate how 
development will contribute to improving health 
and well-being and refer to Sport England’s Active 
Design Guidance for further information on the 
principles of Active Design.1
1 Active Design Guidance, Sport England38.8 / Buildings and the spaces which adjoin  
them should be fully accessible and inclusive  
for all, including people of all ages and those  
with mobility and sensory impairment or other 
health concerns or disabilities. In addition to 
physical access to buildings and places, this will 
include improving wayfinding, to making the public 
realm easier, more pleasant and safe. Access to 
existing buildings, especially historic buildings, may 
present additional challenges, but there will almost 
always be scope to make improvements. In some 
locations this may not just be about physical access 
but should also consider the ways in which services 
and information can be managed and provided to 
meet the needs of all users. In all cases, applicants 
will be required to demonstrate that access 
provision has been considered effectively.
38.9 / Well-designed environments can help to 
minimise the opportunities for crime, anti-social 
behaviour and reduce the fear of crime. New 
developments should make every effort to 
contribute to increasing safety and security in  
the built environment through proactive design 
solutions to reduce crime and anti-social 
behaviour (including counter-terrorism measures) 
providing active frontages, avoiding recesses, 
promoting natural surveillance and defining private 
and public space to ensure a clear sense of 
ownership and responsibility. These should be 
integral to the design from the outset or where 
added to existing buildings, must be sensitively 
designed and sited.148
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Sustainable design
38.10 / We want to encourage durable buildings  
to leave our generations’ mark for generations to 
come. Applicants should demonstrate that they 
have taken into account principles of sustainable 
design and that measures to improve 
environmental performance and mitigate and 
adapt to climate change have been integrated into 
the design. This may include strategic design 
considerations, such as the orientation of buildings 
and spaces, design of façades to capitalise on 
solar gain, whilst minimising risks of overheating 
and other measures, for example incorporation of 
green infrastructure, flood resilience and 
sustainable drainage measures. Excellence in 
design quality and floorspace adaptability should 
support the lifespan of buildings.
38.11 / As new developments are large consumers 
of resources and materials, the possibility of 
sensitively refurbishing or retrofitting buildings 
should also be considered prior to demolition  
and proposals for substantial demolition and 
reconstruction should be fully justified on the basis 
of whole-life carbon impact, resource and energy 
use, when compared to the existing building. All 
development should ensure the reduction, reuse 
or recycling of resources and materials, including 
water and waste and minimise energy use and 
emissions that contribute to climate change. As 
Westminster falls within an area classified as 
“seriously” water stressed, all development should 
maximise water efficiency. Residential 
development should meet the optional water efficiency requirement of 105 litres or less per 
person/day in line with Policy SI5 of the London 
Plan. This will be secured by condition.
38.12 / Connectivity to future services can  
include digital networks and sustainable energy  
or district energy networks. Connection to nearby 
energy networks or shared provision for plant  
and machinery should be explored to maximise 
efficiencies and minimise the need for new plant. 
Consideration should be given to how buildings 
and spaces will be managed by either private or 
public owners and managers, to ensure they remain 
of high quality over the lifetime of the development.
38.13 / BREEAM (Building Research 
Establishment’s Environmental Assessment 
Method) is the most commonly used methodology 
for assessing, rating and certifying the sustainable 
design and construction of buildings. Applicants 
will demonstrate how they will meet BREEAM or 
equivalent standards.
Promoting excellence in contemporary design
38.14 / We welcome creative approaches to 
contemporary, high quality architecture and  
state of the art building technology in appropriate 
locations, optimising densities and making the 
most of the opportunities they present to 
celebrate, enhance and reveal the existing  
built and historic environment.39. Westminster’s heritage
A. Westminster’s unique historic environment 
will be valued and celebrated for its 
contribution to the quality of life and 
character of the city. Public enjoyment of, 
access to and awareness of the city’s 
heritage will be promoted.
B. Development must optimise the positive 
role of the historic environment in 
Westminster’s townscape, economy  
and sustainability, and will:
1. ensure heritage assets and 
their settings are conserved 
and enhanced, in a manner 
appropriate to their significance;
2. secure the conservation and continued 
beneficial use of heritage assets 
through their retention and sensitive 
adaptation which will avoid harm 
to their significance, while allowing 
them to meet changing needs and 
mitigate and adapt to climate change;
3. place heritage at the heart of 
place making and good growth, 
maintaining the unique character of 
our heritage assets and delivering 
high quality new buildings and spaces 
which enhance their settings.149
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
WESTMINSTER WORLD HERITAGE SITE
C. The Outstandi ng Universal Value 
(OUV), authenticity and integrity of the 
Westminster World Heritage Site will be 
conserved and enhanced. The setting of 
the site will be protected and managed 
to support and enhance its OUV.
D. Development will protect the skyline, 
prominence and iconic silhouettes of the 
Palace of Westminster and Westminster 
Abbey and will protect and enhance 
identified views out of, across and 
towards the World Heritage Site.
E. The council will work with partners to 
promote the use, management and 
interpretation of the site in ways that 
protect, enhance and better communicate 
its OUV. The council will commit to lead 
the production and review of an updated 
World Heritage Site Management Plan.
F. Applicants will be required to demonstrate 
that any impacts of their proposals on 
the World Heritage Site or its setting 
have been fully assessed, informed by 
Heritage Impact Assessment methodology 
and that any harm, including cumulative 
harm, has been avoided or justified.LISTED BUILDINGS
G. Works to listed buildings will preserve 
their special interest, relating sensitively 
to the period and architectural detail 
of the building and protecting or, 
where appropriate, restoring original or 
significant detail and historic fabric.
H. Changes of use to listed buildings 
will be consistent with their long-term 
conservation and help to restore, retain 
and maintain buildings, particularly those 
which have been identified as at risk.
I. Development within the settings or 
affecting views of listed buildings 
will take opportunities to enhance or 
better reveal their significance.
J. Demolition of listed buildings will be 
regarded as substantial harm and will be 
resisted in all but exceptional circumstances.
CONSERVATION AREAS
K. Development will preserve or enhance the 
character and appearance of Westminster’s 
conservation areas. Features that contribute 
positively to the significance of conservation 
areas and their settings will be conserved and 
opportunities taken to enhance conservation 
areas and their settings, wherever possible.L. There will be a presumption that unlisted 
buildings that make a positive contribution 
to a conservation area will be conserved, 
unless it has been demonstrated that 
the relevant tests in national policy 
have been met. Buildings which make a 
negative or neutral contribution may be 
replaced or refurbished where this will 
result in a high quality building which 
will improve their appearance in the 
context of the conservation area and 
their environmental performance.
M. The contribution of existing uses to the 
character, function and appearance of 
conservation areas will be considered 
and changes of use supported where 
they make a positive contribution to 
conservation areas and their settings. 
ARCHAEOLOGY
N. Westminster’s Scheduled Monuments 
and their settings will be preserved, 
and opportunities taken to 
enhance and communicate their 
significance, where appropriate.
O. Applicants for development which  
involves excavation or ground works in 
Westminster’s Archaeological Priority  
Areas or other areas suspected of having CONTENTS
150
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
archaeological potential will demonstrate 
that they have properly evaluated the 
archaeological potential and significance  
of the site and assessed and planned  
for any archaeological implications  
of proposals.
P. Archaeological deposits will be preserved 
in situ wherever possible. Where it has 
been demonstrated that the conservation 
of archaeological remains in situ is 
impossible or deposits are considered to 
be of lesser significance, full investigation, 
recording and an appropriate level 
of publication and archiving will be 
required, including public display and 
interpretation, where appropriate.
REGISTERED HISTORIC 
PARKS AND GARDENS
Q. Proposals affecting Westminster’s registered 
historic parks, gardens and open spaces 
will safeguard their special historic interest, 
integrity, character and appearance, 
and protect their settings and significant 
views from and towards these spaces.
NON-DESIGNATED HERITAGE ASSETS
R. Non-designated heritage assets (including 
local buildings of merit, archaeology and 
open spaces of interest within and outside 39.1 / Westminster’s historic environment is one of 
its greatest assets. The unique character of the 
city derives in large part from the concentration 
and importance of its heritage assets, many of 
which are of national and international importance. 
Given its immense contribution to the character, 
economy and quality of life of our city, it is vital that 
the historic environment is valued, maintained, and 
refurbished in ways appropriate to its significance 
and as an integral part of good growth.
39.2 / Applicants should ensure the significance of 
heritage assets and impact of proposals have 
been fully assessed and understood. In the first 
instance, harm to their significance should be 
avoided. Any harm will require full justification, 
taking into account the significance of the asset, its 
designation, the degree of harm caused (whether 
substantial or less than substantial), alternatives 
which have been considered, any public benefits 
(which may include heritage benefits) and the 
circumstances of the case. A heritage statement is 
usually required where development will affect 
heritage assets. Information submitted should be 
proportionate to the asset’s significance and the 
scale and potential impact of proposals.conservation areas) will be conserved.  
When assessing proposals affecting  
non-designated heritage assets, a balanced 
judgement will be made regarding the  
scale of any harm or loss of the asset and 
the benefit of the propose d development.39.3 / The retention, regeneration and reuse of 
our historic building stock can help in the fight 
against climate change by avoiding the higher 
carbon footprint associated with new construction, 
but to have a sustainable future, heritage assets 
also need to adapt to meet changing needs. There 
will also almost always be scope to find sensitive 
solutions to improve access to the historic 
environment and upgrade facilities and 
environmental performance. Proposals for 
retrofitting historic buildings will only be supported 
where a sensitive and tailored approach to design 
and specification is taken which recognises 
modern and historic buildings function differently 
and ensures that their significance is not 
compromised, having regard to impacts on historic 
fabric, traditional construction, siting, visibility, 
design and advice set out in Historic England’s 
and our Retrofitting guidance. We will encourage 
creative design approaches to the upgrading of 
historic buildings where they enhance their 
significance.
Westminster World Heritage Site
39.4 / The inscription of the Palace of Westminster 
and Westminster Abbey, including St Margaret’s 
Church, as a World Heritage Site recognises its 
Outstanding Universal Value (OUV). As a 
designated heritage asset of international 
importance, it is of the highest level of significance 
and must be afforded the highest level of 
protection and maximum weight possible in the 
planning process.151
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 33: Westminster World Heritage SiteCONTENTS
152
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
39.5 / Where development will affect the site or its 
setting, applicants will demonstrate proposals will 
conserve, enhance or better reveal its OUV. 
Sufficient information should be provided to 
demonstrate impacts have been considered and 
depending on the scale and nature of proposals in 
addition to the heritage statement, this will include  
a Heritage Impact Assessment using the 
methodology set out by ICOMOS.2 Applicants 
should refer to the Statement of Outstanding 
Universal Value for a summary of what makes the 
site significant and the key attributes of OUV 
identified in the management plan.
39.6 / A number of significant projects will affect the 
World Heritage Site during the Plan period, in 
particular the Restoration and Renewal of the 
Palace of Westminster. We will work with partner 
organisations to ensure potential for the positive 
contribution of such projects to the conservation, 
enhancement and communication of OUV of the 
site and its setting is realised. Enhancements to the 
spaces within and immediately adjacent to the site, 
including improvements to public realm and 
approaches and ceremonial routes to the site, 
security measures and visitor experience, will be 
encouraged and initiated where possible. We will 
support production of conservation management 
plans for the Palace of Westminster and 
Westminster Abbey to ensure the protection of the 
key buildings within the site and are working with 
the World Heritage Site steering group to update 
2 Guidance on Heritage Impact Assessments for Cultural 
World Heritage Properties, ICOMOS, 2011the management plan for the site, which is a key 
tool for the long-term sustainable management of 
the site and its setting.
39.7 / The striking silhouettes and iconic views of 
the Palace of Westminster and Westminster Abbey 
contribute significantly to an understanding of its 
Outstanding Universal Value. The site’s 
prominence and riverside location means that 
development at some distance, including outside 
the City of Westminster, can affect it. We will 
continue to work to protect views towards the site 
and its wider setting and ensure the cumulative 
impacts of development within its setting are 
understood and managed.
Listed buildings
39.8 / Our 11,000 listed buildings and structures 
range from well-known landmarks to small items  
of street furniture; together these provide  
an irreplaceable physical record of the  
city’s development.
39.9 / We expect alterations and extensions to 
listed buildings to safeguard important or original 
fabric and relate sensitively to the architectural 
detail, materials and style of the original building 
and any later phases of work which contribute to 
significance. Applicants should identify and protect 
those elements which contribute to special interest. 
This may include internal features such as plan form, 
location and hierarchy of rooms, historic floor levels, 
the structure of the building (including foundations), 
as well as patterns of openings, chimney breasts, staircases and roof structures. Historic fixtures and 
fittings can be at risk of damage or theft when 
buildings are vacant, undergoing work or on the 
market and applicants should consider how this risk 
will be managed. If such features are damaged or 
stolen, we will require their reinstatement.
39.10 / In general, the best use for a listed building will 
be that for which it was built, and this will very often 
be part of its significance. However, most listed 
buildings need to remain economically viable to be 
conserved in the long-term, and suitable and 
sensitive changes of use can help secure this. Where 
a change of use is proposed, the building should, so 
far as possible, be capable of being converted into 
the new use without harmful extensions or 
modifications, with particular consideration given to 
issues such as fire protection, sound proofing, floor 
loadings, servicing and access.
39.11 / Where listed buildings are at risk through 
neglect, decay or other threats, including those on 
Historic England’s Heritage at Risk Register, we 
will support development which will enable 
necessary repair works and bring buildings back 
into active uses consistent with their heritage 
value. In finding the optimum viable use for a listed 
building, other development plan policies may be 
applied flexibly to achieve the long-term 
conservation of the building. The total or 
substantial demolition of listed buildings which will 
result in substantial harm will only be considered 
where exceptional circumstances have been 
demonstrated, as set out in the National Planning 
Policy Framework (NPPF).153
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 34: Archaeological Priority Areas and Scheduled Monuments in Westminster
154
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
39.12 / Even development at some distance which 
doesn’t physically affect a listed building may harm its 
setting. Applicants should demonstrate they have 
assessed impacts upon setting and where it can be 
sustainably achieved, development within the setting 
of a listed building should take opportunities to 
enhance or better reveal its significance.
Conservation areas
39.13 / Westminster’s exceptional range of 
conservation areas are designated for their special 
historic or architectural interest. Many have a high 
proportion of listed buildings and some contain 
townscape of more than local significance. It is 
particularly important that development in 
conservation areas is of the highest architectural 
quality and responds positively to their character  
and appearance.
39.14 / We will not accept outline planning 
applications for development in, or affecting the 
setting of, conservation areas. Applicants should 
demonstrate a full understanding of the significance 
of the area, explaining how its key characteristics 
have informed proposals and identifying those 
elements which contribute positively to character 
and appearance. These may include buildings, 
landmarks, views, trees, open spaces, historic plot 
widths, street layouts and land use patterns or other 
features of architectural or historic interest which 
contribute to local distinctiveness.
39.15 / Opportunities should be taken to  
enhance conservation areas wherever possible, for example through the redevelopment or 
improvement of buildings or features which detract 
from the area, reinstatement of original detail or 
historic plot widths and original urban grain,  
where appropriate.
39.16 / Demolition or substantial demolition of 
unlisted buildings that make a positive contribution  
to a conservation area will be resisted unless it can be 
demonstrated that the public benefits of the proposal, 
including the quality of the replacement building, 
outweigh the case for retention of the building. Any 
replacement buildings in a conservation area must 
respect and seek to enhance its character and 
appearance. In some circumstances, demolition 
behind retained façades can provide a way to protect 
façades of townscape merit while allowing new 
accommodation to be developed behind this and 
may be acceptable where the overall integrity of 
unlisted buildings is maintained in street views 
retaining side or rear elevations or roofscapes of 
townscape value. In all cases, we will only allow 
demolition where proposals for the future 
redevelopment of the site have been approved and 
their implementation assured by planning condition 
or agreement, to avoid harmful gaps occurring within 
the townscape as a result of empty plots.
39.17 / Conservation area audits provide additional 
guidance for applicants and identify buildings and 
features which contribute to or detract from 
individual areas across Westminster. We will review 
and update these where necessary and keep 
conservation area boundaries under review.Archaeology
39.18 / Westminster’s archaeology is an 
irreplaceable and fragile asset. Investigation has 
revealed evidence of prehistoric, Roman, Saxon 
medieval and post medieval archaeology.
39.19 / Westminster’s three Scheduled 
Monuments (the Chapter House and Pyx Chamber 
next to the abbey cloisters, Westminster Abbey;  
the Jewel Tower; and a subterranean commercial 
ice-well, Park Crescent West) will be afforded the 
highest levels of protection. 
39.20 / The Greater London Archaeological Advisory 
Service (GLAAS) identify Archaeological Priority 
Areas (APAs) based on evidence held in the Greater 
London Historic Environmental Record (GLHER).  
Each APA is assigned to a tier reflecting their 
archaeological sensitivity and significance. APAs  
are non-designated heritage assets, but as set out  
in the NPPF (Footnote 63) where these are found to 
include sites or archaeology of national importance 
equivalent to Scheduled Monuments, these sites or 
archaeological findings should be accorded the same 
weight as designated heritage assets. 
39.21 / Applications for development which 
involves ground works in APAs in Tiers 1-3 must  
be accompanied by an archaeological desk-based 
assessment and, where appropriate, field 
evaluations to demonstrate that potential impacts  
of proposed development on archaeological 
significance have been fully considered. All land 
outside APAs is treated as being in Tier 4 but major 155
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
developments in these areas sometimes require 
the same archaeological evidence as higher tiers.
39.22 / The design of development should make 
provision for incorporation, safeguarding and 
preservation in situ of archaeological remains 
wherever possible and there will always be a 
presumption in favour of the retention of nationally-
important archaeology in situ. Where we agree that 
conservation of archaeological remains in situ is 
impossible or deposits are of lesser significance, 
investigation, recording and an appropriate level  
of publication and archiving will be required.
Historic Parks and Gardens
39.23 / Westminster’s rich legacy of historic parks 
and gardens are a cherished part of Westminster’s 
heritage and an intrinsic part of the city’s character. 
These include garden squares, designed landscapes, 
public parks, churchyards and private gardens.
39.24 / The Royal Parks and several other parks, 
gardens and squares are included on Historic 
England’s Register of Parks and Gardens of 
Special Historic Interest and as such are 
recognised as designated heritage assets. 
Proposals that will have a harmful impact on their 
significance will be required to meet the relevant 
tests set out in the NPPF.
39.25 / Most London Squares in Westminster are 
protected by the London Squares Preservation Act 
1931 and many other gardens and open spaces, 
although not designated heritage assets, are of local interest and contribute to the character and 
setting of conservation areas and listed buildings.
39.26 / Proposals affecting the layout, design, 
character, use and function of historic parks and 
gardens should retain and enhance their significance 
and should not prejudice their future restoration. 
Features such as original planting layout, garden 
buildings, statuary, railings, steps and fountains should 
be identified and protected. Views from and towards 
historic open spaces can also be particularly significant 
and the impact of development on views and the 
setting of open spaces should be carefully managed to 
maintain the character and enjoyment of these spaces.
Non-designated heritage assets
39.27 / Although the highest level of protection will 
be afforded to designated heritage assets,  
non-designated heritage assets also contribute 
positively to Westminster’s historic environment. 
These may include local buildings of merit, parks and 
gardens, street furniture or archaeological deposits. 
Unlisted buildings and other features and spaces of 
merit may be identified by us and local communities 
in conservation area audits, supplementary 
planning documents, specific studies or in made 
neighbourhood plans or any future local list. In 
some circumstances, they may come to light as  
part of the development management process. 
39.28 / Some non-designated heritage assets are 
subject to other legislation and guidance, including 
London Squares and Archaeological Priority 
Areas, as set out above. We will work with local 40. Townscape and architecture
A. Development will be sensitively designed, 
having regard to the prevailing scale, 
heights, character, building lines and 
plot widths, materials, architectural 
quality and degree of uniformity in 
the surrounding townscape.
B. Spaces and features that form an  
important element in Westminster’s 
local townscapes or contribute to the 
significance of a heritage asset will be 
conserved, enhanced and sensitively 
integrated within new development, 
including important architectural details, 
boundary walls and railings, historic roof 
forms or structures, open lightwells, historic 
or characteristic shopfronts and street 
furniture, as well as squares, parks and 
gardens. Where possible, lost or damaged 
features will be reinstated or restored.
EXTENSIVE DEVELOPMENTS
C. Extensive development will maximise 
opportunities to enhance the character, communities and other stakeholders to improve 
understanding of local heritage of interest and 
develop criteria to ensure a consistent approach is 
taken to the future identification and conservation 
of our local heritage.156
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
quality and functionality of the site and  
its surroundings, including creating new 
compositions and points of interest, and 
high-quality new streets and spaces,  
linked to the surrounding townscape to 
maximise accessibility.
ALTERATIONS AND EXTENSIONS
D. Alterations and extensions will respect  
the character of the existing and  
adjoining buildings, avoid adverse visual 
and amenity impacts and will not obscure 
important architectural features or disrupt 
any uniformity, patterns, rhythms or 
groupings of buildings and spaces that 
contribute positively to Westminster’s 
distinctive townscape.
ROOF EXTENSIONS
E. Roof extensions will be supported in 
principle where they do not impact 
adversely on heritage assets and should:
1. where part of a terrace or group already 
characterised by roof additions or 
alterations, be of appropriate design which 
follows an established form and would 
help to unify the architectural character of 
the existing terrace or a group;
2. where part of a terrace with an existing 
roof line unimpaired by roof extensions, take a coordinated approach, adding 
roof extensions of consistent and 
appropriate design to each property 
across the terrace;
3. in other locations, be of appropriate 
design sympathetic to the architectural 
character of the existing building.
WESTMINSTER VIEWS
F. New development affecting strategic and 
local views (including local views of 
metropolitan importance) will contribute 
positively to their characteristics, 
composition and significance and will 
remedy past damage to these views 
wherever possible.
40.1 / The densely developed townscape and 
concentration of heritage assets in Westminster 
means that most development opportunities 
involve the infilling of small sites or extensions  
to existing buildings within areas of established 
townscape. We will seek to ensure the design of 
such development will respond positively to the 
character of Westminster’s diverse and distinctive 
neighbourhoods and celebrate and build upon  
the legacy of high-quality architecture in the city.
40.2 / It is important that what makes different 
parts of Westminster special and unique is not lost 
as our city grows and develops. Our varied townscapes include highly uniform residential 
terraces, squares and crescents which form 
architectural set-pieces, relatively modest workers’ 
housing and mews and in contrast, areas of varied 
townscape characterised by architecture from a 
wide variety of eras and in a variety of styles.
40.3 / We recognise that there will be greater 
potential for modern intervention, regeneration 
and change in certain areas of Westminster, where 
the quality of the existing built environment may 
be lower or character more varied. In other areas, 
the quality and / or uniformity of existing 
townscape demands a different architectural 
response and a greater degree of integration with 
the existing context. In general, the more uniform 
the townscape, the greater the degree of 
coherence with the original scale, form and 
materials of the existing townscape that should  
be shown by new development.
40.4 / A variety of distinctive spaces and features 
contribute to the character and appearance of 
townscapes across the city. The layout and pattern  
of development in Westminster, much of which was 
developed in the Georgian and Victorian eras, gives 
rise to certain locally distinctive building forms, 
rhythms and patterns of architectural detail within the 
townscape. Where such characteristic architectural 
detailing, features and spaces contribute to the 
townscape, these should be retained, enhanced and 
integrated within new designs, where appropriate. 
The protection and /or restoration of such features 
and spaces is particularly important when heritage 
assets are affected.157
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Extensive developments
40.5 / Extensive development covers a large site 
area and has some independence of character 
which differentiates it from the surrounding 
townscape. Such sites are relatively uncommon in 
Westminster and most are likely to be covered by 
site briefs or design guides providing further 
guidance. Where they do exist or become 
available, their potential to improve the quality and 
functionality of the area must be fully realised. A 
comprehensive and integrated approach to urban 
design will be required, including consideration of 
building layouts, creation of new public realm, 
streets and spaces, incorporation of landscaping 
and infrastructure to maximise the opportunities 
for positive change. Designs will build in capacity 
for future needs, promoting legibility and ensuring 
good connections, while also taking into account 
the wider setting.
Alterations and extensions
40.6 / Given the densely developed character of 
the city, extensions to existing buildings (both 
upwards and outwards) have an important role to 
play in meeting the growth ambitions of this plan. 
They can provide room for expanding families, 
may provide additional housing units, and can 
allow businesses to grow, as part of single or 
mixed-use development.
40.7 / Works to alter and extend existing buildings will 
be supported where they are successfully integrated 
with their surroundings. To achieve this, extensions should be subordinate to the host building, 
respecting the scale, detailing and materials of both 
existing buildings and adjoining townscape. Care 
should always be taken not to disfigure buildings or 
upset their proportions and to ensure good standards 
of amenity as set out in Policy 7.
40.8 / Roof extensions can be a practical way  
to create additional floorspace but can also  
have a significant impact on the character and 
appearance of buildings and the wider townscape, 
and a sensitive approach and highest standards  
of design will be required.
40.9 / National and London Plan policy identifies the 
potential for building upwards to increase housing 
supply. Where upwards extensions will allow the 
creation of additional residential floorspace to 
provide family housing or new self-contained 
residential units and they are sympathetic to the 
townscape context, they will be supported.
40.10 / Many of Westminster’s residential areas are 
characterised by terraced housing of consistent 
design. On terraced houses of the Georgian and 
Victorian eras, mansards will very often be the most 
appropriate form of roof extension. However, this 
will depend on the age and style of the building. 
Where mansards or other roofs are an established 
feature within a group of buildings, roof extensions 
which follow the established pattern will usually be 
considered acceptable, but they should respect 
existing architectural features such as chimneys, 
party wall upstands, parapets and cornices.40.11 / If properties affected form part of a group  
or terrace that remain largely unaltered or have  
a historic or distinctive roofscape integral to the 
architectural character of that building, further 
upward extension may be unacceptable, and the 
design of development proposals will need to be 
especially carefully considered. Where a terrace 
retains a uniform roofline with no roof extensions, 
the addition of one roof extension or multiple roof 
extensions of different designs can cause harm  
to the appearance of the roofscape. However, we 
will consider applications which would take a 
coordinated approach, adding roof extensions of 
consistent design to a complete terrace with a 
uniform roofline. This will typically be on Georgian 
and Victorian terraces where mansard roof 
extensions can be accommodated behind a 
parapet. In such cases we will require extensions 
across the whole terrace group to be implemented 
at one time and this may be secured by legal 
agreement. Upwards extension will usually be 
inappropriate where a mansard or other later roof 
extension already exists.
40.12 / While one additional storey will often be most 
appropriate, larger extensions of more than one 
storey may be appropriate in certain locations, 
particularly in commercial locations with more varied 
townscape character including the Opportunity 
Areas, in the International Centres of the West End 
and Knightsbridge and the Queensway/ Westbourne 
Grove Major Centre, and in other commercial 
locations on the Transport for London and Strategic 
Road networks which are characterised by a larger 158
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
scale of townscape. In these locations more than one 
storey will be supported where it is demonstrated it 
can be designed to minimise harm to townscape, 
amenity and heritage assets and will help fulfil growth 
targets. This will depend on townscape context. Not 
all of the buildings within areas identified will be 
suitable for roof extensions and there may be other 
commercial locations across the city where larger 
roof extensions can be accommodated.
40.13 / The creation of larger extensions to 
existing buildings may also lead to additional 
challenges and the capacity to support additional 
loading will be an important factor in determining 
the feasibility of delivering such rooftop 
development. Where substantial demolition of 
existing buildings will be required to allow for 
additional height this will be considered having 
regard to the criteria set out in heritage policy.
40.14 / Even small-scale alterations and additions 
can have a cumulative impact on townscape 
character. The design of new doors, windows or 
shopfonts should be carefully considered to relate 
sensitively to the existing building and adjoining 
townscape. Additions such as plant, balustrades, 
fire escapes routes, telecommunications 
equipment, cameras and alarms, micro-generation 
equipment, any associated cables and fixings, as 
well as air conditioning units, flues and water tanks 
should always be carefully designed, sited and 
detailed or screened where appropriate.Westminster views
40.15 / Westminster’s unique townscape gives rise 
to some of the most familiar and cherished views 
of London. These include views of the River 
Thames and its frontages, the Royal Parks, as well 
as many other ‘picture postcard’ views of famous 
London landmarks.
40.16 / There is a hierarchy of protected views in 
terms of their significance, sensitivity and status in 
the planning system. Strategic views are those 
which are considered to help define the character 
of London and are identified in the London Plan – 
eighteen of these affect Westminster. Several of 
these are protected vistas and have geometrically 
defined viewing corridors, subject to specific 
protection and height limits. Several designated 
townscape views and river prospect views are 
focused on the Palace of Westminster and protect 
its silhouette. Guidance on these views is set out  
in the London View Management Framework.
40.17 / Local views are valued for their contribution 
to Westminster’s distinctive character areas. These 
may contribute to the appreciation of important 
listed and other landmark buildings or distinctive 
skylines or groupings of buildings, historic parks 
and gardens, and views along or across the River 
Thames and Westminster’s canals. Recognising the 
national importance of Westminster’s heritage and 
townscape, we have also identified certain 
‘metropolitan views’ of major landmarks and the 
most significant river views and areas of townscape 
in the city. We will publish a list of views of metropolitan importance and prepare guidance on 
their management. Other views are important at a 
local level and may be identified by us or local 
communities in conservation area audits, made 
neighbourhood plans or other area-based studies.
40.18 / New development should make a positive 
contribution to the characteristics and composition 
of significant views, both strategic and local,  
and improvement to significant views will be 
encouraged. This may include a proactive 
approach to view enhancement by repairing  
past damaging development. For example, 
opportunities should be taken to reduce the scale 
and impact of existing harmful buildings in the 
foreground or middle ground of protected vistas. 
Careful consideration of building materials and 
finishes can make proposals more sympathetic  
in long distance views. A proportionate approach 
to view protection will be taken, taking into 
account the significance of the view and 
magnitude of impact of proposals.
40.19 / We will work with adjoining boroughs to 
ensure the impact of development in Westminster 
on protected views in other boroughs (and vice-
versa) is understood and managed carefully and 
sensitively. Potential impacts on views should be 
identified through visibility analysis, supported 
wherever possible by the use of accurate 3D 
digital modelling.159
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Figure 35: Protected Vistas and Other Strategic Views160
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
41. Building height
A. Tall buildings are defined as buildings of 
twice the prevailing context height or 
higher or those which will result in a 
significant change to the skyline. In all 
locations proposals for tall buildings will 
need to satisfy both the general principles 
in clause B and relevant locational 
principles in clauses C and D (and for 
Housing Renewal Areas, Policy 42). 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
B. Proposals for tall buildings will be  
required to:
1. be proportionate to the role, function 
and importance of the location in terms 
of height, scale, massing and form; and
2. achieve exceptional architectural quality 
and innovative and sustainable building 
design from all viewpoints and 
directions; and
3. create an attractive and legible 
streetscape that takes account of the 
use of the public realm for a variety of 
uses and includes active uses at ground 
floor level; and
4. enhance the character and 
distinctiveness of an area without 
negatively affecting valued townscapes and landscapes, or detracting from 
important landmarks, heritage assets, 
key views and other historic skylines 
and their settings; and
5. mitigate negative impacts on the 
microclimate and amenity of the site  
and surrounding area; and
6. avoid unacceptable impacts on aviation 
and telecommunications; and
7. provide publicly accessible viewing 
platforms at the roof of the building  
(for any exceptionally tall buildings).
LOCATIONAL PRINCIPLES
C. Development of tall buildings may be 
acceptable within the Paddington 
Opportunity Areas, Victoria Opportunity 
Areas, Marylebone flyover / Edgware Road 
junction and the Housing Renewal Areas. 
Provided in the first instance they comply with 
the general principles under clause B. These 
principles need to be cross-referenced 
against the area specific design principles set 
out below, and for the Housing Renewal 
Areas, policy 42 and with site-specific 
guidance set out in the forthcoming Site 
Allocations Development Plan Document:PADDINGTON OPPORTUNITY AREA
There may be potential for further tall  
buildings in this area that complement and 
help to frame the setting of Paddington 
Basin and contribute to the quality and 
character of the existing cluster. 
The prevailing context height for the wider 
Paddington area is identified as 6 residential 
storeys (20m) with a varied context. Tall 
buildings within this area of 2 to 3 times this 
context height may be appropriate.
MARYLEBONE FLYOVER /  
EDGWARE ROAD JUNCTION
Tall buildings may be appropriate at the 
junction of the flyover and Edgware Road 
but must be designed to relate to and 
complement each other and help to frame 
this area as a gateway junction.
The height of any tall building in this location 
must step down significantly from, and be 
subordinate to, those in the Paddington 
Basin cluster. They must also be slender and 
elegant in their form. The acceptability of a 
tall building proposed in this area depends 
on the quality of its design, reflecting its role 
as a local landmark. 
The prevailing context height in this area is 6 
residential storeys (20m) but as it sits within a 161
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
varied context. Tall buildings of 2 to 3 times 
the context height may be appropriate.
VICTORIA OPPORTUNITY AREA 
There may be potential for further tall 
buildings in this area that complement and 
help to frame the setting of Victoria Station 
and Victoria Street and contribute to the 
quality and character of the existing cluster. 
Any tall buildings in this area must not 
cause harm to the Outstanding Universal 
Value of the World Heritage Site and its 
setting or breach its protected silhouette 
and must be sensitive to the other listed 
buildings, conservation areas and 
registered parks and gardens. 
The prevailing context height in Victoria  
is 6 residential storeys (20m) with a  
varied context. Tall buildings in this area  
of 2 to 3 times the context height may  
be appropriate.
D. Proposals for tall buildings outside of the 
areas identified in clause C will not 
generally be acceptable, and will need to 
demonstrate how they (in addition to the 
general principles under clause B):
1. significantly strengthen the legibility of  
a town centre or mark the location of a 
transport interchange or other location of civic or visual significance within the 
area; and
2. will not undermine the prominence  
and / or integrity of existing landmark 
buildings and tall building clusters.
41.1 / Westminster has a diverse and historic 
townscape that is already densely developed. 
Height is mainly concentrated in the Victoria and 
Paddington Opportunity Areas, but this does not 
come close to the height of some of the tall 
buildings in neighbouring boroughs. The historic 
position was, and remains, that Westminster is not 
generally suitable for tall buildings. However, we 
also recognise that in some locations – and when 
well-designed – tall buildings can make a positive 
contribution to our townscape and can help deliver 
the growth and regeneration objectives of this 
plan. We therefore set a positive strategy for 
building height in the city.
41.2 / Building densely does not always mean 
building high. There are many ways to deliver  
on our growth targets with high density 
developments without adding significant height. 
Outside the areas identified as having potential  
to accommodate tall buildings, proposals 
incorporating buildings significantly higher than 
their surroundings are likely to be resisted and 
should therefore provide evidence that other 
options have been explored to make efficient use of 
the site without adding significant additional height.41.3 / The impact of a building’s height is 
dependent on its context. An eight-storey building 
may be perceived as tall in one area, but not in 
another. We therefore follow a context-based 
approach to tall buildings, which considers the 
prevailing height of the surrounding areas 
impacted by the development. The prevailing 
context height sets a baseline against which  
the impacts of any proposals for tall buildings  
will be considered.
41.4 / It is necessary to define what a tall building is 
as their impact is greater than that of other large-
scale buildings, and they therefore require a 
specific policy approach. A tall building can be 
created by constructing a new building or 
extending an existing building upwards.
General principles
41.5 / The appropriate height of a building is 
influenced by many factors. In addition, the height 
of a building is not the only aspect that determines 
the impact or suitability of a tall building. The 
general principles that all tall building applications 
will need to comply with make sure they are of 
exceptional design and make a positive 
contribution to our townscape, including by being 
of appropriate height.CONTENTS
162
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
41.6 / Tall buildings should fulfil a clear function. 
They can mark an important location, improve 
legibility and enhance the character of an area. Tall 
buildings can also provide public benefits, such as 
publicly accessible viewing platforms which we 
require for any buildings that are exceptionally tall, 
standing out in the townscape. The potential 
benefits of tall buildings will be balanced with the 
need to mitigate their potential adverse impacts.
Locational principles
41.7 / The Westminster Building Height Study (2019) 
identifies five areas that may have capacity for 
additional tall buildings as they have fewer 
constraints than other parts of the city, could make 
a contribution to growth and regeneration and are 
well connected. The study also informed the design 
principles for tall buildings in those locations.
41.8 / The prevailing context heights identified in  
the policy set a baseline for the consideration of any 
tall building proposals in the relevant areas. As there 
is a lot of variation in height in these areas, there is 
greater scope for increased height than if the areas 
were of uniform height. The height ranges have been 
tested as part of the Westminster Building Height 
Study (2019). The appropriate height of each 
individual scheme is subject to its impacts. Any 
deviation from the identified height ranges must  
be robustly justified by demonstrating the general 
principles in this policy have been met in full.42. Building height in the 
housing renewal areas
A. Delivering large scale public estate 
regeneration comes with viability 
challenges that are different to private 
developments, such as decanting of 
existing residents and a higher affordable 
housing requirement. While the design 
principles for these estates remains 
paramount and any scheme must adhere  
to the general building height principles  
in Policy 41 B, what is considered an 
appropriate height must be balanced 
against the wider public benefits the 
scheme is able to viably deliver.41.9 / The Westminster Building Height Study 
(2019) did not identify further opportunities for tall 
buildings outside the five areas and tall buildings 
are therefore not generally acceptable outside of 
these areas. However, there may be instances 
where a tall building of a local scale elsewhere in 
the city may be appropriate as it strengthens the 
role of the place in the townscape and does not 
affect the function of other tall buildings or tall 
building clusters. We therefore set additional 
criteria to asses any proposals for tall buildings 
outside of the areas identified in the policy.B. The Church Street / Edgware Road Housing 
Renewal Area and Ebury Bridge Estate 
Housing Renewal Area have been 
identified for renewal and there are 
opportunities for taller buildings here 
where they contribute to the creation of  
a place with a strong and enhanced 
character and:
1. On Ebury Bridge Estate respect the 
setting and views from the surrounding 
Georgian and Victorian terraces within 
the adjacent conservation areas; have 
the tallest element towards the northern 
end of the area marking Ebury Bridge 
and the crossing of the railway line, with 
building heights stepping down from 
this location.
2. On Church Street / Edgware Road 
Housing Renewal Area are at the main 
east-west route and the commercial 
focus for the area; and are delivered  
in the heart of the regeneration scheme 
as part of a comprehensive approach.163
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 36: Victoria Opportunity Area, Ebury Bridge 
Estate Housing Renewal AreaFigure 37: Paddington Opportunity Area, Marylebone flyover / 
Edgware Road junction, Church Street Housing Renewal Area164
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
consistency of materials and have an 
appropriately engineered surface that  
is fit for purpose;
5. creating clear sight lines, improve 
lighting and following the principles  
of designing out crime;
6. creating new quiet routes;
7. resisting the creation of gated 
communities which do not promote 
socially inclusive and cohesive 
neighbourhoods or connectivity 
between places.
COMMERCE IN THE PUBLIC REALM
C. Additional kiosks or other structures for  
the display and sale of goods outside of  
a market will be resisted. The replacement 
and relocation of existing structures will  
be designed and sited to:
1. respect local context and not detract 
from any heritage asset;
2. minimise obstruction to pedestrian 
movement and street cleansing 
arrangements;
3. minimise energy consumption; 
4. ensure they are capable of  
quick removal.43. Public realm
A. Development will contribute to a well-
designed, clutter-free public realm with use 
of high quality and durable materials capable 
of easy maintenance and cleaning, and the 
integration of high-quality soft landscaping 
as part of the streetscape design.
AN INCLUSIVE AND  
ACCESSIBLE PUBLIC REALM
B. The public realm will be safe, attractive and 
accessible to all. Development should 
contribute to improving connectivity, legibility 
and permeability of the public realm and the 
network of public spaces in the city through:
1. helping to provide a network of 
connected and defined frontages  
and spaces such as pocket parks;
2. optimising active frontages towards public 
streets and spaces particularly in areas 
identified as appropriate for tall buildings;
3. ensuring that soft landscaping is 
maximised to soften the streetscape 
and provide visual and environmental 
relief from hard landscaping,  
buildings and traffic;
4. using high quality new, or reinstated 
paving materials whose colour and 
texture underline a sense of place and 42.1 / We are ambitious in our plans to deliver more 
affordable housing in Westminster; a significant 
opportunity to contribute to this delivery is on existing 
estates designated for renewal. The housing renewal 
programme offers opportunities to deliver new high 
quality homes for our residents, with new green open 
space and community facilities. Housing estate 
renewal is inherently complicated, particularly in 
terms of viability because of the responsibilities to 
decant and return existing residents and the 50% 
affordable housing targets on public land set by the 
London Plan. The Westminster Building Height Study 
(2019) identified scope for taller buildings on the 
Church Street / Edgware Road Housing Renewal 
Area and Ebury Bridge Estate Housing Renewal Area, 
however this policy does not direct appropriate 
heights for the estates. Prescriptively indicating 
appropriate heights here may preclude the design 
solutions necessary to facilitate the comprehensive 
public benefits that large estate-wide development 
can deliver, including the significant contribution to 
the strategic priority for more affordable housing in 
Westminster. This does not, however, mean that the 
heights for housing renewal areas are limitless – we 
will expect new buildings to be of an appropriate 
scale for their local context and applicants will 
demonstrate how the proposal adheres to clauses  
A and B of Policy 41.
42.2 / At present only Church Street/Edgware Road 
Housing Renewal Area and Ebury Bridge Estate 
Housing Renewal Area have been identified for 
housing renewal, however, other housing estates may 
be identified as suitable for renewal in future.165
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
H. Pedestrian signage will be consistent with 
Legible London or any subsequent 
successor standards.D. Proposals for trading from premises extending 
into the street (including provision of tables 
and chairs on the highway) will be supported 
where they would not:
1. harm local amenity;
2. compromise pedestrian movement  
or traffic conditions;
3. impede refuse storage and street 
cleansing arrangements.
PUBLIC ART, STATUES AND MONUMENTS
E. Applicants will be encouraged to provide 
high quality public art as an integral part  
of the design of new major developments, 
particularly around gateway locations and 
where they benefit legibility.
F. New statues, monuments or memorials  
in the public realm will be directed outside 
of the Monument Saturation Zone.
SIGNS AND ADVERTISEMENTS
G. Signs and advertisements will make a 
positive contribution to amenity or public 
safety by being sensitively designed in 
terms of their size, location and degree  
of illumination, their impact on the building 
on which they are displayed, local context, 
street-scene and wider townscape.43.1 / The public realm refers to all the physically 
and visually public, accessible space which form 
the setting for human interaction, such as streets, 
pavements, forecourts, squares, parks, open 
spaces and building façades. The cross-cutting 
impacts of public realm on strategic permeability, 
legibility and connectivity of the city’s public realm 
means that it is intrinsically linked to the City Plan’s 
10 objectives and contributes to the delivery of 
other core policy strands such as sustainable 
travel, design, green infrastructure and town 
centres. Addressing improvements to the public 
realm from a strategic viewpoint is essential,  
while placing public realm considerations at the 
heart of individual development schemes and 
establishing the critical measures an applicant 
needs to consider when going through the 
planning process.
43.2 / All such spaces must be carefully designed, 
using high quality materials and detailing which 
respect and enhance the existing character of 
areas within the city. The public realm will be 
carefully managed and maintained, with the 
principle of decluttering advocated whilst 
discouraging graffiti and deterring anti-social 
behaviour and crime to ensure the amenity,  
well-being and health of residents and visitors.43.3 / The public realm should be distinctive and 
attractive and positively contribute to the City Plan 
objective of creating and enhancing successful 
places. It should offer opportunities to meet, 
congregate and socialise, as well as provide 
opportunity for quiet enjoyment. Wherever 
possible, development should make the most of 
opportunities to green the urban realm through 
new planting and vegetation in order to soften the 
townscape. Ongoing maintenance of the public 
realm is a key consideration and will be secured 
through planning conditions and/or legal 
agreements where appropriate.
An inclusive and accessible public realm
43.4 / Given the pressures on space in 
Westminster, in order to ensure an inclusive public 
realm a particular priority must be given to the 
needs of pedestrians, with a special focus on 
disabled people, those with dementia, children 
and others with particular mobility requirements.
43.5 / To facilitate this objective whilst recognising 
that pedestrian movement will increase through 
new infrastructure projects, such as Crossrail, 
pavement widening will be promoted. This 
approach and the need to connect with planned 
public realm and transport enhancement projects 
may require the loss of some ground floor space 
within a development site’s red line boundary in 
order to make a scheme acceptable.CONTENTS
166
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
43.6 / The installation of seating will be 
encouraged where appropriate and where it adds 
to the peaceful enjoyment of the public realm.
43.7 / It is important to distinguish between private 
and public space in order to create a more cohesive 
and defined street scene whilst aiding delineation 
of ownership. Boundary treatments which help to 
green parts of Westminster are promoted in an 
attempt to soften the built environment particularly 
in public spaces where people gather.
Commerce in the public realm
43.8 / Commerce in the public realm can add to 
the diversity and vibrancy of city life and support 
economic development. However, it can also 
hinder pedestrian movement, cause traffic 
congestion, undermine the character of historic 
areas, result in adverse impacts on nearby 
residential amenity, and compromise city 
management functions such as street cleansing 
and refuse collection. 
43.9 / Given the intense pressures on much of the 
city’s kerb space, and the need to prioritise safe 
pedestrian movement, commercial activity of this 
nature must be carefully managed to balance its 
benefits and adverse impacts.
43.10 / Therefore, a net growth in semi-permanent 
kiosks (i.e. those that cannot be removed without 
the need for dismantling) will be avoided. Where 
replacement facilities are proposed (including 
those in alternative locations to the existing), they should deliver net benefits by being designed and 
constructed in a manner that makes a positive 
contribution to their proposed setting and wider 
energy efficiency goals. Their location should not 
impede pedestrian movement through an area 
and between buildings, and any arrangements for 
street cleaning. This includes being designed to 
avoid stock spreading onto the pavement. 
43.11 / It is considered that a single, well designed 
and located structure could have less negative 
impacts than clusters of smaller stalls, and as such 
may be preferable where it can be used to house 
several separate functions. Quick removal of 
structures may be necessary to facilitate highways 
works, street cleansing, or other works for special 
events in the public realm.
43.12 / Extending trading onto the street,  
including through outdoor seating, can help 
sustain businesses such as cafés and restaurants 
by adding to their offer. Where well-managed, 
such use of outdoor space can also enhance the 
utilisation of the public realm as a space for social 
interaction. However, this needs to be carefully 
balanced against the need to facilitate movement 
of pedestrians and other highways users. 
43.13 / The noise associated with such 
development can also cause disturbance to 
residential occupiers of upper floors. Where 
schemes are supported, they will be required to 
store temporary street furniture off-street outside of 
trading hours, so as not to impede refuse storage and street cleaning. City management powers will 
also be used alongside planning powers to limit the 
number of tables and chairs, hours of use,  
and secure suitable management arrangements. 
Permission will generally be granted only for a 
temporary period in order to allow the impact of the 
tables and chairs to be monitored and re-assessed. 
Further guidance on the effective management of 
these issues will be forthcoming in the form of a 
supplementary planning document.
Public art, statues and monuments
43.14 / Public art demonstrates a shared 
commitment by us and applicants to high  
quality public places and a public affirmation of 
pride in new development projects. It contributes 
to creating a sense of place and a visually 
stimulating environment, which adds to public 
enjoyment of the public realm.
43.15 / Westminster has an outstanding heritage  
of more than 300 statues and memorials. Many of 
these were by the leading artists of their day and 
are major works of art in their own right. Almost  
half of all memorials, 47%, are situated in the royal 
and governmental heart of Westminster – a 
relatively small area centred on Whitehall and  
in the Royal Parks. It is not possible to continue  
to accommodate new statues and monuments  
in Westminster on the same scale as in the past, 
and the most central areas are already saturated. 
However, new statues and monuments are strongly 
encouraged in other areas of Westminster, where 
public art is under-represented.167
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTSCONTENTS
Figure 38: Monument saturation zones168
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Signs and advertisements
43.16 / Signs and advertisements are common 
features in many parts of Westminster, in particular in 
the more commercial areas of the West End. Although 
they play a role in providing information, control of 
signs and advertisements is important as they can 
have significant impacts on the quality and 
appearance of the street scene and upon the building 
on which they are displayed. They may also affect 
amenity and public safety, including highway safety, 
and can damage the appearance of the streetscape 
and the architectural integrity of our built 
environment. On the other hand, properly planned, 
executed and managed, advertising can enhance 
peoples’ experience of the public realm. We will work 
with the industry to find ways of ensuring the most is 
made of the positive aspects. Careful consideration 
will be given to the size, location, materials, details, 
and method of illumination of proposed signs and 
advertisements together with the impact they will 
have on the architectural features of the building 
upon which they are fixed. It is recognised that 
commercial advertising on shrouds and hoardings 
along with high level and temporary advertisements 
may cause substantial injury to visual amenity and 
can have a particularly detrimental effect on 
surrounding townscape.44. Security measures  
in the public realm
A. Development will provide an integrated 
approach to the security of the site 
including buildings and any associated 
public or private spaces.
B. Development and or public realm 
improvement proposals will be required to 
incorporate appropriate counter terrorism 
measures advised by the Metropolitan 
Police and / or the council. Where 
appropriate, the retrofitting of existing 
buildings and spaces may be required.
C. All security measures will be designed  
and implemented to take account of the 
functionality of the area and the needs of 
its users, and will be sensitively designed  
to respect the surrounding context and 
public realm.44.1 / Westminster attracts millions of visitors as an 
international tourist destination, the centre for the  
UK government and the location for many other 
institutions, businesses as well as educational, 
medical and cultural venues. For these reasons it has 
places and uses that are terrorist targets – as shown 
by recent attacks. It is a priority to ensure and 
maintain a safe and secure environment for people 
visiting, residing and working in Westminster.
44.2 / Building and public realm schemes will  
be assessed as part of the planning application 
process to ensure their resilience against 
emergencies including terrorism and related hazards. 
This assessment will be based on advice from the 
relevant authorities, in particular the Metropolitan 
Police. Applicants for major development should 
undertake a Security Considerations Assessment 
process. This will ensure that potential security-
related vulnerabilities have been identified, assessed 
and, where necessary, addressed in a manner that is 
appropriate and proportionate. Where there is a 
clear threat from terrorism and to ensure security and 
counter-terrorism measures can be incorporated into 
higher risk developments and public spaces, 
applicants are encouraged to contact the 
Metropolitan Police’s Designing Out Crime Officers 
who will make contact with Counter Terrorism 
Security Advisors for further advice. Architects and 
engineers are also encouraged to seek advice from 
the Metropolitan Police’s Counter Terrorism Security 
Advisors on appropriate counter-terrorism measures 
that can be incorporated in high risk developments 
and public spaces.43.17 / Legible London provides a pedestrian 
signage system that has been installed at more 
than 1,700 locations across the capital (450  
within Westminster) to aid effective wayfinding. 
The uniform nature of these signs is critical to  
their successful interpretation (particularly  
across borough boundaries), and as such all  
future pedestrian signs should be consistent  
in design and quality.169
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
44.3 / Developments that achieve Secured by Design 
accreditation will help to make Westminster safe and 
sustainable, a place where people want to visit and 
stay. Therefore, as a minimum the basic principles of 
Secured By Design, including counter-terrorism, 
should be incorporated into new developments to 
minimise potential physical risks, deter terrorism, 
detect terrorist activity and help mitigate its effects. 
Incorporating security features can be costly if it is 
thought about too late and have to be retrofitted into 
schemes. They should therefore be considered at the 
outset of the design process.
44.4 / Security measures and surveillance 
equipment must, wherever possible, be sensitively 
designed and positioned to avoid detrimental 
visual effects, as Westminster’s historic 
townscapes are sensitive to visual intrusion. 
Measures should provide effective protection and 
embrace good design.
44.5 / In light of a significant vulnerability to 
terrorism, we will use planning conditions where 
appropriate and request legal agreements to 
ensure design and other measures required under 
this policy are incorporated and maintained, 
including effective management of access to both 
private space and spaces that are accessible to 
the public. Legal agreements may make provision 
for long-term management and maintenance of 
security measures at the expense of the applicant.45. Basement developments
A. Basement developments should:
1. incorporate measures recommended  
in the structural statement or flood risk 
assessment to safeguard structural 
stability, and address surface water  
and sewerage flooding;
2. be designed and constructed to 
minimise the impact at construction  
and occupation stages on the 
surrounding area;
3. protect heritage assets, and in the  
case of listed buildings, not unbalance 
the building’s original hierarchy of 
spaces where this contributes to its 
significance; and
4. conserve the character and appearance 
of the existing building, garden setting 
and the surrounding area, ensuring 
lightwells, plant, vents, skylights and 
means of escape are sensitively 
designed and discreetly located.
EXTENT AND DEPTH OF BASEMENTS
B. Basement developments will be supported 
where they:
1. do not extend beneath more than 50%  of the garden land – on small sites 
where the garden is 8m or less at its 
longest point, basements may extend 
up to 4m from the original building in 
that direction;
2. leave a margin of undeveloped garden 
land proportionate to the scale of the 
development and the size of the garden 
around the entire site boundary;
3. not comprise more than one storey 
beneath the lowest original floor level 
– exceptions may be made on large 
sites with high levels of accessibility  
for construction;
4. provide a minimum of one metre  
of soil depth (plus minimum 200mm 
drainage layer) and adequate overall  
soil volume above the top cover of  
the basement; and
5. not encroach more than 1.8m under any 
part of the adjacent highway and retain 
a minimum vertical depth below the 
footway or carriageway of 900mm 
between the highway surface and  
vault structure.170
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
45.3 / Given their nature, basements can be 
vulnerable to flooding from a number of sources 
including the overflowing of drains and nearby 
watercourses, groundwater flooding and surface 
water flooding. A site-specific Flood Risk 
Assessment (FRA) and a structural statement  
will be required for basement developments 
located in flood zone 2 or 3, or surface water flood 
risk hotspots. Flood risk considerations are also 
addressed in the structural methodology 
statement required for all basement 
developments. Measures to be incorporated 
include Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  
and positive pumped devices or equivalent to 
address sewerage flooding, and other measures 
recommended in the FRA.
45.4 / The construction works associated  
with basement excavation can often have a 
serious impact on the quality of life of neighbours  
and cause disruption. Applicants for basement 
development must therefore demonstrate that 
reasonable consideration has been given to 
potential impacts of construction in line with  
our adopted Code of Construction Practice.  
A signed pro forma Appendix A of the Code of 
Construction Practice should be submitted as  
part of basement development applications. 
Applicants for basement excavation works are 
strongly encouraged to consult with neighbouring 
occupiers prior to submitting an application. 
Evidence of engagement with neighbouring 
occupiers, including a schedule and timetable  
of works may be requested as supporting 
information with planning applications.45.5 / Westminster’s heritage may be sensitive  
to the impact of basement development. Listed 
buildings and archaeology can be especially 
vulnerable to damage when excavation takes place. 
The internal hierarchy of buildings could also be 
unbalanced by basement developments, negatively 
impacting on the architectural and historic interest 
and significance of historic buildings.
45.6 / When poorly designed, basements can 
negatively affect the character and appearance  
of buildings and the wider townscape. Private 
gardens also make a significant contribution to 
Westminster’s character as an important part of 
our green infrastructure network. A satisfactory 
landscaping scheme should be provided that 
incorporates soft landscaping, planting and 
permeable surfacing as appropriate.
Extent and depth of basements
45.7 / Limiting the extent and depth of  
basement development can help reduce both  
the risks associated with basement development 
and mitigate negative environmental and  
amenity impacts.
45.8 / Standards for extent of the garden (site area 
excluding the footprint of the original building) are 
intended to strike a balance between allowing 
development, while ensuring a substantial area 
remains undeveloped (without any impermeable 
surfacing installed) to ensure adequate drainage 
and preserve the garden setting.45.1 / Basement extensions have become  
an increasingly common form of development  
in Westminster in recent years. Although often 
hidden from public view, basement excavation  
can have significant impacts on the amenity of 
neighbouring occupiers and may affect ground 
conditions, biodiversity, heritage assets, local 
character and garden settings. This policy  
seeks to make sure that basement developments  
are appropriately designed and applies to  
new basements as well as extensions to  
existing basements.
Basement development principles
45.2 / Excavation in a dense urban environment  
is more complex than many standard residential 
extensions and has the potential to damage 
existing and neighbouring structures and 
infrastructure, and irreversibly alter ground 
conditions. Basement developments should 
therefore safeguard the structural stability of the 
existing building, nearby buildings and other 
infrastructure including highway and railway lines/ 
tunnels. Applications for basement development 
should be accompanied by a structural 
methodology statement and appropriate self-
certification from a suitably qualified engineer  
to demonstrate the impacts of the proposed 
development have been understood.171
DESIGN CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
45.9 / The most appropriate form of basement 
development will be no more than one storey 
(approximately 2.7m floor to ceiling height) below 
the lowest part of the original floor level. In some 
cases, an exception could be made for large sites 
when they are able to accommodate plant and 
machinery and include appropriate access  
(e.g. rear or side access) to enable construction 
without an adverse impact on neighbouring uses 
or occupiers. The definition of large sites will 
depend on individual circumstances.
45.10 / Sufficient soil depth will be required  
to support sustainable planting. In some 
circumstances a soil depth of up to 1.5m (plus 
drainage layer) may be required to support tree 
growth. Applicants should provide detail of soil 
profile and composition.
45.11 / Work to basement vaults can restrict the 
space available for services in the highway and 
may make it difficult to access cables, pipes, 
sewers, etc. for maintenance and to provide 
essential items of street furniture. In order to 
ensure that services and essential street  
furniture can be provided, adequate space  
must be available between the highway and  
any excavation proposed under the highway. 
Applications adjacent to or affecting the  
Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) or 
public transport infrastructure should seek  
advice from Transport for London.IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING172
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
The City Plan, the London Plan and any made neighbourhood plans make up 
Westminster’s Development Plan. It is also supported by a suite of national planning 
policies and other local planning documents – illustrated by this diagram. IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING
Figure 39: Westminster’s Development Plan Supplementary 
Planning DocumentsStatement of Community 
Involvement
CIL Charging Schedule Other council strategiesNPPF and National 
GuidanceAuthority 
Monitoring Report
Infrastructure 
Delivery PlanCity Plan 2019-2040
London Plan Neighbourhood PlansWestminster’s Development PlanPolicies Map
Forthcoming Site Allocations 
Development Plan DocumentIMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING173
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING
Supplementary Planning Documents
We will prepare additional information including 
technical notes and Supplementary Planning 
Documents (SPDs) to explain more detail on how 
to implement the City Plan policies effectively, 
support the efficient use of land and the delivery  
of the right kind of growth in the city. These will  
be published on our website and provide more 
detailed guidance that should be taken into 
account when designing developments and 
determining planning applications.
The SPDs will cover the follow topic areas,  
among others:
 –Planning Obligations and Affordable Housing
 –Heritage
 –Design and Public Realm
 –North Bank
 –Environment
 –Local Enforcement
 –West End.Neighbourhood planning
Neighbourhood plans are written by the local 
community - they are an important tool that gives 
Westminster’s communities statutory powers to 
shape how their local area develops.
Neighbourhood plans must have regard to 
national policies and guidance and be in general 
conformity with the strategic policies in this  
City Plan to ensure they directly contribute to  
the delivery of the City Plan objectives. Appendix 
2 sets out a schedule of which policies in this plan 
are strategic to help guide neighbourhood forums 
in developing their plans. Neighbourhood plan 
policies and spatial designations can differ from 
the non-strategic policies, but they need to be in 
general conformity with strategic City Plan 
policies. General conformity is judged on the 
neighbourhood plan as a whole, so absolute 
conformity on every detail of strategic policy  
is not required.
Westminster City Council offers bespoke  
guidance and support for the delivery of 
neighbourhood plans across the city - our  
website includes helpful guidance, information  
on data sources and contact details.1
1 westminster.gov.uk/neighbourhood-planningImplementation
Westminster’s Development Plan policies and 
national planning policies will be implemented 
through Westminster’s Development Management 
process. Legal agreements including Section 106, 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), Carbon and  
Air Quality Offset funds will also be used to help 
deliver the City Plan. We will allocate council 
resources (including capital funding) and use funding 
from other sources e.g. Greater London Authority, 
Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs 
and lottery grants to implement the City Plan. We will 
only use compulsory purchase powers where it is 
demonstrated that there is a compelling case that it 
will enable the acquisition of land to help deliver our 
planning and regeneration objectives.IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING174
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Transition of existing mixed-use credits 
Mixed use residential credits registered under the 
2016 City Plan policy S1 may continue to be used 
to offset the affordable housing requirements of 
Policy 9 in the Central Activities Zone where the 
floorspace registered is affordable housing. 
All conditions agreed at the time of registration of 
the original credit regarding their drawdown will 
still apply, as will anything previously agreed in a 
Section 106 legal agreement relating to the credit.
Early delivery of off-site affordable housing  
As set out in paragraph 9.13, the early delivery of 
affordable housing floorspace may in some 
circumstances count towards future requirements 
for affordable housing triggered by Policy 9. This 
mechanism may only be used as part of wider 
estate regeneration proposals and any affordable 
housing delivered must be used in full for the 
estate on which it is delivered i.e. the affordable 
housing cannot be ‘banked’ or traded to offset 
affordable housing requirements on other sites.  
Legal agreements will be used to: 
 –ensure that the intention to use the affordable 
housing as a contribution to another named site 
is agreed by the council at application stage for 
the affordable housing; 
 –ensure the market housing cannot be  
occupied until the affordable housing is 
complete and transferred to a Registered 
Provider, where applicable.Viability
Applicants should factor in the costs of delivering the 
City Plan objectives when considering potential 
development proposals or site purchases. Where 
proposals meet the policies in this plan, it will be 
assumed that they are viable.2 It is up to the applicant 
to demonstrate whether particular circumstances 
justify the need for a viability assessment at 
application stage. Such circumstances could include:
 –where further information on infrastructure  
or site costs is required;
 –where the type of development proposed is 
significantly different from standard models  
of development e.g. build to rent; and
 –where economic circumstances have significantly 
changed since the Plan was adopted.
Land use swaps
The City Plan protects almost every land use in  
one way or another throughout the city. Floorspace 
can be better protected when it can be transferred 
to another site as part of estate management or 
dual site developments. This approach can avoid 
lengthy marketing exercises leaving floorspace 
vacant where it can accommodate a different use if 
the original land use is satisfactorily re-provided 
elsewhere. Therefore, a system of land use swaps 
may be appropriate in the following circumstances 
to enable better development outcomes:
2 The policies in this plan have been independently  
viability tested1. the sites are in the vicinity of each other; 
2. there is no net loss of floorspace which is 
protected by other policies in the Plan across 
the sites taken as a whole; 
3. the uses are appropriate within each area; 
4. any residential accommodation is of a higher 
quality than could have been achieved without 
the land use swap.
The applications for all sites must be submitted at 
the same time and must be accompanied by a full 
schedule of the existing and proposed floorspace 
including the following:  
a. the floorspace of each use (Gross Internal Area) 
proposed for each site, and for all of the sites 
taken as a whole; 
b. in the case of residential floorspace, the 
breakdown of floorspace provided in 
accordance with (a) by the tenure, unit 
floorspace, and the number of bedrooms of 
each unit, and the total floorspace for all of the 
sites taken as a whole; and 
c. calculations of any floorspace shortfalls being 
met by a payment in lieu. 
If agreed, the sites subject to the land use swap will 
be treated as though the development is on a single 
site, including for consideration of viability (the sites 
should be within sufficient proximity to one another 
that there is no significant differential in site value) and 
all elements of the scheme are to be completed 
within a time frame agreed by the council.IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING175
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING
Enforcement
Planning enforcement is part of the end to end 
process of development, from policy to the granting 
of permission through to monitoring and achieving 
compliance with the development which our 
policies seek to achieve. We will investigate all 
reported breaches of planning control in a 
transparent and proportionate manner and will 
pursue enforcement action where it is considered 
expedient to do so. In determining whether it is 
relevant to pursue enforcement action regard will  
be given to national, regional and local policy and  
to any other material considerations. When pursuing 
enforcement action we give priority to prevention 
and harm to residential amenity; the effective 
functioning of lawful business premises; preventing 
the loss of permanent residential accommodation 
and other priority uses; and the preservation or 
enhancement of our heritage assets and any harm 
to visual amenity. All breaches of planning control 
will be considered on their individual merits. We will 
prosecute offenders under the relevant legislation 
where it is considered expedient and in the public 
interest to do so.
Infrastructure delivery
The Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) sets out the 
key locations, sites and infrastructure, which are 
essential for the successful implementation  
of the City Plan’s strategic policies. It also details 
the timescales for delivery and funding 
mechanisms. The Infrastructure Delivery 
Statement (IDS) will monitor delivery of the  
IDP and will be updated regularly.Working with partners and stakeholders
We will work with neighbouring authorities, agencies 
and partner organisations including the GLA and 
community groups to deliver a range of services and 
realise the benefits of an integrated approach to 
development and to ensure the realisation of shared 
objectives. We will continue to utilise our Open 
Forum network to liaise with resident groups and the 
designated neighbourhood forums on planning 
issues, where appropriate.
Monitoring
We will monitor the implementation of City Plan 
policies to ensure that the objectives and targets 
within the Plan (as well as the programme for 
infrastructure set out in the IDP) are met. Through 
the Integrated Impact Assessment (IIA), the annual 
Authority Monitoring Report (AMR) and 
Westminster’s Monitoring Framework we will keep 
economic, social and environmental trends and 
risks under review.
The table overleaf sets out Westminster’s key 
monitoring indicators which will be used to monitor 
success towards meeting the objectives in this 
plan. If the trigger points are reached this does  
not necessarily mean the policy is failing. All key 
Performance Indicators will be reviewed annually 
through the Authority Monitoring Report (AMR)  
to ascertain trends in how the policies are 
operating and if the Plan and spatial objectives  
are being achieved.Review 
As required by national policy the City Plan will be 
subject to a full review to ascertain if amendments 
are required five years after adoption and every 
five years thereafter. 
The findings of the AMR will inform the review and 
if the majority of policies are deemed to be 
performing well it may be the case that no action is 
required. However, if key policy objectives are 
failing e.g. housing delivery is lower than the 
annual target or air quality objectives are not 
achieved this may indicate amendments to policy 
are required. IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING176
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Key Performance Indicators City Plan objectives Data source Trigger for review / review mechanism
1 Delivery of new homes (floorspace, units  
by size, type and tenure) against target of 
985 new homes per year and 20,685 homes 
overall up to 2040 1, 9 Westminster  
City Council Delivery is 10% below target  
for three consecutive years
Review the SHMA for delivery of all 
accommodation types within five years
2 Delivery of affordable homes (floorspace, 
units and location of delivery) against target 
of at least 35% of all new homes delivered 1, 9 Westminster  
City Council Total number of new affordable homes  
does not meet target after three years
3 Delivery of homes through the Affordable 
Housing Fund (floorspace and units) 1, 9 Westminster  
City Council 
4 Number of family sized homes delivered 1 Westminster  
City CouncilLess than 25% across the city
5 Net change in Class E floorspace across 
CAZ, Opportunity Areas, and town centre 
hierarchy2, 3, 9 Westminster  
City Council 
6 Delivery of C1 Hotel floorspace 2, 3, 9 Westminster  
City Council Net reduction in floor space
7 Loss of public houses 3, 4 Westminster  
City Council 15% loss of current number over 5 years
8 Hot food takeaways permitted within 200m 
of a school 9 Westminster  
City CouncilAny permissions grantedMonitoring FrameworkIMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING177
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING
9 Change in land uses in the Special Policy 
Areas (SPAs) 3, 4, 6, 9 Westminster  
City Council 
10 Delivery of social and community  
floorspace 4, 6, 9 Westminster  
City Council Review against IDP
11 Change in number of jobs by sectors and 
levels of worklessness2, 3, 4 Westminster  
City CouncilNet loss in total jobs and or increase in 
levels of worklessness
12 Employment, skills and training opportunities 
secured through Section 106 contributions2, 3, 4 Westminster  
City CouncilRegular review with Westminster City 
Council employment service
13 Delivery of walking and cycling 
infrastructure schemes5, 9 Westminster  
City CouncilReview against IDP
14 Installation of electric vehicle charging 
points by type5, 9 Westminster  
City CouncilReview against IDP
15 Number of applications approved for 
residential development without on- or 
off-site car parking in an area of existing high 
parking stress5, 9 Westminster  
City Council
16 Delivery of cycle parking spaces 5 Westminster  
City Council
17 Number of developments of thresholds set 
out in policy achieving BREEAM excellent (or 
equivalent) Standard6, 7, 8 Westminster  
City Council
18 Noise complaints received 7, 8 Westminster  
City Council Key Performance Indicators City Plan objectives Data source Trigger for review / review mechanismIMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING178
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
19 Applications that include renewable 
technologies7, 8 Westminster  
City Council
20 Applications granted planning permission 
against Environment Agency advice on  
flood risk7, 8 Environment 
Agency No more than 1% of applications permitted
21 Reduction of NOx and particulate matter 
(PM2.5 and PM10) concentration against 
national and regional Air Quality targets7 DEFRA
22 Reduction of carbon dioxide emissions (total 
end user and per capita) by local authority 
area, as reported by Department of Business 
Environment and Industrial Strategy (BEIS)3 Westminster  
City CouncilStrategic net reduction
23 Net change in Sites of Importance for  
Nature Conservation (SINCs) and  
designated open space8 Westminster City 
Council & GLADeterioration in quality or net loss
24 Delivery of play space in areas of play  
space deficiency6, 8, 9 Westminster  
City Counci
25 Improvements to parks, play areas and  
other open spaces6, 8, 9 Westminster  
City Counci Review against IDP
26 Number of open spaces awarded the  
Green Flag Award8 Green Flag Awards 
Website
27 Applications incorporating living  
walls and roofs8, 9 Westminster  
City CounciKey Performance Indicators City Plan objectives Data source Trigger for review / review mechanismIMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING179
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
28 Capacity of new waste and  
recycling facilities7, 8 Westminster  
City Council
29 Amount, type and destination of waste 
exported from Westminster6, 7, 9 Waste Data 
interrogator. In line 
with tables in 
Appendix F of the 
Waste Data Study 
(2020) and 
thresholds agreed 
by the London 
Waste Planning 
ForumAn increase in waste exports by the 
following amounts will trigger engagement 
with recipient waste planning authority:  
 –5,000 tpa non-hazardous waste  
(LACW and C&I)  
 –10,000 tpa inert waste (CD&E)  
 –100 tpa hazardous waste
30 Delivery of public realm schemes 5, 8, 9 Westminster  
City Council  Review against IDP
31 Number of designated heritage assets 
completely demolished/lost 10 Westminster  
City Council & 
Historic England No loss
32 Number of planning applications approved 
and refused with a Heritage Impact 
Assessment for development impacting on 
the Outstanding Universal Value of the 
World Heritage Site or its setting10 Westminster  
City Council Database of applications impacting on the 
World Heritage Site
33 Number of applications called in by the 
Secretary of State in relation to any 
development that may have an impact on 
the Outstanding Universal Value of the 
World Heritage Site or its setting10 Westminster  
City Council Applications called inKey Performance Indicators City Plan objectives Data source Trigger for review / review mechanismCONTENTS
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING
180
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
34 Number of heritage assets at risk and 
removed from the register or with  
solution agreed10 Historic England Less than 1% of total number of listed 
buildings on register and no conservation 
areas identified as at risk 
 35 Effective policy for the World Heritage Site 
through production of updated Management 
Plan as ‘living document’ with regular  
review mechanism 10 World Heritage 
Committee Production of updated Management Plan  
as ‘living document’ with regular review 
mechanism and removal of the  
World Heritage Site from the annual 
reporting requirements of the World 
Heritage Committee
36 Utility infrastructure improvements  
and development8, 9 Westminster  
City CouncilReview against IDPKey Performance Indicators City Plan objectives Data source Trigger for review / review mechanism181
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTSAPPENDICES
Appendix 1: Westminster’s Housing Trajectory
The following table sets out Westminster’s housing supply for years 2020-35. 
Deliverable sites are named where over 50 net new homes will be provided. 
Developable sites and locations for growth in years 6-10 and 11-15 are grouped by area. Individual developable sites will be assigned capacities 
through the forthcoming Site Allocations DPD. 
Area Type Delivery 
PhaseNet housing Units
Paddington Opportunity 
Area  Deliverable  1-5 108   
Includes development of the following site:   
 –North Wharf Road   
Developable   6-10 501
11-15 400
  Victoria Opportunity Area  Deliverable  1-5 385 
Includes development of the following sites:   
 –New Scotland Yard   
 –Stockley House   
Developable  6-10 75  
11-15 330APPENDICES APPENDICES182
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
APPENDICES
Area Type Delivery 
PhaseNet housing Units
Tottenham Court Road 
Opportunity Area  Deliverable  1-5 87 
Includes development of the following site:   
 –Tottenham Court Road Elizabeth Line Station (Oxford Street/ Dean Street)   
North West Economic 
Development Area   Deliverable  1-5 429 
Includes development of the following sites:   
 –Warwick Community Hall, Harrow Road   
 –Westmead, Tavistock Road  
 –Jubilee Sports Centre, Caird Street   
Developable   6-10 176
11-15 341APPENDICES183
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Area Type Delivery 
PhaseNet housing Units
Church Street / Edgware 
Road Housing Renewal Area  Deliverable 1-5 1,216   
Includes development of the following sites:   
 –283-329 Edgware Road (West End Gate)   
 –Paddington Green   
 –Capland Street, Bedlow Close and Luton Street   
 –Parsons House   
 –Lisson Arches  
Developable  6-10 775
11-15 735
Ebury Bridge Estate Housing 
Renewal Area  Deliverable  1-5 96
Developable   6-10 326
11-15APPENDICES184
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Area Type Delivery 
PhaseNet housing Units
North Westminster   Deliverable  1-5 1,089  
Includes development of the following sites:   
 –St John’s Wood Road/ Lodge Road   
 –Whiteleys Centre, Queensway   
 –Dora House, St John’s Wood Road   
 –St John’s Wood Barracks, Ordnance Hill   
 –Bayswater Road/ Queensway/ Consort House/ Fosbury Mews   
 –Marble Arch/ Edgware Road/ Bryanston Street   
 –Tollgate Gardens Estate   
Developable   6-10 216
11-15 280
Central Westminster  Deliverable  1-5 765 
Includes development of the following sites:   
 –Park Crescent/ Portland Place   
 –22 Hanover Square   
 –Aybrook Street Car Park   
 –87-89 Cleveland Street   
Developable  6-10 29
11-15 70APPENDICES185
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Area Type Delivery 
PhaseNet housing Units
South Westminster   Deliverable  1-5 1,531  
Includes development of the following sites:   
 –Old War Office, Whitehall   
 –Ergon House, Horseferry Road and 9 Millbank   
 –Millbank Complex   
 –First Chicago House, Long Acre   
 –Palace Street/ Buckingham Gate   
 –Arundel Great Court, Surrey Street   
 –Castle Lane/ Palace Street   
 –Chelsea Barracks   
Developable   6-10 388
11-15 420
Windfalls  N/A
N/A6-10 2,500
11-15 2,500
TOTAL DELIVERABLE HOUSING SUPPLY (2020-25)   1-5 5,706
TOTAL DEVELOPABLE HOUSING SUPPLY (2025-35)  6-10 4,986
11-15 5,076
TOTAL HOUSING SUPPLY (2020-2035)  1-15 15,768APPENDICES186
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Policy Number Policy clause
1 Westminster’s Spatial Strategy Whole policy – strategic 
2 WERLSPA Whole policy – strategic 
3 Paddington OA Whole policy – strategic 
4 Victoria OA Whole policy – strategic 
5 NWEDA Whole policy – strategic 
6 Church Street / Edgware Road and Ebury Bridge Estate Housing 
Renewal AreasWhole policy – strategic 
7 Managing development for Westminster’s people Whole policy – strategic 
8 Housing delivery Whole policy – strategic 
9 Affordable housing Whole policy – strategic Appendix 2: Schedule of strategic policies  
Schedule of Strategic Policies
The policies within the City Plan are made up of both strategic and non-strategic elements. Strategic policies are those policies which address the strategic 
priorities of the area and any relevant cross-boundary issues, whereas non-strategic policies deal more with more localised issues. Where neighbourhood 
plans are being prepared, neighbourhood forums should ensure policies within them are in general conformity with these strategic policies.
This table sets out which policies in the City Plan are considered strategic and non-strategic based on national guidance and will guide groups in the 
development of their neighbourhood plans.APPENDICES187
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
10 Housing for specific groups Whole policy – strategic 
11 Innovative housing Whole policy – non-strategic 
12 Housing quality A, C – strategic  
B, D, E – non-strategic
13 Supporting economic growth A, B, D, E – strategic  
C – non-strategic
14 Town centres, high streets and the CAZ A, B, C, D, G, H, J – strategic  
E, F, I – non-strategic
15 Visitor economy Whole policy – strategic 
16 Food, drink and entertainment Whole policy – strategic 
17 Community Infrastructure & facilities Whole policy – strategic 
18 Education & Skills A, B, D – strategic  
C – non-strategic
19 Digital infrastructure and information and communications technology A, B – strategic  
C, D – non-strategic
20 Soho Special Policy Area Whole policy – strategic 
21 Mayfair & St James’s Special Policy Area Whole policy – strategic 
22 Harley Street Special Policy Area Whole policy – strategic Policy Number Policy clauseAPPENDICES188
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
23 Savile Row Special Policy Area Whole policy – strategic 
24 Sustainable Transport Whole policy – strategic
25 Walking and Cycling Whole policy – strategic 
26 Public Transport and infrastructure Whole policy – strategic
27 Parking Whole policy – strategic
28 Highway access and management Whole policy – strategic
29 Freight and servicing Whole policy – strategic
30 Technological innovation in transport Whole policy – strategic
31 Waterways and waterbodies A,B,C,D – strategic  
E, F, G –non strategic
32 Air quality Whole policy – strategic
33 Local environmental impacts Whole policy – strategic
34 Green infrastructure Whole policy – strategic
35 Flood risk Whole policy – strategic
36 Energy Whole policy – strategic
37 Waste management Whole policy – strategicPolicy Number Policy clauseAPPENDICES189
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
38 Design principles Whole policy – strategic 
39 Westminster’s heritage A - Q – strategic  
R – non-strategic
40 Townscape & architecture Whole policy – strategic 
41 Building height Whole policy – strategic
42 Building height in the housing renewal areas  Whole policy – strategic
43 Public realm Whole policy – strategic
44 Security measures in the public realm Whole policy – strategic 
45 Basement development A – strategic  
B – non-strategicPolicy Number Policy clauseAPPENDICES190
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
City Plan Strategic Policies (November 2016) Superseded by policy 
S1 Mixed Use in The Central Activities Zone Deleted
Policy 21 Mayfair and St James SPA
S2 Special Policy Areas Policy 22 Harley St SPA
Policy 23 Savile Row SPA
CM2.1 Harley Street Special Policy Area Policy 22 Harley St SPA
CM2.2 Portland Place Special Policy Area Deleted
CM2.3 Savile Row Special Policy Area Policy 23 Savile Row SPA
CM2.4 St. James’s Special Policy Area Policy 21 Mayfair and St James SPA
CM2.5 Mayfair Special Policy Area Policy 21 Mayfair and St James SPA
S3 Paddington Opportunity Area Policy 3 Spatial Development Priorities: Paddington Opportunity Area
Policy 41 Building Height
S4 Victoria Opportunity Area Policy 4 Spatial Development Priorities: Victoria Opportunity Area
Policy 41 Building HeightAppendix 3: Schedule of superseded policies  
Table 1: Westminster City Plan (2016)APPENDICES191
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
S5 Tottenham Court Road Opportunity Area Policy 2 Spatial Development Priorities: West End Retail and Leisure Special Policy 
Area and Tottenham Court Road Opportunity Area
S6 Core Central Activities Zone Deleted N.b. designation removed
S7 West End Special Retail Policy Area Policy 2 Spatial Development Priorities: West End Retail and Leisure Special Policy 
Area and Tottenham Court Road Opportunity Area
S8 Marylebone And Fitzrovia Policy 14 Town centres, high streets and the CAZ
Policy 16 Food, drink and entertainment
S9 Knightsbridge Policy 15 Visitor economy
S10 Pimlico Policy 14 Town centres, high streets and the CAZ
S11 Royal Parks Policy 34 Green infrastructure 
Policy 40 Townscape and architecture 
S12 North Westminster Economic Development Area Policy 5 Spatial Development Priorities: North West Economic Development Area
S13 Outside the CAZ And NWEDA Policy 14 Town centres, high streets and the CAZ 
Policy 16 Food, drink and entertainment
S14 Optimising Housing Delivery Policy 8 Housing delivery 
S15 Meeting Housing Needs Policy 10 Housing for specific groups
S16 Affordable Housing Policy 9 Affordable housingCity Plan Strategic Policies (November 2016) Superseded by policy APPENDICES192
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
S17 Gypsies and Travellers Policy 10 Housing for specific groups
S18 Commercial Development Policy 13 Supporting economic growth
S19 Inclusive Local Economy and Employment Policy 18 Education and skills
S20 Offices and Other B1 Floorspace Policy 13 Supporting economic growth
S21 Retail Policy 14 Town centres, high streets and the CAZ
S22 Tourism, Arts and Culture Policy 15 Visitor economy
S23 Hotels and Conference Facilities Policy 15 Visitor economy
S24 Entertainment Uses Policy 16 Food, drink and entertainment
S25 Heritage Policy 39 Heritage
S26 Views Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
Policy 41 Building height
Policy 42 Building height in the housing renewal areas
S27 Buildings and Uses of International and National Importance Policy 1 Westminster's spatial strategy 
S28 Design Policy 38 Design principles
CM28.1 Basement Development Policy 45 Basement developmentsCity Plan Strategic Policies (November 2016) Superseded by policy APPENDICES193
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
S29 Health, Safety and Well Being Policy 7 Managing development for Westminster’s people
Policy 33 Local environmental impacts
Policy 38 Design principles
Policy 12 Housing quality
S30 Flood Risk Policy 35 Flood risk
S31 Air Quality Policy 32 Air quality
S32 Noise Policy 7 Managing development for Westminster’s people
Policy 33 Local environmental effects
S33 Delivering Infrastructure and Planning Obligations Implementation and monitoring chapter
S34 Social and Community Infrastructure Policy 17 Community infrastructure and facilities
S35 Open Space Policy 34 Green infrastructure
S36 Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation Policy 34 Green infrastructure 
S37 Westminster’s Blue Ribbon Network Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies
S38 Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure Policy 34 Green infrastructure
S39 Decentralised Energy Networks Policy 36 Energy
S40 Renewable Energy Policy 36 EnergyCity Plan Strategic Policies (November 2016) Superseded by policy APPENDICES194
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
S41 Pedestrian Movement and Sustainable Transport Policy 24 Sustainable transport 
Policy 25 Walking and cycling
S42 Servicing and Deliveries Policy 29 Freight and servicing
S43 Major Transport Infrastructure Policy 26 Public transport and infrastructure
S44 Sustainable Waste Management Policy 37 Waste management
S45 Flood Related Infrastructure Policy 35 Flood risk 
S46 Thames Tunnel Policy 35 Flood risk
S47 Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development Deleted
CM47.1 Land Use Swaps and Packages Implementation and monitoring chapter
CM47.2 Credits Implementation and monitoring chapterCity Plan Strategic Policies (November 2016) Superseded by policy APPENDICES195
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
UDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)
STRA25 Parking control Policy 27 Parking
STRA34 Pollution: Air, water and land Policy 32 Air quality 
Policy 33 Local environmental impacts
COM7 Diplomatic and allied uses Deleted
COM8 Retention of light industrial uses in creative Industries SPA Deleted N.b. Creative Industries SPA deleted
COM9 Provision of new light industrial floorspace Policy 13 Supporting economic growth 
Policy 21 Mayfair and St James SPA
COM10 Retention of small-scale industrial uses Policy 13 Supporting economic growth 
Policy 20 Soho Special Policy Area
COM11 Provision for general industry and commercial warehouse storage and distribution Policy 29 Freight and servicing
COM12 Retention of wholesale showrooms Deleted N.b. East Marylebone SPA deleted
H2 Preventing the use of housing by non-permanent residents Policy 8 Housing delivery 
H3 To encourage the provision of more housing Policy 8 Housing delivery
H4 Provision of affordable housing Policy 9 Affordable housing
H5 Providing a range of housing sizes Policy 10 Housing for specific groups
H6 Hostels and Special Needs Housing Policy 10 Housing for specific groupsTable 2: Unitary Development Plan (2007) (saved policies)APPENDICES196
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
H7 To protect Houses in Multiple Occupation Policy 8 Housing delivery 
Policy 10 Housing for specific groups
H8 Provision of homes for long term needs Policy 12 Housing quality 
Policy 11 Housing for specific groups
H10 Provision of gardens and community facilities Policy 12 Housing quality 
Policy 17 Community infrastructure and facilities
Policy 34 Green infrastructure
H11 Controlling housing density Policy 8 Housing delivery
TRANS1 Protecting the environment from the effects of transport activities Policy 24 Sustainable transport
TRANS2 Road safety Policy 24 Sustainable transport
Policy 28 Highway access & management
TRANS3 Pedestrians Policy 25 Walking and cycling
TRANS4 Bus service provision and improvement Policy 26 Public transport and infrastructure
TRANS5 Surface, Underground railways and trams Policy 26 Public transport and infrastructure
TRANS6 Coaches Policy 26 Public transport and infrastructure
TRANS7 Taxis and mini-cabs Policy 26 Public transport and infrastructure
Policy 28 Highway access & managementUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES197
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
TRANS8 Improved public transport access Policy 26 Public Transport and infrastructure
TRANS9 Cycling Policy 25 Walking and cycling
TRANS10 Cycle parking standards Policy 25 Walking and cycling 
Policy 27 Parking
TRANS11 Motorcycles (including all powered two-wheelers) Deleted
TRANS12 Water-based transport Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies 
Policy 24 Sustainable transport
TRANS13 Helicopters Policy 41 Building height
TRANS14 Transport assessments Policy 24 Sustainable transport
TRANS15 Traffic reduction Policy 24 Sustainable transport
Policy 25 Walking and cycling
TRANS16 The road hierarchy Policy 28 Highway access and management
TRANS17 Protecting filling stations Policy 30 Technological innovation in transport
TRANS18 Road improvements Policy 28 Highway access and management
TRANS19 Development under the highway Policy 45 Basement developments
TRANS20 Off-street servicing, deliveries and collection Policy 29 Freight and servicing
TRANS21 Off-street parking Policy 27 ParkingUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES198
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
TRANS22 Off-street parking: non- residential development Policy 27 Parking
TRANS23 Off-street parking: residential development Policy 27 Parking
TRANS24 Off-street parking: mixed development Policy 27 Parking
TRANS25 Off-street parking: public off-street parking Policy 27 Parking
TRANS26 Off-street parking in forecourts and front gardens Policy 27 Parking 
TRANS27 Disabled access to buildings Policy 38 Design principles
PSPA4 Controlling new hotel and conference facilities Policy 3 Spatial Development Priorities: Paddington 
Opportunity Area
Policy 15 Visitor economy
NWW1 Small scale business development Policy 5 Spatial Development Priorities: North West 
Economic Development Area
NWW2 Large-scale mixed-use development Deleted
NWW3 Townscape and public realm enhancements Deleted
SOC1 Community facilities in general Policy 17 Community infrastructure and facilities
SOC2 Childcare facilities Policy 17 Community infrastructure and facilities
SOC3 Education facilities - Part A Education facilities - Part B Policy 18 Education and skills  
Policy 10 Housing for specific groupsUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES199
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
SOC4 Health care facilities Policy 17 Community infrastructure and facilities
SOC6 Children’s play provision Policy 34 Green infrastructure  
SOC7 Indoor leisure and libraries Policy 17 Community infrastructure and facilities 
SOC8 Public toilets Policy 15 Visitor economy 
SOC9 Telecommunications equipment Policy 19 Digital infrastructure, information and 
communications technology; 
SS3 Enhancing shopping in the International Centres’ Primary Shopping Frontages Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ
SS4 New retail floorspace in the CAZ and the CAZ Frontages Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ
SS5 Seeking an appropriate balance of town centre uses in the West End International 
Centre and elsewhere in the CAZ and CAZ Frontages – outside the Primary Shopping 
FrontagesPolicy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ
SS6 District Centres Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ
SS7 Local Centres Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ
SS8 Shops and services outside the District and Local Centres Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ
SS9 Long-term vacant shop units in peripheral locations Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ
SS10 New retail floorspace in development schemes Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ
SS11 Superstores, Supermarkets and other major retail developments Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ 
SS12 The location of minicab and motorcycle courier offices DeletedUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES200
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
SS13 Street markets and individual trading pitches Policy 14 Town centres, high Streets and the CAZ 
Policy 43 Public realm
SS14 (Clause 1) Character and appearance of conservation areas Policy 39 Westminster's heritage
SS14 (Clause 2) Convenience and safety of pedestrians Policy 25 Walking and cycling
Policy 43 Public realm
SS14 (Clause 3) Residential amenity Policy 7 Managing development for Westminster’s people
SS14 (Clause 4) Traffic circulation in the street and neighbouring streets Deleted
SS14 (Clause 5) Increase in number of people using the street Policy 25 Walking and cycling 
SS14 (Clause 6) Creating a positive social environment Deleted
SS14 (Clause 7) Access requirements of emergency and refuse vehicles and bus services Policy 26 Public transport and infrastructure 
Policy 28 Highway access and management
Policy 29 Freight and servicing (Refuse vehicles);
Policy 27 Parking (Emergency vehicles)
SS14 (Clause 8) The Servicing needs of local businesses Policy 29 Freight and servicing
SS14 (Clause 9) The needs of cyclists Policy 25 Walking and cycling
SS14 (Clause 10) Recycling facilities Policy 37 Waste managementUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES201
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
SS16 Pavement shops Policy 43 Public realm 
SS17 Window displays Deleted
TACE 1 Existing hotels Policy 15 Visitor economy 
TACE 2 New hotels and extensions to existing hotels Policy 15 Visitor economy 
TACE 3 Temporary sleeping accommodation and permanent residential use Policy 8 Housing delivery
TACE 4 Conference and related facilities Policy 15 Visitor economy
TACE 5 Arts and cultural uses Policy 15 Visitor economy
TACE 6 Theatres Policy 15 Visitor economy 
TACE 7 Arts, Culture and Education Special Policy Area Policy 15 Visitor economy
TACE 8 Entertainment uses which will generally be permissible
TACE 9 Entertainment uses which may be permissible
TACE 10 Entertainment uses which will only be permissible inexceptional circumstancesPolicy 16 Food, drink and entertainment
TACE 11 Tables and chairs on the footway Policy 43 Public realm 
TACE 12 Amusement arcades and Centres Policy 16 Food, drink and entertainment
TACE 13 Sex-related uses Policy 16 Food, drink and entertainmentUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES202
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
ENV2 Environmental appraisal Policy 32 Air quality
Policy 33 Local environmental impacts
ENV3 Vacant and under-used land Deleted
ENV4 Planting around and on buildings Policy 34 Green infrastructure 
ENV5 Air pollution Policy 32 Air quality
ENV6 Noise pollution Policy 33 Local environmental effects 
ENV7 Controlling noise from plant, machinery and internal activity Policy 33 Local environmental effects
ENV8 Contaminated land Policy 33 Local environmental effects 
ENV10 Light pollution Policy 33 Local environmental effects 
ENV12 Waste and recycling storage Policy 37 Waste management
ENV13 Protecting amenities, daylight, sunlight and environmental quality Policy 7 Managing development for Westminster's people
Policy 12 Housing quality
Policy 34 Green infrastructure
ENV14 Metropolitan Open Land Policy 34 Green infrastructureUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES203
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
ENV15 Public and private open space Policy 34 Green infrastructure
ENV16 Trees and shrub cover Policy 34 Green infrastructure 
ENV17 Nature conservation and biodiversity Policy 34 Green infrastructure 
DES1 Principles of Urban Design and Conservation Policy 38 Design principles
DES3 High buildings Policy 41 Building height 
Policy 42 Building height in the housing renewal areas
DES4 Infill development Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
DES5 Alterations and extensions Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
DES6 Roof level alterations and Extensions Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
DES7 Townscape Management Part (a) Public Art Policy 43 Public realm
DES7 Townscape Management Part (b) Street Furniture and flood lighting Policy 43 Public realm 
Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
DES7 Townscape Management Part (c) Boundary walls and railings Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
DES7 Townscape Management Part (d) Off street parking and hard standing Policy 27 ParkingUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES204
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
DES7 Townscape Management Part (e) Paving Policy 43 Public realm
DES8 Signs and advertisements Policy 43 Public realm 
DES9 Conservation areas Policy 39 Heritage 
Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
DES10 Listed buildings Policy 39 Heritage 
DES11 Scheduled Ancient Monuments; Areas of archaeological priority and potential Policy 39 Heritage 
DES12 Parks, gardens and squares Policy 39 Heritage 
Policy 34 Green infrastructure
DES13 Canals Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies
DES14 Strategic views Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
DES15 Metropolitan and local views Policy 40 Townscape and architecture
DES16 World Heritage Site Policy 39 Heritage 
RIV1 The design of development Policy 38 Design principles
Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies
RIV2 Views Policy 40 Townscape and architectureUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)APPENDICES205
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
RIV3 Environment, open space and wildlife Policy 34 Green infrastructure
RIV4 Promoting activity Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies 
RIV5 Development built into or over the river Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies 
RIV6 River crossings Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies 
RIV7 Piers Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies 
RIV8 Permanently moored vessels Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies 
RIV9 The Thames Path Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies 
RIV10 Encouraging access to the river and its foreshore Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies
RIV11 Safety issues Policy 31 Waterways and waterbodies
RIV12 Flood defences Policy 35 Flood riskUDP Policies (January 2007) Superseded by policy (in whole or part)GLOSSARY206
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Unless provided in the table below, definitions 
detailed in the National Planning Policy Framework 
and the London Plan apply.
Accessibility
The ability of all people, including elderly and 
disabled people, those with young children and 
those carrying luggage and shopping, to reach, 
move around and use places and facilities.
Active frontages
A ground floor frontage which generates passing 
trade and provides a ‘shop-type’ window display 
with interest at street level.
Affordable housing
Housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs 
are not met by the market. In Westminster this is 
split into ‘social’ and ‘intermediate’ types.
Air Quality Neutral 
An Air Quality Neutral development is one that 
meets, or improves upon, the air quality neutral 
benchmarks published in guidance from the GLA. 
The benchmarks set out the maximum allowable 
emissions of NOx and Particulate Matter based on 
the size and use class of the proposed 
development. Separate benchmarks are set out 
for emissions arising from the development and 
from transport associated with the development. Air Quality Neutral applies only to the completed 
development and does not include impacts arising 
from construction, which should be separately 
assessed in the Air Quality Assessment
Ambient noise
Ongoing sound in the environment such as from 
transport and industry, as distinct from individual 
events, such as a noisy all-night party. Unless 
stated otherwise, noise includes vibration.
Amenity spaces
Private, communal or public external spaces that 
provide opportunities for informal activities which 
contribute to the appearance of developments or 
localities. Private external amenity space is 
exclusively used by a single household; common 
forms are balconies and gardens. Communal 
external amenity space is exclusively used by the 
residents of a residential development; common 
forms are communal gardens, terraces and roof 
gardens. Public amenity spaces are normally small 
spaces where workers or visitors can relax, are 
used for dog walking, play, rest or quiet enjoyment, 
or merely to provide visual amenity in densely 
built-up developments.
Appropriate marketing
Where a use has been prominently marketed  
for the existing use, with reasonable terms and conditions, as certified by an appropriately 
qualified professional, independently verified  
by the council at the applicant’s expense.
Carbon Neutral / Zero Carbon 
Activity that causes no net release of carbon 
dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions into 
the atmosphere.
Central Activities Zone (CAZ)
A diverse area covering much of central London and 
extending across 10 London boroughs, as designated 
by an indicative boundary in the London Plan.
CAZ retail clusters
Clusters of retail activity within the CAZ that have 
been designated through the London Plan or the 
City Plan.
Character
The distinctive or typical quality of a building or 
area, as described by historic fabric, appearance, 
townscape and land uses.
Civic amenity spaces
Includes civic and market squares and other hard 
surfaced community areas designed for pedestrians 
with the primary purpose of providing a setting for 
civic buildings, and urban spaces for public 
congregation and public events.GLOSSARYGLOSSARY207
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Combined Heat and Power
The combined production of electricity and usable 
heat is known as Combined Heat and Power 
(CHP). Steam or hot water, which would otherwise 
be rejected when electricity alone is produced, is 
used for space or process heating.
Commercial use / development / floorspace 
Comprises all Class E uses and commercial sui 
generis  uses in accordance with the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order and its 
subsequent amendments.
Community facilities / infrastructure
Facilities / infrastructure available to the local 
community. These consist of buildings and external 
spaces and can be publicly or privately run. They 
include health facilities, education facilities, social 
services uses, sports and recreation facilities, 
community meeting halls, youth centres, local arts 
facilities, and public toilets. 
Comparison goods
Predominantly durable goods and services where 
customers may wish to compare prices / quality / 
type of product sold, with other similar products 
sold in other shops. Comparison goods retail use 
falls within A1 Retail use class.
Context height 
Context height has been taken as the typical or 
prevailing height within an area, with high and tall 
buildings considered as an exception to the 
context rather than defining the context itself.Convenience goods
Basic goods or services which people may need 
on a weekly, if not daily, basis. Convenience goods 
retailers include grocers and newsagents and fall 
within A1 Retail use class.
Creative industries
Generic term for the following sub-groups:
 –Creative Content: includes enterprises that 
produce intellectual property, usually copyright 
protected, distributed to customers and 
audiences through sales, advertising or 
subscription to earn revenue e.g. broadcasters, 
record companies, and all kinds of publishers 
including software, computer games and 
electronic publishing.
 –Creative Experience: includes enterprises 
whose core business model is based around 
selling the right for consumers to witness or 
experience specific activities, performances  
or locations e.g. live theatre, music, opera  
and dance.
 –Creative Originals: includes enterprises based 
on the manufacture, production or sale of 
physical artefacts, the value of which derive 
from their perceived creative or cultural value 
and exclusivity e.g. designer fashion, bespoke 
tailoring, craft-based activities such as jewellery 
and arts and antiques.
 –Creative Services: includes enterprises based 
around providing Creative Services for clients 
earning revenues in exchange for giving up their time and intellectual property e.g. 
architects, advertising agencies, graphic 
design, new media design and post production.
Custom build
Custom build homes are where an individual or 
group work with a specialist developer to help 
deliver their homes and they can input in the design 
of their home or customise elements of it. The 
developer may help to find a plot, manage the 
construction and arrange the finance for the project.
Designing out crime
Using the design of the built environment to 
minimise opportunities for criminal and anti-social 
behaviour, through matters such as provision of 
appropriate layout, active frontages, suitable 
lighting etc.
District Heating Network (DHN)
A network of pipes that connects energy 
production equipment with energy customers. 
They can range from several metres to several 
kilometres in length.
District centre
Service centre, usually with up to one hundred 
commercial premises of various kinds, with a 
predominantly retail function.
Entertainment uses
Uses predominantly or partly used for 
entertainment purposes: it includes D2 uses 
including live music venues and sui generis  uses GLOSSARY208
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
including nightclubs, casinos, amusement arcades 
and shisha premises. The entertainment uses that 
are not considered within this definition are sports 
halls, swimming baths, gymnasiums, skating rinks, 
other indoor or outdoor sports or recreation areas, 
concert halls, cinemas and theatres.
Essential infrastructure
Essential transport and utility infrastructure 
(including mass evacuation routes, electricity 
generating power stations and water treatment 
works) and wind turbines. As set out in the 
Technical Guidance to the National Planning  
Policy Framework.
Evening economy
Economic activity where main business hours are 
between 6pm and midnight (e.g. restaurants, 
theatres, public houses).
Family housing
A housing unit with between three and five 
bedrooms. For affordable housing, units with two 
bedrooms may be considered suitable for families, 
but this will be at the discretion of the council 
based on need on the council’s waiting lists and 
the size of the unit.
Flood-related infrastructure
Includes infrastructure to defend against and 
manage flooding from a number of sources 
including tidal, fluvial and surface water flooding, 
such as the Embankment Wall and Thames 
Tideway Tunnel.Freight consolidation centre
A facility for the collection of goods from a number 
of recipients, that are then sorted into fewer 
vehicles for the final leg of the journey, in order to 
reduce the overall number of freight movements.
Greenfield run off rates
The runoff (due to rainfall) that would occur from a 
site in its undeveloped and undisturbed states.
Gross floorspace
Method of assessing the extent of building (or 
land) occupied by a use. This should be measured 
as Gross Internal Area in accordance with the RICS 
Code of Measuring Practice, or subsequent 
replacement professional guidance.
Highly vulnerable uses
Relating to flood risk. Uses include:
 –police stations, ambulance stations and fire 
stations and command centres and 
telecommunications;
 –installations required to be operational during 
flooding;
 –emergency dispersal points;
 –basement dwellings;
 –caravans, mobile homes and park homes 
intended for permanent residential use; and
 –installations requiring hazardous substances 
consent as set out in the Technical Guidance to 
the National Planning Policy Framework.Highway
An area of land to allow the public to move along a 
route. Includes the carriageway (for vehicles) and 
the footway (for pedestrians). The council (and in 
places the Royal Parks and Transport for London) 
are the highway authority, responsible for 
maintaining the highway.
Historic fabric
Surviving original and historic fabric in the form of 
buildings, their structure, details and decoration.
Host scheme
The development is the one which forms the 
original application which triggers a requirement 
for affordable housing and which is first assessed 
for whether it can provide on-site affordable 
housing in whole or part.
Human scale development
Development of a scale and form suitable for 
people to interact with and where pedestrians feel 
comfortable by the scale and massing of buildings 
and open spaces making up the public realm.
Idling
Unnecessarily running a motor vehicles engine 
when the vehicle is not in motion.
Infill development
The insertion of one or more new buildings within 
a continuous street façade or frontage.GLOSSARY209
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Intermediate housing
Homes for private rent provided at a cost at least 
20% below market rents (including service charges 
where applicable) or low-cost homes for sale as 
defined in the NPPF, provided to households who 
meet the council’s income thresholds.
International centre
Town centre at the top of London’s town centre 
hierarchy of international reputation and attracting 
global visitors.
In-vessel composting
An industrial form of composting biodegradable 
waste within an enclosed container, where 
conditions such as air flow, temperature and 
emissions are controlled.
Land use swaps and packages
Where two (land use swap) or more (land use 
package) sites are considered as a single 
application for the purposes of determining a 
planning application. These are used to meet the 
policy objectives required over more than one site.
Legibility
The degree to which a place can be easily 
understood and moved through.
Linear open spaces
Open spaces and towpaths alongside the Thames, 
canals and other waterways, paths, disused 
railways, nature conservation areas, and other 
routes that provide opportunities for informal recreation. Often characterised by features or 
attractive areas which are not fully accessible to the 
public but contribute to the enjoyment of the space.
Local distinctiveness
The positive features of a place and its 
communities which contribute to its special 
character and sense of place.
Local service provider
Westminster City Council, the National Health 
Service or related organisations such as a Primary 
Care Trust, the Metropolitan Police, Registered 
Provider and other public sector services such as 
job centres and courts, and voluntary sector 
organisations operating within the city. These are 
public social and community uses.
Local centre
Small town centre, usually containing convenience 
goods shops, local service uses, restaurants, cafés 
and pubs, mainly providing facilities for people 
living or working nearby.
Major development
Development greater than or equal to:
 –10 residential units; or
 –0.5 hectares site area (residential) or 1 hectare 
(non-residential); or 
 –gross floorspace of 1,000 sq m (GIA).
Major centre
Predominantly retail centre providing a range of 
services to a wide catchment area.Meanwhile use
Short-term use of temporarily empty buildings 
such as shops until they can be brought back into 
commercial use.
Metropolitan Open Land
Strategically important open space defined in the 
London Plan. In Westminster, this comprises the 
Royal Parks – St James’s Park, Hyde Park, 
Kensington Gardens, Green Park and Regent’s 
Park. Metropolitan Open Land is afforded the 
same protection as green belt land.
Modular homes
Pre-engineered building units that are delivered 
and assembled as large or volumetric components 
or as substantial parts of a building. These can 
include whole rooms, parts of rooms, or separate 
highly serviced units such as toilets or lifts. Off-site 
construction refers to buildings, structures or parts 
manufactured (and wholly or partially assembled) 
away from the site before installation in their  
final position.
Neighbourhood forum
A community group of residents and / or 
businesses that has been established to prepare  
a neighbourhood plan for their designated area.
Night-time economy
Economic activity that occurs between midnight 
and 7am, e.g. late-night bars, casinos, night-clubs.GLOSSARY210
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Noise sensitive receptors
Comprises residential use, educational 
establishments, hospitals, hotels, hostels, concert 
halls, theatres, law courts, and broadcasting and 
recording studios.
Non-self-contained homes
A home with some shared space or facilities  
e.g. with a private bedroom but shared bathroom, 
kitchen and / or living room.
Off-street parking
Dedicated parking that is provided away from the 
street, which can include garages, driveways, surface 
level and multi-storey or basement car parks.
On-street parking
Parking that is permitted on the street as opposed 
to within a designated car park.
Open space
All land in Westminster that is predominantly 
undeveloped other than by buildings or structures 
that are ancillary to the open space use. It includes 
a broad range of types of open space within the 
city, in public or private ownership and whether 
public access is unrestricted, limited or restricted.
Includes all parks and gardens, regardless of size 
(whether public or private); the River Thames and 
the canals and their towpaths; civic spaces; 
children’s playgrounds, including school 
playgrounds; ballcourts and other outdoor sports 
facilities; amenity green spaces, such as open 
spaces on housing estates; churchyards; and 
community gardens.Opportunity Areas
Areas defined in the London Plan with good public 
transport accessibility that provide London’s 
principle opportunities for accommodating large-
scale development. The areas will provide 
substantial numbers of new employment and 
housing opportunities.
Original building
In relation to a building existing on 1 July 1948, as 
existing on that date and in relation to a building 
built on or after 1st July 1948, as so built.
Parking stress area
Area where annual parking surveys indicate 80% 
and higher usage throughout the day / night, in 
compliance with any restrictions that exist. Parking 
surveys address daytime and weekday overnight 
parking, and include bays that residents’ permits 
can be used during the day (i.e. residents’ and 
shared use bays only) and all other spaces that 
can be parked in without paying overnight (i.e. all 
visitor bays and single yellow lines that are not 
otherwise restricted).
Pedestrian clear zone
The area available for the pedestrians (including 
users of wheelchairs, prams and buggies) to walk 
without obstruction. Also known as the ‘clear 
footway width’. The useable zone accommodates 
the flow of pedestrians between the street 
furniture zones (and space to use the street 
furniture) at the back of footway (if any) and that 
placed adjacent to the kerb (if any). The minimum 
width for any new design should be two metres but may need to be greater when foot traffic is 
more intense. In intensely used locations it may 
have to be the full width available, even if this is 
less than the desirable width for the peak time foot 
traffic if it were being designed today.
Platform based delivery
Delivery of goods ordered via the internet or 
mobile applications; e.g. Just Eat, Deliveroo etc.
Pocket parks
Small areas of open space that provide natural 
surfaces and shaded areas for informal play and 
passive recreation that sometimes have seating 
and play equipment, with a size guide of under  
0.4 hectares.
Predominantly commercial neighbourhoods 
Areas of the Central Activities Zone where the 
majority of ground floor uses comprise of a range 
of commercial activity.
Protected species
Certain plant and animal species protected to 
various degrees in law, particularly the Wildlife and 
Countryside Act, 1981 (as amended) .
Public realm
The parts of the city in either public or private 
ownerships which are available free for everyone 
to use or see, including streets, squares and parks.
Rapid inundation zone
Low-lying areas close to the River Thames which 
would rapidly inundate (flood) to significant levels if 
the Embankment Wall was breached.GLOSSARY211
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
Registered providers
Registered Providers are owners and managers of 
affordable housing whom are regulated by 
Government. Most operate on a not-for-profit basis 
and use any trading surplus to maintain existing 
homes and to help finance new ones. Registered 
Providers can include the council, housing 
associations, housing trusts and cooperatives, 
registered charities, or non-profit making provident 
societies or companies.
Retail frontage
A street level frontage characterised by a 
predominance of shop-type premises.
Self-build
Self-build projects are defined as those where 
someone directly organises the design and 
construction of their own home. This covers a wide 
range of projects from a traditional DIY self-build 
home to projects where the self-builder employs 
someone to build their home for them. Community-
led projects can also be defined as self-build. 
Sense of place
The unique perception of a place created by its 
local buildings, streets, open spaces and activities. 
The more distinctive the place the greater the 
sense of it being special. A character which is 
greater than the sum of the constituent parts.
Shoulder hours
Those hours that book-end peak times e.g. 
6am–7am or 10am–11am for the morning peak.Sites of Importance for Nature  
Conservation (SINCs)
The Greater London Authority designated SINCs 
to highlight areas of ecological value that are rich 
in wildlife within the city. The sites are graded as 
being of Metropolitan, Borough or Local 
Importance. Sites of Metropolitan Importance are 
those which contain the best examples of 
London’s habitats and rare species that are of 
significance to London. Sites of Borough 
Importance are those identified to have an 
importance to Westminster and any damage would 
mean a significant loss to the city. A site of Local 
Importance is identified because of its value to the 
nearby community, especially in areas that are 
deficient in wildlife sites.
Small open spaces
Gardens, sitting-out areas, children’s play spaces 
or other areas of a specialist nature, including 
nature conservation areas, with a size guide of 
under two hectares.
Social housing
This includes housing owned by local authorities 
and other registered providers for which the rent is 
set in accordance with the Government’s rent 
policy for social rent or London Living Rent (as 
defined in the London Plan). It may also be owned 
by other persons and provided under equivalent 
rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with 
the local authority or with Homes England.Soundscape
The overall quality of an acoustic environment as a 
place for human experience. Soundscape design 
might include preserving, reducing or eliminating 
certain sounds or combining and balancing 
sounds to create or enhance an attractive and 
stimulating acoustic environment.
Specialist housing
Affordable housing, hostels, Houses in Multiple 
Occupation, housing for those with special needs 
including elderly people, students, people with 
learning or physical disabilities, or mental health 
problems, or other supported accommodation. 
These fall within the C2 and C3 Use Classes, or 
are classified as sui generis  uses.
Specialist housing for older people
Housing that is intended specifically for occupation 
by older people. It may not necessarily fall into the 
C3 Use Class and can include sheltered 
accommodation where the occupants have no, or a 
low level of support; extra-care catering for old or 
vulnerable people who have an existing or 
foreseeable physical, sensory, cognitive or mental 
health impairment – a range of facilities may be 
provided e.g. 24-hour access to emergency 
support, resident’s lounge, a guest room, laundry 
room, day centre activities, a restaurant or some 
kind of meal provision, fitness facilities and classes 
and a base for health care workers, domiciliary care; 
residential / nursing care providing non-self-
contained residential accommodation for people 
who by reason of age or illness have physical, CONTENTS
GLOSSARY
212
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
sensory or mental impairment, including high levels 
of dementia. A scheme manager and in-house care 
team provide a consistent presence, meals and 
personal services are routinely provided to all 
residents and personal or nursing care is a critical 
part of the accommodation package.
Sustainable drainage systems
Sustainable drainage techniques and measures 
that manage surface water run-off from buildings 
and hardstandings in a way that reduces the total 
volume, flow and rate of surface water that runs 
directly into drains and sewers.
Sustainable transport modes
Walking, cycling and other non-vehicular means of 
movement; public transport including rail, 
underground, buses, coaches, passenger ferry, 
light rail / tram and licensed cabs; and high 
occupancy and electric vehicles.
Tall building
Buildings of twice the prevailing context height or 
higher or those which make a significant change to 
the skyline.
Tidal breach flood level
Predicted depth to which flooding will occur for a 
breach in the tidal flood defence walk. These have 
been modelled in Westminster’s Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessment.Waterfront enhancing uses
Uses that do not necessarily require a waterfront 
location, but that can attract people to the 
waterside e.g. restaurants, cafés, museums, 
galleries and parks.
Water related uses
Uses that require a waterside location to function 
e.g. boat moorings, piers and watersports facilities.
West End Partnership (WEP)
A partnership between the public and private 
sector, and resident communities, that seeks to 
secure further investment in the West End, so it 
continues to attract businesses, talent and visitors.
Windfall development
Development that has not been planned for and is 
not included in the housing trajectory.
Visibility splays  
Feature of an access or junction that allows traffic 
on a minor road to see cyclists, vehicles and 
pedestrians on the main road.
Vulnerable people
Someone who is or may be in need of care and / 
or support by reason of disability, age or illness; 
and is, or may be unable to look after themselves 
against significant harm or exploitation.
Zero emissions
Activity that causes no release of air pollutants and 
carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases.APPENDICES213CONTENTSCONTENTS
APPENDICES214
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Westminster’s City Plan  
will contribute to the delivery  
of the council’s suite  
of other strategies.WESTMINSTER’S  
STRATEGIES
A City for AllW
alking S
trategy 2
017–2027 (
2017)Strategic F
lood R
isk A
ssessment 2
016 (
2016)Statement o
n A
ff ordable H
ousing P
olicies (
2017)Statement o
f L
icensing P
olicy (
2021)Statement o
f C
ommunity I
nvolvement (2014)Westminster C
ity C
ouncil S
trategic P
lan 2
017–2020 (
2017)Safer W
estminster P
artnership S
trategy 2
017–2020 (
2017)Housing S
trategy D
irection o
f Travel S
tatement (2015)Local Flood R
isk M
anagement S
trategy 2
017–2022 (
2017)Economic D
evelopment Framework (2015)Community C
ohesion Re
port (2018)Westminster Noise Strategy 2010–2015 (2010)Housing Strategy (Draft) (2015)Church Street Master Plan (2018)A Partnership Approach to O
pen Spaces and Biodiversity in Westminster (2019)Westminster City Council Air Quality Action Plan 2013–2018 (2013)Health and Wellbeing Strategy for Westminster 2017–2022 (2017)Local Implementation Plan 3: Delivery Plan 2019/20–2021/22 (2018)
Decentralised Energy Masterplan for the City of Westminster (2014)A City for All
Active Westminster Strategy (2018–2022) (2018)
Markets Strategy (2019)
Greener City Action Plan 2015–2025 (2019)
Draft Surface Water Management Plan 2011
Municipal Waste Management Strategy 2016–2031 (2014)
Cycling Strategy (2014)
Specialist Housing Strategy for Older People (2012)
Homelessness Strategy 2019–24
Energy Strategy 2019 (emerging)
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2019 (emerging)
Electric Vehicle Strategy 2020 - 2025
Air Quality Action Plan 2019–2024 (emerging)
Economic Opportunity Strategy (emerging) (2019)
Cultural Strategy 2021 - 2025
Local Football Facilities Plan (emerging)
Built Facilities Strategy (emerging)
Playing Pitch Strategy (emerging)
Dementia Plan (2020)
Private Re nted Sector Strategy 2020 – 2 4 (emerging)Lighting Strategy (emerging) (2019)Climate Emergency Action Plan 2021 (emerging)
214
214APPENDICES215
CITY PLAN 2019 – 2040CONTENTS
A City for AllW
alking S
trategy 2
017–2027 (
2017)Strategic F
lood R
isk A
ssessment 2
016 (
2016)Statement o
n A
ff ordable H
ousing P
olicies (
2017)Statement o
f L
icensing P
olicy (
2021)Statement o
f C
ommunity I
nvolvement (2014)Westminster C
ity C
ouncil S
trategic P
lan 2
017–2020 (
2017)Safer W
estminster P
artnership S
trategy 2
017–2020 (
2017)Housing S
trategy D
irection o
f Travel S
tatement (2015)Local Flood R
isk M
anagement S
trategy 2
017–2022 (
2017)Economic D
evelopment Framework (2015)Community C
ohesion Re
port (2018)Westminster Noise Strategy 2010–2015 (2010)Housing Strategy (Draft) (2015)Church Street Master Plan (2018)A Partnership Approach to O
pen Spaces and Biodiversity in Westminster (2019)Westminster City Council Air Quality Action Plan 2013–2018 (2013)Health and Wellbeing Strategy for Westminster 2017–2022 (2017)Local Implementation Plan 3: Delivery Plan 2019/20–2021/22 (2018)
Decentralised Energy Masterplan for the City of Westminster (2014)A City for All
Active Westminster Strategy (2018–2022) (2018)
Markets Strategy (2019)
Greener City Action Plan 2015–2025 (2019)
Draft Surface Water Management Plan 2011
Municipal Waste Management Strategy 2016–2031 (2014)
Cycling Strategy (2014)
Specialist Housing Strategy for Older People (2012)
Homelessness Strategy 2019–24
Energy Strategy 2019 (emerging)
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2019 (emerging)
Electric Vehicle Strategy 2020 - 2025
Air Quality Action Plan 2019–2024 (emerging)
Economic Opportunity Strategy (emerging) (2019)
Cultural Strategy 2021 - 2025
Local Football Facilities Plan (emerging)
Built Facilities Strategy (emerging)
Playing Pitch Strategy (emerging)
Dementia Plan (2020)
Private Re nted Sector Strategy 2020 – 2 4 (emerging)Lighting Strategy (emerging) (2019)Climate Emergency Action Plan 2021 (emerging)